Thank you everyone I hope you
all have while everybody left
again
they'll be right back
will wait just a second.
Our next presenters hello
I reverend holly bombard and
also
skiters and with the tool rosa
base and down windows and thank
you I know last time we met in
last few posted on lunch and we
really appreciated that and
I think it was our last time
and last year I should say so
thank you for you know
presenting again and and get
helping us get up to day night
how
things are going.
Okay
thank you madame chair and uh
mrperiod buys chair and
committee free inviting us to
speak here and allowing us to
give you the update on what's
happening with recar
right now what is happening is
nothing
the regard expect the rigor
expired on june tenth of this
year
but it's still not dead in the
water we still have some time to
work with it because we
understand there is still about
a thousand applications that
need to be processed and as long
as there's the applications that
need to be processed the doors
are not closed
the united states senate passed
the rigor expansion sb thirty
eight fifty three
by a boat of sixty nine to
thirty that was historic
tin according call founder has
been working on this for
nineteen years she's presented
before the senate judiciary
and the house
with the hope that they would
finally approve recup for a new
mexican
well since then we badded other
states a lot of western states
that had been excluded and guam
and thanks to the
by partisan ur work of both
senator josh holly and arsenator
ben ray luhan they were able to
get it passed like I said at a
boat of sixty nine to thirty
the block right now is due to
one man the speaker of the house
mike johnson has refused to
bring the senate bill
to a vote on the floor we
understand from our
congressional representatives.
That if he would do that it
would pass reacon and find the
all of these western states
including the mexical would
finally be approved for
getting the compensation that
has been overlooked for so many
years
one of the things that were also
needing to do is reach out to
event harold
who supports getting an
expansion of breaker but only
for the uranium workers
that build does not include the
down windows when interviewed
she says she's in favor of
reaker but she doesn't tell the
whole story she only tells the
part that she's in favor of rica
she doesn't she omits the part
that says it's only further for
the uranium miners and not the
the down windows now we want to
reach out to her because she's
got the year of speaker might
johnson and we know that if she
would just put a bug in his ear
and ask him to at least give us
a meeting which is something he
is totally avoided
there's a possibility that maybe
maybe he would be consider his
no vote
to date we have bombarded his
office with calls
to the point that he's asked for
us
to stop pressuring and stops and
in calls well now is when we
apply the pressure because we're
going to continue calling his
office and asking him to pass
reacher
there
there's also two other members
to other representatives that we
would like to include in our
called action representative
steve scoles.
And representative james jim
jordan
maybe they were the place some
pressure dire speaker might
johnson
were asking for a bipartisan
letter of support from this
committee
requesting that speaker mike
johnson
bring the record bill to a vote
the bill that was passed in the
senate not the other build the
ebed harold is promoting.
We all start asking that the
republicans on the committee
reach out to the republican
leadership in new mexico and
asked that they publicly support
the record expansion and contact
speaker johnson and request that
he scheduled the bill for a vote
we have continued to like I said
reach out to
speaker johnson with no luck.
We've told him are stories which
are planned for and from
different states it's not just
as we have a coalition of many
states that are involved the
front line coalition that is
involved and we've all reached
out to mike johnson
with no luck we're hoping that
this committee
with reaching out to him as well
the bipartisan letter would
assist as in at least getting
him to bring the boat to the
floor.
One of the things that speaker
johnson right now doesn't have a
reason for denying the vote
but we had heard before that his
reason was it was going to cost
too much money
well that's not true when we
first set out the amendment it
what we were asking for a
hundred and fifty thousand
and health care
we've had to compromise lower
that
and no health care and the
health care is one of the most
important things that we really
really want for the people there
to get another thing that
is important for speaker johnson
to know is that there are fifty
two districts republican
districts in the house
there would benefit from this
only ten democratic districts so
not only as you denying all the
down windows and uranium miners
post seventy one his denying his
own constituents for the
assistance for compensation that
they deserve as for the cost i'd
like to address
ms holly here
to kind of
explain some things about the
cost of rica
good afternoon good afternoon
madam and mr chair and members
of the committee and the
reverend holly ball mine
organizing director of interface
worker justice new mexico and
i've been
on the steering committee of the
tvdc for over twelve years for
many years i'm very visual i've
worked in the legislature for
over twenty years and everybody
knows that at some point it's
gonna be about the money and in
some cases that's right it needs
to be about the money
i've been warning a chart.
Hide show that that shows what
recactually costs the government
costs the taxpayers for years
and we were finally able to get
one produce which you have the
handout that was produced by
nuclear watch new mexico under
the leadership of j king and
this is such a vivid
portrayer of what in fact rica
will cost taxpayers as you can
see there the little tiny red
sliver over there in the mouth
of that huge industry is a way
of showing what has been spent
on reacher and what is being
proposed is above that the blue
area sort of violent area is
what we have already from
nineteen forty two to twenty
twenty two spent a nuclear
weapons we like to say that
right now the budget for nuclear
weapons includes fifty billion
dollars a year just to put the
weapons that currently exist to
bed every night fifty billion
dollars reaker so far has spent
two point four billion now let
me just pass for a minute here
this is something that I have
started to do now that we've
moved into this error of
throwing around terms like
trillions of dollars let's put
this in perspective if we're
describing comparing millions
billions and trillions in
seconds
one million seconds is eleven
and a half days
god that
one billion seconds is thirty
one years
got
one trillion seconds is thirty
one thousand six hundred and
eighty eight years I just want
to help put in prospective what
we're talking about when we're
comparing millions and billions
and trillions of money that's
being spent.
The other point I want to make
is when we talk about this with
legislators whose votes we need
almost inevitably the response
that will get is it costs too
much which is why this piece
showed has been so incredibly
important for us to be able to
show that the amount of money
that we have spent on recar is
a few seconds compared to the
years that we've spent on on the
trillions of dollars that we've
spent on weapons and then also
we are now at a point where the
federal government has committed
us to a natch national security
policy that is recommitted to
the use of nuclear weapons and
the plan to rest to upgrade and
expand and do all of what needs
to be done for a new generation
of nuclear weapons to the tune
of trillions of dollars and we
are saying that it is a long
overdo for the government to
include a a line item in the
budget of trillions of dollars
that provides for the citizens
and residents of this country
who are going to be impacted by
that industry it is not our
position to challenge the use of
nuclear weapons that's been
quite as being done quite
effectively by other groups
hours it's simply to make the
case that if we are going to
continue to have a national
security policy that is
dependent on nuclear weapons
than that industry must re- be
held to have a line item in the
budget from our federal
government that provides
compensation for residents who
are impacted negatively by that
industry and that's what this is
about
the other response that we get
when we talk about recar is
people saying right here how is
it.
Possible that i've lived in new
mexico or my life and I know
nothing about this that goes all
the way back to nineteen ninety
one when record was first passed
by congress we had two senators
representing new mexico in
nineteen ninety one jeff
fingerman
and p diminishing people manage
you was sitting on the senate
appropriate he was the chair of
the senate appropriations when
reeker was being considered and
eventually passed we haven't
been able to ask senator
diminished she why he did not
include new mexico his home
state in the original recar but
we have had a chance to ask jeff
bingerman senator jeff bingamon
why he did not include new
mexico in the original recar and
his response very simply before
he escorted us out of his office
was we had no idea
and at this point i'm willing to
accept that because we've talked
to so many people about the
impact of the trinity barm our
new mexico and what we hear all
for an over again especially
when we were presenting
memorials in the state
legislature was how is it
possible that i've lived in new
mexico my entire life and I knew
nothing about this will let me
tell you some other things that
people don't know about the
state of new mexico did you know
that the state of new mexico had
the highest per capita
volunteers who who joined the
military at the outbreak of
world war two new mexico had
more people volunteer for
service than any other state in
the nation new mexico also had
the highest casualty read
per capita of any other state in
the nation new mexico also had
the highest number of donations
of materials and other things
that were called up to be given
to the military to help.
Build our response then any
other state in the nation we all
know about the now the whole
code talkers twenty nine who've
finally been recognized eight of
them were from new mexico after
pearl harbor the first combat
victims in world war two were
members of the new mexico
national guard who were serving
in the philippines when the
japanese attacked the
philippines that's who we are
and yet insult to injury is
being told for some reason we do
not we do not deserve the
benefits of breaker when it was
passed in nineteen ninety one it
was assumed that record would
provide for those people who had
been spot exposed to radiation
from the nevada tests at that
time we did not know that new
mexico was also reexposed by all
of the tests in nevada so it has
been accumulative
so I believe is that recar will
correct a glaring omission and
will provide finally the justice
and are resources that new
mexicans have deserved since
nineteen forty five.
I need to add to work a holly
said
is there is a lady lowest lipman
who has produced a documentary
it has been showing all over the
country and like calling stated
people are
amazed when they see this
documentary it is profound miss
lipman followed us around for
about almost ten years and in
this research that she was done
she's accumulated about five
hundred hours had to cut it down
to ninety
nine I need to let you know that
the
profound statements that we have
received from the people that
have seen the documentary is
that like colleague said they
can't believe they didn't know
this history it is going to be
showing in los ana moss which
was a major surprise that the
invited lowest lipman to present
there and it starts august
seventeenth for nine days
and the fact that they wanted to
it's gonna be during the up and
hymer film festival which is
kind of ironic
but are if any of you get the
opportunity to see it I think
it'll be world well worth the
time spent to see the
documentary it is profound and
would you reiterate where it's
going to be shown at the solar
solace center in los alamos it's
gonna be
on central avenue is what I
remember and it's in the
newsletter which you received
yeah I don't know I don't
remember the exact address but I
note central avenue
so you can also get online at a
first week bomb new mexico dot
com and go to screenings and it
will give you the time.
And place
I would also hope that you would
take a moment to look at the
handouts one of which includes
the impact of regard on the
state of new mexico new mexico
has the highest medical debt of
any state in the country and I
can tell you as someone who's
lived in new mexico for forty
years i've also lived all over
the country and I have a sense
of how new mexico is perceived
by people who've never been here
and know nothing about us and
it's assumed that were sort of
this quiet little brown stayed
out there in the southwest that
doesn't really do much but is a
great place for us to send
military and other projects that
no one else wants to to have in
their state and there's very
little that's understood about
the state of new max account
based on my twelve years plus of
working with the tv i'm
convinced that new mexico is
suffering from enter
generational trauma front
trinity and the medical debt
that we've acquired as a result
people wonder why new mexico is
one of the poorest states if not
the poorest state in the country
I can tell you why it's because
we have been systematically
suppressed and oppressed for
generations by our government
and previous governments the
economic impact of recar would
help new mexico recover who we
could be if we hadn't been
spending everything that we had
and selling our livestock in our
land and everything else in
search of the medical care in
some states somewhere that we
desperately need to stay alive
i've worked on the family trees
for down windows one of which
that is most impressive is that
that is the family tree for
burning scotiarise and i'd be
happy to send it to you can you
just say if a little bit about
the impact on your on your
family what kind of the speak
about the medical da.
New mexico population of about
two million people has medical
data eight hundred and eighty
seven million dollars the
highest in the country
I was born in carries all
all of my family my mom my
parents my answer my uncles
lived there too
we moved out of court give when
I was too so I didn't grow up in
carrier
but it was too late we had
already been exposed
every member every sibling that
my mother of my mother's that
had children has had cancer or
some radio generic disease
in my immediate family.
Excuse me
take a breath.
My oldest son.
Died from cancer.
So it still had to talk.
My only daughter survived direct
cancer.
My husband is a colin cancer
survivor
his youngest sister when his
younger sisters died from long
cancer
is other sister his older sister
head by road cancer
his brother had priced it cancer
his younger sister lives with
lupus
my mom
survived three types of cancer
she had by royal skin and breast
cancer
and the breast cancer didn't
come till she was eighty two
years and age so there is no
aged limit to when you can get
it
my only sister has survived
three bouts of direct answer it
when getting progressively worse
a brother had their word cancer
his youngest daughter had their
way cancer and more recently
this past just a few months ago
was suffering from breast cancer
another brother had prosteted
cancer
my youngest brother
lives with fireway disease and
on the recommendation of my
medical history my under canal
just told me get rid of your
favorite so I did
when you don't have a firewood
depresents are whole set of
different issues
you're having to be monitored
constantly your medication in
fact I just threw away I don't
know how many bars of different
doses by road medication that I
have had to take as my doors has
changed I get monitored every
six months I have lab worked on
every six months and depending
on that now currently i'm on too
direct medications because of
the the changes in my lab work
so
my
my family medical chart I list
the cancers there's like forty
four members of my family that
have.
Live through either cancer or
radio gender diseases seven
members have died
I only list individual I
understand each member of my
family once what I failed to do
is list the number of cancers
they have gotten for example one
of my first cousins
survived a brain tumor
survived
skin cancer and currently had to
have twenty percent for long
removed because she had lung
cancer
other
like my youngest had their road
cancer and breast cancer another
first case cousin
survived that we cancer and last
week found our cheese got brisk
cancer so many of my relatives
have had multiple like my mother
three
have survived or lived with
multiple cases we we don't ask
if we're going to get cancer we
ask when and we don't have an
age limit as to when you can get
it
I am five generations deep the
cancer's daughter with my great
grandfather who died of stomach
cancer and it's gone on down to
every generation
it's unconscionable that our
government refuses to
acknowledge as and to
accept
what we go through every day.
And I would remind you that you
know someone in congress said to
someone about this well let's
just wait because aren't they
all dead by now
and what people don't understand
is that there is no one to this
are because radiation exposure
has an impact on the genetic
make up of your children and
your your grandchildren and
hence for it in a court of a who
is their survivor of of cyroid
cancer has a nice a lovely young
niece name kenzie who has now a
college student in california
who this last year was diagnosed
with third cancer and so it's
the new generation is now
experiencing the impact of the
trinity bomb back in nineteen
forty five and this will
continue to be the legacy of the
state of new mexico and so the
fact that that the record bill
that is all it's left for us has
been stripped of medical care to
my mind is a travesty but we
have to keep break a live so
that we have something to work
with and we have to continue to
tell this story and one of the
reasons why I share the military
history of new mexico is that I
am tired of people thinking that
new mexico is this poor little
state of brown people with their
hands out to the government
we need to impress upon this
government what new mexico has
contributed even before there
was a united states to the
legacy of this part of this
country and the cultures that
are a part of this this portion
of our nation this is incredibly
important and we're committed to
making it happen and
we know that my chance and is
coming to las cruces next week
he's coming to campaign for a
vet we've made it clear to them
that they need to pass this
because if about horrible is
going to be reelected in new
mexico she's going to have to
support the full recobil.
She doesn't seem to realize how
many of her own constituents
depend upon recap so we have to
make that clear representative
hall if you are anyone else can
find a way to get an audience
with speaker johnson and impress
upon him what passing record
would mean to new mexico to the
reelection of event heral and
also to all of those republican
districts that will benefit i've
been telling republicans pass
recar and when you go home you
will be met with parades of
gratitude from your constituents
for passing this bill how do we
impress upon the republicans and
congress and pacific
specifically the house and how
important reca is to all of us
and particularly to the
republicans in the states that
have been impacted by this
you know another thing were
the requirements to get ricker
right now are you had to have
lived in new mexico through
nineteen sixty two I desended
are not eligible and it's our
kids not better getting it are
kids of grandkids.
Thank you
because we are running so short
on time um I would like to
i'm sorry senator pinto won't
like to see
thank you matter and it's more
of a comment than especially
about the area and where where
we are at and thank you for your
presentation in the fact that
you brought especially when we
talk about the military and the
defense of our dayship because
our veterans answered the call
and even our constituents
answered to come because right
here to some east of gallop is
the old army depot and it was
you know a place where they
dispose it
be initials where they now
expose
it it's a hazard of substance
when you talk about lead our
snick
pcbs and explosive compounds
that don't surrounding the you
know people in those areas were
exposed to and
we should not be in this zone of
sacrifice
unknowingly so it employed that
we actually really put things in
place to make sure we're
protecting our people at the
best of our ability because that
that area along with what we
just the presentation we had
just above this is
what surrounded by and we
shouldn't have been
so what whatever we can do for
you but thank you for your
presentation at the kissi thank
you manager
me thank you senator steinborn
thank you think you are for your
presentation it kind of renewing
the reasons why we need to
support regard and I think
you're point about how it
continues generally
generationally in such an
important point
so I would like to move out of
chair that we we issue another
letter
to that we work with the
committee here the downwinners
figure out exactly who should be
addressed.
To and congress so I know you
mentioned names but let's work
together to get the right
congressional leaders on that
letter.
That the new mexico radioactive
and hazardous materials
committee urgently supports the
passage of reaker to include new
mexicans effected by radiation
exposure and to include
new generations of new mexicans
who are experiencing the
generational impacts health
impacts of exposure and that
further more time you can work
to make sure that we have the
right wording it companies is
the scope of the legislation
that meets the needs of what
we're experiencing here in
mexico that's my motion
me I say some teaser we would
really appreciate it if you
would direct the letter to mike
johnson speaker mike johnson is
the only person that is right
now the deterrent from getting
it passed in the house but thank
you for that and I think you
know but including our
delegation so others know that
the legislature I think in a
bipartisan we always have
supported recar that you know
it's good for them I know that
we're for them to have that
support as they advocate thank
you do I have a second
second by representative johnson
center set of oh i'm sorry to
you
i'm sorry did you want to have a
comment or the
ok.
Yeah.
I forgot to put mine any
opposition
to the letter okay great thank
you we have a letter
going to speaker johnson and
will work on crafting now and
thank you for all the screen
information that we will include
in our reasons for a supporting
regard to
past and
also I just like to say I was
able to be and do see when you
had one of your many um
press events there that was
included are congress's people
um
is it harsey
thank you so yes and
then a big amount I have been
doing okay i'll get it right and
they were they were just really
great to be there and and
everybody needs to know that
josh holly's wife.
Was born and her family live in
the morning new mexico and i'm
i'm counting on there to be part
of the reason why judge holly
include a rate new mexico out of
the record of bill or he can't
go home so
who know right and I just like
to encourage everyone to see the
film if they get a chance is it
possible that that letter could
be handed to my chance and when
he's in new mexico next week.
Somebody who's gonna see him
course possible
I won't be going I didn't know
the speaker was even going to be
in our state next week right
it all would pay two thousand
dollars please you can be there
with i'm just I don't know why
it takes for pleading anything I
know played a goal
her representative if you could
if you could
maybe work with us about how to
to present this to him and and
get some delegation to speak to
him while he's actually in new
mexico
thank you.
Well we'll see what we can deal
and swear in last cruises but
not usually invited to those
events but
um thank you so much for your
perseverance and we just
really trolley support you know
the efforts for new mexico's you
know get the letter
to the net you have a tone but
she has it you know
do that yeah that's right
yeah
I mean yes what will work on
that so thinking again thank you
thank you madam chairman
in community.
Okay next we have the funding
for the clean up of abandoned
neglected and contaminated sites
just in bal the bureau chief
of ground water quality bureau
and also kelsey
never environmental manager of
albuquerque elio county water
utility authority
are they here
yes okay forty five minutes
problems
ok and
we are running a little bit like
forty five minutes behind.
So we don't want to rush you but
committee members if you can
keep that in mind also
with your question sorry burn
east
and great secret part.
Whenever you're ready.
Madam chair of members of the
committee thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak to
today about the neglected
contaminant sites program
project that we've been working
on and this is an update from
previous discussion by her
director rodrick back in
december
so
start with third
trying to explain what is a
neglected contaminated site why
these sites are neglected um
where they are located.
When what is currently being
done in what we hope the next
steps will be.
Neglected contaminated sites
are sites that have of either
known are suspected um
contamination that would cause a
threat to human health in the
environment and I will
appropriately as well.
These are sites that are falling
through the cracks
um clean up assistance through
existing state or federal
programs does not exist.
Um
these cases the responsible
party for the contamination of
the release either cannot be
identified or located or they
don't acknowledge the
responsibility or are unable to
unwilling to proceed.
Uh I think i've jumped all the
way to the four slide
sorry repeat the idea that the
contaminated sites are
considered neglected when we
can't identify an rp
and
this one other the documents
that we've created at its and a
citation later in this then the
slight is that the report and
the origin of the list of the of
all of these sites is
the
process in which we go through
the the the circle of process so
the grandmother quality bureau
has the super fund oversight
section and then as part of
their work
gets funding from the federal
government to
do the preliminary assessments
which is the document search
very similar to the phase one
environmental site assessments
that I discussed earlier today
and then they go uncollect some
samples and they see if the site
will score and relative to the
national are priorities list and
basically the list that we've
compiled is the collection of
the other sites that we've
looked at and they did not score
on the state side we have the
state cling a program which is
the
program for
the beep and regulations uhm
in the
the utility of that program
basically requires a responsible
party the the state does not
have a fund to assist in the
clean up of sightsome it is the
responsible parties
responsibility to do so but in
some cases they don't exist.
So the problem is is that right
now the new mexico environment
department doesn't have the
legal authority or the funding
or the staffing.
Necessary to address
contaminated sites without
responsible parties
that cannot be reimmediated
other under other state or
federal programs.
The.
Then the question as well where
these exist these sites are all
across the state new mexico and
i've i've skipped down to the
next slide
please go ahead and ignore the
the the colors of the of the
state there was an external
choice it doesn't have a
particular meaning other than I
looked pretty
the note the
inverted triangle so those are
the locations of these sites all
across the state
in these cases the releases may
have occurred decades ago
the responsible party would be
long gone and then contamination
persists
uhm
we've got three hundred sites
uh craft up there
in thirty of them or a dark have
documentation where we do have a
release of a water contaminant.
The.
Next line
the slightest is to give an
update relative to the carlo
village cleaner side
carlisle and sorry
it's a
I yes i'm read that connection
earlier today uhm
the.
The environment department
changed the regulations in
twenty eighteen to address
soil vapor contamination so we
have volta
cornered compounds or a
particular concern and we change
the regulations to make it
certain that we had the
authority to regulate those to
be protective of human health
because one of the prenicious
things about chlorinate itself
and says that they will
evaporate you can go into the
air in that can include
buildings and so people are
experts without their knowledge.
And so we did a little bit of
research and we identify the
bunch of all dry cleaners across
the state and in their process
were trying to take a look at us
where we can identify some
funding that we have sometimes
it it comes to us in in
unexpected ways and in this
particular case we had some left
over funding
to do so i'm scary in this
particular case we denied this
particular
grouping of a two dry cleaners
in this location and we've heard
it to the superfound oversight
section and they did the initial
investigation
and so since we've last spoken
about this um
it's been recognised that this
is such a a large
high concentration a significant
rest of the community that we
referred it to
the federal superfound this
section to help address now in
the super fund group there is a
the federal levelers to two
groups there is the remediation
which is the remunition group
that handles the all the sites
that are on the national
priorities list
when there are discoveries in
which it is
a very acute and the risk level
is higher than there's the
removal section the removal
sections will come in and
address the problem on an
emergency basis and that's what
happened here so.
The remote section is a agreed
uh
and done additional
investigation with our
assistance and the identified
particular area that they are
going to address with vapor
mitigation systems
and have asked for the state to
accept responsibility for the
operation and maintenance of
those
remediation systems after they
have install them and put them
in for and and run them for a
year and so we've have accepted
that uhm the long term is that
we expect that the site will be
proposed
on to the npl less in september.
Yeah.
No it would.
This site is
as an example and it is and
depending on your perspective
it's a great example or it's a
horrible example right this site
is in a location that has a
population that
that
scores on the list and therefore
the feds will assist in in the
clean up.
The.
Um.
Was the facts a pattern for this
particular site is repeated
all across new mexico right and
so
just because the population is
high then this will be taken
care of but
there is no answer for
the slightly less contaminated
or a slightly less populated
it's still a problem it's still
exposing people or potentially
exposing people um
we don't have an answer for
that.
So I go to the next line and
talk about the what has been
done
we have published a
three reports the neglected
contaminated site report in
twenty twenty one which is the
excerpts that I have shown so
far
and then we also did uhm a
programmatic gap analysis and in
the question is what would it
take to set up a program
within the environment
department too handled this
this problem.
When of course as you can
imagine it's a funding and
staffing is is is paramount
and then the next thing we did
was a
created and implementation plan
and we outlined the steps that
would have taken order to set up
the program.
The.
And the next letter show what to
conceptually what we expect to
do moving forward under.
Um we've identified that we can
make some amendments to the
water quality act
to
follow the governor's fifty year
old water action plan
implementation accent c one um
when a provide authority
to develop regulations to create
a statelight response
investigation and remediation
program
we also need to act a liability
framework to clarify liability
and provide liability
protection
in the context of a beam and
water pollution and
contamination and soil and swell
vapor
and then violate we need to
create a fund.
With it substantial
appropriation to support the
program work and then address
contamination such that we are
not forced to pick winners and
losers across communities across
the state.
Um and in the next slide is the
links for those four reports
that I have three reports and
the fiftier water action plan.
And with that I will
turn back to the chair.
I think you will go to your next
presenter and it will take
questions after both of you are
presented
up and sorry
I could up renewed madame share
members of the committee my name
is costy picknell and I work for
the water thirty in alva kirky
we call ourselves and want to
thirty for short gives me up a
very long name I rule the water
thirty is the environmental
manager which means that it is
my job to oversee an implement
hour source water protection
program and i'm here today to
provide you with a stakeholder
perspective on the important set
up new budget contamination
sites and their immediation in
terms of source water protection
as you can go to the next slide
please
I just want to offer a common a
definition for what source water
is in industry we define source
water as water within
ground water and ribbers and
leaks that supply drinking water
it's sort of like pre drinking
water if you will it's it's
water that exists in nature
before we access it for
our needs as with humans in this
idea of source what are
protection refers to policies
and actions that are taken to on
proactively prevent
contamination and in the cases
that contemination has occurred
to it steps to remediate that as
quickly as possible and the
stems from the idea that a water
quality can't ultimately become
a water quantity issue something
with las vegas with the fires so
we know that water quality can
can impact our water quantinary
building access clean drinking
water i've been going to the
next slide please
in order to
determine and protect in there
is a general ways to protect
source water it's important for
us to identify on what risks
exist within your source water
environment so are on the slide
here I have a graphic of the
water through this developed to
explain what's potential sources
of groundwater contimination
are.
And the way that we assess risk
of these um these things are
there two parts I want is the
likelihood of occurrence and the
second is the several day the
impact so
just going and picking a couple
examples from this diagram item
be is a legacy landfill so the
way that the water pretty would
written first as a medium to
high likelihood of
an impact and source water and
also a high severity of impacts
simply because these would be
pre regulation land bills if the
online the types of materials
like that could be in them I
tend to be more hazardous and
less known than post regulation
landfill so we would assign
those are a higher risk I
suppose to for instance item a
commercial industrial leaks and
spills these are less likely to
occur although I could have a
high sort of impact on the
industry
and I do when I highlight that
i'm neglected contamination
sites are confirmed to anyone in
this categories they they they
can be on petrol and sites they
can be arm you know dry cleaners
old are farms that had leaks of
fertilizer etc
they fall within all these
categories that are shot in the
slide and there is why we want
to assess where they are from
utility perspective is that
knowing what they are and have
an idea of what the risks are in
our tourists for a swatter means
that we can then create a plan
to protect our source water
being going to the next life
please
i'm just offering a the three
components of the water the
resource wire protection plan
are we asked for a solved three
questions the first which I
explained on the previous side
is what I was threats to our
source waters
the second is that what
protection measures can reduce
and eliminate those threats so
with it out with an albuquerque
for instance the water thought
he has partnered with the city
of albuquerque and bringing your
county to promote on best
mentioned practices to promote
effective disposal household has
waste or unpharmaceuticals.
N we also engaged with state
agencies like named as the third
part to advocate a four time we
clean up of sites that we feel
are a high risk i'm too our
source water
something good at the next slide
this is just an example of a how
the water thirty engages with
contermination sites and white
my role primarily is the water
whenever we identify a
contemination site that might
warrant further engagement or
investigation on our side
determinance risk to our source
water we kind of follow these
steps in the left
the first is that we identify a
regulatory authority and
responsible party and after we
do that we are gathered the
information that we need to
that's available to understand
the nature and extent of the
contamination and we do this
sort of a parallel to what the
response of parties require to
do so we can I ensure that our
idea of you need your external
contamination either lines or
doesn't align with the
responsibilities and if it
doesn't if we can figure out a
wine advocate for her
you know what needs to be done
what what might be missing
following that after we have
that information and are able to
develop that conceptual site
understanding we then move into
assessing the threat to our
source water often it's ground
water but you know occasionally
there could be potential service
water impacts
and then finally based on that
information that we develop the
console conceptual site model
we've developed we then I work
with the responsible agency to
advocate for a timely and
complete cleaner
that's a normal contamination
site for negligent
contermination sites these are
offer a unique challenge because
we are just mentioned are unable
to identify responsibility and
anybody would be the normal
regulatory authority does not
have a regulatory authority over
these sites
you know there is little to no
information about the site and
it's contamination which then
makes it difficult for us to
assess
the source what are threads send
there's a lot of uncertainty
with that.
And then finally again because
there's no authority your
responsibility we don't really
have a mechanism for advocating
for offer clean up
and if you can get at the next
slide
I am also picking on the curled
bill clear a site because it is
a really great example of a
what contemination site it has
just mentioned they've been
working with the epa on
emergency response to mitigate
the immediate impact of the site
i'm so presently the only
regulatory authority with the
site is emergency response
you know the the site
information has limited me new
we know it's a historic dry
cleaner that was active at a
time when they're regulations
around the chemicals and how
they are disposed of we know
that does operation release
directly insolvent since the
ground and that those solvents
then created a beeper plume and
a subservice contamination
that's all we know we don't know
how deep that contamination
won't we don't know if it's
impacted water and so because of
those reasons we at as the
utility are unable to am assess
the threat to source water from
a site like this because either
is
no mechanism for complete
investigation I do they're not
being a responsible party
so as I have it read it again
we're not unable to add it for a
timely clean up because there is
no funny source there is no
response party and there's a no
regulatory authority for us to
unwork with you advocate for
that
back clean up in you know
just an as a side you we have I
happen to utility line as an
example in the slide because
this is with an albequirky we
have a water lines that we have
to maintain about this site that
have required us to take another
level of
care when it comes to it working
on these hugely lines of another
interesting side effect of these
types of sites and again their
present all over the city as
justin or what it's and likely
this one of my you know it
listed as a
superfund site for clean up
their super fund but not all the
ones in the state on how ba.
That luck
so we can go to the next item I
final slide
just bring it back to these
contemination sites at a local
scale from the skill v water
thirty
just ensure that there were
three hundred potential sites
that have been identified so far
around the state i'm over fifty
of those are in burning your
county and the water for your
service both albuquerque and the
surrounding county that are
connected to a system we have
you know what negligent
contermation sites as carrying a
greater risk are two source
water again permanently because
there's no mechanism to clean
them up and as such they're able
to languish on the ground for a
long period of time and and I
have more time interact with
source waters
arm and finally the water is in
full support of a fully funded
like a contimination site
program for more perspective it
allows to understand and better
I set the risks to our source
water and then more
ineffectively engaged in
progress towards clean up in
that from our perspective you
know a I would argue that it
would benefit many communities
across the the state not just
large utilities as well so
thank you and with that I think
we'll stand for questions.
I think you manage members of
the community thank you for your
presentation
as i've been there
washington organic story to them
does the state of new makes do
we have protections when you
talk about source water in the
in the fake the protected area
where no
well I mean this describe in
portland there is an area that
you can hike up there look at
the water but you can't touch it
that's all you can do and nobody
else's allowed in there you
can't even drive up there if you
want to go up to where they end
so they don't treat their water
and that's the I think they
probably have the best water
quality in the US
do we have anything like that in
new mexico.
I think that the the locust of
that question is actually is
kind of related to individual
water utility authorities or the
equivalent
I do know that there are for the
for
utilities that have a source was
surface water sources and things
specifically santa fe I know
that they have a couple of lakes
high upon amount and that they
do have restrictions relative to
access to that drinking water
supply so I believe that that's
a
common thing i'd think that's
actually specifically related to
drinking water
regulations so I am unfamiliar
with us so the entity there's so
being is not a large community
and missus makes a very small
scale not like you're serving
the the city of portland
it's the city of santa fe
madam sherit and members of the
committee if I may offer also so
the water thirty has elected to
run its own source water
protection program because we
have the capacity to do so but
perhaps not and grow up a couple
of year but I believe within the
drinking water quality bureau
the state of new mexico does
have e a couple staff members
that are dedicated to assisting
communities with source or
protection and there are staff
i'm horrible to help prepare
some sort of protection plans
and assess risks to his
communities arm at the state
there are there are stop
dedicated to that thank you
madame chairman that's all here
thank you
boy
thank you manager I have some
questions I want to say I think
this a perfect time for us to do
this because of all the one time
money we have in one thing you
on this committee over a number
of years and you know being that
where the radioactive and has
there is materials committee he
started
see
this history of contamination
across our state.
Some turns were winning the
battle against it more clean it
happens in terms were losing the
battle like when you know learn
about pharson inner we have new
contamination and forever
chemicals and it's like a man
it's so in this battle right
we're in a position now with all
this one time money where we can
actually go on the offense and
we can clean up and put to
productive economic use these
sites that as you can see from
the map and once you look at
that you say it's existing every
one of our communities these are
deadsons right economically
because they're not able to be
productive and there might be
threatening groundwater your
statistic about hundred and
sixty sides for whatever was out
of the three hundred maybe
threats to to ground water and I
mean that's pretty scary you
think about it and we're not
doing anything about it because
we haven't had the money to and
the environment departments
can't see pushing the boundaries
on what we're asking the deal
what they can do with their
funded to do this is an area
where really we've got to be
aggressive and proactive I think
and use this one time money to
help clean up new mexico so
that's where
I do hope we create a clean up
fund if I could could be
simplistic about and kind of
give it a marketing phrase a
clean it fund that we can use to
clean up these sides.
I'm I do have a few a few
questions
so.
First of all the whole issue of
legal authority are you one
hundred percent certain that
right now madame chair that new
mexico if you have truly a sigh
with no responsible party to me
that says it's a.
It's a.
Which caused an abandoned
condamned site where the owner
is walked away I would assume
right is that what that means or
is there an owner of these
proper user
the owner deceased her.
Manager members of the committee
that's a very good question
there in the apaitment
regulations we have various
definitions are specifically
relative to responsible party
one of the definitions is um
well the responsible party and
it is it has been described by
folks on the other side of the
table as a a circular argument
in the fact that it is whoever
has been required to a bait and
therefore
we've had some some push back
against that now
the big pictures is the state
responsible party
and liability framework is is a
little bit different than the
federal version and
we believe that an adoption of
the the federal circle
liability framework would be
advantagious for for us and for
the for the state
part of the liability structure
also gives protections right and
I spoke earlier about the folks
conducting her phase one so the
assessment the main advantage
were the the purpose of doing
that is provide the innocent
land owner defense and so that
if you do the research and you
prove that you were not
responsible that property that
if you docked me that the
existing contamination was
someone else's then you can
purchase the property and and
the eligible for
liability protection and also
some federal funding
opportunities like targeted
brown fills assessment and some
clean up for
so complicated complicated issue
and adult.
Totally know that I got the
answer to the question about it
where is the owner of this thing
and you know maybe i'm sure it's
technical about what is neglect
who is responsible party
I can't imagine that a new owner
of a property if they exist
isn't responsible cause it's not
like they can sell or not
responsible and then lose that
property anywhere they weren't
so anyway so i'm just gonna put
a few things out there and time
assured so we don't have to go
totally down the rap at all each
month
so i'll just say that what you
propose as I wonder when you
really dig into it how much
authority you actually have
right now to be able to do it I
mean can you have an moa for
example with a local government
if a property is essentially
condemned or whatever.
And they already have kind of
local government authority to be
able to do something with that
by virtue of kind of a parallel
designation can they not do an m
away with the state then do
something without having to pass
a bill giving new legal
authority swell out of attorneys
in the legislature right and you
know you start doing that kind
of stuff than you know you
create this whole harness now so
if you don't need to create a
new area of authority is better
than not even go there if we can
just give you the funding and
then you can work with local
governments so that's a question
that
question number two is
do you really need like this
liability protection because
that's another thing these
defense attorneys really hate
so immunity
yeah so you know throw that out
there as a number two concerned
but the money parts good but I
just throw that out there have
you all problems you probably
haven't drafted a bill or
madam madam sure members of the
committee
we have not drafted a bill we
are currently in the then I
apologize this is my first
experience in the whole
legislative part sounds great
but i'm not really sure if this
is a going to end up being you
know a governor's bill in the
agency bills are um a a sponsor
in the legislature for this but
we're we're doing a research
we're identifying the the issues
that we need to address
ticked to go back to your
question about your
common about the the liability
protection in this particular
case that would be protective of
uhm at the state but the other
individuals that would purchase
problems
there may be a good we could
think
okay so I would you know
sometimes agencies will work
with a legislator on kind of a
technical basis even though they
have an asselling door to bill
taping in.
Specially since you are the
experts I would volunteer to
open a file to to work through
this independent of whether or
not I are someone else with
sponsor it definitely would urge
they get you know as you
mentioned it in your
presentation this is part of the
governors fifty year water plan
let's put some teeth in that
let's put the money in it out
with this one time money so we
don't leave this contamination
behind when the good times are
quite as planner for.
But I love to work with you on a
bill i've heard a number of how
much money it would cost to your
address is abandoned sites
you know i've heard the number
of hundred and fifty million
dollars is that in the bar park
or have you do you have a number
of portal
of madam chair members of the
community thank you
it is a very difficult to put a
number on the election the
discussion in the previous
depending urania mines in some
cases they haven't been
investigated it's very difficult
to
come up with a total dollar
amount
I i'm afraid to do that because
I am afraid of the number
someone around the zero
colloquial idea i'll give you
the one example that you know we
we had a good day we went to the
environment apartment went to a
new pa big check event in santa
fe and they gave
through a competitive bid
process the
return received half a million
dollars to do a targeted brown
films assessment in their
community now that involves
basically phase ones and face
too so doesn't involve a clean
up and I think they were gonna
get maybe twenty sites looked at
but I have a million dollars
i've got at least three hundred
if you look at the investigation
and implementation plan we
talked about you know like a a
rough idea of what we could do
with a certain amount of money
and I think it was like I guess
thirteen million dollars we had
a political we had a vision of
what that could look like and
you know we expect a certain
amount that will be simple you
know we can twenty thousand
fifty thousand we can you'll
scoop up some dirt take that
away clean it up if we run in
the groundwater contamination
problems will those are going to
be two hundred thousand five
hundred thousand million dollars
five million you can do.
I it's difficult to put a number
on what that is but what I can
tell you that would you get to
grow water contamination that is
very very expensive and so i'm
so here at your sand so you're
saying you got to do it
assessment
and characterization of on these
sites so that they knew what the
priorities are you know how much
you really need what we could do
so maybe it is a multi fair
thing with us course I would be
just as happy if we put five
hundred million dollars in a
fine and we know we're going to
have clean up costs unless you
go back in put the money aside
while we have it and starting to
trust fund like senator
suggested over there and really
recognize and then maybe use
this fund for other purposes
besides just contaminate a
neglected sites and we could use
this for some of the iranian
mind sites and you know and we
start hearing from
orphan well you know people
start wanting to know okay well
you're going to put all this
money inside for cleaning up
does this include other than
contamination and it's like
yeah there's different funds in
honestly we should be going
after a more however we can but
I think
it would be getting awk never
wondered to help develop a bill
these legal authorities that you
think you need to change but
flash shows out and get him in a
bill number two it might be good
to come up with two scenarios
one plan a few gives the money
we can characterise all these
sites and then come back to you
with another number to clean him
up
or option b which may be
absolutely just we just come
with a big chunk of money we
make a hard place to
go
what's the instant i'm I am
certain that are that the
hundred and fifty million
dollars could be well spent and
we would take care of the
problem i'm
so yes yes please I think it's
the correct answer.
We
we have enough problems out
there that
we will need to
you could use a characterised
them prioritise them that's the
big thing and uhm
and then try to take care of as
many problems as we can there
you go recognizing hundred fifty
million may well not be enough
by a long shot I
I would love to come back in a
generation and take bats on or
will you take that's now the
wall will come back and ten
years so maybe it's fifty
million guests the party started
we characterize these sites we
have enough money to get to
serious work on many of them but
it's not enough when we
recognize abandoned uranium
mindsights and other sites that
hundred fifty million his face
wi.
Sounds good to me and love to
work with you are on on looking
at the legal language you think
you need and maybe we can start
to try to bet that and
that you know talking to my
colleagues try to get in front
of the lfc to start to build
support for this idea of cleaner
that I have made sure thank you
ok next we have
sen into a nets to deal with
thank you
I too am real interested in and
I think
i'm wondering why you think you
need a forty to develop
regulations
uhm
because you have regulatory
authority to enforce the
provisions and these are
violations their threatening the
health whatever I mean
if you think you need
regulations regulations are
easier but we new mexico still
have such everyone doctoring
so I I don't I mean I I don't I
think you could actually do it
if you want to and if you have a
will but the real problem is the
money
and if we could pass whatever
statute giving you authority if
there's no money it doesn't
matter and that's the biggest
lesson i've learned has a
legislator is requiring the
state to do something and not
putting money there is just
useless the money is actually
more important than the
regulations I think because I
think you could argue under your
mandate has an agency you have
regulatory authority and could
start setting up the framework
the liability framework
this is too vague for me to
liability protections for the
abatement of water pollution and
contamination is it the person
doing the abatement that's
getting a liability the you know
at this
it's it's too vague but you
should be careful with liability
because you don't want to open
open this to.
Under cripple is people who
think they can just come and do
whatever they want because
they're abuned from liability
you know and they and we've seen
that if they have immunity they
have no interest in doing it I
mean you know egg negligence I
don't think we should wave
negligent um
road actions you know when I
mean still sure so I I was a
little bit confused by that
liability framework uhm the uh.
Chair and
committee members and that is
particular phrase that
you know we
I am thinking about that in
relative to adapting the the
federal circle liability
framework and that includes
it in a cost recovery you know
for a person who is responsible
and will clean it up but we're
gonna go back after you can find
the okay
that needs to be clarified coz
the way it is now you're going
to raise the hackles of a one
blurs so you should you should
say extent it may be something
establishing establishing a
clean now find the liable person
later kind of approach because
the that makes a lot of sense
instead of letting it turn into
this driving situation which is
in my district and i'm very
grateful that you've taken it on
i'm curious how much is it cost
to department to do the work
that you've done so far do you
know I I don't know of the top
of my head the total I can I
think believe for the like the
vapor of mitigation system that
I referenced earlier I believe
that those are going to cost two
million dollars and something
like two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars a year for
maintenance for that little
building I think it's it's more
than just the building it's at
some additional residences and
businesses around it for the
entire area that was effective
not the entire area there was
affected but a portion of the
bulls eye that is above a
specific risk level
and then wants the
once it enters into the national
priorities less than
a larger area will be addressed
and we're going to
assess an assistant and
work this system as best we can
so that all the folks in the
neighborhood.
Are protected as quickly as
possible I have gotten a lot of
questions about it and it
appeared on next door and I
responded I just want to offer
to you that I would be happy to
post a town hall um to have
discussions because all all we
got with a letter
and you know that raised a lot
of questions about what this
meant and how how either risks
the neighbor that I believe that
the neighbors in well obviously
the neighbors you the residences
that you've tested or are
informed but the broader
community is concerned
so I just want to offer to help
you
with you know discussing it in
and do anything possible to
facilitate um I wanted to
clarify because the letter I
don't have them for me but I
recall feeling it was vague on
what we are talking about what
the vapors were polluting where
they polluting our indoor air
where they polluting the water
table where they polluting the
soil like which you should we
not have a garden you know it
was confused it was
that would I remember I recall
but I don't remember how it was
freezed so could you clarify
what are the risks of these
papers
madam chair of them members
with respect to that letter I
will get a hold of that one in
review it in and get back to
your assistance to that
interpretation
but in general the risk driver
for the for the area is
inholation of the vapors within
the homes
so indoor quality
senator I don't remember the
language but I do remember it
was vague so I appreciate that
and I offered to help as well I
think this is really important
the the neglected contamination
sites the abandoned sites.
It's it's a really big problem I
mean this dry cleaners
it's a very old neighborhood and
that neighborhood you know there
was no protection back then and
the neighbor you know which had
the jet flu the jeff fuel plumb
so the neighborhoods some people
are asking me as it's another
and thank you for this
for this because it was like
well maybe this no you don't
think it is
met insurance senators that you
look as
i'm currently bulkiels check the
plume is
further south than where this
area is much for themselves and
they do not interact at all
they're not interacting but is
it another plan we have the jet
fuel ploom and then do we have
another plum and that bloom has
been monitored although I think
the monitoring
isn't sufficient
but is this being minted in the
same way that batch up for your
blood has been monitored on
madam chair and I sent a receipt
to deal up as um so that's the
big issue with the size we don't
know we don't know if there is a
ground water impact at this
point and that's from the water
is prepared perspective what the
major concern is around this
site i'm and others like it is a
need to be able to fully
investigate them when there is
no party to pay for that
investigation and you know
ideally anyway you could assume
that and and do the
investigation so we can
determine if there is apply to
my grandmother we don't know at
this moment thank you this may
be something that you can also
do an mo with bring your county
since they run the water of
their part of the water
authority
oh okay and you're on the water
authority so seems like because
there was collaboration in
sighting and also paying for the
monitors for the jet fields
please and so could that happen
here I met insurance under a
steel up as to be specific the
those the role that the water
pretty pleased when it comes to
your reference or a couple of
outlay requests for the monday
noise.
I'm that is specifically so that
we can determine the risk to our
source water it is not too
characterize a site we the water
is position is that we don't
want to assume responsibility
for assessing a site because
that responsibility lies with
the responsible site party in
these cases there isn't one so
unfortunately that
responsibility that
responsibility would I think
likely light with you
investigate them or someone else
that's with the tricky part is
about these sites as they're for
normal everybody since everybody
else's problem right if normal
sites that have a response to
party the responsibilities on
them to investigate it and and
clean it up it's the one pretty
will not assume that
responsibility we do advocate
very strongly but we would like
to see in terms of investigation
that we feel the best filmy gaps
in that investigation but again
those monitoring wells that we
can stalled we've installed one
we have a a project to install
another are purely to
monitor our source water quality
in assessor there are any
changes in those sites that
would pose a greater risk to our
source water that we then need
to act on isn't this a little
bit like the fox guarding the
chicken house if you're asking
the responsible parties to do
the monitoring they have
absolutely no incentive to fight
I mean to find anything
so why would they do it
manual community members said
it's my job to make them do that
I think that's the quick the
shortest answer to it um
and what's the consequence of
medium chair if they don't
I am sure the committee is
the
under the of baitman regulations
and the penalty structure
the penalties can be as much as
ten thousand dollars per day for
a tell your act
depending on the particular for
a responsible party are there
enough people to enforce.
This in your department
madam chair committee members
enforcement is is difficult and
challenging
it is it takes a lot of effort
to do so
and it's always been
uhm
you know choosing the right time
and location to have the best
benefit for
the environment and to be the
determined
um
deterrent for
other
responsible parties right if
they see they can get away from
get away with it then we have to
make sure that they get a
different message
I don't see a lot of just a will
for
denial
for folks that have uh
the money to do the the work for
first that have the money but a
lot of rural communities were
talking about little dry
cleaners little gas stations
little that do not have the
money and don't have an
infrastructure to dispose of
this properly and put it out in
the back and
it's a bigger problem in I would
be happy to work with you on
figuring out ways and and figure
out if if we can get the
financing to do a better job so
that the messages the rather who
you are you can't just pollute
our our water **** nearly add
so thank you manager sure thank
I then thank you for the
presentation and neglected
manager thank you
senator rodriguez for our last
quick question if you could keep
the briefthank you the answers
to
thank you met a return and good
afternoon again just
thanks
I just have a question here
madame chairman because i'm a
little bit confused about.
You indicated justin that you
don't have the authority to
clean up at these sites and
someone is retarking without the
responsible party involved in
some then let me just bring sat
map and then are promised to let
you respond we do have the
corrective action plan that we
are ready
we have established that funds
for the new mexico to the
environment department in your
already administered the correct
of action fund for clean up of
some contamination I know it was
intended initially to to clean
up
like for example all gas tanks
that were left under ground by
gas stations from many years ago
that have leaked into the acquis
and that's what the fund is for
but it's it's called corrective
action fund for that reason and
you do administer so why would
you indicate that you didn't
just educate me here why would
you say that you don't have the
authority maybe there's
something we can do make it more
clear
manager members of the committee
yes the corrective action fund
is one of the funds for cleanups
in the environment department we
have multiple funds for a
different specific purposes so
the corrective action fund is
specifically for releases from
underground storage tanks and
the
the the mechanism for that is
quite strict
to the point where as an example
in groundwater we have the state
clean up program the state water
flows down here ground orders at
the bottom grandma quality
period deals with the things
that doesn't fit in other
regulatory authorities and my
example for that is like when
the tanker middle delivery to an
underground storage take they
didn't couple the tank and the
tanker together correctly and it
spilled out over the sides of
the underground storage thank
that was not eligible to be
cleaned up under the patrolling
storage tank bureau.
Corrective action find because
it didn't emanate from the tank
itself unfortunately
the details and the details are
important so
I am
in my next presentation I will
do my best to further
discuss what we're lacking yeah
and liability authorities thank
you that but even with that
limited
they can't see limit authorities
I do believe you have authority
but within the corrective action
fund the the limitations of a
language and the purpose of the
fan for example it still sats
the precedence by which a
legislature has given you
authority to administer some
form of clean up in this case it
has to be the like yassed weeks
and so on but just a look at
that perhaps there's something
in there that already allows you
to do it and if we need it to
treat the language to insure
that gives you authority to do
it all the other cleanups and I
think
just time boring has been
advocating for a clean up fund
for a long time in fact I
thought you had already
established that but I just saw
it here hasn't yet that are
anyway so that's basically it
and in one last I promise
manager because I think this is
important and then i'm going to
stop in there I did notice just
and then on your app and this is
page I don't have the patient
number I don't know where it is
to point you to a better
anywhere one of your right under
the staple
where it says
okay where it says why do
neglected contermination sites
continue to exist and on the
fourth bullet or it says that
the new mexico environment
department current at her
department's current state clean
up programs require responsible
parties to take the initiative
my point is madame chairman that
if you yourselves are making
this requirement
the the.
Fact that you use are to insure
that responsible parties have to
take an initiative first then
you at the department level can
in fact make that change if you
establish the language in the
programs that says we require
responsible parties to take the
initiative to assist and fund
the clean up of these sites then
if it's just within the
department itself to regulation
or program regulations then you
can make that change to through
the same method to indicate
something to this effect perhaps
okay just food for that the new
mexico environment department
will make every effort to
locate and recover for example
the responsible parties but in
in you know and if not then you
can always go back and again
recover the the cost is when I
was trying to see for the for
correct in this damages and III
guess if you have it in your
program rules then you had to
have established it maybe not
you but however at the
department of environment so you
can change that that way we can
do something about all these
different contaminated sites I
really find in I understand that
but just wanted to have you
maybe take a look at that.
Manager committee members thank
you for the question then and
comment
I think that one short answer to
that is that
if we did cross recovery at this
point we don't have a fund to
put that money back into
and to do additional work so
I have other stress the need for
a new collected contaminated
sight fund
to do these types of clean up
yes thank you and I agree with
you you need to have the
mechanism by which you can draw
from and and we need to provide
funds for that but in doing that
can you take a look at madame
chairman take a look anyway at
the corrective action fund
language and see there's
anything you can use to extract
a late from there to get this
started earlier than waiting for
the legislature and then proceed
from there thank you mister
chairman our matter chairman
thank you
if you don't have a fund it just
goes into the general fund.
Change that senator steinborn
had one thank you one more
really important question and
that I was gonna ask earlier if
we remediate a site in the ban
and contaminated say we
remediate it there's no
responsible party whatever that
means now suddenly you have a
remediated site that is worth
more they can now be put to
economic use
becomes really important who the
owner is where that person is
could certainly that energy
shows up news yeah you know and
then flips it and we've just
subsidized this investment they
as not something taxpayers would
really feel good about you know
where subsidizing someone else's
property they knew was
contaminated when they bought it
most likely or or maybe they
didn't but think you have to
usually do your phase one you
know you buy an industrial site
kind of a thing so
I I guess I wonder about what
would be the mechanism for them
taking a a cleaned up site and
putting it back to the public
how does that work in a week we
we clean it up and then it's
still site with a known owner or
phone owner or not exactly you
know i'm saying how it there
were how will we put that back
in the productive use
what's that part of the legal
equation
either about it back in the
chair committee members of I I
think that's a really good
question and that is one of the
kind of ideas that we need to
think about as we set up the
program and prioritise the sites
the framework of of the
liability and the ownership of
the properties is quite
important
you know it may involve make
maybe one thing is by definition
we put a lean on the property
in
that possible so that's did you
want help you don't have to ok
all right.
Well that's something to think
through obviously cause that
would be a real benefit to the
stay into the cities on the
legislature and you know we're
going to clean these up and now
you get add that to your tax
base and do something without
property aside from all the
other or imminent bats that were
dealing with so
yeah how do we recoup our money
if somebody then shows up hey
you know and now they're back in
business you know how do we
recoup our money or how do we
get them to caught
it sounds like we got to think
that through you know so more
homework thanks membership thank
you we appreciate your
presentation and great
information will keep in touches
we develop
me the bill yes
thank you okay
we're going to
we are now thirty five minutes
uh behind schedule so
I will ask
you committee members to please
keep your questions as to sink
as possible and if there are
things that you want a further
discuss if we can take em off
line if it's possible
but.
So our next presenters are for
the emergency preparedness and
response if you come forward um
we have one two three four
people
dustin
middleton adambury beverly
simpson yes and
clear read.
And when
it's just a two
years of mountain dust and hand
to leave oh okay cause we got
late.
So I feel
oh
okay
alright we have two presenters
that are that was
forgot that are remotely read
and also cynthia wheeler so
let's start with
you all here in person that we
can go
out they already i.
Adam berry you won't go ahead is
really
good afternoon madam chairman
committee my name is out and
bear in on the mercy manager
from mckinley county saturday no
and provide a very brief
overview of the train
development that occurred approx
me twenty miles west of where
we're currently at back in april
this year
so at twelve thirty eight and
fifty seven seconds on april
twenty sixth twenty twenty four
mckinney canny metro dispatch
received a non one one call
setting a train just blew up
within three minutes within a
three minute time span
approximately eight now on one
calls were received by metal
dispatched to report the
incident
based on these calls and multi
agency multi jurisdiction in
multistate response ensued just
inside new mexico at the new
mexico arizona state line just
south of I forty
the first mechanic can you
shares office deputy arrived
unseen approximately fourteen
minutes after the first that one
one call was received in the
first making a county fire
rescue apparatus arrived on
scene approx me thirty three
minutes after the initial call
initial arriving resources found
it being a set of train with
multiple rail cars derailed in
activity within the bsf right
away
additional resources from
mckilley county the city gallup
stated new mexico novel who
nation state of arizona a patch
accounting arizona and b and sf
continue to arrive on scene as a
sizer was being conducted in the
initial command structure was
established
one portion of agencies new
mexico department transportation
and arizona department
transportation did an initial I
forty closure near the incident
since the
exact contents involved in the
development were still being
identified the closure
eventually spread further east
and west
how safety personnel were
provided the train manifest by
the benefits of crew shortly
after public safety arrival
between the main affairs in
mckilling county drone flight
it's in it command is able to
determine how many cars were
involved and what the contents
of the cards were.
Fortunately only six of the cars
were labeled as hazardous
however they were all thirty
thousand gallon tank cards
carrying non autorise l p g
better known as property
it was mostly the propane that
was on buyer following the
initial
tank tearing paper ignition that
was being reported by the public
is an explosion video team later
from a citizen showed a paper
release from the tanks prior to
the ignition
over time the fire did spread
into some of the other rail cars
and products in the debris
filled
some of the other products that
were involved included oriented
strainboard or osb flyash item
of bills beer plastic pellets
paper and metal coils
is that a command determine it
was best to let the burn and
move the staging and command
post to the new mexico welcome
center at the three mile marker
on I forty
it was there the public safety
and b s started briefing each
other on the incident in
determining a plane of action it
was determined that a two mile
evacuation radius was in the
best interest of the public and
public safety personnel while
this was especially populated
area they ended up being
approximately fifty three
residents evacuated from their
homes with majority these being
with their number who nation
jurisdiction a truck stop in a
few trading posts were also
closed and evacuated due to the
due to their proximity to the
incident in the concern for
boiling liquid expanding paper
explosion or a blebby with the
take cars that still have
product in the multiple love how
nation agencies worked with
being a to evacuate shelter and
feed evacuates been in november
rangers also insured that live
stocks that were left within
evacuation zone had adequate
food and water the killer county
mercy operation center was
partially activated to assist
with situation awareness and
resource coordination for the
deromate and associated I forty
closure that resulted in impacts
across new mexico and there is
owner the fire is monitored
overnight is being assessed
personnel and contracted
resources continue to arrive on
by the afternoon of the twenty
seventh.
B f deemed it safe to begin fire
suppression operations on the
nine lp fires and started
clearing the debris from the
railway this operation continued
continually until all the
thousand extinguished and the
railroad is back in operation
air monitoring began by being
served and I did the incident or
in their contractor and the
united incident and continue
through early the next week to
ensure personal on sight in the
general public were safe then
mexico environment department
love ownation epa and the us epa
state and contact with the air
marketing contractor and being
assessed throughout the incident
we could talk about this
incident for the rest of the
afternoon plus some but have it
just a few things to kind of
summarize
the incident
the trenk insisted of four local
motives in ninety seven related
cars six were hazman placarded
with those being a propane cars
thirty five cars were derailed
with one or two others damaged I
forty was closed for forty eight
hours in the railroad was closed
for approximately fifty three
hours fifty personnel from
mckinley county
or mechanically agencies
provided eight hundred and sixty
personnel hours to support the
incident and this did include
all the other responding
jurisdictions
we are fortunate there were zero
injuries in zero fatalities
throughout this incident
approach me fifty three
evacuates were careful by novo
nation and b and stuff fifty
three thousand gallons of water
were used for fire suppression
efforts and the majority this
water did come from the city
gallop water supply
at least thirty six agencies
were involved in the response
this included local tribal state
federal and private partners
we're still working on our after
actually important improvement
plan for this incident but based
on the data that we have
reviewed thus far and here are
some of our top strengths and
areas for improvement that we've
identify so strength
we had multiple agencies though
came together and to respond and
recover from this incident with
several of these agencies having
not worked together before
the incident was resolved with
no injuries fatalities or
lasting environmental impact.
So we've been made aware of
previous trainings exercises and
real world incidents contributed
to the success of the response
in some sense some examples of
these trainings exercises in
incidents I include the mechanic
county local mercy planning
committee received a
presentation from bnsf on the
response capabilities during our
october twenty twenty three
meeting
a functional exercise was
conducted in november twenty
twenty one with a derelmant
scenario and then in november
twenty twenty two a table top
extra says with the health care
focus use a scenario for a train
deromate mass casual the
incident
and then we've also had
the deromate made our seventh I
forty closure since the winner
of twenty twenty three in the
kelly county so several of our
agencies had a rough plan on how
to handle prolonged interstate
closure
some areas for improvement that
we've identified so far include
we need more memorandums of
understanding an agreement with
neighboring jurisdictions and
agencies
more planning training and
exercising on expanding
incidents unified command
structure and interruptable
communications is needed
oh we need to work with state
agencies to develop a statewide
interstate closure and rerouting
plan to try to reduce the
impacts on other parts of the
state and when we do have a
closure
and lastly additional lepc
planning train in equipping
activities are needed
and just kind of a signal on
that the mechanic county
are in mckilley county and with
hattery reduction in industry
over the last several years so
at lepsy does not have really
any funds available to them
through donations or anything
other than what i'm killing
county officers emerge in
management able to provide
throughout operating budget
so at the ability for local
lapsic lapc's across the state
to access to your two funds that
the state receives would be
beneficial to assist with lepc
trainings planning activities
and their exercises as well as
purchasing equipment for
regional has met teams.
And for me killing county we
depend on the city a gallup's
via department for hasmat
operations if needed
so thank you again for your time
and i'll stand for questions at
the appropriate time
thank you next for goats
to beverly i'm sorry yes i'm
missimpson thank you
good afternoon madame chair and
committee my name is barely
simpson i'm the almost county
emergency manager I have been in
the position for almost ten
years so seen a multi to
different responses as far as I
am from emergency management rbc
our number one is fire but i'm
several of the previous speakers
with almost county has the
common deal with them as far as
um ground water contamination
the wrecker and legacy waste
clean up I give you a quick
overview of our radiological and
hazardous material
preparedness some of the local
risk factors some of our
initiatives I need to mirror out
of statement on the lepc
we are a small arm entity also
while the training i'm and then
some of our critical funding
needs
so
it's also almost counting you
are neighbors what's almost
national laboratory so it's very
important for us to have a
radiological and hazardous
material properties in the
salmons I do want to stress the
fact that
um those almost county
does participate practice drill
exercise with the salmons
national laboratory but unless
an incident that happens in los
alamos county is related to the
laboratory the lab will not
respond so make a bridge is the
cut off for response when armed
account who use basically on her
own arm so we do have resources
but.
We're going to call in every
other available resource as far
as local
for service are tribal nations
that are neighbors
national park service in
addition to whatever this taken
can support also
we have for our local risk
factor I would see the big one
landlords involvement in nuclear
research as resulted in
potential radiological hazards
including true waste management
and environmental contamination
from legacy sites like dp road
len or dark the dpro required
remediation
after the county started the
initial building and a well the
groundwork and then lent or had
to come back in and we did
receive assistance from state to
her to remediate that ground and
then it was re released back to
the county to be able to build
one
letter in our handles and stores
and transports those radioactive
materials to include
in store sorry I significant
quantities of platonia muranium
and other iced tubes in liquid
solid and gas states and also
their buy products from
experimentation we have the
transportation of the
radioactive materials between
the landlord sites so
within you know counties to
restriction but then also to
whip
we I
participate as I mention with
lennel and I also said of all
cone umm hemisphere will I a
number of different entered to
to insure that were prepared for
for an emergency or an event
should it happen radiological
and in the desert just materials
are fired
also is the responders for a
landl.
As far as has mount materials so
we have a very well trained fire
department by a part of the
caveat to
their their great education and
experiences that are we also
staff the fire station three
fire stations on a length
property on per contract that
needs to be there's a
there's a staffing level that
must be retained maintain on a
daily basis
we had the lepcesa out of
mention we have that we meet
quarterly also there is night
there is no finding initiative
besides what we have are
embudget to to be able to
continue that outreach and to
bring more businesses in we have
done on
the the outrage we've sent a
done social media we've tried to
incorporate other businesses
within the community to are
pretty participated in the lepc
arm and that has been a struggle
i'll be the first to admit that
it grows a trip's arm and a and
we really don't get that
participation that we would are
we would like to be able to do
that out reach in the training
to other entities
lets you
want it to we do have
environmental contamination
there is ongoing concerns about
legacy waste sites and their
impact on the soil and ground
water including the hax
available chromium bloom in
martin ad canyon which we've had
to close out water well
to make sure it doesn't I get
into the water that's released
to the community.
We've we have developed strong
network some with the schools
and businesses as I stated
but I just wanted to touch on
the critical funding needs um
one is the tier two finding for
a local lepces were not seen out
outraged from the state are were
not sure we've had discussions
with each other one were that
funding goes if it could be
reallocated to to the
jurisdictions to help with that
lepc
out that would be wonderful
as far as will sell the most
counties federal priorities um
one was supported by mental
clean up and health and safety
of the community
what's almost county it's
requesting and
it's requesting that an
appropriation at the minimum of
three hundred and fifty million
dollars in funding for defense
environmental cleaner
we would require environmental
management to provide the county
with a full risk assessment in
information to make an informed
decision on its position on the
possible future convenience of
md and current
as currently committed by
environment environmental
department for twenty twenty
five excellent the final
remedy of the cleanup of the
chromium plan and protect the pm
three drinking water will for
our residence
continued to accelerate the
shipping of the true waste from
lannel to web
and then one of the other cume
ones were passed the american to
the radiation exposure
compensation act to extend the
time and eligibility of coverage
to add new mexico and the other
states eligibility as we know a
number of.
You know I had generations of
landlord employees or residents
family members have had exposure
also and as stated previously
but you know it's a it's been
limited to provide a test side
as opposed to new mexico and
other surrounding states that
were involved in all the testing
in a dead nation
n
I stand open to any questions
also will finish with all of our
presenters and then come back
for questions um next we're have
by the zoom
clay read.
Thank you madame chairman member
the committee let me see if I
can share my screen with you.
I tell you to have my
presentation handy where we can
put it up there because it's not
let me share.
Okay.
Not really.
Can you see that
yes that's great are perfect.
So I just want to start off
quickly and go over some of the
things that be an sf does too
help communities that we run
through and our safety vision in
our safety vision overall as the
companies operate a free of
accidents and injuries and the
good news for us is we do
achieve the sixty percent
reduction in the real much since
two thousand and eight and a
fifty percent reduction employee
injuries of the last ten years
and last year was our safest
year in the history of b and s
effort for a employee injuries
so we do community training is
one of the things that are has
met departments tasked with last
year we trained over eight
thousand responders as mentioned
we were in gallop in two
thousand and three we're on
track to do about that same
eight thousand again this year
we do on site training we have
computer based training modules
and we also have web and ****
from time to time this all done
free a charge for the
communities that we run the room
this is up how we account there
are department small there's
eleven others in the department
eight of us out in the field so
we last or b and s f
mechanical folks that are
exampled and which they're
training to hasmat technician
levels and their preposition
throughout our network to help
make responses to the real
matter other types of
emergencies very quick and they
can be out there and n b r first
line of defense is what we call
it in the end of being less of
contractor network we have about
two hundred contractors location
locations throughout our system
so we typically have gone
contractors you know throughout
the system that they are
typically very close to where
our problems happen and and we
have a quick response we have
thirty two felt thirty two of
these firefighting trailers that
contain a r a laugh
the ones that were used in the
the gallop the realm that one is
prepositioned in the balance of
mexico the other was in.
Winds low arizona so they were
deployed to that derelman as
well
in the up at being siff has made
dot com that's a great place we
give comma beflow.
Information so if you want it
back a city if you want it by
county or if you want it by
state we can get that
information in all you do is
request it online it is secure
information and it's on a need
to know basis but
but that's that's obtainable
right then we also you can sign
up for the ask rail
application on your phone that's
another way to get the
information on on patience
materials that are on trains so
those are two things that you
can go to b and s fast matt dot
com site that's also where you
can get the computer based
training there again that's for
free and whoever wants to take
that training so we'll talk a
little bit specifically about
the gallop.
Derrelman are you matter gold
loved them
thirty four cars to rail is
previously talked about six of
them were the propane cars i'll
move through this pretty quickly
as it was already talked about
so this was the some of the
initial pictures you can see at
the very top that I forty was
still open at this time so this
was getting when bag out there
this is pretty much what what we
were looking at here
then we utilized the decided
process whenever we come to a
derail met so it's up it's a
circular kind of thought pattern
that when you know we're looking
at identifying and then taking
action and then evaluating the
prod progress of the derelman
end of response continuously
throughout that tampering and
the under some of the agency
that were there and i'll just
take a little side note and say
that the agencies that were out
there were great to work with
is as far as this beat you know
this was not everybody's best
day right we had a problem but
the way everybody came together
and worked together as I think
was outstanding so
and with that incident comma
unified incident command this is
just gives you an example of
some of the things that we have
on our situational board this is
updated pretty much constantly
with no information so anybody
that was in that incident
command staff.
Or anybody that need to be
briefed
state agencies local folks
whatever could come in there and
look and see exactly what was
going on on in any particular
time and how things were
progressing and it gave a look
at it it's a real good overview
of what's happening without
having to go down to the site
and look at it
i'm sorry fire suppression
started out very thankful for
machine county and gallop for
really helping us with the water
in the trucks and everything
that we needed to make this
successful.
So extinguished the fires we
went to damage assessment before
moving any of the cars to make
sure that we could in fact move
though safely and they end up
this just overhead picture of us
wrecking the cars is what we
call it that's clearing the rail
so then they can be rebuilt and
that's just going to be
equipment working there so
that's all I had forty and if
you have any questions i'll be
happy to answer them thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah
yeah.
This.
Okay hello.
Um.
Thank you madame chair and
committee members can you hear
me fine.
Yes okay i'm sindy wheeler and
with roger taylor we are the
coach chairs of the two eighty
five alliance and i'm also here
as uhm uh just a resident in the
state.
In our increasingly dangerous
world we depend on government
agencies to protect us from
dangers we don't even know exist
new threats come from new
chemicals being used in new ways
we aren't even given the choice
to accept these new dangers so
robust can emergency response
plans have to be in place
throughout the state you know
some of the dangers and they've
been discussed here pfa's and
lead in drinking water that
permanently harm children's
ability to learn accidental
intentional releases of
radioactive and answered as
chemicals real train support of
chemicals that in a can destroy
entire towns in a moment you may
not know about battery storage
technologies these are prone to
run away fires and are being
approved uhm right next to
residential areas people's lives
and health and property and
investments are so easily last.
All of these risks can be
mitigated though if the proper
emergency systems are in place
and we don't think they are
in our community group has been
investigating how ready
government agencies are to
protect us and much of the
information concerned santa fe
county because that's where we
live and much is anecdotal
because I don't have permission
to use the names of some I spoke
with but what we wanted to know
was how do you find out which
agencies responsible for an
event if it understands the
correct response to a new
technology or new chemicals are
as personnel trained in
available does the public know
what to do before help arrives
and how do you attend public
media meetings that are posted.
It's surprisingly hard to find
this information I I describe it
is like looking for a black cat
in a dark room that isn't even
there and this is what we've
found on a federal level local
emergency responders aren't told
about new risks created by
federal agencies like the
department of energy for
instance I make presentations
that inform communities about
new missions planned by the do
for whip the information is
published in the federal
register but at one presentation
and exceptionally experienced
and honest leader and county
emergency management told me
he'd never been told about does
new missions.
These missions put his
responders among the first at a
complex scene involving
radioactive materials and toxic
chemicals I don't think this was
by accident because doe did not
want the public to know about
this unpopular project even to
the extent that it kept
emergency planners in the dark.
So what's last when the feds
don't communicate with local
responders well equipment first
the county fire department has
no detectors for radioactive
plutonium that must come in
substance transported alpha
counters are needed not tiger
counters.
The other thing that's lost as
public information communities
along the route haven't been
told what to do if radioactive
plutonium is released it's
information they need before it
occurs the public intuitively
thinks to evacuate it should not
because evacuating puts you
outside breathing plutonium
particles which cause cancer one
hundred percent of the time and
i've given my I cited my source
there people should shelter in
place.
On the state level the state
emergency response system sir
has net sporadically for years
sometimes twice a year once a
year or not at all this is in
santa fe county the next the
next meeting is september.
Compliance that's the federal
emergency planning and community
right to no act is lacking in
sound afaimancy program manager
for the new mexico department at
home land security and emergency
management saturday walked her
said in a june news article that
in about a third of new mexico
counties including santa fe the
required committee and has met
response plans under epra don't
exist.
And i've listed i've cited the
source of that story I think you
should have two images of maps
in the material I gave you if
you look at the map on the left
the vertical green line is the
route nuclear waste takes going
from lan alter whip but one of
those new missions that I
mentioned earlier that do he
wants to employment will
increase traffic on that route
so much that for the rest of the
century it will become a major
shipping lane something that we
have an experience up to now.
The horizontal orange line shows
waste from a second mission that
will come in from out of state
along interstate forty to landl
and then back along interstate
forty through at least nine
other states for the next sixty
years the map on the right shows
the counties that need robust
emergency services because of
this exposure i've been told
some of them don't have that.
On a county level.
Through an ipra request we've
learned that santa fe county has
no hasmat team this is the
county that has the most
communities on the designated
route for radioactive and
hazardous chemical way shipments
if available were told the
cities has met team will be
requested if not then los alamos
or albuquerque will be called.
In this epra company applying to
santa fe county to build a
battery electrical storage
system has chosen a site.
Concerningly close to large
residential neighborhoods this
type of battery storage system
is prone to thermal run away
fires that release toxic gases
and can't be extinguished which
is why it should only be
approved are from residential
areas
if you look at the image on the
left that is a fire in one of
those forty five foot long
battery containers and on the
right you can see where they
plan to place this facility and
the communities that are around
it and close by.
When they were applying the
company asked the county if it
had a current pre incident plan
for this kind of system it
didn't it but the county
suggested that the company might
be able to help it create one.
In this approach arrival times
for emergency crews given were
based only on how long it would
take someone to drive to a site
not the time needed to actually
alert and find personnel and
vehicles and most stations have
two to four personnel if any or
on vacation or ill or at another
emergency then you have even
less.
It was interesting to hear the
other two presenters talk about
lepcs because center county has
not had one for years it's
creating a local lepc nominees
are sent to circ for approval
interested residents and we've
had quite a few of them have
been told they must be members
of registered organizations will
not have voting privileges
voting for work i'm not sure and
will be subject to dismissal for
cause or no cause we did not
find any of this information in
the approach federal statute for
lapcs so the most important need
is for funding agencies need
more personnel training and
equipment they need to do more
public education.
We asked the legislature to
focus on providing these funds
and we also asked this committee
to provide more oversight of new
mexico circ the search should
meet several times a year and
the public should have easy
access to such meetings quite
frankly were terrified of the
added dangers that we live with
were being exposed to new risks
without the safety net of proper
planning by government agencies
so we're asking you to hear us
now before the next disaster
thank you.
Thank you.
Cable.
Since.
Thank you
please.
Hello hello think we're better
yeah
thank you just a quick question
for each of the emergency
responders there is you know
proposal to ship high level
nuclear ways through the state
in the mexico which is now we
passed the last thing we can't
store that material in the state
but what was wild about it was
all that material was going to
move through rail and it would
have been the responsibility of
local if there was an accident.
Hello on the clear ways it would
have.
Been the responsibility of local
governments to do emergency
response.
And the state in mexico but
depending power it happened you
know you are would be the
frontline and responders how
many of you.
I would expect los almost but
how many of you are trained in
dealing with the radiological.
Incidents.
And man who do represent
most almost county indeed but
but I also have a military
background and a noise a
responder for a reality nuclear
anybody else
shared committee making the
county we have pretty limited
training and resources for radio
logical we're fixing to get a
little bit of training through
department health with some of
the whip funding even though
we're not a primary whip right
route through here on the are
going to bring a little bit of
training for our hospitals
the other people raise your hand
if you have any radio logical
training.
Okay as far as bnsf on the phone
are on the line of it being
bansf.
How do your workers feel about
being expert you know having to
carry that type of cargo like
spend fuel and kind of the
training is a company to build
to do that or comfort level with
that where you're asking that
kind of prospect we transfer or
transport very little amount of
that but it's in the pacific
northwest it's when I say little
it's two hundred miles those
trains are dedicated drains up
with the story.
Yes can you hear me
so or we transport a little bit
of spent nuclear waste for about
two hundred miles a pacific
northwest those trains are
dedicated trains they have a
cabuse in their manned by dod
people and or monitored and in a
case of a response the DO d
would be the people that would
respond to that derelmant
the casks that they are
transferred to transported the
waste is transported in the over
twelve inches thick of stainless
deal and are extremely robust so
is far as the train itself those
are those are dedicated trains
like I said that are monitored
in and and have people on those
trains
but constantly while their
movement so as far as i'm aware
of employees don't have a
problem with it because they're
not really involved that much in
it.
Okay
if you commute yourself
so
hello
you can meet
me
please.
The.
Thank you
madame
please
after.
Yeah.
The best practices.
I haven't really heard much from
either
any of the emptys but do you
have a list of how many cars
developed but how long was the
train or how many
bill the whole link that the
the cars of this particular
train do we know.
Going to I believe it's ninety
seven cars.
Is that for vsn
so somebody mentioned I think
you mentioned about how many
were derailed but
then then I think mr read
mentioned to but how many were
intelligent the whole tree.
Mountain
ninety seven ninety seven cars
and four look at motors bell
deferred a mystery to give us a
length of the
I don't have the length but I
know others ninety seven cars on
it
mr
breed could you give us the
length of though
can you hear me if we know the
dimensions of a card and
multiple.
Your near me.
Yes.
But the ninety seven cars I do
not know the length of the
train.
He takes it the cars are about
seventy feet long each and
multiply that out but I do not
know the length of the train.
Thanks.
A company coming in and am no
doing business that the profit
margin is something that is
usually sought after to increase
it so i'm wondering about when I
like this after the
investigation is completely
probably still need to hit a
report back
it at the cars is.
That could be we're not going
into an area where we're not
heating the best practices to
hinder our offset any kind of
other feature issues especially
when we talk about having other.
Substitutes on the rear think
you matter church that's all you
have
okay thank you anyone when else
from the committee
I was just wondering if um
mr read or
mrperiod berry if you
did you mention what caused the
dereloment.
Manager committee
which I heard it's still under
investigation by the federal
relevant and in tsb.
To determine actual.
Um.
Mr read and do you have an idea
or they're guessing or you have
to wait till the investigations.
We wait till the investigation
is over.
The.
Representative johnson thank you
madame chair do we have an
estimate or a way to
figure out what the cost was to
clean that up and how is that
determined and
who's responsible for the cost
of the clean app
manager committee ultimately b
surf was reimbursing all the
local agencies that responded as
was the state agencies so it
fell back on b
thank you no we don't have an
estimate or cost figure
mountain committee I I do not
have for the overall ing and I
forgot to bring how much the
county spent on the incident
thank you and I just want to
think
all the state holders and
partners who participated in the
cl.
Thank you
etc up center I keep trying
representative alcohol
here
have anything in around the same
time i'm just curious maybe mr
denser how many crew members run
this trade that you really do in
my district here really
does
matter members of the committee
there were two people on the
train conductor and engineer.
In the army now.
Yes
there were there sorry about
that there was a two members on
the train and engineering a
conductor.
Thank you
that is not the normal
yes that is the normal we we
usually have two people on the
train like that
in that let that is the no one
yes there could be more people
but that's actually not normal
we could have a switch winner
something like that on their
mast month mainly for local
are deliveries and pick ups but
when you have a tra- freight
train like that it's typically
too crew members
thank you.
Any other questions from the
minutes
well thank you very much
everyone who brought forward all
this information and thank you
for you know the great work that
went into this in coordinating
and I think we'll be sure to
support any funding dead is
requested by the different
counties
or agencies you know to improve
their training and
uhm especially with
radiological
materials doubt we will be
seeing a lot probably more of in
our state
and i'm glad that no one was
injured or
i'm just sorry for all of the
traffic that was blocked and had
people had to wait for forty
eight hours two days
what do you do when people run
out of gas or do they just leave
their vehicles and they get
rides to
some place.
Manager committee unfortunately
we didn't have to worry about
that too much people able to be
rerouted back in the gallup or
some side roads around the end
of it up shutting down the
interstate kind of just outside
of our tricky I would think they
there might have been a few more
issues in bernaldio county due
to that
diversion at route six
but there is something that
we've got to do more planning on
it if we do get strained and
motorists on the how we like
they did and novada is a few
weeks ago how are we going to
make sure that they're taking
care of fuel food ratings that
kind of thing
yeah that would be good and also
miswealer was bringing up about
the east side of the state
how they might be at the big
disadvantage to for in the
training and for the
coordination so
I think this just makes it so
that we
bring forward you know the needs
and how to make those
improvements we appreciate
everyone's consideration in
doing that making those
improvements so
thank you
we look forward to hearing what
uh the actual cars at the
crash was or the derail and I
should say more appropriately.
Thank you committee
well we have some public hermes
one person is here and and we
have one to three four or five.
Nearest okay five five people on
us zoom and we will limit it to
two minutes per person or less
and is
the owner morgan still here.
The.
The.
The.
Go ahead when you're ready.
Good afternoon madame share
members of the committee with
all due respect out I would like
to request the full three
minutes I have a lot of
information and i've been here
all day i'll try to keep it to
two but if I run over I do
apologize
my name is leona morgan she put
it in initiates and obviously
bushes changing to she checked
who gleaning dish number I am
from this area I graduated from
galipi and nineteen eighty nine
my entire family maternal and
paternal sites live in eastern
naba who and so I just want to
think all of you for coming out
it's really good to have you in
the community
I have been doing your animal
i've been working on uranium
maining issues and radioactive
waste issues for a long time and
right now i'm in school at unm
working on my masters for
planning I heard a lot of talk
about planning earlier and so I
just want to start by saying
that you know we all we all want
safe healthy communities
we all want clean up and we do
want accountability from the
federal government.
I'm going to speak about some of
the stuff that was brought up
earlier and then I have a couple
other concerns I just wanted to
list quickly but for the most
part I know we heard a press a
link the presentation in and and
discussion around the clean up
to create a repository and so I
know communities out here need
cleanup we need clean up we do
need a repository and I I know a
lot of folks support this
however a lot of folks do not
support the repository idea at
the room chapter
the eastern naval her land
commission has passed a
resolution requesting that state
lan be used at a brochure lake I
can forward that resolution as
soon as we're done here the the
roo chapter has also passed a
resolution opposing this and
several a few other chapters i'm
trying to locate that resolution
i'll be happy to forward it but
they requested a fax number so
these communities and then I
just wanted to mention last year
and instructor at the through
high school asked me to come to
speak to her class so I spoke to
over a hundred tenth graders who
are they're really scared about
this proposed repository those
tenth graders are going to
outlive all of us
hopefully so I think they are
the ones we need to listen to
they did have an audience with
the the governor and they've
been actually on pbs talking
about this issue and so this is
what I wanted to present that
if and brochure lake can be the
agreed upon solution this
committee is the one that will
make it happen going back to the
uranium office I just want to
think you offer that work and in
getting that uranium office
storied
we probably need a speed it up a
little bit but I do support all
so this.
Request to do a partnership with
the federal government as well
as other entities because we
need to work on this problem and
do a lot of planning on it I
would also add to the letter of
moratorium on new nuclear
spending in this state until we
get that all mess cleaned up why
make new messages or allow the
federal government to make new
messages when they haven't even
cleaned up their first mass so I
relay them way over my time so
i'll just list the other
concerns that I had
um real quickly just as forty
funds might be used for some of
this on however they are
available for new new clear
reactors which I don't support
so going back to some of the
other comments that were made
regarding plutonium pits there's
eight billion dollars on the
table for some of the new
nuclear weapons development that
could easily pay for reca
there's also concerns in the
public communities about
treating releases and of course
we heard about whip expansions
I definitely want to support
whatever work you all are doing
on record if we can get that
past
and the last thing I want to
talk about is haley highest a
low enriched uranium so I don't
know how many of you are aware
of what this stuff is but this
is a new type of iranian fuel
that they're pushing for so
called new reactors that don't
exist yet but we have the only
enrichment facility in the in
the whole continent so I would
just be aware of what your
income is up to because that is
a very dangerous endeavor so
with that I think you for
allowing me to have some extra
minutes and
thank you so much to the
committee madam chair and
committee the cap thank you for
being with us all the active.
Okay next will go to our zoom
participants mr carl peterson.
Madam chair I do don't wish to
testify thank you very much for
the opportunity however.
The.
Next ballery.
She dropped.
Bob chavers
you can unmute yourself.
The.
Okay
I was gonna say name sounds ok
each miller are you on.
The.
Okay
jeremy rants.
Hi good afternoon.
My name is johnny erins and i'm
with concerned citizens for more
nuclear safety can and were
based in sanity can you hear me
yes
okay terrific.
I'm with concern citizens for
nuclear safety we have observed
the produce water hearing before
the water quality control
commission in may and august we
would like to alert the
committee.
About the conflict with the
produce water act and the new
mexico water quality act and
specifically
we heard a lot of expert
testimony about the known and
unknown hazardous materials and
waste and produce water.
But there was no mention of the
new mexico hazardous way stacked
and it's authority over
hazardous wakes as well as the
authority there was a lack of
discussion about the authority
of the environmental improvement
board over the house of disway
stacked and specifically the
water quality act has a
prohibition.
That reads the water quality act
and this is at seventy four dash
six dash twelve b and I will
submit our written comments to
this committee and section b
says the water quality act does
not apply to any activity or
conditions subject to the
authority of the environmental
improvement board pursuant to
the hazardous waste act except
to abate water pollution or
control the disposal are use of
september acceptage and sludge
so the water quality actives
pressly excludes from water
quality control commission the
regulation of hazardous waste
ccn
is testifying today in order to
are providing public comment to
alert the committee to.
This conflict and how we're also
concerned that the produce water
act under seventy dash thirteen
dash three dash b state said the
jurisdiction.
Of the produce water act is is
under the water quality control
commission
which is a conflict with the
nineteen ninety three water
quality act
we don't understand how
the produce water act allows the
wtc
to regulate produce water when
the nineteen ninety three water
quality act is specific that
says that anything involving
hazardous ways
goes before the environmental
improvement board
and I
want to say thank you so much
for listening today and expect
our written comments.
Thank you very much.
Thank you
so much.
Does our start um I think
everyone knows.
All
and now in or bath if it is not
supposed to be on the list for.
Public comment and
and sarah thank you for making
the trip
another great meeting you all of
it together with speakers and um
I want just to remind committee
members that september
thirteenth is our next meeting
in harbs and uh we
rank out is going to be offering
a site visit the day before um
and we are also
well will be sending out
information if you haven't done
that yet but that's
why
oh shoot I forgot your name
already miss morgan
was referring to
assistant
just a minute and then but the
afternoon of the thirteenth we
are going to be doing a site
visit and um
a wd miss representative serious
explained a little bit about
that sure it's just a quick
we're gonna look at flaring and
glaring on of different areas in
the in the state where the look
at using it for a cameras to
look at the emissions that are
being admitted all over um and
it's just a tour we we like to
see in hobso's like going on so
this will be a really good to it
be short but it'll be the
beginner manager do we need to
get to them to do a background
check or anything before we go
into that like when we went to
your income yeah so they did
that before one I went to a
different facility and they had
to do clean background you will
be sending information from them
forwarded to you so if it has
that on there
look for that I can't remember
it's been a while because
usually for security they want.
Some information on everybody
okay can like last almost yeah
yeah same thing something they
just kind of want to know who
you are so security just kind of
check you know
