here this morning.
When, good morning Jaitarola,
um, how the 16, that's uh west
side Albuquerque. I live close,
you know Albuquerque close to
West Mesa High School, I4
course.
The river Rio Grande from
Montago all the way to Central
is part of my district.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning, everyone. I'm Debbie
Sarignano representing us just
21 on the east side of
Albuquerque, um, and if you know
Monzano, right by Monzano High
School, um, and I've been on
this committee my whole 9 years
and I love this committee, so
I'm glad to be back.
Uh, good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Joanne Ferrari
from Las Cruces, um, House
District 37, and I've been on
this committee, I think
so.
9 years.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you
all for being here. State
Senator David Gallegos. I'm from
Lee and Eddy County, uh District
41 Argas. Thank you.
Representative Stefie Lord,
thank you all for coming here
today and thank you for your
patience. I rode my motorcycle
in today, a beautiful weather,
tempting to keep going up in the
towns and around, but.
This is an important committee,
so I came here and uh I'm glad
you guys are here. Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Jim
Townsend.
he from Eddy County.
David said he was in the heart
of the oil and gas. He's the.
We, we kind of shared that. I
don't know if it's in the heart
or not, but we're, uh, we're, I
served Eddie and Otero County so
we are in the middle of the
premium and um we look forward
to um adding some topics to the
agenda, hopefully and, and, uh,
working through the issues of
energy and, and radioactive.
Hazardous waste materials in New
Mexico. We're glad to be here.
Thank you.
So,
I'm Paul Company y'all introduce
yourselves.
Paul Sto,
um, the staff attorney with
Legislative counsel Service, um.
I
And thank you to our staff.
We're really, we're really
lucky. You all do a lot of the
hard work of putting these
agendas together and
cleaning up all of our
aspirations and trying to uh
Put it into a legal actionable
form, so we appreciate y'all.
And hard work that you do.
Um, OK, so, without further ado,
we'll move on to our work plan,
discussion of the work plan.
For the new members,
particularly, it's really
interesting. This committee is a
little different from other
interim committees because we're
one of the few meetings that
actually are rooted in law.
in the New Mexico hazardous
waste Act. It created this
interim committee to have
oversight over these issues.
And it created a two-year
two-year term, which is a little
different from the chairmanship
that other committees would tend
to be one year separating the
House and the Senate. This one
is in law is a two-year deal,
um.
And I think that that that is
important to understand the
mindset of the work we do here
that we are here to really be
the oversight of
Radioactive and hazardous
materials issues. I mean, we're
as close to a legislative
watchdog as exist for these
issues and that's just a role I
take real seriously and
Trying to get us up to speed on
things that we may not be up to
speed on or we need to, that are
coming fast. So,
Without
We will, uh, roll into the work
plan and you all have that in
front of you.
A lot of these issues are issues
that we have dealt with before.
There's a few new things that
are on.
You know, the radar things that
we haven't, that are, that are
new issues, um, such as the new
rules and the environmental
improvement board regarding
TFASS, oil and gas, chemical
disclosure, or banning of
certain chemicals. That's new.
Um, we certainly want to learn
more about that role and some of
the stuff surrounding that. We
also have a new law that was
just passed, um, dealing with
carbon sequestration where the
state is going to be.
Future owner of facilities.
And we really
I think probably most of us
don't have a real sense of what
that's gonna look like and
How many and when and um what
the rulemaking is gonna look
like and we're just at the early
end of it where
We need to learn more. So, um,
we're looking forward to that
and then a lot of ongoing issues
that we really took a lead on as
a committee like the banning
uranium mine cleanup sites,
which we took a lead on and then
out of this committee several
years ago, we actually developed
a bill um that represents
Sarena,
um, introduced and thankfully
got past creating uranium mine
remediation coordinators that
many of us got funding to help
fund that work, and now, of
course, we need to get the money
to do clean up.
But uh, it's, it's good, and
then we deal with national
defense staff that we deal with
federal issues as well, the
national labs, waste isolation
pilot plant and um Elsbad, the
nation's only uh repository
federally owned for um transatic
waste in the website.
So, but we deal with national
labs and we don't deal with top
security stuff, but clearly, you
know, we deal with a lot of
Radioactive issues related to
the labs such as the plutonium
pit mission that they have and
Um, and then there's a lot of
contamination. Unfortunately,
uh, related from previous eras
and chromium plumes and things
like that that we also have
inserted ourselves into trying
to help mediate a little bit.
Between the government and some
of their contractors, so in the
state of New Mexico, just so you
know, even with these federal
sites, we have a state
regulatory role.
Over those sites, we have to
issue discharge permits and
other permits, so there is a
Strong relationship, regulatory
relationship between the state
of New Mexico and our federal
sites, including now our
Department of Defense sites
because we just passed a law
saying that we now will regulate
um PFAS firefighting film that
is.
Contaminated near several of our
bases now as a hazardous waste,
so our snake regulate that. So
there is a relationship there.
As well, that's important for us
to know about and support.
So with that, um, maybe everyone
take a look at this and um
You know if you have any
questions or thoughts, that's.
Yes, Mr. Chair.
As I, as I looked through that
list, I would like to also
propose that we look at
The utilization of small modular
reactors that are, I think, are
being considered with some of
the data centers that are
Being contemplated across New
Mexico right now that's the.
Something, I think we're gonna
have to face sooner or later.
The other is, um,
I
I think we should also begin to
look at
Um, clean the wind and solar
installations and foundations
and just see what the what the
issues might be if there are any
er.
And address that across.
As part of as part of our
curriculums.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
landlord.
That's
7.
Thank you.
important chair of this
committee, uh, a couple things I
think we should go over. I
definitely agree. We, we have
somebody come and talk to us
about the modular reactors, uh,
and going back with the wind,
I'm having an issue in Torrance
County because we're having
water issues and they're taking
the water out to make the
concrete to set the wind
turbines and their spraying the
dirt roads all day.
And that's become an issue with
our water, so we need to look at
that. And I think we need to
look at the president's nuclear
power executive orders that are
probably gonna affect, um, you
know, just at least to see
what's going on with that.
That's all. Thank you.
That's good. Anybody else have
any thoughts? Yes.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd
like to look at ozone too,
especially in the Caribbean
basin and the pollution that
pollution and um.
And different ports out about
constant um pollution from oil
and gas.
OK.
Anybody else.
Well, I think we can integrate
those suggestions into the
schedule either as a part of a
topic that's there or related to
an agency or as a standalone so
we'll work to do that.
We need to figure that out.
Precisely now Paul or is that
enough to just say that it's
enough.
OK. OK.
Very good. Any other feedback,
suggestions on the work plan.
All right. Do we have a motion
to approve the work plan.
I don't move that we accept the
work plan.
OK.
And
as amended, yes,
as amended.
OK,
Just a second.
second.
Anybody opposed to that motion
or do we need to I like to do
the anybody opposed, anybody
opposed?
Your post, OK.
Cheer up.
That'd be all right.
All right, I showed it all are
in favor.
work plan, I suppose.
When
Well, let's see here. See, we're
back on schedule. I love it.
We're early.
So why don't we take a minute
and I'd love to have the
audience all introduce
themselves and who you're here
representing, if you don't mind,
and sir, we'll start with you in
the front row.
OK, thank you.
you.
I'm sorry, with what program?
OK.
Right
men trusted we are now a little
ahead of schedule, so you're
welcome to join us and are you
waiting on a staff person to
join you. All right, well.
Yeah
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name is Maggie Hart Stebbins.
I'm New Mexico's Natural
Resources trustee, and as
always, I'm grateful that you
invite me here to talk about the
work that um the Office of the
Natural Resources Truste is
doing. Um, I feel given, um,
The recent support or actually
the longstanding support that
the legislature and the
governor's office have provided
to us, we are, um, making some
really significant progress. So
happy to um
Present on that today, um.
I think many of you know we are
um the office there are um we
are a staff of 5,
we are administratively attached
to the Environment department
and um by statute, the uh the
attorney general's office
provides our legal counsel.
Um, slide number 2,
talks about, um, what is our
mission? ONRT's mission is
really to protect New Mexico's
environment and well-being, um,
as trustee, I have a crucial
role in protecting communities,
environmental and economic
well-being. Um, I am responsible
legally responsible for managing
and protecting natural resources
on behalf of the public,
particularly when those
resources have been damaged by
pollution.
Or other hazardous or other um
harmful activities.
When there is a release of a
hazardous substance such as oil
spills, chemical contamination
or that really that results in
habitat or um natural or natural
resource injury.
I have the authority to assess
the harm, seek compensation from
responsible parties and oversee
the restoration efforts.
That process ensures that
communities aren't left to bear
the costs of environmental
injuries that they did not
cause.
My goal as trustee is to
follow the principle of making
the public whole. Make sure that
it's upheld when there is injury
to New Mexico's natural
resources, and that protects
both current and future
generations access to healthy
natural resources.
Um, page number 3, of the
presentation, the legal
authority under which we
operate, um, first and foremost,
the create the Office of Trustee
is created by federal statute.
created under the Super Fund
Act, um, the Superfund act, the
Oil Pollution Act, and the
Federal Water Pollution Act, and
then, um, in 19 uh
93, the New Mexico Legislature
established the New Mexico
Office of the Natural Resources
Trustee to um carry out the
provisions of of circle and the
other Feder laws, but also, um,
pursue claims.
That don't fall under that.
Slide number 4. again, I think,
um, all of you have seen this
slide before. There is a very
distinct difference between what
The Office of the Natural
Resources Truste does and what
the environment department does,
um, remediation and restoration
are two very complementary but
distinct processes, um, NMED
sets pollution limits, monitors
compliance and can impose fines
that require corrective action.
By contrast, my office
specifically addresses
environmental injury that has
already occurred, and we seek
compensation for restoration of
those injured resources, and it
has been my goal in this office,
and it is the role of the
trustee to create new funding
streams through injury, damage
settlements that are
specifically dedicated to
restoration projects.
Providing resources that
otherwise might not be
available.
Um, slide number 5, I'm not
gonna go into detail on this,
but this, um, under the
Superfund Act, there are
regulations that we follow when
we bring in natural resources
claim, um.
The first, um, two pieces are,
um, we, when we become aware of
our release, we do an
assessment. That means we
evaluate and quantify the
injury, we then determine the
tight scale and cost of the
restoration projects that would
be needed to fix that injury,
uh, once, and that is the way
to, to come up with a a monetary
estimate of what it's gonna take
to fix the problem. We then
Enter into negotiations with the
responsible party with the
polluters to um hopefully settle
or litigate um to require the,
the responsible parties to
provide these resources for
restoration. And then when, when
we reach a settlement with
community input, we developed a
list of restoration actions and
implement them.
Um, as you can see later in um
my presentation, we, we work
with other with other local
governments, um, primarily, um,
And um
the efforts to compensate the
public for the losses.
Slide number 6, shows a list of
the settlements since uh since
2000, um, these are the
settlements that ONRT has
reached 14 settlements over 22
years, um, and, um, just since,
uh, 2020, this office has um
Has has
Um, obtained, um, over $14
million in uh different
settlements, um, those would,
you know, the Gold King Mine
release, um, the settlement with
the US Department of Defense at
Fort Wingate and um a settlement
with Front oil over at um oil
release into the Cimron. Um, so
slide 7, I think you've seen it
before, um.
The state of New Mexico, um,
brought claims against various
responsible parties for the Gold
King for injuries caused by the
Gold King mine release, um, of
those of that amount, $13
million
was for natural resource damages
that those dollars came to the
um the trustee fund and um the
slide on page 7 shows the
projects that we are um funding
with that $13 million.
Um
The trustee has when we reach
these settlements, we have the
um the opportunity not only to
restore the resource when that
is the most appropriate, um,
Um, restoration option, but also
to compensate for the loss of
use of the resource. So Gold
King Mine is a good example, um,
when that um contamination
occurred in 2015, um.
The community suffered primarily
irrigators, uh, farmers, um, the
outdoor recreation industry, um.
As well as the resources such as
aquatic habitat and surface
water, um, so we are very
pleased, um.
Why this was of projects, you
can see our project partners are
generally other local
governments and um I want to uh
do a big shout out to both our
project partners but also ONRT
staff, um, in that we have in
just the last 2 years, been able
to get much of this money on the
ground, and the sooner that we
can um get these dollars working
for communities at the faster
the restoration begins. Um,
FY 25 spending will be close to
8.3 million.
And so we're very proud of that,
um, and again, I want to give a
shout out to ONRT staff, um, but
also I just want to mention that
part of what has made this
possible is a relationship that
we have with the general
services division, and you may
know that they have um roving
procurement officers or a mobile
procurement officers, we have
been able to take advantage of
those services, um, Charlotte
Prost has been an amazing um
point of contact for us in
getting these contracts with
local.
Governments, um, completed
getting the dollars out the
door, so, um,
You want to give a shout out to
um everybody who's made this
possible cause I feel it's been
some remarkable progress. Um,
also, our project partners such
as um the City of Aztec, um, the
city of Farmington, San Juan
County is amazing, um, they're
helping getting, get these
projects done.
In the next couple slides, like
slide 89.
These are just some.
Photographs if you want to see
what um
But the results of our work
looks like.
Um, one,
Actually, there's gonna be a
ribbon cutting for one of our
projects with the City of
Farmington, um.
June 29th, I will make sure that
y'all receive an invitation if
you're uh interested in coming
um.
Slide number 12 is a project
that was funded with um money
from the Chevron Malicor mine
settlement. Um, it was a
partnership with Amigos Bravos
and many other community groups
and funders, uh, that.
Uh, we're very proud of.
Um
Uh slide 13, we, when I came to
this uh position, we had some
funding left over from two
settlements in Albuquerque's
South Valley. Um, we had about
$556,000 to spend, we entered
into a partnership with the
Albuquerque Buro County Water
Utility Authority, um, to do
some restoration at the South
Side Water Reclamation plant
outfall. Um, and this is a good
example of how some of our
partners have been able to
leverage ONRT dollars.
Um, our funding was 566,000 that
was um.
Supplemented
By state capital outlay of $1.3
million and the water authority
has uh has uh obtained another
$7 million in federal grants and
other sources to make this
possible, there will be um, you
know, on the left-hand side of
this, you see the jetty Jacks,
the non-native vegetation, um.
The um erosion of the stream
banks on the right is what it
looked like a month ago where um
the um stream bank has been
graded to benefit, uh,
endangered species and native um
vegetation, um, it's very hard
to see, but that whole area is
planted with um native plants,
um,
So there will be again a
celebration of that in the fall.
I hope that you can um attend.
Um, so,
That those are our past
projects. Now we get to um what
I feel is really important work
that we're doing, um, damage
assessments, that is the process
by which we identify natural
resource injuries and um
determine what it's gonna take
to make the community whole. So,
Um
Our current natural resource
damage assessments, um, we have
a, uh, we are working with Los
Alamos National Laboratories uh
laboratory for contamination
there, um, the NASA White Sands
test facility um is another uh
claim we are pursuing, we are in
a cooperative assessment with
Rio Alga, um, for the Kibera,
uh, uranium mines, and then we
are part of the state's uh
multi-district litigation
involving PFOS and so we have uh
natural resource damage assess.
ment s underway at Cannon Air
Force Base and Haldeman Air
Force Base. um.
What we are looking at for
future damage assessments, um,
and I'll talk and there's a
slide for each of these coming
up, but, um, the Grants Mining
District, looking at the
entirety of the uranium mining
and milling natural resource
injuries and um coming up with a
comprehensive strategic plan,
um, we are in the process of
putting together a trustee
council, um, for the Northeast
Church Rock, um, site, uh, in,
uh, northwestern New Mexico, and
I apologize.
guys for not putting this on the
slide, but I, you mentioned it
this morning, we are in the
process of looking at the San
Juan generating station. Um, we
do believe that there is, uh,
there are likely natural
resource injuries that require
our attention.
So I'm, I apologize. I don't
have a side on that, but um,
You want to point that out, that
that is um
That we have added that to our
list. Um,
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
slide number 15, um, you can see
there are um significant uh um
natural resource injuries
related to um operations there
since the beginning of the
Manhattan Project, um,
We are in a um cooperative
assessment with the Department
of Energy, that means that we
are working currently working
with them and our co-trustees
that are listed um on um this
slide to um
To reach uh um an agreement to
conduct the natural resource
damage assessment and um
hopefully reach an agreement on
what the appropriate
compensation is. Now,
In this situation, I feel like
we have the opportunity to make
some very significant progress
over the next year and a half.
Um, we are following the um the
guidance of um this, the current
uh federal administration in
terms of trying to um save costs
and expedite projects, um, so we
have been in this uh cooperative
assessment for 15 years now, um,
made some progress, but not
enough, and so on.
has the capacity at this point
in time to provide an
alternative that will reach a um
That will be uh result in a
Legally defensible, um.
More timely, um,
Assessment of the injuries so
that we could enter into
settlement negotiations with the
Department of Energy, um, that
is currently a discussion, um.
So we're hoping that it's
supposed to following the
process that we have for the
last 15 years that we could um
take some steps to actually get
this done, um.
And then slide 16 is just
Um, I, I hope these slides
convey the complexity of these
cases. These are, um, you know,
Historic sign significant
complicated um injuries that
require uh highly technical uh
work to determine what the
extent of the injury is, um, and
we have a really excellent
working relationship with our
co-trustees, um, um, the four
pueblos that um
They're like located in the area
of the US Forest Service and the
Department of Energy.
side 17 again, you know, this is
um a graphic that shows the uh
chromium plume, you know, from
over time from it's the start of
the release in the 50s to
current and kind of how it
travels.
So, we are working on the
groundwater injury assessment.
Um, slide number 18 is the case
is a claim that I have um
discussed with this committee
more than once. Um, it is, uh,
groundwater claim for uh
injuries caused by NASA, um, at
the White Sands Test facility
outside of um of Las Cruces.
Um, NASA and the DOD are the
responsible parties and we have
been working on this, um, for
quite some time, um, we had, um,
begun conversations with the US
Department of Justice to try and
settle this claim um at the end
of last year, um, and
unfortunately, um, right about
the in the middle of
discussions, it was clear there
was gonna be administration
change in Washington and so we
have put that on hold until
things kind of
Uh, work out um at the US
Department of Justice, so we can
continue to continue those
discussions. Um, this is very
significant quantity of water
and um
As I've said before, the plume
estimate, um.
To, you know, makes it the
largest contamination in the
state of New Mexico, uh.
So not much update on white
sands, um, but on slide number
19, as I mentioned, we are, um,
the Office of the Natural
Resources Trustee is part of the
um
Uh, states multi-district
litigation involving PFOS, um,
and uh.
I am sure you've heard this
before, but um the use of a F is
contaminated the ogallala
Aquifer in that part of the
state, um, Oklahoma is the
primary source of water for
drinking, agriculture,
industrial, military and
domestic uses and being in the
High Plains region, there were
very few options um for
alternative water sources, um,
you know, the last bullet is, I
think, very concerning to
everybody. Studies show that the
aquifer is rapidly declining.
Due to overextraction, um, the
water table is estimated to be
dropping 2 ft a year.
Um, an estimated, some estimates
say that it will be depleted
within 6 to 10 years.
Um, and I want to point out that
this is a place where ONRT can
be a problem solver. We are not
just about penalizing
responsible parties. We look for
solutions that actually benefit
communities, so rest the funding
stream that we could get for
restoration could include
options, um.
Uh, conservation measures that
would prolong the life of the
aquifer.
Um
I think there's no question
about the liability here, it is
just a matter of when the
Department of Justice is going
to be willing to have
conversations with us about what
that restoration looks like. We,
um, are hoping that, um, the DOJ
will entertain early restoration
options while there is still um
things that can be done, you
know, if we get to 10 years,
there will not be many options
for restoring that groundwater.
20, just a graphic that shows on
the left, the decline in the um
The aquifer.
The, the water table levels and
on the right depiction of the
plume, um.
It's like 21.
Um, again, this is a, uh, uh, uh
location where there have been
releases of uh a POS containing
aqueous firefighting foam, um,
uh that has affected Hoffman
Lake, um, Haldiman Lake is a
very important um ecological uh
or is it in ecologically
important water source in the
Tula Tularosa Basin,
particularly for uh migratory
waterfowl and um very high
levels of PFOS have been found.
in both surface water and in uh
both the um
Mammal tissue and plant um
tissues, um, some of the highest
levels found anywhere in the
world.
So we are, um,
We are evaluating the situation
and um getting ready to do our
um damage injury assessment.
an Air Force Base.
Um, a current assessment we have
underway, as I mentioned, we
have a cooperative assessment
underway with Rio Alga, um, and
BHP for uh the Kira uranium
mines and mills, um, this claim
was initiated in 2008. We have
an agreement on what the
approach will be to the
assessment. Um, we have a number
of co-trustees and just in the
last year we have brought on a
new consultant and working very
well with uh Rio Alga and BHP to
get the injury assessment done
so we can get
To a, um, get to the
conversation about restoration.
So new assessments.
Um
The Grant's mining district,
very, uh,
You know, lining, uh, beginning
in the late 1940s, thousands of
boreholes, hundreds, you know,
100s over 100 mines, mills, um.
You may know this, but um 37% of
all uranium production in the US
came from the Grant's mining
district, um.
This is a very complex site and
the, the following slides just
reveal the complexity of both
the geography, the
jurisdictional issues, um, land
ownership, um,
So we are in the process again
with the resources provided by
the legislature, we have
excellent technical consultants
who are helping us put together
a master plan for the area. Um,
you know, they're in very
different types of mines and
mills in the area, um, there are
large sites with viable PRPs.
There are orphan sites where
there are no viable PRPs, but
potentially responsibility, um.
That we could pursue and then
smaller sites that would
probably be um our, our third
priority, um, if you look at,
um,
You know, slide 25. Again, it's
just, you look at the um
Just the complexity of the site.
So we feel that um this is a
very important area for the
people of New Mexico, um.
And we're taking it on.
Um, slide number 26, I just
thought I would, um, address the
potential changes in the federal
government, um, we don't receive
ONRT doesn't receive any federal
funding. So we are not at risk
of losing funds. Um, we do have
several federal co-trustes, um,
so that includes the Department
of Agriculture through the
Forest Service, the US
Department of Interior through
BIA Fish and Wildlife and the
Bureau of Land Management, we
have found that there has been
some disruption in um.
In staffing, uh, some of the
individuals that we have worked
with on our, our, um, different
trustee councils and so we have,
um, we're appropriate stepped in
to offer to take over some of
the administrative tasks that
had previously been handled, but
um we are looking forward to
that.
Settling down, um.
You know, and then I think um we
do not really know um how our
current um or potential claims
against federal entities, um,
will be handled. We have the um
the Alamos claim with the
Department of Energy, um, the
NASA, so the white sands test
facility can in Holloman, um,
that are, you know, will be
claims against the US Department
of Defense, it's really too
early to say how, uh, the US
Department of Justice will, um,
respond.
Um
work with us. Um,
So that's my presentation and I
um again am grateful to be here.
Um, happy to answer any
questions.
Great job, Madam Truste. Thanks
for the really excellent
presentation and informed.
For. So let's turn to the
committee for questions. OK,
we'll start with Senator
Townsend and we'll make our way
on over.
Thank you.
Thank you for your presentation.
Um, I have a
A couple of questions,
one more
and more than that, but um.
In the process of the
evaluating.
And determining
The um
The extent of
contamination, I unders.
I understand how that's done.
But how do you quantify the
impact.
To determine the level of fine
or restoration costs. How do you
do that?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Townsend,
thank you for that question.
Actually, we, there are um rules
promulgated by the federal
government that dictate how we
determine how we monetize an
injury, and that is done by um
reaching out to the community
and looking at all the options
for restoring the resource that
has been injured. So what are
the options of replacing that in
of that that resource uh
restoring habitat and what does
that cost?
And that is how we come up with
an estimate for what the
responsible party should provide
communities in order to um
fix the injury.
One of the, one of the
issues, Mister Chairman, that I
have noticed of of recent.
Has been in Secretary Kenny, I
don't know if he's here yet, but
he and I.
Um, have talked about this on a
number of occasions.
was
And, and he admitted that it
came into the, in the
In his
Formula
is a
person or accompany's ability to
pay.
So should my question is, should
I big company.
be fined more than a small
company.
And my question, you know, comes
down to a fairness deal is
should a young man go to prison
longer than an older man for the
same crime, and that, you know,
it's, that's troubling, but my
question is, is, is the value of
the company
Something that you
Consider when you are estimating
the value of the impact.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Townsend.
Our injury assessment and the
damage assessment is is
objective.
We look at the injury, we use
data that's provided by the
Environment department or the or
the responsible party or the EPA
to evaluate the injury.
But, um, the costing of
restoration options again is
objective. We don't take into
consideration who the PRP is.
Other than, we will not pursue a
claim if there is no viable PRP.
We are res we are, we res we are
responsive agency. We're not
proactive. We respond when there
has been a release, but the um
value of the corporation would
likely come into consideration
only when we get to the
settlement negotiations and it,
and uh the um responsible party.
Um, would have to negotiate with
they are able to pay, but our
process is meant to be objective
and community-based, um, and not
relevant to the value of uh the
responsible party.
Well, I hope it isn't because I
think in um Mr. Chair and
The um.
I think
The
task that you're assigned to is
to.
remediate and provide for their
remediation of their site. I get
that and I'm, I'm supportive of
that.
When we get to the point that we
start uh penalizing based on a
person's ability to pay more
than someone else seems a bit
unfair, but I appreciate that.
You mentioned the um POs level
won't over around Holloman, I
think, I forget what the lake is
called.
Lake Alma.
And I had a landowner that um
That owns property adjacent to
that particular lake that runs
cattle.
And when I posted when I saw
that that had
been discovered and I posted on
some social media platform about
it. He called me and he said,
how come I never had any.
Notification.
And so I would encourage if
there's a way to notify adjacent
landowners.
We ought to do that, and we
ought to do it in a manner that
uh provides him some level of
protection.
Um
is there
A
Consideration for
self-reporting.
Um, for a
individual or a company that has
as a release and self-reports
versus being discovered.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Townsend.
Not that I'm aware of. Again,
what, when we become aware of a
a release of a contamination of
a contaminant, um, release of
the hazardous substance we our
goal was to have an objective
process or um evaluating the
release and coming up with what,
um, with a fair um defensible
estimate of what it will cost to
make the community whole. So the
both the communities that rely
on the natural resources but
also the wildlife, the fish.
habitat, um.
We do have the opportunity to
settle a claim prior to doing a
full-blown uh natural resource
damage assessment and um that
would
Uh, generally the cost of the
assessment are paid by the
responsible party and so there
could be cost savings um by
self-reporting and entering into
those negotiations, um, right
away as opposed to um
Uh, prolonging the process.
Well, Mr. Chairman, my point is,
I think it would behoove us.
To recognize self-reporting
because our job is legislators
is to protect the public and if
someone's self-reports.
And makes a notification that
Limits the
The potential impact to the
public.
Uh, most
Contaminants that I have been
aware of, time is of the
essence, and so the quicker you
can
You can stop that mitigation,
you know, deeper in the soil or
have run off, all of those
things work in our favor.
So I would hope that we would
come up with a process that
says,
And I'm not saying don't let him
off not free, that's not my
intent. My intent is if people
self-report.
And they limit the impact to the
general public.
We ought to recognize that
because we ought to incentivize
remediation and clean up. That's
our, that's what we should do is
make it get it cleaned up
sooner. So if people
self-report.
That's one thing we ought to
consider it. If they run under
the risk of being discovered.
They may go years.
And, and then the litigation of
trying to find the responsible
party. By then it may have been
sold to a 3 times. It gets much
different. So I think we ought
to consider that.
Um
But I do appreciate your, um, I
do appreciate your presentation.
I hope that my comments are
considered as you.
As you go through your process,
but you gotta, you have a heavy
job and I appreciate that and I,
and I appreciate your work.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Real quick on that point, Madam
trustee, are people given
fines is very disincentivized
for not reporting.
That that entities are given
fines for not disclosing.
Mr. Chairman, I think Secretary
Kenny is the appropriate
individual to answer that
question. We are not a
regulatory entity, and we are um
entirely responsive to releases,
and we don't have a role in
preventing or um
We permitting, um, so I'm sorry,
I can't give you a better
answer, but I really think
Secretary Kenny is the
appropriate person to answer
that's the way we handle, but we
can maybe follow up with him.
All right, uh, board.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you for your presentation.
I do have a few questions.
So in this cleanup and Cannon
Air Force Base, now seeing that
the PIAS or PAs or I like to
call it's what I'm gonna call it
from now on. I don't care.
That's now enough Ogallala
Aquifer, which is the world's
largest aquifer.
So now what happens? Is it?
Spreading and at what rate and
can we contain it to certain
parts so it doesn't get any
further. What, what is the
process now?
Mr. Chairman Representative
Lord, um, again, Secretary Kenny
can discuss that in more detail,
but I know that at this point in
time, the Environment department
is responsible for enforcing the
the cleanup, and I know that the
Air Force has installed one pump
and treat system um has another
in the works that will, um,
The the intention is to um
retard the growth and pull the
POs plume back towards um the
Air Force Base. Um,
Um, Mr. Chairman, expert, is
that I can trying to remember if
that was an issue before we're
having an issue with the feds
admitting to cleaning up, is
there now a cleanup in process?
Without the deepest out there in
canon, Mr. Chairman, um,
Representative Ford, yes, there
is active remediation underway,
and I know a plan for um
For the interim remedy in the in
the final remedy. um, but again,
I don't have the details of
that, but um,
I can respond to you later, um.
If you would like, I'm happy to
answer that question. Thank,
thank you. I'd appreciate that,
Mr. Chairman, um.
What, so what happens if they
say the initial settlement is X,
and then we find it's now in the
aquifer.
Then how does that, is there has
to be another settlement or is a
settlement open to, we thought
it was gonna be X, but now it's
Y. How does that work out?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Floyd, we have the opportunity
to reach a partial early
settlement.
That would reserve, that would
say this is what we know about
the plume now, this is what we
know about the natural resource
injury, the quantity of
contaminated groundwater, what
it will take to restore or
replace that water, but we could
we could, I would believe at
least my preference would be
that the settlement would allow
for um additional conversations
should the um plume be larger or
in more places than is currently
acknowledged or um known at this
time.
So we tend, we like to, I know
responsible parties want
finality, and so we respect
that, um, but also in terms of
protecting um the public now and
into the future, we do want to
make sure that um future
releases are um are covered.
Mr. Chairman, um,
And our expert. So what is
happening with that water since
that water is used as drinking,
I think it's mostly used for
farming.
Does that mean they cannot farm
with that, but we're gonna farm
it. They're gonna put it onto
the crops.
So can you give me a little
update on that? Um,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Ford, my unders and again
Secretary Kenny can provide much
more detail on this because
that's really his role in the
process, but, um, or the
environment department's role in
the process, but it's my
understanding that there are
some water users who have
stopped, um, utilizing their
private wells, um, because they
recognize that there is
contamination and um Secretary
Kenny could tell you the extent
um of that and how um
How different water users are
responding to this
contamination.
OK, so Mr. Chairman, uh, an
expert, so.
And if they're running a bunch
of cattle, then it would
probably be not in their best
interest to be using that, so
then how does that play out for
them as the farmer.
rancher, sorry, that uh has
cattle and they can't use that
water now how, who, who is
supplementing them to pay for
the water that now I guess needs
to be trucked in.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Lord, I, I
imagine you're probably familiar
with the situation of uh Art
Scott, who is a dairy farmer,
um, in that region where he has
lost the use of his well, um, it
was determined that his cattle
were drinking contaminated water
and he was forced to euthanize
um his herd. um, I think that he
does um.
Again, Secretary Kenny could
probably be more explicit about
what strategies can compensate
him and other like likewise
affected water users for their
losses. You know, it's our
intention to, we cannot, the
Office of the Natural Resources
Trustee, we cannot compensate
individuals. We are very focused
on the resource and projects
that have a broad public
benefit, but I would imagine
that Secretary Kenny could
detail for you what uh
What
water users, other options are
for their personal losses. Yeah,
thank you for sharing. We saw
the pictures of all the dead
cattle and it was devastating
and going back to that with
notification how if they're
monitoring this as it moves
through the aquifer.
Are they testing everybody's
wells as they go along, or how
are people getting notified,
hey, you now have peas in your
well.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Lord again Secretary Kennedy,
and I don't need to be pushing
these questions off, but I would
be um remiss if I tried to
answer when that's not really my
area of expertise or my
responsibility. So um I know
that they're monitoring wells
that are um throughout the area,
but um
But what the strategy is for
completely characterizing the
injury.
I don't know the answer to that.
And, and I appreciate that, Mr.
Chairman expert. I, I would, I
would hate you to have to try to
guess on all this, so I have one
last question, maybe you can
answer this for me. If not, I
need uh Secretary Kenny here
immediately to ask questions.
Um, so in that tronox, I think
it's in it, right, Tronox a
settlement out for all the mind
tailing out there. I think it
was initially I thought it was a
trillion and then it looks like
it's 5.15 billion and the EPA's
got $1 billion for initial
cleanup.
And then there's gonna be more
released in 2026. So is that
clean up going and cause I keep
seeing section A, Section B,
Section D. How is that playing
out with that cleanup out there.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Stephanie
Barr, do you have some excellent
questions today. I wish I could
be, um, more informative, um,
again, the Tronnock settlements
are really on the remediation
side, that's the cleanup piece
that is under the control of the
EPA and the uh New Mexico
Environment Department. I can't
tell you the status of the
cleanup that's being funded, um,
with the Tronox dollars, um,
again, our, um,
Our role, our mission at the
Office of the Natural Resources
Trustee is to really focus on um
the injury that has occurred in
figuring out how do we
compensate communities, how do
we make the communities in that
region whole, um, for the loss
of their, uh, the use of
groundwater habitat or whatever,
uh, however they have been
affected.
So, Mr. Chairman, how do you,
how do you play a role then if
you're with the oversight with
that.
And they suing this company. How
does that play out? Because
they're going to court or
they're making a settlement.
They're saying we're gonna pay
this amount.
But you need this amount. How,
how is that matching up?
And Mr. Chairman, again, uh,
Representative Ford, our
responsibilities are very
distinct. We are not an
enforcement agency. We're not a
regulatory agency. We are, um,
we are.
Uh, we don't have a role in the
remediation, which is the
cleanup to a health-based
standard. So that is the
responsibility of the EPA, the
New Mexico Environment
Department, maybe the Navajo
EPA, um, if we're for mines that
are on the Navajo Nation, um,
what we look at is, can we um
quantify the injury to natural
resources, so that would be
wildlife habitat, wildlife, um,
fish, um, are focused at this
point in time is groundwater.
What is the injury to the
groundwater and can we
began, um, restoring that
groundwater as quickly as
possible. Um, so we don't have a
role in the the litigation for
the cleanup piece, the Tronox
piece. We've not been a part of
that, um, so, I wish I had
better answers, and again, if I
would be happy to um do some
research and, um, give you
something that um I could
defend. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chas
only question I have, and thank
you for your trying to answer my
questions for me.
Good questions. Um,
Just a little follow up. So when
you do, um, when you get a uh a
settlement to repair damages is
that never, that precludes
payments to
Individuals, that's just for the
resource itself.
Mr. Chairman, that is correct.
We cannot compensate
individuals.
Or uh individual losses. OK, so
that's like an NMED thing.
In essence.
Interesting. OK, good question.
OK, moving on to represent
Ferrari.
Yes.
I want to turn your mic on.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair.
And please correct me if I'm
wrong, Miss Debbins, but I don't
believe that NMED can prescribe
a payment to a private property
owner or damages.
mean that
That's the boot too. Now, I
think an individual can use
Data
is public.
That was used in the
prosecution.
Uh, setting a fine.
In a civil action against a
individual or corporation, but
An individual
Um
I may be wrong about this, but I
don't even believe the federal
government could prescribe.
Uh, a penalty of a third party.
Is that not right? Mr. Chairman,
Senator Townsend, I stand
corrected, um.
I think
Certainly from
The state procurement code, uh,
the anti-donation clause
prohibits us, and I would guess
the environment department as
well from
Providing payments to
individuals, um, where what I
have seen, for example, in the
Gold King mine release that
there were individual claims
brought by private attorneys
against the responsible parties.
I cannot, um, I do not know the
result of those claims of those
lawsuits, um, but so.
I stand corrected. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
So I've got a running list of
follow-up questions asked the
secretary later today. Now you
all just have to come after
today, right? everyone's words,
they're gonna come here after 2
because I'm gonna ask these
questions.
And, you know, it's kind of like
a
Cliffhanger here.
Right.
Policy nerd cliffhanger. All
right.
Moving on, great questions. Uh.
Repent for.
Mr. Chair and thank you, um, uh.
Madam Truste, um,
that I was just reading that the
governor has just declared an
emergency drought condition for
her state, so that makes the
water that we are not able to
use, um, even more important in
uh getting settlements such as
with the white sands and
Holloman Air Force Base. Um, do
you think that this kind of
action will help.
Um, with the litigation, um, and
to force, um, so that we can
remediate.
Or restore.
I should say that um
Less use of water by using the
settlement money to um reduce
the use in the communities that
depend on that water.
Does that make sense, Mr.
Chairman representative Ferrari,
absolutely the governor's
recognition as we all have
recognized that we are in severe
drought conditions and that our
water resources are declining,
um.
At an alarming rate that does
mean that the water resources
that we have, particularly
groundwater, which is a
non-renewable um resource become
much more valuable to the
communities that depend on them,
um, we have discussed before the
White Sands test facility Pumas,
um, an estimated 30,000 acre
feet.
Um, of previously pristine water
that could have been used by the
city of Las Cruces by the
Elephant Butte Irrigation
District by the state of New
Mexico to, you know, comply with
delivery compacts, um.
We know the value of that water.
We knew Mexicans, um, what we
hope to impress upon responsible
parties is that um the value.
is first of all, that, that
intrinsic value to us, but also
that the value increases in the
cost of restoration increases as
these resources decline as our
options for restoration, um, we
get fewer because they're just
In the water.
So, again, conservation, both
historically at LNRT and during
my term in this job, um, we have
focused on funding conservation
measures that either that
protect the resources, um, into
the future, um.
Preventing additional
contamination, for example,
because
Um
We don't have water, you know,
we're, we don't.
Water is still it for, yeah,
water is like, um, so, um,
We need the funds, the
settlement to be able to
conserve the water that we're
not going to be able to use over
the next, you know, 100 years or
so. Um
And
I thought we, we came close to a
settlement, you know, can you
tell us what changed or what
happened?
Uh, uh, Mr. Chairman
representative for or co-chair,
um Ferrari, um.
We had initiated conversations
with the US Department. We had
completed our injury assessment.
We had completed the damage
assessment that we believed
represented a reasonable um
amount for the Department of
Defense to uh pay for
restoration options we had
initiated conversations with the
Department of Justice, we had
some uh unfortunate delays in
bringing on the outside legal
counsel that we needed for those
conversations, um, and really in
about October and November and.
September. It's the first time
we'd actually had the
opportunity to sit down, um,
with the Department of Justice,
but again, um,
There was um uncertainty about
how the the new Department of
Justice would approach these
claims, so we have decided to
put it on hold until we have
clarity.
So disappointing.
Of course.
Yes, very, um,
We hope that
can be resolved soon. Um, also,
when, um,
Senator Townsend.
used to that, um, was talking
about, um, you know, cattle and
contamination such as in the
Holloman uh lake, but also um
Yeah
Wildlife, um contamination and
how I think we spoke about this
before, but um how people can be
alerted if they're hunters does
um.
Fish and wildlife, um.
give notice to people when
they're hunting in that area.
Mr. Chairman, um,
Madam Vice Chair.
The Department of Health and the
uh
Uh, game and fish department
have responsibility for those
notifications. I know that when
the first report came out last
year about these high levels of
POS in um in bird tissues and
mammal tissues, there was
discussion about putting out um
an alert and a consumption
advisory. I don't know the
status of that, um, at this
point in time, but I know that
there was discussion about
notifying um
hunters that consumption might
be a risk.
So is that something we need to
and maybe another committee, um,
ask them.
Or
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Ferrari, um,
Yes, because I can't provide you
an answer, but I think it is a
concern. It is something
certainly something that um is a
concern for us and I will
explain why, so.
Wildlife and, uh, you know,
hunting is a, you know, a use of
A natural resource.
And when hunters um are not, um,
can't use that resource, that's
a cost, that's a cost to them,
it's a cost to the community.
And so we would factor that into
our um injury assessment. Like,
what is the loss of use of that
resource. That's true for fish
or um any other natural resource
that communities use, uh, so it
is a concern for us. We are
keeping an eye on it, but I
don't have an update on um
Where, where those advisories
are at this point in time.
OK, thank you. And would that
also go for um Tularosa Basin
residents that they would need
to be um aware.
You know, or have that kind of
advisory.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Ferrari, I know that there are
warnings around or there used to
be, there are supposed to be
warnings around Lake Holman that
individuals should not, um,
Access the water or the the
surrounding area. I don't know
if those signs are are still in
place, but there certainly were
warnings about um
The risks of being exposed to
the POS that was there, um, and
again, you know, I think the
Department of Health or the game
and fish department sort of need
to assess who is at risk of
being injured, um, when they are
considering their, their uh
consumption advisory or their
health advisories.
OK. Thank you very much.
Miss.
Really great questions. So,
Another question to ask the
enemy secretary, and also I've
asked Paul to um bring in cayman
fish to talk to us about this
issue of honey and their
awareness of these hazardous
things and notification, because
you're right, Mr. Charis is a
hunter and fisher person myself,
I would greatly appreciate to
know. Yeah, yeah, they need to
be on the radar if it isn't and,
you know, cause these animals
are not just there, they then
migrate, right? So,
It's an issue.
Uh, because they have been found
to have it, the contamination,
so.
Moving on to, for example.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Madam Trusty. Good to
see you. A couple of questions I
think we're really focusing on
the Holloman issue and I think
that's important. So,
First of all, you said, I
believe there's gonna be an
assessment in the future. Could
you tell me more about that and
what, what kind of metrics we're
looking at regarding that
specifically from your
Your office.
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Block, thank you for that
question. Yes, so our next step
would, would be to do an injury
assessment and so that would be
to either use existing data or
collect new data to determine
the extent of the PFOS
contamination. Um, so both in
the immediate area uh in uh
wildlife that might travel
through the the landscape, um,
and as uh the chairman mentioned
um
Migratory waterfowl. What is the
impact on birds that are
stopping at Lake Homan, but then
moving to other parts of New
Mexico or other parts of the
United States, um, so.
Our next step for us, um, we
have done a, you know, a
preliminary screening to to
clarify that yes, we do have a
viable claim. There is a
responsible party and our next
step would be to put together a
damage assessment plan, and so
that would detail what's the
injury assessment, what data do
we need to collect, um, how will
it be evaluated, we would reach
out to the community for ideas
for restoration ideas, then look
at the ideas that have
presented, figure out what they
would cost, and then
Um, hopefully enter into um uh
conversations with uh the
Department of Defense about
reaching a settlement.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and so
I guess my question then would
be, we said there was a viable
claim.
So, was there a specific
Human or
Individual who has been harmed
directly from this and can we
prove that because when I asked
that question, not because I'm
trying to
Say that doesn't exist, but with
the the study that I, I did
read, the really interesting
study, it didn't necessarily
talk about concrete information
related to human contact and
harm, and it mostly was dealing
with the foul as well as mice,
but other than that, we didn't
get specific health-related data
to say, OK, this lake
specifically created this health
problem. I'm just wondering what
we're going to
for cause I don't see any real
data currently.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Block, so I'm the
natural resources trustee.
And so my focus, my mission, my
responsibility is uh the natural
resources themselves.
And so our investigation would
be, uh, what's the impact on
waterfowl on reproductive
capabilities, um, the benthic
community has that been, you
know, the, the entire um
ecosystem. Has there been an
injury, um, we, when I mentioned
the the human use element. So we
focus on, we don't.
We focus on um
Communities that use natural
resources for their livelihoods.
And so we can seek compensation
for that. We do not get into the
health impacts of various
contaminants or various
releases. Again, that is
something that I believe is the
jurisdiction of the environment
department, perhaps the health
department, so you generally
won't see us collect data about
the impact of PFOS on human
health, because again, our
charge is our is New Mexico's
natural resources.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Trustee. No, I totally agree
with you. I totally understand.
So I just, I'm trying to figure
out then what data we have for
the bad benefits or not.
Not benefits because there's not
good benefits of of being bad,
but what effects specifically do
we see on the wildlife? Because
I know that these are transient
wildlife. They, they migrate,
they run around, you know, like
mice, for example, those things
they travel a crazy distance, so
I'm just wondering what, what
can we do to mitigate in the
future current use, and then
also while we're getting our
assessment ready, are we going
to look at that?
then what do we expect DOD is
going to do, or are they going
to let us go on to Hollman Lake,
see some more information, get
our own independent data that's
not from the peer reviewed
study. I'm just trying to figure
out what the next steps are on
that, and that'll be my last
really big question that I'm
sure that you have a lot of
answers for.
So, Mr. Chairman Representative
Block, um, at a previous
presentation when I was in
Alamogordo, I had more detailed
slides about the levels of POS,
uh, in, uh, wildlife tissues and
plant material and um there was
a graph which I'm happy to
provide again that showed um
published studies show have a
negative impact on whatever the
resource is, so a certain amount
of PFOS in liver tiss.
you will indicate reproductive
failure or um premature death.
So there are published studies
that we can um
Look to to determine what
Um, what's the impact on
A, a duck.
With that level of PFOS in its
in its tissues. And then we
would use that. And again, we
have, this is a very technical
process we hired outside
technical experts to do this for
us, but it's a, it's an
established defensible process
for saying this amount of PFOS
contamination has these impacts,
not just on that particular
deck, but on future generations.
And so, um, circle and the
Uh, Natural Resources Trustee
Act do allow us to take into
consideration impacts into the
future, uh, future generations
that might either be impacted or
um or not happen because of um
the exposure to a contaminate to
a contaminant, um.
So, I hope, does that answer
your question, please.
Thank you, Chairman. So, yeah, I
think it's important just to
look at all the different
variables because I know that
the big study that everyone's
like, oh, it's a huge study.
It's so much information that
the world's, you know, the sky
is falling, but it only focused
on mammals mostly and those
mammals were vertebrates, and so
it was a really small sample of
what the wildlife actually is in
that area, and I would just like
to see a more holistic.
I'd like to know what the
invertebrates are, you know,
worms and tiny little fish that
don't really have
systems or even microscopic
organisms. I just am super
interested to see, OK, these
things are being eaten by those
fowl, and those fowls are
traveling, and then also there
are other predators that are in
the area that are eating the
mice. What does that do? And so
I, I appreciate all your hard
work and thank you, Mr. Chair,
for, for bearing with me with
these questions, but yeah, if,
if there's any other information
that you have with your office,
Madam Truste, I would love to
see it because that's right
outside my district and it
absolutely affects my
constituents. Thank you.
I appreciate your strong
advocacy for regulatory
oversight and scientific
research and you know, look
forward to good funding support
to we must regulate the worms.
It's all about the worms. Hey,
I, I like what you're thinking
about that too. I used to be a
worm farm. Really? Yeah, I grew
red worms.
They all have their role. All
right. Good. All right. Moving
on to representative Cerignon.
Thank you, Mister Chair, and
thank you for your presentation,
Madam Trusty. Um, since we're in
PAS, I'll ask you about Kurtlin.
So I know initially there wasn't
any PFAS found, but has that
changed at all?
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Saraana, my last conversations
with um the Air Forces, they
have not had new detections of
POs. I think that investigation
continues, um, so,
Again, a question, uh, Secretary
Kenny might be able to answer um
more um thoroughly than I.
But it's certainly we are very
interested in what those um
results are, OK, um, Mr.
Chairman, second question. On
page 6, your map.
Have a map that shows all the
settlement areas and um in the
southeastern part of the state
with I was just reading that
they had 1500 in 2020, 1500 oil
and gas spills and in 23 almost
um even more gas bills, almost
1500, um, and 4.5 million
gallons of oil and produced
water spilled. So it seems like
that's a lot of waste happening
and super fun level stuff. So
why is this area not
Um,
in your settlements or looked
at.
you tell me, uh, Mister Chairman
Representative Saraa, that is an
excellent question. Um, you will
notice that there are no, um,
there have not been any
settlements in that area because
circle exempts petroleum
products from um natural
resource damage claims.
So, Madam Chair, Mr. Chairman,
um, Madam Justice, they can,
they can.
Um
Emit hazardous waste and every
kind of waste there is in the
water and the land and, and we
can't really do much about it.
Um, Mr. Chairman, we can pursue
claims for any hazardous
releases of hazardous substances
that are defined by EPA as
hazardous, and I believe there's
a conversation going on about um
produced water, like what is
contained and produced water and
what the public can know about
that, um, as of now we do not
have access to data about what
is um what is in produced water
and where it's going, so, um.
Again, I think you know my
history with Kirtland Air Force
Base and the uh bulk fuel
facility plume, we cannot pursue
a claim because that's a refined
petroleum product that was
released into the groundwater.
So again, cir uh um has that
restriction the uh federal Oil
Pollution Act, um, we can pursue
claims for releases of petroleum
products, but only when they're
into waters of the United
States. So that just that that
does not include groundwater,
femoral, um, water bodies,
arroyos, um.
So
We do operate under that
restriction.
Madam or Mr. Chairman, Madam
Truste, so, um, it's under
circle that kind of eliminates
and stuff, but you know, and is
there any way to get it for you
to have it or no? There um Mr.
Chairman Representative Seana,
there are states that have
independent authority to pursue
those claims. New Jersey, uh,
the state of Washington, um,
those, uh, the authority is
provided under state law, um,
that, um, we do not have that in
New Mexico at this point in
time.
Mr. Chairman, Madam, trustee,
would you like that? Would you
like us to pursue something like
that? Would it help you in your
job because keeping the state
clean of hazardous waste that's
constant, especially in that
part of the state seems to be a
community health issue for me.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative
Serana.
We are aware of the many
releases and the the quantities
of petroleum products that are
released into New Mexico's
environment, um, into our
scarce, uh, water resources and
other natural resources, um.
That's a policy decision that
really the legislature um needs
to make.
Um, but we are certainly willing
to take it on if that is your um
if that is your decision.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
believe that's very important
and that's something we should
probably do. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, trustee Demons for all of
the information this morning.
Um, I'm curious, Mr. Tubman,
what a notification look like
right now and how is your
department notified, um, around
those or contamination.
Mr. Chairman Senator Charlie,
that's an excellent question and
something that as long as I have
been in this office, I've been
trying to improve our knowledge
of releases around the state of
New Mexico. So we communicate
regularly with, um, uh,
are with the environment
department with the EPA with um
the energy and minerals
department to try and get
information about releases that
take place around the state, uh,
we look to news reports, um,
about
Accidents that happen, I am on
uh the National Emergency
Response list that gives me a
notice anytime there's a
release, um,
Of the contaminant in um
in
Within New Mexico's boundaries,
um, most of those are um
involved, um, petroleum
products, so we don't pursue
claims, but we are always, um,
we are trying to do better
outreach and um work with
communities so we get notified
when um when there is a release
that we need to be aware of.
Thank you, um, Trusty.
Uh, also,
Our sites chosen for NRDA.
Um, Mr. Chairman Senator
Charlie, so when we become aware
of a release, we have a process
that we follow and the first
step is to do uh a preliminary
um assessment screen. So there
are criteria that we would
follow. Is it a, a release of a
hazardous substance is there a
viable PRP, um, or we.
To determine whether it makes
sense to use taxpayer dollars to
pursue a claim because often we
have to incur the cost of the
investigation before we can um
Before we can bring a claim. And
so we do that analysis, is it
worth?
Do we have a viable claim and is
it worth pursuing? um.
And if we make the determination
that yes.
There has been a release that it
qualifies under federal and
state law as a release for which
we could pursue natural
resource, uh, a natural resource
claim, um, we would then, um,
again, then there there's a
second.
3rd, 4th, and 5th steps where we
um look at what data is
available, um, what do we need
to um understand how to
characterize the injury to
understand what's the extent of
the injury and um
Again, then there would be an
assessment, is there enough data
here to bring a viable claim
against um the polluter, um.
And um that process, I, I forget
the number of the slide, but you
know, I laid out with the
processes, um, and then
hopefully we would um
Have, um,
A, uh, compelling.
um claim where the the polluter
would agree to settle with us or
we go to litigation. We do, you
know, we have the authority to
sue, uh, polluters for releases
and uh
Generally, most nerd acclaims
nationally settled, but we do
have the authority to pursue a
um
Pursue the claim in court.
OK. I hope that answered, I hope
I didn't forget something.
No, that was great, Mr. Cha and
Trusty, um, and it's a nice
segue into the next question,
which is, I mean, I'm curious
about your budget. Are you
self-sustaining? Um, what is
your annual annual budget? Where
does the money come from to do
your work, um.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Charlie. So when I came into
this position, um, the trustee
fund that we, the assessment
fund that we use to bring our
claims was insolvent. Um, I
started in, in, um, at the end
of 2019 and the legislature and
the governor's office um over
these past 5 years have provided
both the operating dollars that
we need to uh run our office and
maintain our staff, but also the
assessment fund, you know, the
resources, the
resources we need to um prepare
our claims and some of the
responsible parties, some of the
potential defendants in these
claims are um
Significant, you know, the US
Department of Justice, um, some
of the larger mining companies
in the world, um,
So, um.
I want to say that the
legislature has been very
responsive to um our requests.
Well, we have our budget this
year, our operating budget was
about, is about 900,000. Um, it
is my, um, intention that that
will stay flat in our FY 27 um
request, um, this past year, we
have, we have replied on special
appropriations into the trustee
fund to fund our um our
assessments and uh this year,
uh, the legis
in the governor's office
provided a significant
appropriation that I believe
will um
Carry us into the future and
also um
Indicate to um polluters that we
have the resources to pursue
these claims, the end, and
that's an important message to
send, so, um, again, I want to
say thank you to the legislature
for um providing those resources
very important to us.
Thank you for that. Um, um, Mr.
Trusty, I think I just have like
2 or 3 more questions. Um.
Regarding self-reporting because
I think it's an interesting idea
during your assessment process.
Does it allow for the discovery
of time when the responsible
party.
Like, can it backtrack and
identify exactly when the
responsible party knew that they
had contaminated.
Um
OK.
Um, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Charlie, that's an excellent
question. There is a time
element to um a natural resource
injury. And so part of our
investigation, part of our
injury assessment would be
determining when the release
occurred, um,
And
Um
Knowledge of the release is.
Not necessarily a factor, you
know, if we have data that show
um the release occurred on a
certain date, and that they, um,
and that the injury um persists,
uh, we can bring a claim for um
the value of water now, but also
the lost value of the water
during that interim period, um,
and I would be happy to send you
there's some very specific
language about um
I calculating that injury, like
the over time.
It's super interesting. Thank
you, Chairman. Um, and trustee,
and then I completely understand
that your office focuses on
broad public benefit and not
personal loss, but one thing I
wanted to mention because I
won't be here this afternoon for
Secretary Kenny's, um,
presentation is that we have a
state agency right now, which is
the Crime Victims reparation
commission that is able to
compensate and make whole
victims of crime, and so we, I
just text the uh commissioner or
the um
Director of the CBRC and and he
gave me a couple of um
exemptions that they apply for
through DFA to make um folks
whole because in the, the
district that I represent, we
are down, um, stream actually
where I live from uranium mining
and those aquifers have been
polluted and will continue to be
polluted and um the farmers and
the ranchers in my district are
highly dependent on those water
resources and
I think the way that it's set up
right now, we're just, we're not
able to compensate individuals,
but, but there is a way it
exists, right? Um.
Another, the last question is
something bigger and maybe just
an invitation to build a
relationship with you, um,
trustee step in this, but what
can the legislature do to affect
your work, support your work in
the future. What are the big
issues that you're up against
right now that we can really do
something about. Thank you, Mr.
Turner.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator
Charlie, thank you for that
question. I really do appreciate
the support that the legislature
has has given us this committee
in particular, um, in, um,
supporting our various efforts,
um, you asked the question about
how do we learn about releases.
Uh, you know, we continue to try
and do better, um, you know, if
there are ways, if there are
resources in your community that
we can access to get that
information, um, that would be
really helpful, um, particularly
in the Grants mining district,
we, um, are aware of many of the
advocacy organizations that um
that really care about the
issues of contamination and the
health impacts and the natural
resource impacts, um, connecting
us with those groups when um
Um
is really helpful. Again, as we
go through our process of uh
doing an injury assessment,
collecting data, um, the more
resources and um
Uh
And people on the ground, um,
the better that really benefits
our work. Um, again, I feel like
after this last legislative
session that um my request for
um appropriations, um, will be
much simpler, uh, the, the
special appropriation into our
assessment fund, I think will
carry us for some time, and so,
um, again, thanks to
Representative Sererana, who had
been our champion all these
years, um, but, um.
You know, again, we feel like
we're in a really um good spot
as far as our budget goes, we,
you know,
I tend to be very conservative
when it comes to spending, but
having that special
appropriation is going to enable
us to bring these claims and
carry them to the end. So thank
you for that question.
good questions.
OK, so I have some questions.
First of all, Madam Truste,
thank you for your good work.
I think we're all really lucky
to have a good regulator like
you.
doing this work and looking out
for the state and having served
now with multiple trustees, I
can just say you're doing an
outstanding job and
Really kind of fulfilling the
opportunity that we have in your
office to do more to protect New
Mexico, and thanks for kind of
asking of that and seeking that
and now attaining that.
So, I just want to compliment
you because we see a lot of
Public service under attack
these days and coming down and
really important governmental
functions and it's just such a
stark contrast to be sitting in
front of such a great public
servant doing this work in the
state. We're very lucky to have
you.
I mean that sincerely and your
knowledge and it's just, it's
really good to hear.
So, I have some questions. The
money that we gave you this last
session or we gave you that we
appropriated the legislature. So
is that non-reverting that
special appropriation is that
fun that you're going to be able
to do work on for several years.
Chairman, that is correct. So by
state statute, um, the trustee,
um.
Money that goes into the trustee
fund does not revert.
And I think, as I've said
before, that's really important
when we have these expensive
multi-year complex cases that we
can rely on having those funds
available. So, um, restoration
funds and assessment funds they
do not revert. Thank you. And so
that's good to hear. And um,
I want to talk about a ban on
uranium mine issue a little bit.
So we have
You know, 1000 abandoned the
uranium mine sites, potentially
with no known responsible party,
and we've been talking about
what is the strategy for really
get our arms around that issue,
and um obviously we appropriated
$20 million to NMED.
To, um, do some cleanup.
But we've also talked about the
need.
It was an idea I think they
brought up about really having
staff attorneys really start to
look at.
The states, the ownership.
All these sites to characterize
them so that we can start to
You know, pursue them all.
Especially maybe before some
owners go away or go bankrupt or
whatever the case may be with
some of these sites.
And I think you had mentioned,
hey, you know, we have a little
role there, we possibly have. So
I'm just wondering like, with
the appropriations we've given
you.
Do you see yourself having a
role? Do you see yourself as
having budget to be able to do
some of that work withinMED.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, so
I mentioned that we are in the
process of putting together a
strategic plan for the grants
mining district. And so that is.
Taking into consideration all
the complexity both in terms of
geology and natural resources,
but also the jurisdictional
issues, the land ownership, um,
the abandoned mines, um.
We are putting together a plan
to address that, and that will
set our priorities for how we,
how and when we bring claims and
um as I mentioned, orphan sites,
definitely on our radar. Um,
there may be noresponsible
party, um, no viable
responsibility, no viable
responsible party left, but
there may still be some
liability based on um who
purchased the um or from those
mines, and so we do have.
have, um
Um
Consultants.
And um who are looking at those
legal issues. Like what is the
liability and is a, is a nerd
acclaim possible, um.
And worth pursuing, so you know
we have kind of divided into
really, oh sorry.
Anyway, 3 categories, sort of
the large sites with viable
PRPs, the orphan sites, and
smaller sites that then might
become um a later priority.
Thank you. Yeah, um.
Do you work with the remediation
coordinators for NMED and Ener.
That's rely Mr. Chairman, um,
yes, so the goal of the
Superfund Act of the Natural
Resources provision of the Super
Fund Act is that if restoration
can take place at the same time
as remediation. So as these
sites are being cleaned up if
there can be restoration taking
place, that's um basically the
higher standard, um, if that can
take place concurrently, it's to
the benefit of everybody to the
PRP to the community.
as a whole. And so we do try to
keep up with, you know, the, um,
the mining, uh, folks at the
Environment department with the
Energy and Minerals department,
um, and that's part of our
Um, strategic plan for grants
mining district.
OK. Thank you. Yeah, I, I would
just like to continue to
encourage that as much as
possible and and see an
expansion really of our state
efforts to robustly.
attack this issue on all fronts.
You know, it's great that we're
giving a little bit of money to
clean up some sites, but that
is, you know, a drop in the
bucket compared to the overall
need and that approach will be
wholly inadequate on its own,
even if we continue to do that
for a long time.
We need billions of dollars, um.
Any responsible party out there
that can pay to clean up their
own mess needs to do so. Quite
frankly, the federal government.
Keep saying this needs to write
a big check, because this was
all defense 08, and this is
where I hope the state attorney
general also maybe gets involved
in this issue, because I think
there's various um
Legit claims out there, causes
of action, I think is the right
legal term.
Uh, that we could pursue for the
federal government to take
ownership from a defense
contracted.
What is now way site. So,
Uh, we, we may talk about, you
know, asking them to come in and
share their thoughts.
Better off.
So, legal issues, so.
Um, I think that's all I have
for now. 01 little request,
maybe
some of your pages didn't have
page numbers. It's a very small
thing. Like one of them did, but
most of them didn't. I
apologize. I will fix that. I
know that you were looking at
page numbers. We weren't. It was
a little tough. And as you go
into the season here, it just
might be a good enhancement to
your.
Presentation PowerPoint skills
are
not great. It's a great
PowerPoint. That's the that's if
that's the only thing, uh, no, I
just will fix that. Forgive me
for making that.
Suggestion. Anyway, great job
again today and uh thank you for
taking the time. Thank you for
taking the time to, to listen. I
appreciate it. And for all of
your support.
Have a great day.
Committee
OK, so they uh need to reset the
audio visual, the web basically
which is gonna cause a little
break or we not live at this
point when they reach it's gonna
kill a microphone. I just
before they hit reset, can I
just do one thing real quick?
Sure, OK, before we do that
committee, I just little tail
end of the previous issue, the
work plan. You'll also notice on
the back of the work plan we
have proposed meeting dates and
locations. I just wanna just,
that's on our agenda. I just
want to draw your attention to
that.
So this is just based upon the
issues that we're going to be
talking about and also going
around the new communities which
we always try to do, you know,
obviously we're going to have
big uranium mining cleanup
activity outside grants, so we,
we went, we're going there, I'd
like us to go there. Las Cruces
because of the white sands test
facility in the POs stuff in the
area. We have the Kirtland
issue, which is very active, so
thinking in Albuquerque, we
haven't been there in a few
years. And then uh Santa Fe, you
know, as we have to go.
last meeting.
Does that look OK with
everybody?
Yes.
All right. Great. With that, we
will stand up, uh, take a break,
really, uh, just while we reset.
So if you're watching on the
public, come back to us here in
a couple of minutes. It may go
off, but then you'll just want
to keep checking it in a minute
or so,
we'll be back live again,
any chance we could switch um
Las Cruces to September when
it's a little bit cooler.
and go and go to Albuquerque,
August 1st.
As some of us might be gone to
NCEL also.
I happen at the same time. Yeah,
it's August, uh, it's the end of
July 1st of August.
Um, yeah, I'm personally OK with
that.
Just switching the basically the
locations of the August 1st and
2nd.
On September 2nd
yeah Mr. Chair, yes sir. What,
what are we changing? What we're
just switching, um, we have a
meeting in Las Cruces on August
1st in Albuquerque on September
2nd, which she's suggesting is
we just switch them, so we need
an Albuquerque first on August
1st and then Las Cruces on
September 2nd.
That way, you know, we bring you
there during nice balmy.
You might try rib though, so
it's pretty nice to eat not fall
weather.
All right. Everybody posted that
change we're all good. OK, thank
you. We are on a break.
Very short.
That 122.
I
It.
The.
testing 12.
Oh
Oh
a liar.
Team, we're ready to get started
again.
The table. Thank you, Alita.
It's been wonderful seeing you
Stop that.
All right, are we live again?
Yeah, OK, great. We will go
ahead and resume our meeting.
And uh with a presentation from
the Energy Minerals and Natural
Resources Department with Saliha
Trujillo, the floor is yours.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I am Elitha Trujillo, the task
force coordinator and bureau
chief for Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources.
Energy conservation and
management, and I oversee the
hazardous waste planning Bureau.
I am also the task force
coordinator for the radioactive
waste consultation Task Force.
Um
I provide staff support to that
task force, and their mission.
On slide 2. I'll wait for you to
get your handouts.
have numbers on my slides,
Senator.
So the mission of the
radioactive waste consultation
task forces to represent New
Mexico's interests regarding the
safe and uneventful transport of
radioactive and nuclear material
throughout New Mexico.
Under energy minerals, natural
resources, leadership, Secretary
Kenderine is the task force
chair.
We collaborate with 8 state
agencies. We have Ener, New
Mexico Environment Department,
Department of Health.
Department of Public Safety,
Department of Homeland Security
and Emergency Management, Indian
Affairs Department, DOT, and the
state Land Office, and then we
also have the
State fire marshal as a
non-voting member, but they
participate in the task force as
well.
And then through that,
The coordinator.
Implements that
Transportation safety program.
Um, and we set policies and
operational procedures. We train
and equip responders along the
whip shipping corridors.
Throughout New Mexico, we keep
the public informed on
radioactive materials issues. We
monitor and maintain highway
safety on New Mexico and the
shipping routes and then all
shipments coming to New Mexico
originating in New Mexico are
inspected.
Um, some recent activities of
the task force. They held their
annual meeting in October of
2024, we introduced Secretary
Kenderine as the new task force
chair. We brought in Indian
Affairs Department
representatives, the Homeland
Security and Emergency
Management and the state Land
Office as well.
Um, one of the tasks for the
task force was to look at the
Department of Energy's legacy
transonic waste definition plan,
and we provided comments to that
and, and what one of the big
comments that I provided for and
an important comment within
that, um.
Document we submitted was
requesting that
Because New Mexico's the hub for
whip and we receive all those
waste shipments.
That the deal we consider using
Lane's definition of legacy
waste.
And that's important for us,
one, because we are the host
state for the website, but also
it ensures that we're looking at
Legacy waste as anything prior
to 1999, October 1 of 1999, and
from past nuclear weapons
research and production, and
that's important because the
website started shipping in
1999.
And so what we wanted to do was
ensure that
Any of the legacy ways defined
by Department of Energy that was
going to the whip was in
parallel with the opening of
that site itself. And then also
because Lael is our primary site
in New Mexico. Our priority for
sure as a state, and we wanted
to ensure that we were in
parallel with them as well.
On the definition.
So some of the comments that we
provided to the DOE regarding
their plan for legacy waste
definition. We ask that do we
conduct their meetings and they
planned development and
consultation with DOE Order
144.1A.
Or um coordination with
stakeholders, there's generator
sites, um,
What we found was that the DOE
was
Presenting their
plan development at various
meetings that DOE holds anyhow,
um, stakeholder meetings,
example, the National
Transportation Safety Forum.
They have an annual conference.
Some of the regional group
meetings of statey, uh Western
Interstate Energy Board, the
Southern states and board. So
those meetings, the DOE was
presenting these, but they
didn't do a formal consult with
the tribes per that deal we
order. And so what we ask them
to do was
Because we're, we know that all
tribes are sovereign and
independent of one another and
independent of the federal
government that they adhere to
that DOE order and ensure that
each tribe had an opportunity to
take part in the participation
of that plan, um, and that
especially the four tribes along
the shipping corridor at Lane
that they met with them as well.
Uh, we ask that the do we only
include US defense-related true
waste prior to 1999 and the
opening of Whip. What we didn't
want was DOE to include the
circles plutonium at Savannah
River for a variety of reasons,
but one of them being that one
surface plutonium does not meet
the waste acceptance criteria,
it has to have an adulttered
agent.
Added to it in order for it to
meet the waste acceptance
criteria, so we ask that they
not include that.
As part of the defined legacy
waste.
Um, and if they did that they
would have to make the
Um
The reference that surplus
plutonium plus the adulterant
would then become transuranic
waste.
Um, the, what was important was
that they meet the waste
acceptance criteria, and then we
ask that they prioritize the
cleanup of lannel.
And specifically material
disposable areas, CEG and any
unknown buried waste or non
buried waste.
And we asked that they identify
a process to track legacy
transuranic waste destined for
disposal at width.
And or at least provide an
annual report on that
prioritization of legacy waste
or disposal at width.
And then also identify.
Because it's part of the permit
as well that some legacy waste
will not be disposed of at whip
as per the permit requirement.
On page 5, there's a timeline
for the Legacy True waste
disposal plan, so this took
place in 2024.
The plan was submitted to the
Environment department after
several meetings were conducted
throughout 2024 by DOE.
The comment period was opened
and extended through January
3rd. It was a 60 day public
comment period, several comments
were submitted.
On the website that was provided
by DOE.
And then they extended to
receive.
To continue receiving comments
through February 2nd.
On May 21st, Secretary Kennedy's
office sent a letter to DOE
requesting some improvements to
their plan. And so the ongoing
is ongoing um issues are there
still working on that plan,
reviewing and conducting
whatever.
Meetings and and evaluations
that they're doing and
development of that plan.
I'll follow up with you when we
have more, but it's something
that we're definitely looking at
through my office.
Uh, slide 6. I wanna talk about
our working group. We have some
members of the working group
here. I'm, I get the honor of
working with them. They're
really the brains of this
establishment. That's what I'm
gonna call it. We have um
immiaki from Department of
Health. He conducts all of our
medical training at the
hospitals, um, for donning and
doffing of PPE, so he's training
doctors, nurses, um, maintenance
staff, all, anybody who may be
involved in setting
up, showers and decon um setups
at hospitals and clinics along
the shipping corridor. There's
Bobby Lopez. He's with the
Environment Department. He
assisted in that training as
well, and he incorporates some
of the um the signage and
placards on the vehicles and
goes through the emergency
response guide teaching the
doctors and nurses and other
people how to read that book and
how to understand the different
things about the science, and
then they go through a process
of identifying um
Doing a scan on a
On a mannequin that we have
where the stash them radioactive
sources and allow the students
to go through and search that to
find the
The sources with the equipment
we provide for them. We have
Scott Burnside, he's our
training and development
specialist. He's got the law
he's our law enforcement lead,
um, along the corridor we're
working on, um, we work closely
with New Mexico State Police and
then the local law enforcement
communities along the shipping
corridor as well. Carrie Dio is
not here, but she's our fire
services coordinator and she
provides instrumentation, so
she's swapping out instruments
to our fire service.
s along the shipping corridor,
and then also ensuring that
they're meeting their training
requirements for um radioactive,
it has its materials response.
At New Mexico State Police. We
have Lieutenant Ostfeld. He is
also is not here today. They
have a
Uh
commercial vehicle enforcement
challenge at Isleta that they're
starting today through Saturday.
So if you have an opportunity to
go buy their, they're doing a
challenge, and they've got a
dunk tank and I hear the major
is
seated on that chair of the duct
tape dunk tank, so bring your
best pitcher with you. Um, and
then we have Lieutenant Tapia
and Captain Raleigh, they're on
the emergency response officer
programs for.
The, the
Whip shipping corridor, they
ensure that our state police
officers are trained annually
and then new officers received
their certifications.
And then we have um
Ernie Salazar and Sergeant
Brake, who I really want to
highlight, they're my two whip
level 6 inspection leads. I,
they're my go to people for all
things, um, with transportation
if I have high wind warnings or
I need to put trucks in safe
parking or I have delayed
shipments. Those are the two
that I coordinate everything
with on getting ensuring that we
have inspectors at the ports of
entry to to conduct those
inspections. They're very
instrumental to our program, so
that's our team and some of
of our activities, we're closing
out year 3 and 5 on our 5-year
cooperative agreement with DOE.
Um, the agreement funds the 4
State Department, so these
individuals and carry are funded
100% through that program.
We requested 1.5 million for
fiscal year 2026, and some of
that fund will go to replace the
radiation detection equipment,
training.
Um, inspection.
All of those things that
Everyday operational stuff for
our program. And then we're also
working on our whip tracks, our
web transportation exercise with
the city of Ratoan and Colfax
County, and those departments
participating our Mnerd NMED DOH
DPS minor Colfax Medical Center,
Cardinal Health, Colorado State
Patrol in Trinidad fire.
You have 2 photos there, one's
an inspection photo that I stole
from the DPS website.
And that photo there um on the
right is Mr. Bobby Lopez, and
that's the dummy and they're
going over it with the radiation
detection equipment.
Absolutely.
And then page 7, this is from
our past exercise with the city
of Santa Fe. It was done here at
the um
Community College area.
And whatever the whatever use
they have that the state, the
city EOC is in the background
there, but we use New Mexico
State Police drone team to
Provide that video footage for
our responders, so what they do,
they'll video that exercise and
then we'll get those videos to
the responders and give them an
opportunity to review it and
look at their training, use it
for their training needs.
On page 8 from January 1st to
May 13th.
We had 81 shipments total.
Um, the numbers are a little
offset.
But
You'll see Idaho National Labs
is still our highest shipper,
Savanna riverside to 11.
Oak Ridge, 3 Lawrence Livermore,
0.
Los Alamos 13 and we had no
shipments from Argon. Um, do we,
the website was in a maintenance
period from January to February,
so we didn't have any shipments.
That's why this number is a
little lower.
than previous years.
And then slide 9 is the fun one.
There's some other items of
interest.
So the New Mexico State Supreme
Court is currently Way the case
concerning proposed nuclear
waste storage in Andrews County,
Texas.
which is near the New Mexico
border, so that case impacts New
Mexico, not just from the whole
tech site but also from ISP.
Um, because our responders
through mutual aid are the first
to respond should anything
happen at the WCS site.
So that case, Texas is
challenging the NRC's approval
of the facility, arguing it
shifts long-term responsibility
for the waste onto the state.
And that the NRC lacks the
authority to approve such a
large scale potentially
permanent storage site.
The case raises questions about
the meaning of temporary, which
has been our biggest argument.
Or New Mexico as well, because
of the ability to license and
continue licensing for
Infinity for life in perpetuity
forever.
Um
I think the original license is
40 years and then they can
license for 2 years after that,
thereafter each.
Continuing, so there's no real
end to
What temporary is, and so the
big question is what does
temporary mean to the NRC or
anybody else. Um.
The decision is expected
sometime in June, possibly July,
for sure, no later than July.
And again, that impacts New
Mexico, not just because of the
ISP decision or the ISP site but
also the whole tech site.
Uh, page 10 is a detailed
timeline, so ISP first applied
for the federal license to build
the facility in Texas in 2021
after many public comment period
or public comment period and
public meetings NRC approved and
licensed the facility.
And then the 5th Circuit in
August 23 ruled against ISP and
vacated the license.
And then in 24, the Fifth
Circuit sustained the
three-judge panel's ruling.
And the Supreme Court accepted
the case in October of 2024, and
in March of 25, they heard oral
arguments. So we expect again in
sometime June to have a decision
from the Supreme Court regarding
that case.
Oh, slide 11 is upcoming
activities.
Again, the commercial vehicle
enforcement New Mexico State
Police.
Um, commercial vehicle
enforcement officers are
conducting their
Challenge this weekend at Isleta
Casino.
In June.
June 4th and 5th, we have the
National Governors Association
Federal Facilities Task Force
meeting held here in Santa Fe,
the meeting is June 4th and then
June 5th, they're doing a tour
of Los Alamos National Labs.
In October, we have our WIP
transportation exercise, which
you are all invited. It's
October 25th.
And it's said the Colfax County
Event Center Rodeo grounds.
Um, activities started 09 a.m.
and we're doing two evolutions,
the city will be in the morning
and the county.
Responders in the afternoon.
And then in October, we'll have
our task force annual meeting.
And then future meetings include
the Western Interstate Energy
Board high-level radioactive
waste Committee and with
technical advisory group meeting
is scheduled to be held in
Carlsbad sometime in November.
date to be determined. And the
last pages are contact
information, and it's
Our main team here. I didn't put
the law enforcement officer's
contact information on there for
obvious reasons. But if you have
any questions regarding this
presentation or with
transportation or the whip
treks, there's our contact
information and you can always
call me as well at 505-660-9912.
That's it, Mr. Chairman.
Lisa, thank you so much. Um,
anyone on the committee have any
questions for Lisa.
I heard Mr.
delay.
Instantaneous.
For
yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I just
have a few questions. OK, so as
far as this, the training that
goes for the MS, etc.
Is that because I know that's, I
know.
I don't want to, I know that
things go through certain
counties and things do move
through Torrance County. I don't
want to give any more detail
than that, but.
In Torrance County.
Is it mandatory or is it
optional for them to get
training and if they're gonna
rely on Albuquerque, that takes
an hour for them to get there.
Is that sufficient if something
were to happen.
Mr. Chairman Representative. So
Torrance County does receive
training. They fire department
in fact, they just requested
some merch and it's modular
emergency radio radiological
response to transportation work
long Longworth training from the
DOE, so the fire departments
will be receiving that training
towards counties, um, fire
services.
Now in June we'll receive that
training and DOE puts that on
for them.
Torrance County doesn't have a
hospital, so we train Guadalupe
County, um, Santa Rosa, Tim does
the training there and then
Santa Fe County also receives
training, so Torrance County
gets the benefit of either City
of San Fe Hazmat team or City of
Albuquerque has my team if they
needed to deploy a hazmat team,
but the fire departments are
receiving training and they are
trained and prepared as well as
EMS.
For
A response to a whip event. The
benefit or, or the beauty of not
the benefit, but the beauty of
whib transportation is the
vehicles are very robust and the
true pack containers are very
robust, and so the little alone
is almost 4000 pounds and it
takes a lot to
It's a uh pneumatic system that
takes that lid off and if you've
ever had an opportunity to visit
the website, they kind of give
you an opportunity to see that
if you have an absolutely go do
it. It's a, a great tour for
you. Um, but the point that the
true packs are very
Robust in that they contain that
radioactive material, so the
probability, the biggest threat
of that vehicle.
Or that that truck in itself is
that maybe one of the casks
comes loose and holds over a
vehicle, and that's a very high
Um, very low risk that that
would happen. But it, that's
what it's designed to do is to,
to
Roll
Um, but not open. So what we
trained for, we always train for
the worst case scenario, we
don't get to blow things up,
unfortunately, which is my
favorite thing to do.
My
It's determined an expert at me
but my friend actually does
that. That's his job. He
actually takes those casks and
blows them up and they drop
things and they take them up 100
ft in the air and they dropped
them and they put him on a rail
and they smash them with trains
and semis crash and do and they
do everything imaginable and
when he can't send me things
when it's when it's open to the
public, I get to see those. So
yes, I'm, I'm feeling wearing
for your also my husband's a
nuke engineer, very familiar
with the transport, so I know
how incredibly safe those are.
We actually went out to San and
Nore where they're now doing
with the transition out there
and I got to run the Geiger
counters around there so I know
they're extremely safe. I know
you guys take a tremendous
amount of precaution, so I just
want to make sure from my
district that they're getting
the training that they need if
something should happen, God
forbid, nothing will. It'll be
fine, but I just wanted to make
sure that they have that
available, but back to the
hazmat, by the way, I wish my
friend would take me out to, but
they can't cause it's, it's
close to the public and we can't
see what they're doing till they
release it, but, um, two things.
One,
I do wanna go to whip. I've said
that a couple times, Mr. Mr.
Chair.
Mister Chair.
to
Thank you. See, you
see, thank you, and that was it
and um
and then the house and leave her
there
and leave her there well.
Um, and then also, um, so now
moving into hazmat, which is
different than the training that
they have. So the hazmat then is
Albuquerque or Santa Fe County,
and they're the ones.
But that's about an hour unless
there's something in Edgewood.
So, is that sufficient or do we
need something else closer to
those areas.
Mr. Chairman, Representative.
It is sufficient because
typically what happens is when
there's an incident that occurs
with the whip truck or some
other hazmat event. My
My greater concern is the trucks
like Walmart that are
Or some other company that are
carrying hazardous materials or
the truck that's carrying
Ammonia that are traveling down
the road, right? Those are the
bigger threats to the
environment than the whip truck,
but, but the thing is, it allows
the
First responders in that
jurisdiction, the ability to do
a full assessment and establish
their hot zones and that
notification is almost um
Within that 5 minutes of that
and that initial assessment.
And
An hour sounds like a lot of
time.
It's sufficient only because
when you're out in the middle of
Nowhere Torrance County or even
worse bond, New Mexico and
there's nothing out there. You,
you're dependent on those mutual
aid.
Agreements that you have with
other with other jurisdictions,
so Santa Fe City of Santa Fe is
always ready to deploy city of
Albuquerque is always ready to
deploy. Um
The longest part is the drive
there, right? Getting the, the
vehicles there, but we have so
many resources and we ensure
that when we train, we're
training on all hazard response,
not just specific to if there's
a whip truck, it's any hazard
that occurs, they're receiving
that training from the fire
academy and then they're also
receiving and the MERT training,
it's an all hazards approach.
Um, it does talk about
radiological things, but it
kind of gives that whole all
hazards approach to any
response. So they're prepared
and sometimes
You just have to give time,
time, and you know, people.
Um
Responders are on that.
Adrenaline drive and it really
gives that space to
Do a correct assessment and
ensure that what they're doing,
um,
I
is in preparation for the hazmat
team when they do show up.
I don't know that Edgewood has a
hazmat team, I think.
The closest hazmat team again is
City of Albuquerque or City of
Santa Fe.
And
Again, the, I think everybody's
trained to firefighter one,
whatever those requirements are
through the fire academy, but
it's sufficient enough that
they're able to hold that scene
until Hazmat team arrived if
they needed it.
But for the most part, is
specifically with the whip
truck. Again, the greatest
threat is
Um, what's happening on that
accident scene and handling the
Um, injuries that are occurring
versus the whole hazmat. We do
deploy our commercial vehicle
inspectors anytime there is a
whip truck because even if they
run over a simple thing like
debris on the road, it marks
them out of service because the
wheels are impacted, they have
to get a full level 6 inspection
again before they can get
released back on their route,
so.
It, it sounds like it's a lot of
time, a lot of things are
happening in that hour, but I
think it's sufficient for them.
Um
We do our best to ensure that
they maintain their training.
And then um they they have the
tools and resources that they
need.
And from our part,
From a whip transportation
perspective because that route
comes on.
Through clients' corners and
down to 85. So there's a large
area from Santa Fe to really
fun.
That is kind of open, there's
really not a whole lot out there
to respond to.
Thank you and thank you, uh, Mr.
Charon and for answering that
question because for me, to be
honest, but from what I know of
what they've done with these
things, it's almost impossible,
so you're exactly right, I'd be
more worried about a pneumonia
truck.
than I, than I would with that.
I do have one more question. Um,
They're going to put something
in my district that I have great
concern about. You may not be
able to answer this question.
They want to put one of the
largest solar facilities. It's
not that they want to put the
batteries.
facts and we just had a huge
incident in California where
caught on fire made a.
horribly toxic plume.
So who's gonna do the training
in my district right on the
beautiful 14 highway where you
put this ugly monstrosity, not
to get solar, but this ugly
thing with no.
fire departments or EMS out in
that area, how do you know how
that would be handled? I know
it's separate from what you do,
but who would
Who's the one that's going to
take over that and who's gonna
take care of all the people in
this giant toxic plume in my
district if that were to happen.
Mr. Chair representative, so
Santa Fe County has a wonderful
emergency management program,
um.
And that jurisdiction.
I think is included in Santa Fe
County. It's, it's what we're,
they're gonna put it, it's
isolated. It's in the middle of
nowhere. There's nowhere to even
access it.
So even getting there would be
an issue, but it's right on the
borderline here Santa Fe County.
It's a ranch and it's right here
and it's partially inan ball and
partially in Bernal Leo. OK.
But to get there, they have to
go all the way around the East
Mountains about 1 hour and 10
minutes to get there.
So
If you can, if you want to talk
to me afterwards and tell me who
I can talk to because this is
gonna be a huge concern and the
people that are pulling,
pulling, pulling the center from
Brazil and don't know anything
about this area and how we don't
have the resources we don't have
the training, we wouldn't even
know how to alert people and
it's so isolated that this
become that become a very tragic
incident if it did catch in
parks have a lot of lightning
strikes up there. So I'll, I'll
talk to you about that
afterwards if that's OK. All
right, thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative, absolutely, and
I think Homeland Security,
DHSEM.
could probably give you more
information on what they, how
they would plan and prepare for
that as well. OK, thank you.
Senator Tim, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um and the chairman
may be aware of this more than I
am, but
To
have been 81 loads if I count
this up right there's been 81
loads in the 1st 132 days.
Um
How many loads are left to haul
from.
From each of these. Do we know?
Do we have an inventory on what
we're supposed to, I mean more
loads are, are there to move.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, so the
Department of Energy provides me
a semi-annual letter that
Kind of outlines what they're
projected.
shipment number will be for the,
for the calendar year, and I
believe this calendar year was
545 shipments.
Up to 545 shipments, so they
don't pinpoint exactly because
we leave it open for Murphy's
law and whether and whatever
other anomalies may occur. So, I
believe it's 545 shipments still
to go.
This number is uh as of May
13th.
I typically have
I'm monitoring about 10 to 12
shipments a week.
So
Usually 1 to 2 of those.
Days is Los Alamos and the other
is Savannah River or Idaho, most
of our shipments come from
Idaho.
Um
So by the end of the year, we
should have close to 500
shipments that are going through
New Mexico.
Yeah, but my, and I appreciate
that.
Um, but Mr. Chairman,
Ma'am, do we know is this this
This waste is constantly being,
um,
Made. Is that right? I mean,
there's not like an inventory of
it set up there. I mean,
there's, there's
Radioactive waste that
Occurs because of their
operations on a daily basis. Is
that correct? Mr. Chairman,
Senator, yes, there's new
transuranic waste that's being
processed daily, but we're
accepting now is a lot of the
waste still from World War II.
So a lot of the, the waste
that's coming from Idaho or that
we're pulling out of Los Alamos.
That's waste that's been
generated still from the World
War 2 legs that we define as
that is my question. How many
more loads of
That
armed
are waiting to be transported.
So, Mr. Chairman Senator,
The deal we won't give us a
definitive answer on that what
they'll tell you is, as per the
land withdrawal Act, it's 6.2
million cubic feet of waste that
they're allowed to dispose of at
the website.
And
As far as they're concerned,
that I think we're at 44% full
at whip, so still.
56% of do we believe that.
that 6.2 million cubic foot of
available storage.
is going to be able to hold all
of the transanic waste that they
have.
From World War II stacked up.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, again,
that's dependent on how the DOE
defines legacy waste.
And how
They prioritize the waste, so if
there's been a, a few studies
that have been done by the
General Accounting Office and
some of those studies, there was
one that was done on the surplus
plutonium, and they looked at
the website and the 6.2 million
cubic feet of space that was
available for transuranic waste
and looking at what the
potential.
Or projected inventory was at
the time, plus the surplus
plutonium, it would exceed that
6.2 million cubic feet. That's
written into federal law. So in
order for the DOE to exceed that
6.2 million Congress would have
to act. They have to stay within
that 6.2 million.
So 40 44% of 6.2 million has
been
Currently in place at the
website.
There's not a, a definitive
number of how much transuranic
waste is still out there. We
wish we could get that number
from DE. That's one of the, the
comments that we requested on
the legacy disposal plan was
that they identified what legacy
waste is out there and
What the inventory is and make
it simple enough so that the
average person without a nuclear
science degree could extrapolate
that data and understand it
because the way that the, the
system is set up now, it's very
convoluted and it's confusing
and if you don't understand.
calculus and trig and the very
basics of
Engineering, it would be hard
for you as an average individual
to be able to understand how
much waste is that or they
project out there.
Mr. Chairman, uh, the other
thing that you mentioned was
That storage of the transferanic
waste is one thing, but there is
other ways that is not
permitted.
Or whip that we know is there.
That needs to go someplace.
Do we have an idea how much of
that there is, and
Is there another place for it to
be stored in the United States
other than whip.
Mr. Chairman, Senator.
The DOE has an inventory, so
they have an inventory for low
level waste, a lot of that goes
to Utah, and some of it goes to
WCS
and they have the inventory
online. I'll get, I'll get the
website and send it to you where
you can see what their inventory
or their projected inventory is,
um, there's
Spent nuclear fuel. There's
liquid waste.
There's
Um
Other than
Classy waist, so there's a
variety of different nuclear or
radioactive wastes that are out
there. The only thing that can
go to with is transuranic waste.
And so certain plutonium being
one of those that's identified
in the the disposal plan.
It doesn't meet the waste
acceptance criteria for WIPP. It
has to have an adulter added to
it in order for it to meet that
waste acceptance criteria. So
what we're asking do we again is
to exclude surplus plutonium as
identified in the plan as legacy
waste, because technically it
doesn't belong at with unless
they do the adulter and Mr.
Chairman and gentle lady is um a
cast, I think is their name, is
cast Transportation.
the transporter for
Or whip waste today.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, yes, cast
his our transporter.
I, I see those vehicles on 285 a
lot, and they should be
commended for
The way that they
operate. They uh.
Without a doubt, I, I watch him
and cars pulled in front of
them, you know, I instantly
watched him break and get
distance. They're always done.
What seems to be the very
Right thing to do, so I don't
know, I don't know cats. I don't
know anything about them. I just
watched their operation and, and
I know safe driving and and uh
They do a good job. So I, I
appreciate what they do. I would
just, uh, my only
A so.
And the chairman and I would,
would argue about this, I'm
sure, but
The
The committee, um,
In their, in their effort to
To um
Identify and
Watch over.
Um, these waste streams, it
seems like there is an
opportunity.
To, um
Made me reach out and try to
understand what's the right way.
I mean, if there's this other
way streams out there.
And there's no.
Real place for it to go.
Yeah
For the nation, is it the right
thing to do to, to look at that
and look at the
Whit permitting process and, and
do we have the capacity to
build.
6 dozen new panels or whatever
it takes within whip to store it
in and whip do it safely, and is
it the right way to do it. I,
uh, instead of just opposing it,
I think the solution for the
nation is to address it, and so
I'd be interested in that, but I
look forward to the website
information and and Mr.
Chairman, um, any information
you can send me on that, but
kudos to the transporter too, by
the way. Thank you.
Thank you.
And if you ever want to go to
whip, I'll get you in. I've been
there. I've been there, uh,
senator had the tour, been on
the ground, and uh
I have the t-shirt, yes, yes, I
survived the 4 mile ride down
the elevator.
The self-rescue device and the
whole deal. Um,
So yeah, I checked that box when
I was a chair before. I was
like, all right, gotta do it.
Anyway, so, but yeah, anyone who
wants to do it, I'm sure they
would give you a tour.
Yeah
All right, I have some questions
for you, Alita. Um, thank you
again for your good work as
always. We appreciate it.
Um
Number one, didn't it seems like
we went through an exercise with
whip already changed the
configuration of how much waste
could be stored.
To expand the storage capacity.
Did they not approve that
already, or is that something
still being talked about?
Mr. Chairman, to my knowledge,
they have not changed anything
as to what can be stored up with
the Land Withdrawal Act is very,
is, is maintained its
consistency at 6.2 million cubic
feet. Yeah, and it's not about.
It's about the same amount of
space, but using the space
differently to be able to volume
of the volume, correct.
So, Mr. Chairman, what they did
was, and this was under the last
administration.
11th hour change by the way.
OK, yeah, what they did was
change so what they're doing is
they're not counting the full
barrel per se as the volume of
that entire barrel, but only the
contents, the volume of the
contents within the barrel, so
this, the air that's in there
was not calculated within.
Yeah, and it was very
controversial and, and people
were opposed to it. Um, but they
did do that, right? That's so
it's for you they did actually.
Recently, fairly recently
changed the amount of material
that could be stored in we.
But, um,
Another question for you, have
there been with all the
shipments, are there any safety
issues that you can speak about
in the transport of these.
True
Waste casks. Mr. Chairman, not
for whip, um,
And not because
I work with the program, but
I've been here almost 14 years
or more than 14 years. Um, they
are, in fact, the safest vehicle
on the road. They're governed at
65. There's 2 drivers with the
vehicle at all times. They're
all trained for level 6
inspection, each of the drivers,
they're inspected annually by
the they receive an audit
annually by DOE and then New
Mexico State Police.
conducts an audit biannual or
biannually, twice every 2 years.
Um, they, they have very strict
requirements and part of those
requirements we helped DOE
establish for the drivers their
driving criteria. Um, there,
what they do on their POV feeds
over to what they do in their
vehicles, in their, in their
whip vehicles. So they they're
held under very strict
requirements.
Um, by far the safest vehicles
on the road, aside from my own,
you get your aside from you, OK,
good. Well, all right. Um,
Does, um, in your program gets,
um if I'm wrong, several million
dollars a year from the federal
government to do emergency
response training for
communities, right? Around the
state? Correct,
Mr. And you talked about some of
those. I want to draw a
distinction. I, I, I really
wanted us to hear if there were
any safety issues with this way.
Just to make the
clear distinction we talked
about high-level waste that was
proposed.
And basically made illegal by
the US Supreme Court, the notion
of off reactor site interim
storage that was made illegal by
the US, uh, sorry, by the Fifth
Circuit court, and now it's
being adjudicated by the US
Supreme Court because we had
different circuit decisions.
But, um, and then they, they
threw out the license for
Holtech.
And they threw out the license
for ISP even though we passed a
law, one little thing missing
from your little law SB 53 and
um
2023 making it illegal to store
that was here in Mexico for us
to get permits. So even if the
Supreme Court said yes, this was
legal.
Who take out their license were
restored. We have a law that
says you cannot do it in the
state, we cannot issue permits
until there's a federal.
A permanent repository, which,
as we say, this is interim.
But having said that, the
storage of
of permanent this
But having said that, the
storage of of permanent of this
the transport of high-level
waste.
would be done through rail.
And have its own risk profile.
rail and, and it would be on a
scale nationally precedented or
unprecedented doesn't exist on
the scale we'd be doing it,
what's been proposed here, and
it would be done from a private
company. So the millions of
dollars that your program yet.
From the federal government to
do security, you know, training,
hazmat training does not exist,
did not exist in the proposal
for whole tack and that risk
profile and nothing offered up
by the company, so I just, you
know, I asked about the safety
of, of the, of the true ways
because I'm genuinely interested
in that, but I don't want to
draw it incorrect distinction to
high level waste and what we'd
be dealing with there.
So, um,
Yeah, that being said, um, kind
of to your question, Senator
Townsend, you know that the
website was never designed to be
the permanent.
permanent home for all the
country's true race.
In perpetuity, well, I mean,
it's certainly that which is
there would be entombed in it
forever, but
It the
The federal government is
supposed to be looking for
another repository.
And, and our new permit, as I
understand it requires them to
report to us annually on their
efforts to create a new
repository. So my question to
you is, Lia, have we got a
report from the Department of
Energy about any current efforts
from the OEa site, another
repository in the country.
Mr. Chairman, to my knowledge,
the Environment Department has
not received.
A report from DOP. OK. On a new
repository with Secretary Kenny
can
fancy that this afternoon inner,
uh sorry, an enemy issue. Good
point, yeah, but just so folks
know, I mean, it's recognized
that there needs to be a
Other repositories in the
country, and that whip was not
designed to handle it all in
perpetuity forever. So, so
that's something we as a state
need to push because they will
take the path of least
resistance, and they will gladly
try to maybe even exceed things
that were designed for,
including other waste
classifications, it's up to us
to
To
Uh, you know,
to do things the right way,
including the federal government
keep their word. Um.
All right. And then, um, so
we'll, we'll check with him on
that. And then I just have a
question. Um, in your role, have
you noticed since the new
administration changes and all
the changes we hear about.
management and guidance and
personnel leaving the federal
agencies. Are you noticing any
posture changes in any of the
federal agencies you interact
with that affect your work.
Mr. Chairman, no our program has
continued to flow, um, at the
beginning of the administration,
there was a tiny pause on.
Um, funding across the board for
all.
Cooperative agreements and
grants, but the website falls
under public safety, so it, I
think we were at a 1 or 2 week
pause for funding and
immediately rolled back into
flow, so our program itself and
DOEIP have not experienced
anything. We have
See um quite a few individuals
except the retirement early
retirement program.
Uh, Carlsbad, I think we had 25
people that I worked with
previously that have accepted
retirement.
But they're we're, we still
have.
Our program, the same
individuals that I've been
working with for the past 10 to
12 years are still within the
program itself. So we haven't
personally experienced any
challenges with DOE or cast or
any of the other.
Um, programs that we work with
on both.
With and nuclear energy.
That's really good to hear. And
please, um, would you let us
know if anything changes with
that? I mean, at the first.
First indication of a problem,
slowdown, safety issues, we need
to know that.
The great thing about our
program, um, Mr. Chair, is the
whip Transportation program is
written into federal law through
the Land Withdrawal Act. It's
the only program for with at the
state level that's included in
the federal law.
Unfortunately, it doesn't bring
a whole lot of comfort, but, but
I hear you and it's national
security. So,
Um
Anyway, we'll just leave it
there, you know, any changes,
let us know I will.
appreciate it. Anything else,
committee?
OK, I'll leave the good work
again. Thank you for your time.
Thank you, Mr. Have a good day.
You as well.
You know like
Young man, please join us.
So
Uh, yeah, you're up next, yeah.
Yeah, of course.
Oh, do you have a handout or?
What do you, I'm sorry, what did
you ask me?
Uh, it will be pulled up.
The song.
For when you're ready.
All right, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, appreciate
the opportunity to be here
today. My name is Sun Le
Stewart. I'm the deputy
commissioner of operations.
First, I just wanted to put a
little note, um, I sent this
committee the wrong version of
the presentation, so there are a
couple of typos uh in this
version. As soon as I get back
to the office, I will send you
uh the correct version. So
apologies, uh, uh, for that
little mishap, um, I do, for
example, know, uh, what my
title is on the first page.
All right. Well, I know we're
short for time, so I'm gonna
jump into it. Um, first, I can
go over a little bit about the
legal and regulatory framework,
uh, the land office hit on hold
tech really briefly because I
know there's been a lot of
discussion about it already
today, uh, give an update on
where we are in terms of uranium
mining on state trust lands and
uh a little update as well on
our remediation reclamation
activities. So on slide 3.
A little bit of an overview in
terms of our legal framework.
Um, in essence, you know, we are
not a traditional regulatory
agency. Um, our actions are
often through uh contracts
through our lease terms, uh, or
by the fact that we are
landowner and when we make
agreements with parties to
utilize state trust lands. We
require certain things and those
entities are supposed to uh
follow them, um, so we really,
you know, all the other
agencies, uh, you know,
environment, nerd, uh, PRC, you
know, federal agencies like EPA
really complement, um, uh, that
side, but when we're taking
enforcement action, it's usually
as a matter of contract and uh a
matter of being the landowner
for where the activity occurs.
Um, in terms of whole tech
specifically, as was mentioned,
we're waiting on the Supreme
Court decision to come out, um,
and, and whether
They will uphold the Fifth
Circuit decision.
Listen to the oral arguments. I
think it could go either way,
um, uh, from the perspective of
my boss, I think we are um
hopeful, uh, that, um, the
license will not prevail, um,
and
There's a couple of reasons for
that. Um, if you
And there's a little bit of an
overview, but I'm gonna jump,
jump it on slide 5, and, um,
going to slide 6.
This is really in the heart of
our oil and gas operations in
New Mexico, and as you can see
from slide 7,
The mineral estate, uh, under
the proposed site is actually
owned by the State Land Office.
Uh, we were never consulted
whatsoever, uh, in terms of the
evaluation and going through
this process and the selection
of the site, and importantly, a
lot of the evaluation from an
environmental and safety
standpoint that was conducted
was all about assumptions that
bear little reality. Um, so what
I mean by that is, uh, you know,
they would
assume for the purpose of uh
environmental or safety
evaluation, there would be no
potash uh uh development.
There'd be no oil and gas
activities, no sand and gravel
activities, etc. And some of
these things, um, uh, are just
not correct, and, you know, we
do have active leases, uh uh in
that area, um, we have a
standing gravel lease, um, the
potash, uh, development there
was just the company saying they
didn't intend to develop but the
land office never signed.
on that.
So we remain really concerned
about that site, um, and, uh,
the impact to state trust land
specifically. Uh, on slide 8
provides an overview of uranium
activities on state Trust lands
today. We have two active legacy
leases, um, neither of them are
producing, uh, uranium, uh, both
of these predate, uh, the
current commissioner.
Uh, commissioner Garcia Richard,
uh, her perspective is that we
really should not be doing new
uranium leasing uh in New Mexico
until we actually deal with
these legacy problems and uh we
very much have not dealt with
the legacy problems throughout
the state.
So you look at uh slide 9, this
is the San Mateo Creek Basin.
This is an example of you two
kind of outline sections that
are state trust land, um, that's
a radiation map, they're highly
contaminated.
You know, dealing with this
issue is going to take uh
I think probably decades, uh,
and many, many millions,
billions of dollars, uh, it's a
massive effort, so I, I think
it's a a lesson that was learned
that we really need to be
thoughtful on the, the front end
in terms of the decisions that
we make.
On a slide 10 is just a quick
overview of our participation,
um, in the, uh, the, the
coordinating body out of
environment in terms of uh
uranium cleanup.
Uh, we have been closely working
with them to identify sites on
State Trust land that would be
suitable for for cleanup.
As I mentioned, you know, the,
the big ones are gonna be really
challenging for us. They're
going to take a long time. So I
think they have rightly, uh, uh,
tried to focus some of the
effort on sites where we don't
have responsible parties where
we've got um uh state lands
where there is a willing partner
to be able to move forward. And
we've issued a couple of writing
entry permits, we're working on
scopes of work, uh, uh, to begin
to, to kick off some of that uh
that effort.
On slide 11, uh, are the three
initial sites.
Uh, that we are going to be
focusing on, um, they're all
kind of in the San Mateo basin
for, uh, for reference, this is
just right, um, where Mount
Taylor is, um, it's, it's just,
uh.
Right off of there. But I would
note that there are sites, uh,
statewide, you know, we've got
to carry, there's a site that is
about 56 miles out of Espanola.
Um, so I think that, you know,
the notion that a lot of the
problem is in the Northwest, is,
is correct, but there are sites,
legacy sites, prospecting, you
know, throughout, uh, New Mexico
that we, uh, need to deal with.
Um, slide 12, uh, just gives you
some, uh, the visual of of what
some of these sites look like,
um.
The middle picture is actually
a, a, a, a kind of a dump truck
it.
It would drive in this shaft
here.
That's uh
basically where it would go, um,
you know, many of these sites
have not been fully explored,
um, and we are still very much
in the, the stage working with,
uh, you know, the other partners
of characterizing what needs to
be done, what's possible, um.
I would, you know, note that we
do want to move as quickly as
possible and we're committed to
that, but there are some really
difficult issues that we're
going to need to work through,
uh, in, in dealing with um some
of these some of these sites.
Such as, you know, what do we do
with the waste? Is it, you know,
on-site burial is it off-site
disposal, those types of things
are, are really challenging.
Lastly, I just wanted to give a
quick update on where we are
with respect to our um uh
remediation and reclamation
efforts, uh, this body created a
new, uh, environmental
compliance office for the Land
Office, and we have been uh
trying to do a much better job
in ensuring that sites are, are
remediated and reclaimed
appropriately.
And as part of our
accountability and enforcement
program, we've been trying to
ensure that that responsibility
falls on the operators and the
lessees who are out at the site,
and it doesn't end up, um, uh,
falling on taxpayers. So this is
not a um this is separate and
distinct from the OCD program,
for example, where they are uh
using funds to, to plug wells.
This is, uh, the state land
office working uh with
industry to, to get wells
plugged. Um, when they're
inactive.
Um
Couple of just overview on slide
14 and then on slide 15, just to
challenge the magnitude of what
we're talking about here. You
know, we've been, you know,
doing this since the twenties in
New Mexico, and we have a lot of
land that that is
You know,
Pretty damaged that we need to,
to try to reclaim um and a lot
of it is gonna take
A lot of money, resources, time
and commitment, and I think it's
just being realistic about that,
that challenge. Um,
On slide 15, there's one of the
typos I mentioned in terms of
judgment. Um, this is just an
example of uh one area where we
actually uh want a judgment of
$7.5 million to to have a site
cleaned up. So when you look at
a macro level, the scale of the
problem is, is really
significant.
When you look at a micro level,
you're gonna have some operators
where it's spichetti span.
They're doing a great job.
They're, uh, complying with
rules, um, and, uh, you know, if
there's an incident, they
promptly deal with it and they
take care of it.
And then you're gonna have other
sites where uh neglected for
decades and decades and decades,
and, um, you know, getting folks
uh to the table to deal with it.
It's really challenging. Uh, so
it really does go across the
spectrum. So with that, I will
stop and happy to answer any
questions that the committee may
have. Thank you.
of questions.
OK.
I think
that was something like that.
You want to bet on the locker,
yeah.
OK, I'll take that bid, Mr. Cha.
Thank you. Good to see you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So a
couple of questions real quick.
So about the whole tech.
So, tell me a little more about
the Supreme Court case, and I
know you, you can't really
speculate on how they're going
to decide because you really
don't know based on the
arguments, but I'm just
wondering, let's just say they
do decide in favor of whole tech
that would nullify the states.
Law that was passed a couple of
years ago. And so what would
your department then do if the
Supreme Court did indeed rule in
the favor of Holtec.
And that's quite speculative, so
I apologize for that as well,
Mr. Chairman Representative, the
older I get, the more
comfortable I I get saying I'm
confident that I don't know
certain things. So, um, I, I
would definitely second that it
is a lot of speculation. Um, you
know, the decision is whether
the license, um, you know, on
the Texas side and then they
brought in the New Mexico side,
uh, you know, can be issued for
a temporary site, um.
When reality, I, I think this
ultimately will probably end up
being a permanent site if it, if
it moves forward, um.
I don't know, I listened to the
oral oral arguments. I don't, I
really don't know, uh, which
way, uh, they will go, um, and
so I think it's kind of pure
speculation. I, I think that
there is a strong case that,
that, uh, uh, the license should
not be issued from my
perspective. I don't know that
the decision would nullify the
state law, the state law, uh,
you know, as I understand it,
you know, restricts whether
certain permits would be issued
or not.
I, I think that's somewhat of a
different issue than, you know,
the license being granted
itself.
Thank you.
Yeah, so
the issue.
That the Supreme Court is
dealing with is the
The ruling from the 5th Circuit
that the nuclear regulatory
commission didn't have the
authority to license off reactor
site storage.
That the nuclear waste Policy
Act says that the federal
government needs to figure out a
repository, not delegate that
massive decision to the NRC to
settle to pick sites for off off
reactor site storage which
You know, picking a new site
where it's not generated the
waste, because of course that's
where it is stored.
So if they were to say, um,
Throughout the Fifth Circuit
decision and say we find that
ruling to be an error, then
basically it would just mean
that the NRC has the authority,
and it probably might lead very
quickly or the decision itself,
I guess, um, and this is not a
legal opinion, because the Fifth
Circuit decision simultaneously
said that and said, therefore we
vacate the ISP license.
Maybe it's possible if they
threw out the Fifth Circuit
decision that would by virtue of
that automatically restore the
ISP license or that would very
quickly happen, you know,
administratively by the NRC the
same could happen whole tech.
The issue with our law is very
different and it it it carves
out a uh
Elaine
outside of federal preemption
that we believe in the Supreme
Court has upheld the states
have.
certain regulatory rights, which
is recognized in the EIS itself.
So yeah, it would not, it would
not.
It would not suddenly invalidate
our law. That is not what the
Supreme Court is dealing with
that would maybe be a separate
legal action that Hotech could
pursue, but different from the
Supreme Court, as I understand.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yeah, and
if you have anything to add to
that, I, I don't know, but I, I
do think it's important at least
to look at what the NRC did
because they did issue it, and
so,
They did do studies. I mean,
I've read the studies and when
the bill came up, that was one
of the big talking points that
we all heard, because the
studies were so intricate, so
well done, so, so much
information on how safe and how
temporary it is, which is a
scientific fact. So I just think
it's very interesting to to
learn that and thank you, Mr.
Chair. Appreciate that.
Very good.
OK, fair enough.
OK.
Beard Townsend.
Thank you.
hard to follow, Mr. Sir, thank
you for your, I have a couple of
questions. Um,
When you look at the state
mineral lease helpings around
with.
Um
I completely, I mean, I get it
where you're coming from on
those values, those royalty
interests.
Oh
Has it been, um,
Do you believe that the state
would
With this a trade of assets. I
mean, if the federal government
came to you and said we have
like assets.
That will take those mineral
interests.
Which would lead you of the
Financial potential financial
loss.
I mean, what is a swap.
Um, I'm trying to solve the
problem with a swap of those
mental interests be something
you would consider or you play
Stephanie.
Mr. Richards would consider.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, uh, just
first the clarification, um,
we're talking whole tech, right?
OK, um, so I, I think a couple
of things. One, at a very high
level, you know, the, the
commissioner is not in favor of,
of the project. So I, I'm not
sure that we would, um, you
know, uh, try to go in that
direction. Um, I would also note
that uh doing exchanges is a
little bit challenging, um, with
the land office, we can do
exchanges with the federal
government.
um,
uh, where we exchange the
mineral estate, but in all other
instances, we, we have, we can't
exchange our mineral estate. Um,
so,
If this
Parcel is.
is with a private entity,
essentially. So, um, uh, uh, and
we don't own the surface. We own
the minerals, so I'm not sure
there would also be a path
forward with a private actor,
um, but, um, you know, what I
say that there's no way.
to make that happen through
You know, different creative
mechanisms. No, I think you
might be able to, but
Um, this administration is
supportive.
I, I understand, and that's a
A chip that she's playing and,
and I, and I, I completely
understand, um, Mr. Chairman,
um,
the
The idea that um
That we should not.
Look at.
Any uranium mining in New Mexico
because we have a legacy
problem.
It is really
Um
Something that I would argue.
Strenuously against because
We are depriving the Mexicans of
jobs and opportunities, and
maybe we could take a fund and
build a fund that would then
fuel cleanup costs for other
locations.
And help
Generate the dollars that would
address the issue, and I, and I
understand the issue. I'm, I'm
not arguing the issue, though,
Senator Charlie and I have
talked about it on more than one
occasion. I get it, but
Just saying we're not gonna do
anything about it when
We don't have the money.
To address the issue, and we
have many other issues that we
want to spend tax dollars on. I
just think we ought to try to go
out, and if there is aponsible
Operator that can.
That can mine uranium correctly.
With
Proper bonding, proper
oversight.
And, and generate a revenue
stream that would then give us
dollars to go and dress, a
legacy issue. We're just almost.
In my opinion, would be
irresponsible not to try to
figure out how to fix the
problem, and that's what I'm
trying to do is try to create a
stream of income that we could
address the issue and create
jobs in the in the same trade,
so I, I, I understand. I just,
uh, I would just encourage, um,
us to figure out how to
fix the problem and just say,
instead of saying we have a
problem, we're not gonna do
anything about it. The other
thing is, I know, I believe you
have.
Um, some lithium mine
applications before the state
land office. Is that correct?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I'm, I'm
not aware of any missed lithium
mine applications, there's um a
gentleman who has been seeking
um access through our land,
uh, to get to BLM land where I
think he's he's thinking, um.
How is that? Are we supportive
of that operation or not, Mister
Chairman Senator, um, you know,
it.
In that individual.
In that in that case, uh, the,
the gentleman, um, basically
said that he was not willing to
abide by our rules, um.
And uh if we didn't approve
access, he was gonna trespass
and he actually put that in
writing, which is not always the
smartest thing to do. Um, so it,
it did not give us a lot of
confidence in terms of uh the
type of person or entity that we
would want to be doing business
with and that, yeah, I don't
know anything about an
individual. I, I was told uh
several months ago, in fact, I
got a phone call, um,
From a representative of
corporation, I think it was.
I may be wrong, and I probably
shouldn't said, but I think it
was called Arizona.
Lithium
For
And
And they had some potential mind
activities in
Um, around.
Uh, Representative Ferrari's
area. I
believe that they're in the Las
Cruces area, but
What I was told was they are
some of the most significant
lithium.
Deposits
Um
That we know about in the United
States and one of the most in in
the world.
There's another opportunity for
jobs and, and um
Wr the income from New Mexico,
so I'm just trying to figure out
how to create jobs and and
opportunities for New Mexicans.
I thought it was on state land,
but maybe not, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, let me, let me look
into that. I, I'm not aware of
any application that I, I would
need to check with our folks,
and, and I'll get back to you uh
on that. Um, you know, with
regard to uranium, I, I would
just note.
I think
What we have said we're not
going to be doing new uranium
mining on state trust land, um,
we have two active leases.
Where, you know, on, on slide 8,
new fuels and Rocahondo.
They've never produced, they've
never developed.
So, it is not as though our
action is keeping development
from occurring or keeping jobs.
If there was a market.
Reason
They would develop these leases.
So we do have active leases that
um they have a right to develop
and they are not developing. Um,
And, and, you know, there's
obviously, you know,
international factors about what
uranium costs and um but I, I
just, I just note that it's,
it's, uh, there is potential,
um, and then in terms of state
trust land, when, when the
commissioner was elected, um,
she made a commitment that she
didn't want to leave any uh
state trust lands worse than
when she found it.
And one of the things that the
land office has a uh legacy of
is sometimes making short term
decisions that we bring in
money, create jobs, and it
really comes to bite us down
the, you know, down the road
because we, we haven't really
thought through all of the
potential implications, um, you
know, there's the Nacimiento
copper mine, for example. We've
been trying to get this cleaned
up for um decades and decades,
and it's still not cleaned up.
Um, and, and the land office
made a
talk to the school kids back in
the day, but, but now we're, we,
we weren't very thoughtful about
how we did it. So, um,
You know, we, we are supportive.
Our mission is to make money. We
want it to do it, do it in a
responsible way, uh, but we also
need to look at the other side
of the uh the equation, which is
the legacy side, and if we're
creating liabilities for future
generations. All right, and I
appreciate that Chairman and I
appreciate your presentation
today. I, I would just, uh,
encourage us sometimes we get
off on our own little.
ramp
and I wanna stop this or stop
that, but, but we really have to
do is take care of New Mexico as
a whole, and that's our job as
legislators. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, chair.
On that point, um, Senator, uh,
I looked up that uh Lancaster
Resources is exploring lithium
brine target near Lordsburg.
Then also foremost lithium has
acquired hard wrought lithium
property in the Winston.
Kind of Silver City area, and
then Arizona lithium is also
exploring lithium projects in
New Mexico.
What I was told was, there was a
Appeared to be based on the core
drilling, a significant find in
real opportunities for New
Mexicans to go to work and for
us to create tax dollars. Thank
you.
Oh really?
Now, you gotta go back to that
person.
That might have just been an
invitation for you.
also go back to that person. All
right.
Um, similarly, I have some
questions for you. Um,
Tell me more about um the
uranium task force. I hadn't
really heard about that. What is
that, Mr. Chairman, that's kind
of the title maybe is a little
misleading. There's the
coordinating body for uranium
that was uh uh cleanup sites
that was created via statue, um,
a couple of years back and uh
lives within the environment
department.
Well it's interesting, so this
was representative Saraan and
I's legislation, but I don't
know that the bill itself create
maybe I'm wrong. I don't know,
it created required cooperation.
I don't know but maybe a task
force came out of that, Mr.
Chairman, maybe task force
wasn't the best,
yeah, that's where it's, you
know, that, that there are
multiple players, multiple
entities, uh, coordinating and
focused on cleanup, um, uh, but
it, um, no, it, it, it's, it's
me regular.
coordinating site
identification, those types of
things, but um uh it it wasn't
OK per se, it's a new term, but
I love it. That's great. That's
awesome that you guys are doing
it.
To the state land office, how
many, um, and maybe you said
this, how many abandoned sites
are on state land office lines,
do you know?
Mr. Chairman, I'm, I'm not
exactly sure we're still doing
that site characterization. I
mean, I think that's probably
about 20 or so that are on our
radar, um, we have the 1st 3
initial sites that were
mentioned in this presentation,
uh, that we're part of uh the
RFP, um, and then we have
another 6 sites or so that we're
looking at, um, and a lot of it
is kind of ground truthing where
we think that there's a site,
um, uh, it's in the
EPA and, you know, the, the
dashboard, the environment
maintains, and then when we
actually um get out there
sometimes.
The GIS location is actually a
little different and um trying
to understand the boundaries of
the site, so yeah.
So do you
With, with your sites that are
abandoned, what authority
resources the state land office
have, what do you view as your
mission?
You
Characterize
You characterize those lawsuits
hold responsible parties.
account to clean up. I mean,
what do you view your role on
resources to do that on state
land.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for
that question. So, you know,
first, we don't have budget for
these types of activities. So we
very much rely on, you know, the
money the legislature allocates
to other agencies, um, on the
environment and M nerd side, um,
and any federal dollars that
that may come to, to play, um,
you know, our role has been
helping with site
characterization in terms of
identifying the sites, uh
Be a willing landowner and a
willing partner to, to say,
come, let's work together,
provide access, um, often work
with private landowners who may
or may not be agricultural
lessees in the area to, to get
access cause sometimes um these
are on BLM state, private, kind
of a mixture, um, and helping to
resolve uh those, those types of
issues. Um, and now that we have
our new environmental, uh,
compliance office.
focuses on remediation and
reclamation issues, we do have
some expertise in-house that we
can bring to bear. Um, but it is
very much relying on other
agencies, uh, um, to, to do the
actual work, which is going to
be funded and contracted.
OK, good to know. Good to know.
Um, you might have heard earlier
cause you've been here all day
that I'm really, I mean, I would
love our state government to
take a really aggressive.
Um, putting.
You know, really characterizing
the sites, but the ownership and
starting to pursue them on all
fronts, so.
Even though maybe you're not the
one who would do the work and
you don't have the funding, I
would appreciate any advocacy
from the state land office to
get on with that work and
partner with those that maybe do
have the funds or have the
capacity to raise the funds and
Um
Hopefully we can use some of the
money from the 20 million, which
is appropriated for that work
and not just put it in the clean
up.
But anyway, uh, just put that
out there for you.
I think we need a
Aggressive whole government
approach.
Um
Do you own your state lands
because of the work of this
commission in your office about
commissioner to do outdoor
recreation more, which I really
like and appreciate all that.
Do you have signage and stuff at
these sites to notify people of
any risks of
Mr. Chairman, um, we should have
and eventually will have at a
lot of these sites, um, uh, we
currently do not have uh in, in
a lot of areas and it crosses um
I don't know if we've had to
deal with a lot of the, the
defense uh sites as well, but
you know, New Mexico has been
used as a bombing range in
different areas and we have
trust lands where there are
unexplored ordinances, for
example, and so it's, it's
something that, you know, step
one is actually identifying the
sites, um, and I think step 2 is
then being able to to put up
signage and and get that
information out. Um, there have
been a couple of instances where
When we've identified areas like
in the San Mateo, uh, uh,
instance where we realized that
there were agricultural pieces,
um, on some of these lands, and
um, you know, highly radioactive
areas where we were leasing for
agriculture and, and we
immediately worked with our
agricultural lessees to withdraw
some of that land and working on
fencing some of it out, so
cattle aren't going into those
types of areas. So we do try to
address it as it comes up.
OK.
OK. Good to hear. Yeah, I think
that's important. Um,
Who knows when someone else will
be out there, maybe a long time.
So let's get signs out there
and.
Put a marker out there if
they're not.
Finally, um, oh, well, real
quick before I get to my final
point. So, to the issue of
funding of cleaning up, um,
abandoned oil and gas sites.
My colleague said, let's raise
the money to pay for cleanup,
and I know that Emner was trying
to do that exact thing for oil
and gas wells.
And it's a huge unfunded mandate
because our fee structure is
outdated and
to clean up gets left to the
taxpayers basically. So,
What, uh, Mr. Chair, that's that
triggered a comment. That's just
not true. Well, they, with all
due respect, the presentation
that we had from Mner a year
ago, said that it would cost up
to a billion dollars maybe to
clean up all these.
uh or and well sites, so we
haven't collected the money or
it wouldn't be a cost that's
shifting to us, it's not funded,
with due respect, that was his
presentation to us. Well, Mr.
Carroll just, I'm not gonna
argue with you on this, but if
the reclamation fund, had been
had not been raided.
And it had remained intact we
would have more than enough
money.
To address any and all issues,
so to say that the industry has
not paid in. I will take you in
a task force because that is not
true. Well, maybe we can have a
hearing on this cause we're
gonna have this is a real issue.
I'm not meaning it as a just a
factual, fact-based issue
because it's contamination issue
like everything else we're
talking about that it gets left.
And
So my question was going to be
for you, what are we doing to
help?
Updates those fees, update those
bonding requirements so that
make sure we do have the
resource, yeah, Mr. Chairman,
um.
So, uh, a couple of things. One,
I, I think everybody agrees that
the bonding rate that we have
right now is inadequate in terms
of state trust land, um, and so
that is a rulemaking, we are
going to be engaged, um, uh, on
fairly shortly and we'll be
holding uh stakeholder meetings
with the industry, uh, and, and
other stakeholders, um, uh, to
try to figure out how we can
Provide greater financial
assurance moving forward. I, I
think one
thing that's really important
there is, you know, we look
through uh a lease lens, so we
look to hold lessees
responsible, and we bond on the
lease level, um, OCD looks at
bonding through the operator
lens and, um, you know, there's
some duplication in certain
respects, but um trying to think
about how overall the we as a
state, we can ensure that
taxpayers aren't left, you know,
cleaning enough.
Um, and then on our side, you
know, I think it's really what I
hit on here is going to the
responsible parties. Um, and,
you know, we just want to, uh, a
court of appeals case recently,
uh, that was related to our, um,
uh, our enforcement efforts
where, you know, we're asking
companies, uh,
clean up
For these legacy issues and not
relying on the funds that, that,
um, you know, industry pays
into, um, and then that's the
other part of it, right? And,
and we think that fund should be
really used as a last case, uh,
when you have a bankrupt entity,
there is no responsible party.
Um, currently, the way the law
is written is basically you look
to see whether the operator of
the well, uh, is, um,
Uh, you know, responsible or
not, um, and often we have a
lessee who's responsible that
could step in. So there's a lot
of interplay between the
different, you know, regulatory
bodies and, and us as a
landowner.
Um, but the overall objective is
to to get it right that we're
not.
Overly bonded, you know, we're,
we're not gonna, um, uh, you
know, get crazy and try to, you
know, be unrealistic, but also
that the taxpayer is protected.
Uh
Thank you. I appreciate it.
And uh appreciate those efforts.
Uh, that is, uh.
You forget this last question.
So, question I'm gonna ask
everyone today. Do you notice
any posture change with your
partners on federal lands or
otherwise that affect the
operations of state lands.
So, in terms of day to day
activities, right? We, we
partner with the Forest Service,
BLM, um, you know, and, and
other federal agencies. Um, we
haven't seen drastic changes. I
mean, I think there have
definitely been policy, um, uh,
you know, changes where people
have been kind of
Uh, putting a pause upon further
review as the new administration
comes on, um, for example, our
land exchange, um, you know,
we're still moving forward with
that down in the, the Donana
County area. Um, so it hasn't
been stopped, but there's
You know, a little bit of uh um
additional review occurring
there. I, I would say, you know,
the biggest impact I think has
been of, of the, the
administration that's been on
the revenue side, um.
So
You know, when the price of oil
drops.
Significantly because of market
factors related to trade wars
and those types of things, that
has a huge impact on the school
kids. Um, and, you know, I saw a
slide the other day from one of
Oxy's financials and it said for
every $1.
Uh, uh, uh, per barrel, uh, that
fluctuation, it results in $250
million in terms of cash flow
for the company, and, you know,
we're a partner with industry,
so
You know, as part of those,
those royalties. So I mean we,
we're definitely gonna probably
see that on the, the revenue
side, um, we have a lot of
concerns in terms of forest
health and, uh, you know,
prescribed fires and, you know,
are we gonna have adequate staff
on the federal side to be able
to support um these types of
activities, um.
But so far there haven't been a
lot of things that have just
kind of stopped completely.
OK. Good to hear. If anything
changes, maybe you'll let us
know. let others know if the LFC
and.
Trying to pay attention to those
things, so that's all I have
anybody else committee have any
other questions?
OK, thank you again soon. All
our best to the commissioner and
your team.
So, so maybe we're going to go
on break now for lunch you're on
your own for an hour. I know,
the high class red House
committee. You're on your own,
and you know to fend for
yourselves. And anyway, we will,
uh
They don't.
All right.
I, yeah, rode the hallways. But
anyway, we're gonna start again
at 2 p.m. sharp, OK? We'll have
20 p.m. and we'll have the
Secretary of Environment here
who's really
Um
He is, he's excited. OK, we all
do. All right, we all go, please
