On my left.
The honorable Senator, Mr P
Campos.
Uh, it's good to be here this
morning, Mr Chairman, members of
the committee and of course to
those that are paying attention
to the information that'll be
presented. It's always great to
be here in Santa Fe and
continuing the work of people,
uh, throughout the great state
of New Mexico. I'm state Senator
Pete Campos, representing all
the parts of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico and Mr
Chairman, As always, uh, it's
good to see a beautiful smile
that you have, and also up to
the vice chair. Uh, to you, also
to two great smiles.
Thank you.
Those are the two right there
that I'm paying attention to.
The rest of you Don't smile
represent a Borrego.
Thank you, Mr Chairman and
members. It's really great to
see all of you again. Um I'm
Cynthia Bargo over on the north
Northwest Mesa of Albuquerque
closest to Cottonwood Mall area.
Um, by Rio Rancho and I just
wanted to congratulate our
chairman, because they, um with
the governor, I think you guys
had a a groundbreaking for a new
fire station in Albuquerque, and
it's always great to see them.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Ortiz Pino.
Good morning. Good morning, Mr
Chairman. Good morning,
everyone. Uh, I'm Jerry Ortiz.
Pino, Uh, state Senator for
District 12. I'm on the
committee today as a designee
for somebody who wasn't able to
make it at 8 A.m. on a Friday.
Uh so, uh, I, I
I I'm always available as a
designee, but, uh, this is the
first time I think I've actually
served on the committee. So it's
good to be here with you. We're
glad to have you thank you for
filling in
Representative Cadena
My name is my name is
representative Lara Cadena. I'm
honored to serve in New Mexico's
House district, 33, South
central New Mexico and Dona
County, including three
historical communities, Mesilla,
San Pablo and the Tortuga
Pueblo, as well as the West side
and south side of Las Cuss Main
campus of N MS U, then lots of
egg land and industrial park and
a state prison going west to the
county line.
Um, I'm honored to serve as the
vice chair of New Mexico's House
tax committee and really proud
of the conversations we've had
so far, especially the ways
we've centered equity in, um in
a profound in a profound
direction and look forward to
what we get up to this summer.
Thank you, vice Chairwoman.
Let's move on to my left side
far left.
Representative Duncan, my man,
am I right? Excuse me.
Uh, Mark Duncan. I represent,
uh, the, uh, west side of, uh,
San Juan County District two.
Good morning, Mr Chair. And Mr
Mr Vice Chair. Uh uh. I'm state
Senator Ron Griggs. I represent,
uh, the southern part of Otero
County western part of of Eddy
County. And and I'm here with,
uh, Senator Ortiz Pino At the
start of our farewell tour. Uh,
so we're we're all hoping to
really learn some stuff and and
to give you all benefits of
Jerry's experience.
Who's been here forever and a
day, But, uh uh,
We look forward to hearing this
and this is hopefully we can add
some things that will be
beneficial.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator.
Representative. Good Morning.
Good morning Chairman Going
around doing introductions.
Excellent. Thank you. Jason
Harper, Representative for
Northern Rio Rancho area and,
uh, pleasure to be here this
morning.
Th. Uh, Thank you, Mr Chair.
Good morning, everyone. Peter W
Senate District 25 in Santa Fe.
Uh, good morning Chairman. Good
morning committee members, Um
representative Christine
Chandler from Los Alamos House
District, 43. I also represent
parts of Santa Fe and Sandoval
counties. Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr
Chair and Mr Vice chair for, um,
having me here today. I'm a
guest. Um, my name is
representative Christina
Parajon. And I represent House
District 25, which is sort of
the center northeast side of
Albuquerque includes Coronado
Mall. Thank you.
Thank you.
Morning, Mr Chairman.
Good morning, Mr Vice Chairman.
Just kidding.
In the committee, those in the
audience and those listening.
I'm state Senator Benny Shindo.
Representing, uh, Senate
District 22.
Thank you, representative, Uh,
Senator Brent.
Good morning.
He was chairman.
A quick introduction, please.
And eight o'clock in the morning
for a meeting up here.
It's easy for easy for Peter.
Anyway, Uh Senator Craig Grant,
uh, represents Senate District
40, which is Rio Rancho.
Only have one county.
Thank you, Senator. Uh and I'm
representative Derek Lente,
representing the 65th district
in the House of Representatives
that includes parts of Sandoval
County, Rio, Riba County and San
Juan County and I reside in
Sandia Pueblo, New Mexico, and
it's, uh, good to be here. Good
to be, uh, the chair for this,
UH, Revenue Stabilization and
tax Policy Committee. I am also
the chairman for the House
Taxation Committee, and, uh, we
will run these meetings as as
efficiently as possible. We'll
start on time.
Uh,
Most if not all the time, But
before we do begin, I would like
to also allow our staff to
introduce themselves as well. If
we could please start with my
right.
Good morning and with our left.
So
Thank you and what everyone
Martin Fisher at the Legislative
Council service. Great and
without further ado, let's get
in into our agenda. Uh, I was
told that the Economic
Development Committee meeting
will start at 1030 not 10
o'clock, So we have a little bit
more time, but we will begin
with Mr Torres Ishmael II
Torres, chief economist for the
Legislative Finance Committee to
provide a post session fiscal
review.
Floor is yours, sir. Thank you,
Mr Chair and good morning
members. Uh, it's good to see
you all again. It feels like
it's been too long after the
session. Hopefully you feel the
same way. I have quite a a few
slides. I'm gonna try to go
through them kind of quickly,
Hopefully as a refresh of what
you all remember doing in the
session? I'm sure. Um, I also am
making pretty much a pitch for
our LFC Legislative Finance
Committee. Process review
report. You can find this on our
website or if you'd like a copy
and print. Let me know when I'd
be
To get you one If you don't have
one already, and a lot of this
information is a summary of
what's in here. If you would
like more detail. There's a lot
of detail in our report.
Um so we'll just dive right in
if you turn to page two
Maybe we can get the slides
going here.
There we go. I find it helpful
to just remember the mindset we
were in going into the session,
sort of the context before
diving into what actually
happened. And just so you all
I'm sure you all remember in
December of 23. We came in, uh,
the consensus revenue estimating
group estimated $12.8 billion of
revenue for fiscal year 25,
which was the budget year in
question. Um, we had also upped
our estimate in FY 24 to $12.7
billion, and that represented
almost 20%.
Both in revenues in FY 23, and
then about half of that growth
in FY 24 10% growth in FY 24 and
then slowing down dramatically
to, um just in the tense of of
percent of growth in FY 25,
largely in part due to tax
changes that had taken effect
from, um years prior and of
those increases in 23 and 24, a
third of it was coming from oil
and gas in 23, and then almost
three quarters of it was coming
from oil and gas in 24. So just
a reminder of where the, uh
Increases in revenues were
coming from
And so of course, uh, we always
think in terms of new money,
that's how much revenue we
expect in the budget year minus
how much recurring or recurring
appropriations we've already
committed. And so the
Legislature was coming in with
about $3.5 billion in new money
that was just slightly less than
the record set for FY 24 about
$3.6 billion. So still strong
new money. Um, and reserve
balances were strong as well
Coming in with $4 billion or
about 48%. Usually that comes in
higher than
Target and then during the
session, you all make
appropriations from that amount,
and and it drops, so we knew
that it would go down. But $4
billion left a lot of room for
one time appropriations. So if
you turn to slide three
Here. The appropriate or here is
a A change is made during the
session to recurring spending
most agencies
I think all agencies, uh, sort
of on a net basis saw an
increase. You'll see a couple of
negatives here, but they're not
actually true reductions in
budget. We had a lot of
reshuffling during the the
session in in DF General Control
That negative was a result of
the food programs that had been
going through D FA. Instead,
they were distributed to other,
um, participating agencies.
Department of AG being one of
them, so it on net after you
exclude the transfers, D FA did
receive quite a large increase.
So that negative is a little
misleading there, Same with
health hospitals and human
services. This is actually part
of the Reorg the shuffle from
the Department of Health to the
Health Care Authority
Department.
So on net still up, Uh, 200
million plus dollars there.
Public safety. Um this is
actually the juvenile parole
board that was moved to CYFD. So
again, it was actually an
increase on net there, but the
shuffling, um kind of makes it
difficult to parse that out on
this simple table.
In total, the budget recurring
budget was increased 6.8% $89
million for compensation. $270
million for early childhood and
educate other education
priorities. $230 million,
including, uh, Medicaid rate
increases there.
If you turn to slide four
You'll see some more
non-recurring appropriations and
tax changes here. So in addition
to those that 6.6 0.8% in
recurring
Budget increases or about 600,
some 600 plus million dollars in
recurring budget increases. You
also enacted tax changes that
have an impact of $206 million
in FY $2500 million in FY 25
appropriations. Although there
was more in FY 24 that I can get
into here in a second. The
government results in
opportunity or grow fund also
expanding $326 million out the
door in addition to another
chunk that went into the fund.
Future use that I'll get into
here shortly. 300 Million for
Land of Enchantment Legacy fund.
Um, of course, transportation.
uh, appropriations of 70 million
Capital outlay from the General
Fund, 932 million, and then we
had some other transfers to
other funds like the higher
educational and Financial Aid
Endowment fund. Almost $1
billion there. $500 Million to
the, uh, grow fund. Aside from
expenditures that's for future
years and $9 billion that we're
expecting in the in the future.
Fiscal year for the early
education, early childhood
Education and Care Trust fund.
So a lot of expenditures across
the board for a lot of different
priorities. If you turn to slide
five, this is again my pitch you
can look into more detail on any
single one of these
appropriations in our fiscal
report Linked here, um at the
bottom of the slide and happy to
get you a so if you turn to
slide seven, Skip ahead a little
bit here. Here's more detail on
the legislation specifically
affecting revenues.
And
In total. We're seen by FY 27
impacts of $259.7 million. So
just keeping in mind that these
are reductions in tax, they're
tax reduction, so they'll reduce
our future revenues, which is
similar in many ways to
increasing recurring
appropriations in the sense
that, uh, they reduce the the
excess revenue to recurring
appropriation gap and I and I'll
explain more in a second to to
get into a little more detail on
each of these, the healthcare
affordability fund.
Health care.
Um, premium, sir. Tax revenues
to the health Care affordability
fund it was dropping to 30% by
increasing it to 55%. It reduced
the amount going to the General
fund and sent it to that fund
instead. So that's we expect
reductions of over $80 million
there, the tax package will get
into more detail on the next
slide, the healthcare Access and
Delivery Act.
This is the bill that, um,
imposed a fee on hospitals for
certain.
Non Medicare bed days and in
doing so, collecting those fees
matching them to federal
revenues through Medicaid and
then dispersing them back to the
hospitals. Through that
mechanism, we actually expect
that premium tax revenues will
rise. So that's the increase.
You see here about $100 million
in increased premium tax revenue
that we expect to go to the
General fund.
Distribution to the election
fund. This is an earmark on tax
revenues to go to the secretary
of state's election fund to help
them pay every year for
elections. We estimate that
about $15 million a year tax and
admin fees. I believe this is
the bill that, um, eliminated
the administrative earmark or or
chunk. Take back that the state
was, um, imposing
In exchange for the services
that we're providing that the
state was providing to local
governments for collecting their
taxes, so that's now no longer
going to be taken. That $22
million will go back to local
governments. Um, there
Premium tax to emergency fund
This is for emergency medical
services and local governments.
This is an earmark from premium
tax revenues. That's a reduction
of the General Fund of $11
Million and then the legislative
retirement changes. $1.5
million. So in total, that's a
long way of saying in total $260
million in reductions. I think
we're expecting that might get
to $300 Million in by FY 28.
If you turn the slide, eight.
Here's a little more detail on
the tax package that I'm sure
you all remember since you all
Played a large part or really
the
The entire part in creating this
package $176 million for income
tax restructuring and all I have
a slide covering what happened
there in in a 2nd $17 million in
a flat corporate income tax
rate. That's a game, not a
reduction $65 million gain in
limiting the capital gains.
deduction. $18 million reduced
to the General fund.
For health care and child care
deductions. $126 million for
environmental initiatives that
includes E V S Chargers. Um,
storage facilities and the like
$12 Million to exempt military
retirement income. That's a
reduction to the General fund.
$6 million for dyed diesel
reduction to the General fund.
$8 million reduction to the
General fund to support what the
those people affected by
wildfires.
And then $2 million for Angel
Investments.
If you turn to slide, nine will
get into a little bit more on
the income tax restructuring.
And if you look at the chart on
the right here, the left column
is what our old marginal tax
rates look like. And you can see
that.
Very quickly. A single taxpayer
or a married text that taxpayer
would quickly climb into that
4.9% tax bracket. I believe the
threshold here is $16,000.
And so what The tax bill did was
increase or or grow those lower
Marginal brackets so that it
takes higher and higher incomes
before you hit that 4.9%.
And as you all know the way
marginal tax brackets work, you
pay that percentage on those
that first portion of your
income, so 0 to $16,000. You'll
pay 1.7% than 3.2%, then 4.7% so
by growing those brackets
All of your income at those
lower levels is also being taxed
at lower levels. So this
Then resulted in a tax cut for
all new Mexicans, but the intent
was to focus the benefit.
To the lower income taxpayers at
least on a percentage basis.
And as I mentioned before, that
was about $170 million reduction
to do so to the General fund.
If you turn to slide 10, here's
a little more detail on what I
just described on the other
revenue bills that we saw.
The assessment on hospitals the
redistribution of premium tax to
the health care affordability
Fund and the Emergency Medical
Fund, the elimination of the
administrative fees imposed on
local governments and the
earmarks for elections and, um
Legislator retirement
If you turn to slide, 11
Here's the aggregation of the
tax changes passed over the last
several years. You can see this
is the size of each tax
reduction to the General Fund
here and how 2024 is package
compares to the other tax
packages. And then the numbers
shown. Here is the total amount
and we're looking at close to a
billion dollars in tax
reductions and recurring tax
reductions imposed over the last
six years, and there's a great
table in our post session that
Goes line by line, every tax
change made over those years and
some of them for you all and by
tax program, So if you're
interested, I would highly
recommend looking into that.
If you turn to page 12
This is just a comparison of
where we were going into the
session. This was the LFC budget
scenario that was developed
using the long term estimates.
That's a consensus revenue
estimating group produces and
the LFC budget plan had come in
expecting. I think 6% in
recurring budget commitments or
increases and $200 million in
recurring tax expenditures or
reductions.
And where we ended up was, um
Actually 6.8% almost 7%
recurring budget commitments and
close to $300 million in
recurring tax reductions. So
when we had the LFC and the
consensus revenue estimating
group are taking a look at our
revenues and our expenditures we
as I mentioned earlier account
tax expenditures similar to our
our appropriations in the sense
of how much
Recurring revenue capacity. Will
there be for
More spending in the future, and
and both reduce that amount.
Uh, to the same extent.
And so this graph here is
showing where we expect our
recurring revenues to be in the
future. Given those commitments
so we would have expected are
recurring revenues to grow by
over 3% in the LFC budget plan,
But after legislative actions we
expected to be under 3% in the
future years.
If you turn to slide, 13
Here's another way to cut it.
This is one way to think about
or another way to think about
the expenditures made during the
session. $650 million. You can
see total appropriations
increase their That's the 6.8%
recurring budget, but when you
add the $205 million in tax
reductions you're at about $856
Million in FY 25 we that's
closer to 8% in FY 25.
But that actually reflects, like
10% when everything is fully
implemented by FY Alright if you
turn to
Slide 14.
This is just a reminder. Maybe
an introduction to I'm sure a
lot of the work that you all
will be doing in the interim and
It's looking at our tax
expenditures. Um, you're all
staff. Ham does a great job
compiling attacks. Deviations
report each year that we use to
analyze our tax expenditures and
The tax expenditure list
certainly keeps growing every
year. I think I counted over 300
in total 200 with actual
claimants each year and $1.8
billion only of those
expenditures that are estimated
in total costs every year, So we
have
Maybe close to 100 tax
expenditures every year that
don't have an estimated impact.
That's either because the that
so few taxpayers claimed the
expenditure that the tax
department can't release that
information or because the
estimation is so difficult that
we aren't sure how much exactly
that they're costing us. So at
least $1.8 billion each year in
tax expenditures.
Certainly over 200 tax
expenditures on the books. But
when you look at the total cost
the top 10 account for three
quarters of the total cost, So
when you go down this list and
look at these, um um
expenditures some may be
difficult to adjust given there.
Important value to new Mexicans,
but some actually were done away
with or will be reduced due to
changes in the in the 2024
sessions, Specifically, the
capital gains deduction will
likely fall below the top 10
list in the coming years. But
we'll have to see how that plays
out.
Okay, turning to slide, 15.
This is of course, as an
economist, one of our favorite
charts because it shows the
difficulty we have in both
estimating our revenues, but
also the challenge that you all
have in budgeting those
revenues. The black line here
represents the change in
revenues every single year. This
is what we describe as the
rollercoaster. It certainly
looks like a roller coaster and
then the bars behind them
reflect the appropriations made
each year in response to those
revenues, and you can see
That they're also kind of all
over the place there.
And I bring this up because the
the challenge
That we see ahead for you all is
that decrease in recurring
revenue growth? If you look at
FY 23, that's where you see the
almost 20% revenue growth in FY
24. It's half of that. 10% by FY
25 almost 0% revenue growth and
we expect that revenue growth
over the next several years to
stay close to zero, likely less
than 3%.
And so that those recurring
budget increases that we've seen
and we've been able to enact
over the last several years,
several years becomes more
challenging when revenues are
slowing down. So if you turn to
page 17, I'll talk a little bit
about the future. Of course I'm
an economist. I can't help
myself. But talk about the
future and
When we're talking about where
we expect revenues to go. We
always look to our revenue
tracking. So you're economists
over at the lfc? We are
constantly, you know, checking
in with the tax department
seeing where revenues are coming
in at we're checking in with the
FAA to see where their revenues
are coming in at and then we're
estimating the months that are
missing to think about where we
might end up by the end of the
fiscal year.
And
This is a result of our latest
tracking report are gross
receipts tax are up.
About $70 million from where we
would have expected.
Our corporate income taxes up
$178 million. That was a big
surprise to us, and I'll get
into that here shortly.
But also our investment income,
The state treasurer's office has
been earning a lot more on the
general fund balances because
the Federal Reserve has kept
interest rates much higher than
we expected. We expected
interest rates to start coming
down around this time in
December, and we haven't seen
that happen. And so the interest
rate earnings in the state
treasurers offices balances are
certainly higher than we
expected.
By about $55 million there and
then the state Land office If
you look at rents and royalties
on the right here had a large
lease sale that we were not
expecting in January as a result
of their compliance efforts, so
we don't have a lot of state
land left to lease, especially
in the profitable Permian Basin
and the State Land Office has
Stepped up their efforts to
ensure that those with existing
oil and gas leases are complying
with those leases, and they were
able to pull one lease back and
and resell it again. We weren't
expecting that. That was about
$50 million there.
So going back to corporate
income tax just mention that
some of the tax changes over the
last several years have included
allowing taxpayers to file as
pass through entities to claim
the state and local tax
deduction. At the federal level.
We're seeing some shifting
between personal income tax
corporate income tax. Um, in
that way and
It could be that a large part of
this corporate income tax
increases coming from those that
shifting and we may see a
similar reduction and personal
income tax to that same extent,
so we're showing here $345
million above what we expected,
but I will caution that there's
certainly a lot of risk out
there and we could see that
number shrink.
Moving on to slide 18. This just
speaks to that slowdown in
revenues.
We've seen inflation come down,
although not as low as we'd like
to like it to be. We are seeing
the inflation come down, which
should lower or slow the growth
in the gross receipts tax. We're
seeing our employment, although
very strong, also slowing down,
which slows down our growth and
personal income tax, and we're
seeing the same in our labor
force. So all of our indicators
are pointing towards a slowdown
in revenue growth.
And if you turn to slide, 19,
You can see how this plays out
compared to the pandemic. We
have
Um, very we have surpassed our
pre pandemic levels with
strength 2.5% or about 20,000
jobs above where we were in 2019
or going into 2020.
Unemployment levels for the
first time in a long time, or
staying below or at the national
level, so certainly a strong
economy in New Mexico, but that
growth is slowing down because
there's not a lot of more room
for the economy to grow.
In on site 20. Of course, we're
always looking at oil and gas,
oil and gas prices have stayed
high high enough to keep
encouraging drilling in the
Permian Basin. We're seeing
steady growth in oil and gas
production, in large part
because of those high oil
prices.
Natural gas prices, on the other
hand, have come down quite a
bit, but because the natural gas
is associated Gas that's
produced and comes up when we
drill an oil well here in New
Mexico, that was those low oil
Those low gas prices aren't
having an impact or slowing down
our oil production.
So if you turn to slide, 21,
here's our oil and gas
production. You can see they
continue to grow and beat our
estimates from the consensus
revenue estimating group, So you
know, I would be willing to bet
money that will increase those
production estimates come
August.
If you turned aside 22 the
importance of oil and gas and
our revenues we estimate about
$0 change in the price of oil in
New Mexico has a $60 million
revenue impact A tencent change
in natural gas of $45 million
impact.
That's on the price side. If you
look at the volume side, a
million barrels of oil is about
$7 Million in revenue Impact
impact 10 billion cubic feet of
natural gas about a $5 million
impact to state revenues, so the
price impact certainly have an
outsized impact on on our
revenues. And so that's why, of
course we watch it closely.
If you turn to slide, 23
This is also what we think
about, Um
When we're talking about slowing
revenues.
We look to a lot of national
forecasters, Rice that energy
and various, uh S and P 500
Moody's analytics, and they all
expect a similar slowdown in the
demand for oil and gas.
And the slowdown in demand is
eventually expected to have a
slope an impact on the amount of
production and supply we produce
in New Mexico. So this is a
forecast from rice, that energy
and what they expect in New
Mexico's long term oil
production outlook will be and
we're getting to the point where
we're hitting that plateau or
that slowdown in growth, So this
is again contributing to that
slowdown in both gross receipts
tax but also severance taxes
and, of course,
You all as the Revenue
Stabilization Committee have
looked at this very carefully
over the last couple of interims
and we at the LFC are constantly
thinking about this. And so if
you turn aside 24, you'll
remember the consensus revenue
estimating group conducted a
long term estimate two years ago
and
Specifically, we were worried
about how that slowdown or that
that decline in oil and gas
production in New Mexico could
affect the General fund. And at
that time, we were estimating
that the real General fund
revenue growth could go
negative.
Starting in the early FY
thirties.
And when we paired that up with
our expectations for long term
budget needs for a recurring
budget expenses. We expected
that we could see
Deficits starting in the late
thirties FY thirties if if no
action was taken, And so that's
the graph on the left here are
negative, recurring revenue
growth and the chart on the
right here showing how those
surpluses could quickly become
deficits if nothing happened,
And so if you turn side 25. This
was the Legislature's response
to that problem, which was to
cap the amount of oil and gas
revenues reaching the General
fund.
Stemming the amount of reliance.
the General fund has on oil and
gas revenues, sending anything
above that the windfalls to
investment accounts to then
generate returns and go back to
the general fund, hopefully
offsetting the amount of oil and
gas declines that we were
expecting.
And so this is our current
expectations for oil and gas
revenues in the future. The blue
bars represent that general fund
capped amount. Anything above it
either goes to the early
childhood Trust fund in Orange
or the Severance Tax Permanent
fund in Green. The early
Childhood trust fund is the
amounts the distributions to
that fund, our result of a
rolling five year average and
because we had
A spike in FY 23 revenues. We
had a peak year It really
dragged those five year averages
up, and that's why you're seeing
the early childhood trust fund
amount shrink as those five year
averages grow with it.
Um, In any event, we still
expect that the early childhood
trust fund will grow to over $10
billion in the next couple of
years, and the severance tax
permanent fund will also grow
and that will really drive our
general fund growth in the
future. So if you turn the slide
26
Here's our modeling of how that
will impact the General Fund.
The General fund here on the
left is what we were expecting.
You can see quick growth in the
near term a plateau and then
declining general fund revenues
in the out years. And then
here's the modeling that we are
now showing on the right do to
those investment earnings,
offsetting declines in oil and
gas revenues, so we expect it to
fully offset those oil and gas
declines and generating positive
growth in the general fund.
Into the future.
And we'll be updating that
analysis in September, along
with the rest of the long term
General fund estimates, so if
you turn this like 27
Why? Why do we think so much
about the future? Well, we're
worried about the time.
That could come
When the state is short on cash,
of course. And so these are are
the models that the Craig
produced in the last long term
estimate, and we combined them
with different budget scenario
growth, so keeping in mind 3% 6%
10% includes tax reductions and
recurring revenue growth. They
work in tandem to reduce any
sort of surplus.
And so we have something of a
Goldilocks here that we've we've
found 3% budget and and tax
expenditure growth.
Leaves are really large surplus
into the future may be too large
and 10%.
Expenditure growth.
Could find
The state quickly in a in a
position where we're in deficits
again by FY 30. So that's where
we came into this session with
about 6% in the LFC budget, and
we end the Legislature stayed
close to that 6% target. So we
expect if we continue on that
trend, we can continue having
surpluses. Um, for you all to
Appropriate in in the near term.
And with that, Mr Chair, I think
I am ready for questions.
All right. Thank you so much for
that presentation before we go
to questions, And if there are
any questions, I'd like to
recognize some of the folks that
joined us this morning to my
left Represent Cerrado. Please
introduce yourself. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you.
Committee. I'm representative
Linda Cerrado. I probably
represent the south side of
Santa Fe. Thank you.
Senator. Good Morning, Mr Chair
and members of the committee to
Pleasure to be here. List of
panic. Senate District. 39
currently serves six counties.
It will be reduced to four
counties in January. Good
morning to my right.
Representative. Thank you, Mr
Chair. I'm Dorian Gallegos and I
represent district 52 down in
the southern part of the state.
Glad to be here. Have you all
let's go to questions, comments
first on the list. We have
Senator worth
Thank you, Mr Chair and thank
you for the presentation. It is
good to
Kind of have this snapshot and
realize that we've been doing
some incredible work, um in a
whole bunch of areas, couple
questions and just comment on
Page two.
I know. One of the big biggest
increases is in the investment
income.
We're going from 916,009, or 16
Million to $1.9 Billion in the
1.9 is a recurring
Spin off off the permanent fund.
Is that correct? That's right.
Mr Chair that speaks to the last
slides about the changes and
distributions to the severance
tax Permanent fund. We now
expect investments, which are
the most stable revenue in the
General fund to be the
Fastest growing portion of the
General fund in the double
digits over the next several
years. Thanks to those changes
that you all made, so I just
think that Mr Chair in that
1.9 billion. Is it specifically
earmarked for
Education or this specific
beneficiaries of the fund. How
does that get dispersed? Mr
Chair and Senator worth? These
are all just General fund. A
large portion does go to
education.
It because education is the
largest portion of our general
fund. It has never been a
problem for us before to meet
those requirements, but it is it
is all to the General fund. This
doesn't include earmarks for the
early childhood trust fund or
earmarks from the Land Grant
Permanent fund to the early
childhood department. It does
not include those got it. Well,
I just think, Mr Chair. One of
the things we always talk about
is diversifying.
And by the changes that we have
made, I mean, this now is a
Much larger. We doubled the size
of the distribution from this
fund. I also was
On Page four, thanks to
representative Diego's and
Senator Smith, uh, had to circle
early Education Trust fund at
9.1 billion is that the current
number of what's what? When is
that? Because we've seen
Before billion 6 billion and I
just was like 9.1. Wow, Mr Chair
and senator with that's what we
expect for the budget year. FY
25, the balance will be and so
in FY 26 and beyond it will keep
growing.
So I just, uh, final comments
and this this goes to the roller
coaster slide because I've been
here with Senate or TCP? No, for
the 20 years that we've been on
this roller coaster, but it
feels like it's a very different
Type of roller coaster. Given
the work we have done to
diversify, and just one of the
comments that I want to point
out is that that early childhood
fund is a backup reserve. And so
when you go to page two
Our current reserve balances 4
billion or 48%. If you had 9
billion to that we have $13
billion as backup reserves and I
can remember distinctly in 2017
when we were
Really writing bad checks, and
so the fact that we have created
this level of backup is
something that we as
policymakers need to make sure
we understand, And it's easy to
lose sight of the fact that
there's reserve language in that
early childhood. Fine, but
that's one of the things I can
remember Senator Smith sitting
in my office going Hey, we're
taking 300 million
Non recurring. We're creating
this and it's and it's a backup.
So I just again.
We should feel good about what
we've done in terms of
The position we're in, and the
roller coaster just feels
different to me because of that,
So just a comment. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Very comments. Thank you,
Senator. Let's go to senator
DTP. No.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. And and
thank you, Mr Porter is very,
very interesting information.
Uh,
By looking on page 25.
Um, Where does the
Revenue Stabilization Fund, The
Larry Landon Yoga Fund show up
on this
Mr Chairman, Senator or TCP? No,
That's a great question. The
Uh, Tax Stabilization Reserve
fund.
Receives its funds from this
revenue source.
Only if reserves dropped below
20%.
So instead of going to the early
childhood trust fund, these
revenues could go to the Tax
stabilization reserve if revenue
if reserves are below 20%
reserves have not been under
20%. So it's how Mr Chairman and
how much is in the the revenue
that what do they call it? Text
Stabilization Reserve right now?
Yes, sir. Thank you that show up
on here in any way. It's in the
post session. It's in our
General fund financial summary.
We expect that balance to be
2.22 $0.3 billion
So if you add that
To the 9 billion in the early
childhood and the 4.8 billion.
We were actually showing well in
excess of 150% reserves.
Wouldn't that be accurate?
Mr Chairman, Senator TCP? No, um
By statute or reserves are only
the operating reserve the
appropriation contingency Fund,
the state support fund.
Um, and the Tax Stabilization
reserve.
But your point is absolutely
correct that as backup reserves
they're not counted on our
financial statement. But as
backup preserves those $9
billion exist, the growth fund.
Another $500 million exist. Um,
I think
I should. I should make sure
there are other funds that exist
that could have served as a
backup to the reserves as well.
Well, the rural Library
Endowment fund, which at some
point we'll reach 50 Million, or
52 million, hopefully, in the
future. It's only a 27 or 28
right now. But ideally that
could also serve in the same as
the Legacy fund and all the rest
of it. I just want to thank you
for this information.
What it shows is this, uh, these
dire predictions that when oil
and gas goes south, we're going
to be in dire straits. You
We've made good provisions for
that, and and we we diversified
our revenue streams in a way
that I think takes care of New
Mexico's future needs very
nicely and and is using the
bonanza from oil and gas.
Well into the future. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
the representative Harper.
Thank you, Chairman. Mr Torres.
Good to see you this morning.
Thank you for the great
presentation.
Um
I've I've said, and I and I
really believe it. The
Best thing this legislature has
ever done financially was to
establish the permanent funds
tonight. Spend every single
dollar we get to invest in
provide an endowment fund and
and we've seen incredible growth
and the benefit that's had, um
In New Mexico. I'll add Now I
think maybe the second best
thing Legislature has ever done
financially. You know, Close.
Second is the changes we've made
over the last couple of years to
really strengthen.
Um, the number of investment
funds we have and the
distributions to those
investment funds so we can't see
this great doubling and and
potentially double digit growth
in those investment funds. Um
You know what a great thing
that'll be to help stabilize our
budget? So I'm really grateful
for everyone here for supporting
that for for you and lfc for
helping to craft that really
working partnership.
I've only been here 12 years and
I've seen too terrible downturns
that were just awful.
Many of you have been here much
longer than that and seen more.
Um, I'm really hoping that
What these changes and being
prudent in our spending.
We will not see those kinds of
awful downturns like we have in
the past. Um and I just kind of
going to the
Comments at the early Childhood
Trust fund is a
Emergency reserve.
I sure hope we never use that.
What a terrible thing That would
be when we have all these
programs and families, relying
on that funding for early
childhood.
For the state because we were
not being prudent in in house
bill to have to come back and
take half that money away.
I think that would be awful. So
Just a reminder.
To all of us, and I really like
the that was it Slide 27 where
you kind of give the Goldilocks
right. You're what? You're what
You're really trying to say here
and I'm threatening. I'm not
trying to put words in your
mouth here, but you're trying to
say
We? We
If we had a 3% budget growth
That would be okay. But there
might be room for a little bit
more. If we did 10%, you know.
That could be a problem. So
you're really trying to tell us
Be careful with how we're
drawing the budget.
Mr Chairman and
And is he is that right? Mr.
Chair, Representative Harper, or
at least if you do want to do
10% other changes would need to
be made. Uh, Mr Chairman, is he
thank you. That was that was a
great answer to that. Okay, So
so maybe just two questions. I'm
going to slide 15.
Um
Which is also one of my favorite
Charge that you all put together
for us.
Um
Looking at the amazing growth
we've had from 21 to 24.
Really how much of that was due
to actual economic growth.
Versus non economic growth
factors. For example, inflation
um all the covid 19 money that
was sent to families and the
state how much of this growth
over the last four years was
actually due to our economy
growing
Mr Chair and represented
Harvard. That's a great
question. We've We've done this
exercise, and I believe we
published it in our
Last revenue estimate off the
top of my head. I'm thinking I'm
remembering, seeing you know,
close to two between two thirds
and three quarters from oil and
gas.
And then from there
I think the inflation component
was around 5% economic growth,
maybe around the same amount.
Um, and then other odds and ends
here and their investments was a
big portion as well.
Um, but I can get you that graph
specifically if you'd like.
Yeah. Chairman and Izzy. Thank
you. Yeah, I remember discussing
that, and I just really just
wanted to kind of remember.
You know, A lot of this growth
that we're seeing is really due
to oil and gas and inflation.
Not so much.
Our economy growing. Um we have
a had a little bit of girls in
our economy, but that's
definitely not a major factor
here. So I just want to keep
just remind folks of that.
And then that last point, um for
25.6% growth, um
Yeah.
I'm guessing you included
inflation as part of that,
because on later slides Bieber
shows were expecting kind of a
two or 3% inflation. Um
So I would expected we'd see at
least the two or 3% growth just
because of inflation.
But does that mean we're if
you've included inflation in
that? Does that mean we're
expecting other factors to go
down?
Mr Chair and representative
Harper.
The tax changes are certainly a
drag. I think if you take out
tax changes were actually above
inflation. We have inflation
plus some economic growth and
then tax changes. Bring it back
down below that that figure and
I'm sure there are also some
other components that
Um, aren't coming to mind. But
I would say the largest
proportion is tax changes. Thank
you. Alright and Chairman is he?
I think my last set of questions
on slide 17.
Um, you brought up the large
increase in corporate tax
corporate income tax and
That is just one of the most
volatile revenue streams are
just oscillates back and forth,
and that's just a factor of how
you know we piggyback off the
federal tax system and and how
that structured, you know when
the economy is not doing so
well, you know, they don't pay
taxes and and when it is doing
well, they do and it just
oscillates back and forth with
others. Other factors, but
You mentioned the past through
entity.
Changes that we made may have
impacted that. Would you mind if
if you remember just explaining
how that works, and why we're
seeing this increase.
Sure, Mr Chan, representative
Harper. I think a large or some
of the increase could be
Twofold.
Yeah. In
As taxpayers if taxpayers want
to file through the past through
entity.
Instead of through their
personal income tax.
They are required to pay the
highest tax bracket.
That we have the 5.9%.
So
Some of the increase could be
That we are now receiving a
higher
Tax rate on the same amount of
profit.
Um, but a lot of this is also
shifting and how TRD is counting
the money, so traditionally we
were expecting passed through
entity withholding or payments
to come through the personal
income tax, and it's now coming
through through the corporate
income tax program.
And we've seen a jump.
In that money coming from pass
through entities in the
corporate income tax, and we
typically see the past the
entity on the personal income
tax coming over the next several
months.
So
Over the next several months.
We're going to be watching to
see if there was zero out or if
they remain, and this represents
a true net increase or a
shifting
Yeah. So so Chairman and Izzy
thank you for that. And I
appreciate what you mentioned
that you kind of need two years
to really figure out. If this is
you need a couple of data points
to really show where this is the
change or not, but
The reason I bring this up, and
I think it's important for us to
understand. Um I was at the NCSL
State Local Taxation Task Force
Committee meeting a couple of
weeks ago.
And there was a long
conversation about the, uh, tax
cuts and jobs Act that the J C.
I'm sorry, T c G a
Um
And what we did with this passed
through entity was kind of, uh,
Not kind of it was directly
related to this. So as part of
that that bill
The feds put a cap on how much
you could deduct from your
income taxes for state and local
taxes that you pay right when
you do your 1040. You can deduct
your property tax your gross
receipts, tax your income tax
Whatever.
They put a cap of $10,000. So if
you paid more than $10,000, you
don't get that that $10,000 that
you could deduct
But a lot of states did.
To get around that to help
businesses. They said. Okay, you
don't have to deduct state local
taxes at the personal income tax
level. You can do it first at
your business level.
Or not first, you can do it at
the business level. Only right.
So when you say I've my business
made $500,000 this year, you can
deduct the $20,000 you paid in
state and local taxes there, and
then that would flow.
To your your income tax. And so
it was a way to still be able to
deduct the full amount that you
pay.
It was kind of a unicorn in a
way because by doing this new
Mexico actually gets a little
bit more tax revenue.
And businesses, But businesses
pay a lot less to the feds so as
a net positive to the business
and in that positive to the
state of New Mexico
And lots of other states have
done this that and we did it and
so
Um yeah, I can see where some of
this may be the realization of
that unicorn that we're getting
some of that extra revenue here
while we also helped out
businesses in New Mexico.
Now, the important thing The
interesting thing is, I don't
know how much you've been
watching. But there's been a lot
of
Articles in the news the last
couple of months. Prominent
business people, um, chairman of
the Fed, saying that our current
Debt levels in the United States
are too high.
And then we have to address
them.
Um, this is fascinating to me
that we're seeing a lot of this
coming out right now and to me.
What does is saying is
The tax cutting Jobs Act had a
10 year sunset on it.
And that's coming up here in the
next couple of years.
Hmm.
And I believe what we're doing.
What they're doing is teeing up,
not renewing.
Major portions of the tax cuts
and Jobs Act.
Um
And and perhaps raising taxes at
the federal level, right?
They're not talking about
cutting spending, um, to address
this. Our national debt is too
large.
We're gonna probably let text
act tax cuts and jobs Act expire
and raise taxes.
That's going to have a huge
impact on New Mexico because we
piggyback on the federal code.
So we've asked NCSL to please
start digging into that and
helping US states know how
that's going to impact us.
Um So I just want to weigh that
out here. You know, obviously,
I'm not gonna be around during
the next budget session.
But we need to be thinking ahead
for when this act is not renewed
and how that's getting impact us
and make sure that we're ready
for that.
Mr Chair and represented Harbor.
I'm happy to to say that we've
actually started estimating the
impact of the T. C. J shouldn't
expire and hopefully presenting
it to this committee during this
interim, Um, if you all would
have us and the the
I would I would
Start raising a little bit of a
flag here that
The tax cuts and Jobs Act begins
expiring.
In taxi or 25, and so
Some of these changes if it is
expired, will likely need to be
addressed by the Legislature in
the coming session, and so we're
hoping to be ready to come
forward with you all in in
potential solutions, or or at
least inform you all on on the
potential impacts. Um, if if it
expires so
Yeah, Hopefully you can afford
to that Chairman is he
Brilliant. Thank you. I'm so
glad to hear you guys are
already thinking about it.
That's
Thank you.
Hmm. Thank you, Representative.
Let's move to a senator. Greeks.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And and I
think most everyone knows that
I I grew up in local government.
In Alamogordo and one of the
things that has been an impact
to that community and most
communities around the state or
the or the hold harmless tax
hold harmless payments and one
of the things on page 14 you
talk about.
The number one
Tax expenditure.
Mhm.
This hold harmless, still
hardened payments that the state
makes to municipalities and
counties to compensate for the
loss of the tax revenue on food
and medical services.
So is that continues to go down?
To those communities. Those
communities are then faced with
the challenge of how to recover
that loss in revenue.
The state's done a couple of
things that have protected some
communities, but not all.
And so as we
As we start as we continue to
watch this and we see where it's
going.
We need to know what that you're
doing to local communities as
well, because what we've done is
we put the onus
Something that the state did.
On those communities to recover
and take care of the needs that
they had.
So it is, as you guys continue
to work. Those are things to
remember. I mean, we're
We're talking about here. We're
talking about the state.
But the impact that that has on
local
Governments is still a
substantial deal.
And we need to. We need to be
sure that we
Take that into consideration as
we move forward in the things
that that the Legislature does.
There's other things where we've
impacted local government.
Where we've been able to give
them more through the Internet,
Shales
But then there's communities in
the southeast, of course that
have lost revenue.
Because of the destination
sourcing issue.
So we've got all of these things
that we've messed with. And
we've we've started and we've
done but we need to also
remember as we go forward the
impacts that there are on on
local governments and and Mr
Chair and
We just We just have to be aware
of the of the things that we do
to those guys at that end.
Um
I think I think Mr chairs we as
we look at what's being
presented. We talked about the
growth in reserves and how how
good that's been for us.
And but we need to remember
where it's come from.
And as
Revenue. If we're if we're
looking at revenue from oil and
gas, declining
Then we have to get into
reserves to address those needs
and so reserves won't continue
to grow.
If oil and gas production
Decline.
And I think
We lost an opportunity, uh, this
year in the in the tax package
on a on a small bill, which was
way to allow
Small producers to come into
compliance to continue to
produce.
Revenue for the state.
And I think that would be
something for the Legislature to
pay attention to
Because if we believe and if it
turns out that way, that's going
to be great if we believe we
have economic drivers show up to
New Mexico that will replace oil
and gas or replace a portion of
oil and gas.
Those things will be great.
But if they don't
And historically, they haven't
Uh then we need the help.
Oil and gas maintain a level
That allows us to be able to do
some of the things that we're
doing.
Today and
I think we need to look at that
little bill. We need to look at
Caesar ways Ways to implement
it. Are there ways to expand it.
Uh, because I don't know what
you all see.
But I don't see anything that's
coming down the pipe.
That's going to take care of New
Mexico Revenue Watch.
Anyway, like order Gas does.
And if it's there
Guys take advantage of it. Um,
but I'm not sure that it is so
You know, I didn't really I
wanted to ask some stuff, but I
kind of wandered around and
didn't didn't really get to it.
But the
The hold. Harmless stuff is is
critical.
And critical to local
governments and as you guys
enact stuff, be sure that you
keep them in mind. So thank you
for sure. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Let's move
to representative Barredo.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation. It's
always enlightening to see these
projections. Um, I was looking
at page 15 and thinking about
how cyclical these trends are,
and I was kind of counting the
years between each one of these
spikes, and I think we have
about three or four years
between maybe five in some
cases.
And, you know, thinking into the
future and going back in tip top
17 where you have your Mr Chair,
your budget scenario.
Projections.
Um And I know that many of these
trends are cyclical, based on
the economy, and your modeling
probably includes the sum of
projections, even though you
don't have
Um, I mean, you have a crystal
ball, obviously, but you have
So one of the concerns that I
had, Mr Chair, um, was with the
modeling that you presented.
Is that it only goes to fy 30.
And I wondered if you guys have
any modeling.
Or are expecting to do any
modeling in the future that
would go beyond FY 30 because
we're talking about
35 when the revenues would drop,
possibly
Um, at least what I saw in your
in your in your presentation.
I'm sorry.
I said I met 27. Yeah, thank
you, Mr Chair, So I'm I'm just
wondering, um, do you have are
you planning to doing to do any
modeling?
Beyond FY 30.
Thank you, Mr Chair Representing
Borrego. Yes, we actually go to
fy 50. We're showing fy 30 here.
Just because for the purpose of
these graphs, illustrating the
appropriation and revenue
combination, we felt like it
might not be super useful to to
go out to FY 50 because there's
of course, so much variation
that could happen to that point.
We definitely do it and we have
it on slide 26 you can see two
FY 50 slide 24, although that's
an old analysis and and we will
be publishing another one in
September that will go out.
Taff y 50 so hopefully you can
keep your eyes out for that one.
And Mr Care. Just question on
that. Um, how? How? Okay, So the
s the economy changes and we
project the economy over a
certain period of time. Um and
hopefully, like 2040 or
something like that.
Um
Are are are these does this
modeling includes those?
Sort of projections.
Mr Chair and represented, But I
got yes. They are all based on
the economic projections when we
do long term forecasting, we
look at an average through
cycles because we know that
there will be many economic
cycles between now and 50. They
followed the trend through the
cycles. So you know, of course,
some years you'll have higher
growth. Some years you'll have
lower but we expect a certain
economic growth.
Through FY 50. That's what we
use to build our projections.
Okay? I will be very interested
in seeing those models when
you're done with them. Thank
you, Mr Chair. And also, um, I
would really be interested Mr
Chair in seeing an economic
presentation of our
Nationally and international
economy. Thank you.
Thank you, representative
representative because I know
Thank you, Mr Chair. I just
wanted to appreciate the
comments from our colleague,
Senator Gregg's on his farewell
tour. Um and in particular.
I think we've had meaningful
conversations here about
destination based sourcing and
will continue to do so. But as
we look at at the little bill
that you mentioned, I think
clarifying is important that as
a Senate leadership and you all
made sure to include that bill
in the package. It was not
something the house push back up
on, but actually was the single
piece of the omnibus tax package
that was ultimately vetoed.
And what I wanted to say out
loud, Mr. Chair you talked about
What it means to support an
What it means to support and
invest in an industry that leads
to such economic growth and
And the revenue forecast we see
or the dips we see sometimes in
a presentation like this, but I
was pretty quickly compelled to
support this particular piece of
the legislation because of the
disparate impacts that
communities feel in these
extractive industries, So I
think it's a conversation that
we can and should have out loud
Part of what, Really, Um
How important to me In that
proposal you have brought
forward is that when we think
about the environmental health
where these industries have done
so well, um and if folks that
are proponents of these
environmental initiatives say
it's about, um, wellness and
justice for communities that
called called these lands home.
Then we should also be
supportive of ideas to actually
fund these kind of clean ups.
and I think a compromise that we
might consider moving forward as
it was drafted.
Um, it made it that anyone that
was operating stripper Wells
would have this kind of
financial reimbursement come
back when they came into
compliance, and I think
something we could do is look
at, um the date in which
legislation like this would have
impact so
For instance, now that we all
know the methane rules and
they're in place, and people can
gauge the cost of coming into
compliance before they make
those investments. We could say
something like if you made those
investments, the rules changed
Now You're working to come into
complaints, then that's
something that we could credit
and that to me feels like a
compromise that both invest in
and cares for the wellness of
communities closest to these
industries.
And also recognizes that we did
change the rules, and that
potentially has a negative
impact for people that had
already made those investments
in the stripper wells. So thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
representative. Anyone else
would questions or comments from
the committee? If not thank you.
For those comments,
representative Cadena have a
couple of questions myself in
relation to
On page number for you.
You mentioned Capital outlay
having a $932 million hit to the
overall expenditure fund.
And just as what s B 26 did with
the severance tax permanent
fund. We passed a piece of
legislation this past
legislative session. House Bill.
253. Can you talk a little bit
more about how that may help to
stabilize, so to speak the
capital outlay budget that we
have from year to year from
seeing that roller coaster
effect as well.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thanks for,
um, reminding me. I'm
I regret not including that in
here because that was another
great piece of legislation that
will stabilize both
appropriations and revenues into
the future. That HB 253
Um, essentially
Maybe let me take a step back
going into the session. We had
spoken with the Board of Finance
who had presented on some of the
difficulties they're bonding
program was having with relation
to the debt load that we were
taking on because oil and gas
supported
The capital Outlay program at
nearly 100% recent run up in oil
and gas production and revenues
was leading to a run up in debt
capacity and debt loads taken on
by the Board of Finance and
proportional to our population
that was raising some red flags
to ratings agencies and to the
border finance themselves. And
so HB 253 sought to
Change the calculation on how
total long term debt is
calculated in terms of capacity.
And instead look to use cash
where possible in place of long
term debt to reduce our debt
load, but also to take any
savings from avoided long term
debt and distribute them
distribute them to a new capital
Planning and reserve fund. So in
the event, oil and gas revenues
crash that reserve fund could be
tapped to cover debt service.
But also to begin generating
investment returns to then
distribute back into the capital
program so that cash from those
investments could be used to
fund capital projects instead of
long term debt, So that's both a
short term and long term fix to
several issues that the capital
program has had, and we're
excited to see that take effect
this summer. Perfect. Thank you
and mind you all folks that
these both both the Seventh Tax
Permanent fund and the one that
Is it just talked about now are
the brain Children of our
legislative finance Committee
staff members specifically, Mr.
Mr. I told us himself that has
really taken on a great role to
making sure that today's money
can turn into tomorrow's
investments and we appreciate
you and your work and your
staff's work that you do for all
of us. Thank you with many
partners, Mr Chair can't take
all the credit.
I'm trying to give you credit.
But thank you for that. Is he
for for all you've done for us,
and we look forward to seeing
you in the future, And with
that, folks, we're gonna move on
to the discussion of our work
plan and meeting scheduled for
this upcoming interim session.
So with that I will allow for
Martin to lead the discussion.
Hmm. Thank you, Mr Chair and
members of the committee.
So in your folders, you should
have a stapled white sheet that
has the most work plan.
The items on here we have three
recurring, so the last three are
kind of carry overs that go
every year for this committee,
the ones before that are ones we
maybe haven't hit in the
previous few years or our
upcoming and pressing issues
that
That chair's myself and Miss Pam
Stokes also believe where
pertinent so I just kind of go
through some of the items. Um,
and the meeting dates and then
if there are any comments,
questions, additions. We can
discuss that at the end.
Um, So we have, of course, Long
term revenue stabilization,
especially with regard to the
revenue revenue revenue is
attributable to the oil and gas
industry, um, and the risks
associated with too much
reliance so kind of building on
the discussion that we had
today.
Next. We have an examination of
the liquor excise tax and
discuss
Both previous and maybe new
legislative proposals.
We have an examination of the
effectiveness and value to the
state of tax expenditures and
other economic development
center and the state's ability
to basically
Report and track the
effectiveness of those
incentives and expenditures.
Further kind of a broad
overview an examination of the
underlying tax policy of the
state and
For one example whether we want
to sort of prioritized the
incentives to draw residents and
businesses here or whether maybe
there should be a prioritization
on improving the everyday life
and the quality of life of the
new Mexicans.
With the increasing changes to
the economy and workers and
remote workers. Uh, paragraph e
evaluates that and kind of to
make sure that we are, uh
Paying attention to those
workers who may be live outside
of New Mexico. But then, um,
come and work inside New Mexico
or that live in New Mexico and
then work outside and then sub
paragraph F. We're looking at
energy very broadly, and the
changes the future trends and
again how we can stay in touch
with with those changes to make
sure that we are stabilizing
revenue and and have a
Up to date in modern tax policy
And then the final Three are
items that have kind of carried
over a year to year for this
committee and so looking at the
state's property taxes, and we
had a few members of this
committee who did.
Send in some ideas for the work
plan, and it seems like a few of
those would kind of qualify into
this. The property taxes,
including competitiveness with
other states, and also
especially how they affect local
government.
Um Next. H we have local
governments with is annually we
bring them in municipal and
county level to hear about them
about the pressing issues and
how this committee can address
them. And and, finally, of
course, proposing analyzing
legislative actions to address
these needs.
The committee beyond this first
organizational meeting is set to
meet four times It will all be
here in the capital. We have
August September.
October and then December and
so, you know, July we
traditionally haven't met. It's
It's kind of early. There isn't
quite the
Revenue forecasts and an outlook
to make changes. And then,
typically also, we do not meet
November is it's a very busy for
the other committees. There's a
lot going on, and this committee
has traditionally been approved
to meet in December, which is a
very late one. So we have seven
additional meeting dates in
Thank you, Martin. If there are
folks that want to add anything
to our list for our work plan,
please. The floor is open and
and and we would welcome
anything that you would like to
cover or perhaps some on your on
behalf of your community's
behalf, But please do mention
it. Center Chamonix.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, I think
this could be, uh, fit
underneath G, but I brought up
in past years that international
companies coming or
international
Uh,
Countries come into our state
and purchase properties. And I
would like to, um know how are
Department is actually tracking
collection of property taxes for
that. Thank you.
Very good. Thank you, Senator
representing Serato. Thank you,
Mr Chairman. Thank you.
Committee. I'm also kind of
hoping that within E. We're
looking at the broader
technological changes that are
coming and that are moving
along. So looking at how ai and
machine learning are impacting
how workers are working and
where that's moving along and
just I think that really fits
within their and I'm hoping that
at least a slide would be
included in that.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank
you, Senator or TCP? No.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, and I
just it was coming in connection
with the discussion of the
liquor excise tax. But it seems
to me that a lot of times our
analysis
Even the analysis earlier today
doesn't really take into account
the
Consequences of the tax. The
other implications of attacks.
The potential benefits, for
example, from taxing liquor.
In reducing expenditures down
the line on
Health care.
On treatment on crime on
incarceration, so some kind of
dynamic scoring for some of our
considerations and in connection
with the liquor, text, we we, we
we get about 9594 $95 million a
year from the liquor excise tax.
Half of it goes to the DW out
front. Half of it goes to the
general one.
Just as a as a $48 million or
$47 million.
Item in the General fund if we
match that, with Medicaid, we
would draw down three times
more. We would have another 115
$120 million available for
Other expenditures that were
making so it just wanted to
throw out the idea of expanding
or consideration of important
implications of taxes to more
dynamic, Uh, possibility. What
are we saving in the long run,
and also, how can we attracted
other federal revenue has
matching
Very good. Thank you Know what
else questions or comments?
Additions, Senator
Thank you, Mr Chair just under
age and like to make sure that
we include there.
Presentation on the excise tax
that was just
Held to not be
Um, something the city of Santa
Fe can do on affordable housing.
It's a transfer tax, and I think
we're going to have the city
coming to us, potentially for
legislation.
And I just think that this is
another attempt by the city to
broaden.
The resources they get given the
narrowness of gross receipts tax
that kind of tracks what Senator
Gregg's has talked about, but I
would be interested in hearing
Kind of as part of the
presentation of its municipal
league or whoever just make sure
that that's black because I
think we're going to see that in
the session and I think would be
good for us to have a background
on exactly what the issue is,
and it's probably going to be in
the courts, so that would be a
factor. But maybe here Thank
you, Senator anyone else.
Questions. Comments represented
Canada.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I
appreciate that. The
conversations that we've begun
to have and will continue to
consider around the liquor
excise tax have made it here to
the top Two priorities is item
be on this potential work plan.
I wanted to share Mr Chair. A
bit of an update. I appreciate
that advocates and other
legislators.
Have asked for further
conversations coming out of the
30 Day session. As you all may
remember. This year, we had
multiple bills introduced
because we recognized as a body
that the way we tax alcohol is
outdated and in need of
modernization and updating. Um
some of those proposals.
I went to a vote in house tax
and did not move forward and
others, um, had conversations in
the committee knowing that they
continue to need more work. And
I look forward to doing that.
here. Um other legislators that
are not part of rest up here had
asked that we potentially have a
joint meeting with the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee. You and I
have discussed how that feels
really important and powerful,
including so that we can have
these dynamic conversations.
About implications. Um
For new Mexicans as as people
who navigate trauma and and as
we all imagine what social
determinants of health are, how
we might get to a place where
our tax policy matches, um kind
of values we want to set up as
policymakers, So I appreciated
that you all discussed this Mr
Chair in the L. H. H s
organization meeting as well.
And I look forward to staff
figuring this out, but just to
say out loud it does look like
the September meetings that we
both have scheduled have
overlap. Rest up is currently
scheduled September 23rd and
24th on Monday and Tuesday. The
LHs committee is currently
scheduled September 23rd through
25th. So whether we combined our
efforts on Monday or Tuesday or
rest step went another day to
join.
Um, the conversation on the
25th. I appreciate that. You all
brought that forward and it
sounds important because as
we've shared, Mr Chair
These conversations should be
happening out loud with the
cameras on where public and
everyone else is invited to
participate as we figure out
what the right direction is for
New Mexico.
And then secondly, Mr Chair.
This is something
I've raised in other years.
Understanding that we're here is
the body of the legislature.
The legislation that we passed,
and when that signed into a lot
impacts the entire state.
It. Also to me has been
frustrating that historically,
this committee remains in Santa
Fe instead of meeting in other
communities, like the other
interim committees do, Um, tax
policy is unique. We hear that
and understand that very clearly
on issues like destination based
sourcing in that, um I mean text
policy is not unique, but the
but
The way it lands in different
communities can have really
significant impacts, so I would
suggest a request Mr Chair as I
have previously that we might
have a single meeting outside of
Santa Fe so we can get closer to
the constituents. We represent
Understand those issues, um,
differently and and for some of
us were the drive to Santa Fe is
pretty significant. I appreciate
when that happens on the inverse
so that
Folks have to extend a little
further and understand what it
means to be in a very real
estate like we do so I would
request something like the
October meeting. Be somewhere
like Southeast New Mexico, where
destination based so seeing has
been brought up, and potentially
that meeting could be the the
the the meeting. The focus could
be where we talk about local
government issues as leader
Worth and others have said.
So those are my pieces of
inciting contribution today, Mr
Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Let's move to
represent, but oh,
Thank you, Mr Chairman, Um under
item number E. I just wanted to
raise an issue that people have
been talking about and have
brought up to me. Um people who
work for the state of New Mexico
and under the
E R A Or, um, the PR A fund.
And we know that our population
in New Mexico has really not
changed that much. We actually
haven't really attracted people,
but at once they retire.
There's often times people they
leave the state and they take
their peril with them.
And I think one of the issues
that has been raised to me as
Could we incentivize people to
stay in New Mexico, somehow,
especially people who are, um
retired under our retirement
systems because that does not
benefit the state in any way
when those funds leave the
state, so I just thought I'd
bring that issue up because I've
had a number of people call me
regarding that.
Thank you.
Thank you, representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um, just a
question under under f.
Um, as is easy was talking about
where we're going to be going in
2030 35 and beyond.
What? What thoughts have been
given on how we're going to tax,
wind and solar is that
discussion started And when do
we start that discussion as oil
and gas pumps down, and and we
continue to build, fills and
And farms. So I'd like some
information on that if we could.
Thank you. Absolutely. Thank
you.
Let's go to Senator Chamonix.
Um, thank you, Mr Chair after
the discussion about, um
Yeah, Let's see Liquor. Uh, a
couple of years ago, we had
presentations on how we are
taxing.
Um
Our liquor and many different
ways and that it's not
consistent. Did we have a
resolved?
That issue with the
recommendation from this
committee.
Where the NCSL and other states
come.
Uh huh.
Senator, We have not ratified
any of that. Yeah, that's why
we're working progress when we
talk about liquor excise tax,
and what's the best way to tax
it and what's the most equitable
way to tax it? And so that's
why, as representative Cadena
mentioned that we're looking to
have that conversation out loud
in the public transparently so
that we can all come together to
with perhaps HHS and our
committee to come together to
find a better a better solution.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
And what else? Questions or
comments Additions. Senator
Greece Real quick, Mr. Chair.
Uh, this past interim we had
discussions on destination
sourcing.
We've gotten another year's
worth of data.
It wouldn't. I mean, I think it
would be beneficial.
To talk about that again to she,
uh
What impact that's having now
that we know again have another
year of data, and we can
actually maybe based decisions
better as they impact
Local communities. Uh
When we know more
Try it. Thank you might not be a
bad deal to stick that in some
way.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
Questions, comments, editions,
If not a couple from me. I agree
that we need to a lot, perhaps
half a date to the discussion
with the Legislative Health and
Human Services Committee, Um, on
taxation of alcohol, and whether
or not that happens in the
September meeting as I
understand it, uh, l h h s is
import Alice in
I was wrong right there in
Silver City in September, so
we'll have some logistical
Planning issues with that, but
as we finalize those, we'll get
those to you as soon as we can.
But I agree. I think that we
need to have that discussion
publicly out loud so that we can
all come together to find the
best solution moving forward in
preparation for the next
legislative session. Um, I would
have to also agree. I don't And
perhaps someone can educate me
again and the last staff, but
You know, all the meetings are
in Santa Fe. Perhaps we can have
another one outside of Santa Fe.
We can ask Legislative Council
to make that allowance happen.
But, um, perhaps we do have one
in southeastern Mexico and we
look at Destiny's insourcing. Or
perhaps we actually take the
time to go and visit.
Oil and gas production and find
out
Admittedly, I've never been to
an oil and gas production field,
so I mean, I would like to learn
more about the the industry that
provides 38% of our budget. And
so I think it's worth it. I
think it's worthwhile. And so as
we again developed this agenda
as we develop our plan and our
location for meetings, we will
get those to you as soon as we
can so that we can all plan for
this summer's committee meeting,
so
Would that being said
Anyone else. Questions,
comments additions looking
forward to the summer with all
of you As we come to the close
of this meeting we do have and
we've allotted well, at least an
hour for economic development
until the next meeting starts.
But at this point in time, I
want to thank all of you for
joining us this morning. Thank
you to all of those in the
audience for joining us this
morning. Thank you to our vice
chair for making it out.
From Amos Pueblo and those of
you tuning in online. Thank you
for your attention and for
tuning in and until we meet
again, we'll see you all in,
Okay? Okay, Martin, suggesting
that perhaps we have a motion to
begin to approach or develop and
approve the work plan, and, um,
if it would be Mr Chair members
of the community if it would be
helpful, I can summarize all of
the recommendations that were
made, Um
That can be
Added to the work plan. Um and
then at that point, I guess with
with that sort of amended work
plan in mind, Maybe somebody
could make a motion and or make
comments about
Um specific items that have been
added Sure. So I have under
paragraph G two.
And on international companies
purchasing profit property in
this state and how the
department is tracking the
collection of that property tax
under paragraph E. Um I have
adding broader technological
changes, including the tax and
revenue implications of
Things such as artificial
intelligence and machine
learning.
For paragraph B. In addition to
the liquor excise tax for a more
dynamic consideration of the
implications and possibilities
of the implications of the tax
and possibilities of reducing
other expenditures.
For paragraph H, including a
presentation on
Uh huh. By either the city of
Santa Fe or the Municipal
League, the new excise tax with
regards to affordable housing
and that transfer tax and then
two new items, one about
incentivizing retirees to stay
in New Mexico.
And secondly, a presentation or
discussion about destinations.
Is there a motion amended Work
plan? Very good. Second. Very
good. Any opposition to that
motion seeing none. We have a
work plan to move forward with.
Thank you. And, uh, it's also in
FY. This may be the first and
last time we'll begin our
meeting's at eight o'clock in
the morning, so that being said
