All right.
Let's get going.
Secretary, good to see you.
Thanks at least where I was.
Thanks for coming, and boy, you
got a great full turnout. So
congrats mostly will turn up.
OK, so our closing panel is uh
briefing from the New Mexico
Environment Department,
Secretary Kenny, honored to have
you here with us, and I know
you've been very busy lately
reading about all your work in
the press and the floor is
yours, sir.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, uh, vice chair,
members of the committee. It's
good to be, uh, back here, uh,
not working on a bill with you
all. Um
What?
So
Um,
again, uh, I do want to thank
you all, uh, sincerely for a, a
good legislative session for the
Environment Department. Uh, many
of you helped, uh, get some
really important bills passed
this last session, uh, might
have been my first time on a PIA
uh my first time getting a, a
unanimous vote in the House on
the floor for a POs spill and
then um really good votes in the
Senate as well. So again, thank
you for your
commitment to some of these
topics that are that are often
quite difficult. Um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee.
You have in front of you a slide
presentation that I believe is
also uh on our website for those
who might be watching, uh, the
slide presentation is broader in
scope than what I will get into
in specifics, but if there is
something in the slide deck that
you want me to pause and go
deeper on, I'm happy to do that.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee also sitting to my
right, your
left.
It's only fifty-fifty and I got
it wrong. Um, is, uh, Macy
Rouse, Macy is our director of
strategic plan implementation
and special projects. It's her
second tour at the Environment
Department. I'm proud to say
that she, uh, well, I'm not
proud to say she left, but she
did come back, um, and, and as
with the environment department.
And again, if you need anything
from me or from the department,
you can always reach out to me
directly and Macy as well.
So with that, Mr. Chair, I'll go
through the, the slide
presentation and then we'll hit
the handout that you all
received as well, uh, just a
little orientation. I know, um,
Statute and reg language can be
difficult, so I'm now on the
slide with the table, the first
substantive slide.
But it's, it's often a, I think,
a point of discussion in the
legislature when we appear
before you, that
There's nomenclature that just
is helpful to understand, and
these terms, while we may all
collectively in our everyday
lives consider radioactive waste
as hazardous waste in a very um
straightforward nomenclature
when we apply the law and the
rules, those are very different
applications. So what I wanted
to point out here in this first
slide is that uh industries in
New Mexico like oil and gas
under the hazardous waste Act
are not regulated.
Well, um, the, the radioactive
waste that may come up from
underground is regulated. Uh,
and that's naturally occurring
and concentrated uh radioactive
materials.
When we look at the next 3 lines
on that table, you'll see
federal facilities listed there,
uh, to national labs as well as
the whip, uh, they are regulated
for hazardous waste and not
regulated for radioactive ways,
and you may question that, uh,
why is that in uh EPA regulates
the radioactive componentss
there, as does the nuclear
regulatory Commission and other
federal agencies. And finally,
for things like Hotech, uh,
spent nuclear
fuel, it's not a hazardous
waste, but it is a radioactive
waste. The good news is, is you
can always ask, and we'll
explain it, um, but it, it
should not connotate that one is
less or more toxic than the
other.
The next 4 slides, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, uh
really talk about Los Alamos
National Labs.
And everything from the first
slide with respect to a permit
renewal, these are substantive
renewals that uh are take quite
a long time to issue so I'm on
slide 3 now, um, but we are
still not
permits are administratively
extended until they're reissued,
so it's not like the lab is
without a permit. There are
permits. There is a permit in
place, but we're still going to
through a process to renew their
permit for the wastes that
they're.
and remediating.
Um
Slide 4 is reference to the 2016
consent order, as well as slide
5, and, and really what I think
is important here is there was a
prior settlement with Los Alamos
National Labs for the cleanup of
the waste that are there. Uh,
that was not functioning well
when we came in, uh, this in
this administration, uh, we
tried to work with the lab. It
did not.
succeed, and we, uh, effectively
moved to terminate that
agreement and renegotiate a
separate agreement.
Or a new agreement, that new
agreement has been negotiated
and it is in effect at this
time, um,
And we are in the process or the
lab is in the process of
continuing to remediate the
site, uh, under now this new
consent order that was
negotiated. Um,
As I move a little bit further,
a topic that always comes up
with Los Alamos National Labs is
the hexavalent chromium plume,
um, hexavalent chromium, if, if
you all have ever seen the movie
Erin Brockovich, uh, is the
subject of that film as well,
um, but hexavalent chromium is a
uh additive that was used in
power plants, uh, to keep scale
and algae and things like that
from growing in their contact
and non-contact cooling water.
um, historically, the lab had,
uh, you know, prior to many
years ago, probably in the
Oppenheimer days and subsequent
to that had basically taken that
wastewater and, and let it go,
if you will, um, and that has
caused the chromium plume to at
at Los Alamos.
The chromium plume was the
subject of a lot of debate. We
brought in an independent third
party to sort of mediate a
technical discussion between
enemy, uh, our groundwater
program, our hazardous waste
program and the lab, there is
differing technical opinions,
and that is not, this is normal,
this is, it's a very complex
hydrogeology at Los Alamos, when
you think about all those
perched aquifers that are
Sitting in in that in that
layer, um, so there is concern
that
Uh, Los Alamos may be pushing
around the plume versus
remediating it. So we had a
third party come in mediate and
effectively we came up with a
solution, and I'm happy to say
that that uh accidental chromium
plume is still uh being
remediated and, and, uh, you
know, additional wells
monitoring wells and things like
that are, are continuing there.
So, uh, we hit an impasse, we
resolved it technically, and
we're moving on. I think both to
the lab and to the departments.
Um,
Uh
What's the word? But we're we're
all in agreement.
Um
So that, that takes us a little
bit through slide 7.
Um, I was going to move on next
to the, to whip, and um
You know, this is again the
waste isolation pilot plant in
southeast New Mexico. Uh, this
is a, a really high point, I
think, in what I'll look back
and at my tenure here is that,
uh,
2 years ago, when
The whip permit was expiring,
um, and there is a lot of
contention between uh
Effectively environmental
groups, community members.
Uh, advocates of whip whip
itself, Department of Energy,
etc. and the department trying
to re-permit that, um.
We brought in a mediator to, and
we, we had these mediations, uh,
here in Santa Fe, but we brought
a mediator in to go through the
whip permit conditions that we
were proposing.
Uh, we negotiated those
conditions in real time, and we
wound up not only agreeing to
the permit conditions, which was
already a big win, but we wound
up agreeing that we did not need
a hearing on the permit.
Uh, just this morning, I was
with my team and, you know, the,
the mediation probably cost us
about $250,000.
But a permit hearing probably
would have been excess of a
million dollars for the
department. So, so I think we're
we're showing that
With really if we can work with
advocates and stakeholders and
industry to get something like
the nation's only geologic
repository for nuclear
materials, um,
Negotiated without a permit
hearing to everybody's
satisfaction. I think, I think
that speaks volumes of of the
work that the department can do.
Um
So
Uh, separate issue with whip is
we'd like to still see greater
utilization of whip for New
Mexico-based wastes. That was
the point, a big point of the
permit. Uh, I, I don't believe
that we're seeing as much waste
coming from Los Alamos. I, it,
it's in the numbers as well, but
we're not seeing as much
remediation at Los Alamos and uh
emplacement of waste and whip
that we would like to see both
in volume and number of
shipments.
Uh, so we're continuing to work
on that with the Department of
Energy. Um,
Mr. Chair, before I just jump
ahead, I know there's, there
might be questions about NNSA,
uh, while we're on sort of DOE
and the and whip and the weapons
complex, there might be a couple
of questions that aren't
reflected in my slides, and I
just wanted to pause before we
go into PFAS, um,
And just mentioned that the
tritium issue that is probably,
you've heard about at, at Los
Alamos effectively in 2007, uh,
Los Alamos took uh
They had these drums that should
have been handled back then as
hazardous waste, they contain
isotopes of, of, uh, hydrogen or
radioactive tritium is what we
would refer to it as, as well as
lead. If they didn't have lead,
I'd have no jurisdiction.
But since they have lead in
them, the hazardous waste Act
applies, and we regulate those
drums.
So had they been managed
properly in 2007.
We would not be in the position
of NNSA asking us to
Uh, depressurize those drums and
capture the radioactive tritium
from the drums.
But since they, they weren't
handled properly, and they are
unclear about what the pressure
is in those drums, uh, we are
now in a situation where
I don't wanna create the sense
of an emergency like we should
all figure it out right now, but
there is a sense of emergency
that those drums could based on
the pressure at some point in
time in the future, release
catastrophically. So the idea of
depressurizing them and
controlling the emissions is
what NNSA is proposing and
because there's lead in the
drums, we have to give an
approval. We at the Environment
Department have to give an
approval for that.
Um
I think it goes to to show that
when we kick the can on.
Not literally, we don't want to
kick those cans, but when we
kick the can on making decisions
about how to manage wastes,
whether it is industry or
whether it is the federal
government, we are effectively
creating worse and more complex
situations for us to resolve,
and we still have to resolve
this one and pick the least
worst option. So we're working
with the NNSA on that, um, but I
wanted to just address it before
we move away from the federal
Energy.
Weapons side of the house and
I'm sure you'll have questions
for me on it.
So back to the slides on slide
9,
Again, we, we did some great
work on POS decision,
but just wanted to highlight
that at the federal level, um,
We
have
Uh
OK.
OK.
things.
So on the Zoom issue.
Zuma's chair, um,
Members on the, on PIA's the,
there's a lot going on, uh, but
I will say that what we did in
the last session along with
things that are happening at the
federal level and still
happening at the federal level,
put us in a much better position
than we've ever been before with
our, with the PAS issues in the
state of New Mexico.
Um, there are current drinking
water standards that are a
little bit in flux.
Not terribly influx, uh, there
is uh a
Superfund rule out there at the
federal level that is a little
bit in flux, but I think we, we
did things to insulate ourselves
from, uh, going after the wrong
industry, the passive receivers
of, of, of PAs this past
session, um, and we're
continuing with our, our
hazardous waste program, uh,
with the new state law that will
take effect, well, that was
signed into law, but we'll
really go into effect, uh, June
20th. Um, I
I will tell you that, I mean,
you don't probably hear this
enough from from people who are
who are saying thank you, but I
was contacted by congressional.
Majority and congressional
minority staff.
In DC, who both said,
Every time PA comes up,
everybody's saying you got to
follow what New Mexico's doing.
So I
I think, thank you. That's a big
win for us as a state, um, and,
and, um, I know, uh, Senator
Townsville like this, um,
But just even today I got a call
asking if I could uh let
California
Legislators know how to uh
navigate some of the POS issues,
so interesting that um
You know, other states who, who
typically have sort of been the
lead on some of these issues
are, are looking to New Mexico,
um.
And I, I just think, again,
thank you, you've done a lot to
to help communities more than
you know.
So, uh, as I start to wrap up
here on uh the, the sites that
are typically of interest, and
note that I, I'm, I'm not really
getting into Canada and Holland,
but I'm happy to talk about both
of those sites, uh, but on
Kirtland, which is another site
that always comes up in this
committee, um, effectively what
I would say around Kirtland is
that um
There's information here about
the current status and path for
it, but really what I want to
tell you is, um, the Department
of Defense
Does what they're told.
But won't elect to do anything
more.
And
I think we need to continue to
take a hard look at at these
installations in New Mexico,
Portland included, and, you
know, while they, I'll be the
first to say they're big
drivers, they're really
important to our state. They
don't get the free pass that uh
that they sometimes think they
have, and I would
Advocate that we continue to
both um push at all levels that
they make.
That that
DOD properly funds the
remediation at Kirtland, Cannon,
and Holleman. And that seems to
be a, a place where we in the
agency have some trouble, and I
would welcome any legislative
assistance from you all, um, in
bringing base commanders and
bringing the Department of
Justice in bringing the
Department of Defense in and,
and asking them those questions
as the interim continues. Um, I
do
you think Kirtland is within
reach.
Of putting it into the long term
less science experiment and more
real cleanup. I, uh, in the
source area in particular, but
uh they themselves will tell
you, unless there's a hazard as
documented by the state, they
can't get the money to do the
source area cleanup.
So, um, it's a little chicken
and egg, but I, we're gonna
continue onward, uh, with
Kurtland as well.
Um, Mr. Chad, thanks to your,
you and many others, uh, we had
a good debate and discussion
around neglected contaminated
sites of slide 11, uh, and
abandoned uranium mine cleanup.
Uh, we have $20 million that
we're ready to rock and roll on
as soon as it hits our account.
And as soon as it does, we have
it ready to go for abandoned
mine uranium mining, $12 million
neglected sights, both the two
can carry truck stop and uh the
refinery in Bloomfield, $8
million.02 million dollars for
24 state lead petroleum leaking
storage tank sites, uh, to
correct those. Those are state
lead sites.
This money where confident we
can spend, and we accepted, we
accept the challenge, not that
we had an option, but we accept
the challenge and the agency
that if uh from the finance
committees that if we need more
money come back during the, the
30 day session and tell us you
need more, but we are, we are
lining up all the right
contractors, all the right
staff, we are ready to go to
spend down this money, um, and
hopefully come back and, and
prove that we can not only
Uh, spend the money, but spend
it in a way that's really making
a difference in communities, and
we can keep going.
Mr. Chair, on uranium mining in
particular, uh, we are in still
talking to the new
administration about things we
talked about in the old federal
administration, and we're
optimistic that they will
continue to want to solve
uranium mining problems here.
There is a billion dollars
sitting in Tronic's money that
has yet to be spent.
a billion
Um, we need to get that money. I
would welcome again this
committee, the legislature,
helping us get that money out.
Um
There is uh, in, in my opinion,
and I've said this to both
federal administrations were too
big to succeed.
There are too many federal
agencies, too many state
agencies and not enough
coordination to a single point
of decision, that we can be
effective on uranium mining
cleanup, and I think until we
have an organized approach that
it, it's, it's, it's a
disservice to the communities
that are affected. Uh, so I'm
hoping we can make some big
changes there, as well as with,
with the uh with the new
administration. I've already
talked to the EPA regional
administrator about it, um, and
it's been elevated to the White
House as well.
Um
And lastly, I keep referencing
this, uh, the last slide is
slide 12, I keep referencing all
the great work we've done
collectively together, uh,
So that House Bill 140 defining
uh discarded AFLF as hazardous
waste while protecting passive
receivers from ways that might
be getting onto their property
like Artco and other dairies.
Uh, that is going into effect
where already notifying people
of its applicability and asking
for permit modifications that
will be more protective of
communities, the 212
non-essential band, uh, again,
that is something that we'll see
over time and and labeling of
requirements, etc.
I heard a little bit from this
morning about, about things that
might be of interest to the
committee members. House Bill
291 went through pretty easily,
and it is the rate Act
amendments in circular economy,
we have a number of great
options to bring new rules under
that.
Program under that bill so that
we can.
have market-based solutions that
both spur economy and clean up
the environment.
Uh, and Senate Bill 21, filling
the gaps of surface water and
groundwater and setting up the
surface water discharge
permitting program.
A little bit more breakdown is
in the handout, Mr. Chair, about
uranium mining groundwater,
petroleum storage tanks, uh,
just to give you just a little
bit more breakdown of how we're
aiming to spend that money, but
with that Mr. Jarrett and
members of the committee, I'm
happy to, uh, stand for any
questions you may have. Thank
you. Good job, secretary. OK,
we, everybody wants to ask
questions. So I'm gonna start
with
Representative Lord, who's just
been excited to have you all
day, so we'll start with the
representative.
For a close second by
Representative Block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, kind gentlemen, for
being here today. So good to see
you yet again. It's nice to to
see you 2 in the morning though.
It's more fun.
wander in the halls. Oh yeah.
No, I never mind, I think come
out right. So I do have a
question. So on this tronics.
Cause that was one of the
questions I had earlier.
I could have sworn it was a
trillion to start with, but
it's, we have a billion set for
here what I'm understanding.
But then there's a 5 point right
what oh it's not a trillion,
but, but that would be great. I
know. I was thinking I wish it
was a trillion. So we have a
billion right now, but there's
supposed to be 5 points.
5 or something billion out there
still. Can you give us an update
as what is happening with all
this money, cause I see all the
money coming, but I don't see
any movement and where are we at
with all that? Please and thank
you. Mister Jar and, and
Representative, um,
excited to see you as well. Uh,
the, the, um,
Eelectronics money, I don't
believe any of it's been
deployed to the stadium in
Mexico. I, it's not left the
federal coffers. So we, we
haven't seen any of it. Um, it's
one of those situations where
I, I, I, this is my opinion that
it feels like the victory was
getting the money, not spending
it, and, and I think it needs to
be spent, and that is a uh
something that came up during
the session when we were
bringing some of the, these
bills forward.
Um, but I, I, I absolutely
welcome.
Uh, you know, a, a, a letter, a
trip to DC, a way that we can
talk to the Department of
Justice, the, the Council of
Environmental Quality at the
White House, um, and really just
get this money moved. It needs
to be deployed.
Um, Mr. Speaker and secretary, I
would gladly go and do that.
I'm gladly show up and knock on
some doors. Ding Dong. Please
give us our money.
No, seriously, on a serious
note, that is since I started in
here, which is going on 6 years
now, that money was awarded, I
think a year before there, so 78
years now.
The settlement and nothing has
happened, and it's the most
frustrating thing I've ever
seen, so if we could as a
committee figure out a way, I
think a letter and I think a
visit by Representative Lord
would probably get, get that
done or we send our, our, our
secret weapon over here who just
nicely talked them to death,
representative block, but and
also so we need to get that
money out here. Um, so when we
go back, we talk about
The money that we have here for
cleanup, the money we have a lot
in New Mexico.
As you know, Mr. Speaker and
Secretary, that you have to jump
through a million hoops. You
can't just call Joe's uranium
cleanup.
So what is the plan for that?
Because you have to have so many
federal things.
In order, like I mean you can't
move anything across the highway
without duty and you have to get
all the fur.
events. So how, what is our
plan? How do we use that money
for cleanup when we can't
really, I can't wrap my head
around how we would even do
anything with uranium and other
things that require the feds to
approve every move that we make.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
it's a great question. Um,
So the, the sites that we're
starting with are sites in which
we have those.
Uh, easement access agrees
they're not literally that, but
we have those agreements that we
can move forward with those
effectively. So some of it's on
state land, so it's great to
work with the state land
commissioner on those, uh, some
of it's on.
Private land, so we have uh
agreements to work there, um,
so, so I agree with you, there
will be an eventual roadblock.
It took us, it took NRC.
7 years.
To issue a permit.
Uh, for, so that we could move.
So that waste could be moved at
one point in time. Um, I don't
call getting a permit in 7 years
and then moving waste across the
street and you know, it's not
success. It's really not.
But where we're starting with
the 20 million we received in
the allocation that we put to
our geranium mining cleanup.
That timeline should not be the
issue.
As we understand it right now
because we've
We're picking those sites in
which we have the agreements in
place.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
secretary. That was kind of my
question because as you know, I
mean, there's lots and lots of
steps to do anything, especially
when it comes to uranium or any
type of hazardous waste that
there's multiple steps that have
to be taken EPA and everybody's
got to have their hands in there
with permits being done. So
you're telling me with this one
that we're looking at this
abandoned uranium uranium mine
that will be able to be moved
forward with right now. Is that
correct? That is correct, Mr.
Chair. OK.
My other question is going back
to coordination, it seems like
cause in this committee we have
a lot of.
People come forward talking
about pieces. Well, I only do
this piece and I do this piece
and I do this piece, and then we
have the federal component. What
are you talking about, about
when you talk about coordination
because it seems that that is
sadly lacking on some of the
things. Can you explain a little
bit more about that?
Absolutely. So, Mr. Chair and
Representative, the what you
through through the legislature
and through the, the chair's
advocacy, we received money to
hire a uranium mining
coordinator, that position is in
our shop. Her name is Mori
Harms. She's fantastic. Um, Mori
is our uh
Came from the private sector,
uh, geologist by education and
and works on these issues for
us. She is also in charge of
coordinating with effectively
her counterparts in Arizona,
across the state of New Mexico,
across the federal government.
So she's, she is our person that
is literally making the symphony
come together.
Um, when she can't get that to
happen, that's when I call my
counterpart in Arizona, or I,
you know, work with the federal
government with BLM or whether
it's broader DOI or NRC etc.
Um
That seems to be working. It's
not great, but it seems to be
working.
In the last administration,
Uh, the Governor Hobbs, Governor
Luhan Grisham asked the CEQ.
To allow us to have one person
from Arizona, one person from
New Mexico and one person across
all of the federal government to
be the decision makers, so that
we didn't have this pause.
We're ready to go on cleaning up
waste and moving it to this
landfill. Hey, NRC, could we get
the permit? They, they say, yes,
of course, and 7 years goes by.
So, we, we tried to do that. It
didn't happen. We re up that
letter again to the current
administration. I've already
talked to EPA about it and said,
can you help us on this issue?
And I think I'm, I remain
optimistic while we still try to
do our work.
That's the chairman, thank you
secretary, because the, the
coordination that there's kind
of a big thing that I've seen in
general in New Mexico. Money
goes over here and it lacks the
coordination to make sure
everything's getting done in a
timely manner. Um, so,
Going on to the clean up out
there in Canada which I brought
up and now it's in the Ogallala
Aquifer, which is huge, the
world's largest aquifer.
How does that come into play
because
Canon is ultimately responsible
for cleaning it up, correct? So
what they working with
everybody, are we all on the
same page? Are they gonna plan
to stop the peas or goes further
into the aquifer, are people
being notified that the water
that they're using has got pes
in it. Can you tell me what's
going on with that?
Yeah, and Representative, uh,
this topic really
Makes me mad because everything
you said should be happening,
and
Uh, if it wasn't for the
appropriations you've all given
us at the Environment
department.
Much of what you said would not
be happening.
So we continue.
To look off site as to where the
plume is, we continue to go down
and test people's drink private
well water. We go down and do
blood testing. I'm sitting in
people's homes talking to them
about their medical history, uh,
and increased cancer risks. At
the same time, the Department of
Defense can and has continued to
spill POs into the groundwater,
not address the plume that's
moved off site.
And has no plans.
Um, as far as they can be.
to me, but I'm a member of the
public to them. I am, I have no
position of, of merit to them
under uh the Superfund law that
they say they are cleaning up
under. So effectively, if I
could bottom line it, uh, they
have said to a federal judge, we
are cleaning up cannon under
Superfund.
But I can tell you they don't
have the appropriation, and they
haven't cleaned up.
A drop of pebos off base, a
drop.
Not a drop.
So I, I think it's a, it's a
disservice.
to the community in which they
are the economic engine and
along with the agriculture
agriculture industry, uh, to
make representations that
they're working with.
To clean up the PAs spill or
it's not a spill, release
decades.
Um, when they're not doing it.
Give me a minute to just take
that in cause that's a lot to
take in and one of the things I
appreciate you, uh, with you,
secretary, Mr. um, is that you
humanize everything.
And I truly appreciate. I could
see you.
Be very involved with the
community and being very angry
because this is kind of a big
deal when we have the PIA going
into this aquifer, which is
huge, and now it's not just the
containment of what they think
they're responsible for. It's
now this is going out to people
with cattle and ranches and
farming and going into drinking
water, which becomes a way
bigger issue than just cleaning
up.
So I understand your
frustration, and I always go
back. So what what is the
solution on this?
So Mister Chair
and representative, uh, I've
asked EPA, the new
administration, um,
To help us here in New Mexico.
And the lawsuit the DOD DOJ
filed against the state of New
Mexico to
Remove our authority.
To to have cooperative
un-federalist or uncooperative
federalism.
Um
And I'm optimistic again that
EPA.
Well, we'll step in and help on
this issue.
But for now, we are continue to
fight in the multi-district
litigation in South Carolina,
I'll be going back there in
June.
Uh, to be part of that.
Uh, and we continue to fight in
the 10th Circuit.
So we have two different
lawsuits going on where we were
suing one where we sued DOD.
Uh, but I think things will
Change on June 20th.
Because that's when the House
Bill 140 goes into effect.
And you gave us the authority to
hold polluters accountable for
discarded AFLF and we plan to
use it at the stroke of
midnight.
Uh, as soon as it's a block.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, and,
and thank you Secretary. I
always appreciate you. Uh, I
wanna say in all seriousness,
these are some very important
issues. I mean, extremely
important issue, and I, and I
appreciate that you.
As soon as you can, are gonna do
as much as you can also.
I also appreciate that you
understand how many steps and
things need to be doing to a
clean up, so people don't
mistakenly think, oh, we got all
this money should be cleaned up
tomorrow. It doesn't work that
way. It's gonna be a slow
cleanup process. I do appreciate
again how you humanize it, but
We need to figure out a way to
put more, I don't know how, but
we need to definitely figure out
a way with that Trino money to
get it here, and we need to
figure out a way to um
Get some things moving and and
It's, I'm gonna go down the
road. I don't wanna go down to.
I'm gonna go down down a rabbit
hole. Is there anything else
that you'd like to add one more
thing, uh, representative, so in
about mid June we're going to
release, uh, uh, an aggregate,
uh, aggregate level data, so no
HIPAA violations, but aggregate
level data are in the mid-year
time frame about uh our POS
blood testing POS water testing,
uh, and, and, uh, private well
water testing, not homes or
addresses or anything.
like that, but we're going to be
able to, uh,
Show what impact
The communi the that this plume
has had on the community
members, so that's coming in
June. Um,
And I, I do think that we will
continue to see additional
Uh, issues arising in Clovis,
everything from uh property
values decreasing, but again
through the representation
there, we were able to get $12
million to connect, uh, rural
Kerry County to
Uh, public water to get them off
their, their well water where it
was contaminated thanks to uh
representative Zamora, Senator
Woods, and others. Uh, so we're
continuing to invest. We're
going to continue to gather the
data and we're going to continue
to tell the story, and I would
welcome any of, any ideas, any
and all ideas, uh, from the
legislature to help us.
Um
Help them do the right thing.
Um, Mr. Speaker, uh, last
question, uh, is anyone looking
at cancer clusters in those
areas or is anybody considering
the fact that the cattle are
still drinking the water.
Yeah, so Mr. Chair and
Representative
The, uh
A lot of folks from that part of
the state go to Texas for cancer
diagnosis and treatment. We're
currently making sure that
there's not hidden data in the
Texas Health.
Uh, department that we should
know about.
Right, so I've been talking to
the Department of Health about
that, and we're trying to make
sure we're not missing anything
in the data. There's been a
couple of studies in the area,
one with pediatric brain cancer,
uh, toddler age that shows that
there is a little bit higher
rate there. Um,
And uh
And, and we're gonna continue to
go down that path of the health
studies, so we are looking at
that, um, and with respect to
the cattle we're working with uh
Secretary Whitty, and we've been
testing water for the cattle and
and the the dairies I've been
testing the milk products, etc.
so that we are ensuring that
High levels of POS don't get
into the food supply.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and, and
secretary yeah, because I think
they were worried about their
reputation as it is. Oh, that's
the place where they have the
peas don't buy the cheese and
the dairy from that area, so
that can also affect them as
well. And having grown up in
Santa Susanna, and if anybody
knows, it was actually the first
nuclear meltdown happened with
Santa Susan in California. Not
we was hidden till.
5, 10 years, not that long ago,
it was and I used to play in all
that water and dirt and knock on
wood.
OK, but this is a serious thing
that needs to be handled and in
the back.
In the
Historically, we did a lot of
dumb things that we now look
back, we're trying to clean up,
but this is happening in real
time.
So I, I can't wrap my head.
Anyways, that's all I have.
Thank you.
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you Secretary Kenny, good
to see you. Couple of questions
I'll be as quick as I can. So,
I might not actually, you never
know. It all depends on what
your answers are, right?
But I'm wondering about Holloman
Air Force Base is, uh, the Lake
Holleman. I know there's been a
lot of concern regarding PFOS
there, and I'm wondering, number
one, first question, are you
doing those off-site studies and
groundwater or well water
off-site currently or are you
planning on doing that to see
what the impacts are regarding
that.
Mr. Chair and
Representative, um, so I should
have mentioned earlier that uh
trustee Hart Stebbins and I are
working together on this, so
there is both the investigation
that I have authority for and uh
her investigation in terms of
damages. So I should have
mentioned that earlier for both
for All saints. Um, but we are
doing uh quantification of the
plume under Holloman. We've
been, we have a big report on
our website from a company
called DB Stevens that
Explains where the plume is and
what's going on there.
Um, so we are doing that, the,
the difference between Canyon
and Holloman is that at Holem in
the water is more brackish and
therefore not used for human
drinking water, but is used for,
uh, what I understand to be some
ranching in the area.
So, um, we have not spent as
much.
We spent a lot of resources, but
not as much in terms of the
community work that we did in
Canada and we haven't spent that
much at Holloman.
blood testing, etc.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, and I know that area,
there's not a lot of people who
live out there.
But what the trustee was talking
about was the wildlife. And so I
asked her about like human
aspect of it, and she pretty
much said, well, we only really
care about the natural resource
aspect, and I'm sure you as
well, you know, you're very much
targeted toward the actual
environmental.
Framework. So I'm just trying to
understand what it is that we're
looking at there, because
If it's not as bad as something
else like it canon, for example,
where it is tied to a main
waterway, people are drinking
the water. I'm wondering what
kind of
Future, do we expect from the
DOD on a more minor issue,
hopefully, because there was
some study, I mean, it seemed
like the world was falling
apart. The study that is being
referenced, says that
It's some of the most highest
concentration in the world.
Regarding wildlife with rats and
ferrets or not ferrets, uh.
Rats and gophers, pardon me, and
then, of course, the avian life.
So I'm just wondering how that
all fits into what you guys are
doing together working to see
what's happening on base,
because I know a lot of airmen,
they live on base, a lot, a lot
of airmen, and I don't want them
to be drinking unsafe water,
especially because they're the
ones who are doing the job to
keep us safe. So, please let me
know. And I know there was a
huge, very convoluted question,
but I know you can answer it,
secretary. Um, thank you for
your better confidence,
representative, and Mr.
that, that the
Uh
A couple things come to mind.
One is
Uh.
It, it's, it's only a construct
in New Mexico that people manage
hazardous carcinogen
carcinogens, uh, in open air
surface impalments the way
Holloman is doing it. And it's
often the federal government
that's doing that around the
country, but it's very limited
that you would see that
happening in any other type of
industry, whether it's uh
organic chemicals or petroleum
refineries, pulp and paper, etc.
You don't see that happening,
but, but because we have a lot
of land and evaporation is
great.
Uh, it seems to happen a lot
more here, um,
That doesn't mean that the
receptors being people and
animals and vegetation, uh, uh,
it should be or, or that's,
that's an acceptable means of
doing that. So once that gets
into the food chain once that
gets into the ecology, the
ecosystem, we start to see
breakdowns in
The the concentration as you go
up the food chain and then the
breakdown of the ecosystem as
well. Um,
So it does raise significant
concerns, uh, that, that that is
how it's being managed at
Holloman. The other piece that I
would add, Mr. Chair and
Representative, is the, uh, with
things like the strategic water
supply where we're looking at
saltwater as a means of
desalinization or brackish
waters as a less energy
intensive means of making
unusable water usable.
If we've contaminated to the
point that, uh, it's now going
to cost more money to, let's
say, get Alamogordo or, uh, you
know, um, an area like that
better, higher quality,
consistent, reliable drinking
water, then we, we should be
protecting that as well.
So those are some initial
thoughts and, and frankly, uh,
Mr. Chair and Representative,
It is
With Hospital 140, it's, it's
also illegal to do what they're
doing, so they, they cannot do
that under state law and under
state super fun um federal
superfund law, it's also a legal
for them to be managing the
waste in the way they are.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary. So,
What if it's only contained on
base? Is it only on DOD land?
Mister Chair and Representative,
no, it's not just only on, uh
oh.
Mr. Chair and Representative, it
probably is only on DOD land,
correct.
Um, but Mr. Chair and
Representative, it, they don't
own.
The water
Um, and, and one other thing
that we're starting to see, but
I, I, I can't speak with this
from peer reviewed science
perspective, but we are starting
to see, uh, exposures from air.
emissions as well.
Thank you. All right. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and then thank you,
Mr. Secretary. Uh, and then last
question.
With an S,
uh, regarding POS. OK, so the
technology to to get the POS out
of drinking water or out of any
kind of substance and put it
somewhere else that PAS is
Not necessarily good, so do we
store it? Where do we put it? Do
we destroy it? And do we need
facilities like a whip or like
like a pepos Holtech to hold
onto those chemicals so that
they can be protected and safely
stored in the end of their
lives after they're taken from
the facility.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and
representative, I love that
question, and I heard
administrator Zelden of EPA get
asked that a very similar
question, which is, which is
great. He and I have the same
experience, which is uh an
interesting uh moment right
here, because of the passing of
House Bill 140, we've been
contacted by companies who want
to not only show us their
technology that is for the
destruction and disposal of PAs,
but they wanna manufacture that.
Uh, equipment. They're looking
for homes to domestically make
that equipment. So,
I am
Uh, if, if I were to say nothing
could be treated, then I
probably shouldn't be doing my
job because my job is is is to
make sure that we bring the
technology to the to the
problem, and we, we fix these
issues, uh, but we are starting
to see more people contact more
companies contact us with the
idea that they can
Destroy
Immobilize or treat PAs. One
such technology is a
non-invasive technology where
they
They, this will make a lot of
people nervous, me included, but
they actually do the remediation
in situ where they go, they,
they inject into the aquifer and
clean it up that way. So it,
it's with two national labs and
a state law that says you can't
do this, um, I think we're
poised to solve more problems
than create them around PAs. It
will be interesting to or it is
um interest to note, Mr. Chair,
representative, and I'm glad
Representative Lord is in the
room for this.
That even though we had to pass
a law to say that discarded AFLF
is a hazardous waste, the
Department of Defense ships
discarded PAs as hazardous waste
to a landfill in Texas.
So while they're contesting that
we don't have the authority to
regulate it, they treat it as a
hazardous waste when they
dispose of it. So I think
We need them to
Understand that you have, you
can't just mitigate the risk
when it's
You disposing of it, but telling
the state of New Mexico, you
have no authority, and that's
what they've done for 6 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
that's great that there's
New technology that's being
made, I think that is awesome,
but yeah, if it's just storage,
uh, God forbid, the state of New
Mexico will create a lot to
preempt them from storing it
because they're claiming it's
too scary to do. So, thank you,
Mr. Chair. Thank you so much,
Mr. Secretary, I appreciate
that.
Representative for.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, Secretary Kenny. Um, I
think you should, um, take
Um, most of the credit for the
PFOS bill and when other states
are saying on New Mexico just
did such a wonderful job. I
think it the credit goes to you
because you took all the calls
for the manufacturers that
called in once they saw the bill
and wanted to have their
exceptions, um, and how that
played into, you know, the
incremental um.
You know, uh, adoption, you
know, that they had to take
that. So, thank you so much for
your hard work, not only working
with them, but also as
legislators had questions and um
getting all of that support was
really important.
So, thank you for doing all
that. Thank you.
Um, also, I just wanted, um,
Uh, I'm getting a car this
afternoon, um.
Delivered in Albuquerque and
they were going to put this
spray on it, so I'm checking the
bottle. They said, oh no, it's
safe, but just like the little
bottle that you showed us,
everybody said it was safe. I
don't trust it, so I'm gonna
make sure before they put it,
apply it, um, and I think anyone
who gets new furniture should,
you know, ask like you gave, you
know, um, examples during
testimony.
Oh
that happening.
Um, but also, uh,
We were um in discussion earlier
and I made a note that we were
to um ask you of a report on the
repository. Um, and I'm not sure
if that had to do with whip.
It does, OK.
Yeah, so, um,
Mr. Chair and uh Representative,
but thank you again for, for
being brave and helping to
sponsor that bill and being the
the the one of both of you
actually bringing that and other
bills were related to PAs. It,
it, it really has changed things
and I even saw a lobbyist at
Costco, uh, who had a client
representing uh I had a client
that was opposed, um.
But that lobbyist was proudly
buying POS-free pans, uh, uh,
when, when I ran into him. So,
um,
Uh, so, uh, Mr. Chas
representative, uh, state with
respect to the, the repository
report, one of the innovative
features of the whip permit was
that we wanted to identify when
the volume when the, when the
land withdrawal Act capacity is
reached, meaning whip is no
more.
Because it is filled to the
brim.
For congressional Congress uh
caps.
What, what does DOE plan to do?
And so we put a permit condition
in that on an annual basis, they
have to update this department
or this state as to what they're
doing to identify another
repository, uh, outside of the
state of New Mexico because the
nation's legacy cleanup and pit
production will exceed the
useful life of whip.
So we're asking them to to
materially show us what are they
doing? Are they asking Congress
for money? Are they doing design
studies? Are they seeking
consent from other states? How
are they going about that, um,
to date that they submitted that
report. Uh, we have some
concerns with it and have been
giving some feedback to the
Department of Energy.
And, and that's where that
report stands as of now.
Um, Mr. Chair and Mr. Secretary,
um, so is that a report that
It's available for all of us.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, yes, happy to
provide it to you as well as uh
our comments on the report. I
believe I have.
Believe we've, we may have made
that public already, but it's
not, it's certainly available.
I can get that to you.
That's all. Thank you.
Zam count, oh sorry, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you.
Um, there.
A couple of
Questions. When you said that
Holeman continued to
Contaminate
Can you expound on that a little
bit?
I mean, is PA still being used,
uh, I mean, are they using it
today in a manner that causes
Contamination. I'm, I'm trying
to understand exactly what you
meant, how we could.
Help
So, so, Mr. Chair, and uh uh
Senator, um,
Apologies if I, so let me just
clarify then two things. One is,
Cannon had a spill.
That
Continue to release PAs into the
ground.
Um
Into an ill-maintained
Lined
Lagoon are aligned uh area that
that
Um, wasn't lined properly,
meaning it had holes in it.
Um, so that was one issue, but
both bases
Have the ability to continue to
use
Uh, AFLF.
Uh
Again, at both locations, as
they phase out the more
Uh, the, the fluorinated foams
with with fluorine-free foams,
um, there's a nuance here that,
that I'm, I'm, sometimes I have
knowledge of things based, and
I'm, I'm always trying to
shuffle through, did I learned
that through a negotiation or
something that I can't talk
about it, but my, my
recollection here is that the uh
Department of Defense, the Air
Force.
While they may not be quote
using
A triple F.
They stockpiles, so they might
not be procuring each of both,
let me say it that way. The
stockpile of AFLF at the Air
Force has is still being used.
Do you see the difference in
what I do, yes.
Um.
I was trying to remember back to
my prior life and I remember
something about
As we brought alcohol fuels on.
Um, there's certain fire foams
that work.
And some don't, and I
ing cannon to my knowledge, is
uh a JP4 um.
I mean they run JP4 or no, they
run JP.
8
Um
JP For is the NAFTA-based fuel
like gasoline JPA is a kerosene
base. I mean, it's like what you
get at the airport or what you
see.
But no jets. I mean, it's the
same fuel.
Um, but
I mean
You and I bumped heads on, on
more than one issue, but I think
your work on the POS is to be
commended, and I, and I'd say
that publicly.
Um
We have other issues that we're
going to have to work through.
Um,
But I would also tell you that
I'm a little bit concerned about
we have given you a, a, a big
tool to use.
But come with that comes the
responsibility to use it wisely.
I under the present, um.
Administrations.
I worry about a brat committee.
Definition coming out and losing
bases in New Mexico that would
be devastating.
And we might bite our nose off
to spite our face if we're not
real careful. So I, I just tell
you.
Uh, we gotta, we gotta get a
hold of them. I'm not saying not
to, but I'm also saying.
Uh, pay attention, um, because
the responsibility of using that
wisely, getting what we want in
the long term and not losing a
couple of airbas is, is critical
to communities as well.
And uh, so we, we gotta work
through that issue.
Um
The uh
The hex
For for
for whatever the hell it is
yeah.
How is that clean up? Is that a
percolate and, I mean.
How, how is that clean up
actually occurring? I mean, is
it an extraction? How do we do
that?
So, so, Mr. Chair and Senator,
uh, point noted about the bases,
uh, very much. Um.
The hexamone chromium plume at
uh Los Alamos National Labs is a
pump entry design pump entry,
OK.
So it's not.
Oh, it's, it's not a great new.
technique, it's one that's been
proven, and we know how to do it
and and can do it. OK.
Um
With respect to wit.
I asked this morning about the
inventory of
Transuranic placed on site at.
Lost our most.
And do we have the capacity to
store that all of that.
As well, do we know that?
Do we know what the volumes are.
So, so, Mr. Chair and Senator,
one of the requirements uh of
our permit.
was for the Department of Energy
to
Uh, inventory all generator
sites throughout the country
from Panex to Hanford, etc. and
Los Alamos and provide us with
the plan that
Uh, it's to the best of their
knowledge, basically consumes
that volume.
Up the line was drawn. So we
have that. I don't know that I
know it off the top of my head,
but we, we should have that
information in now, but the 10
year permit renewal that was
renew you know, the, the new
permit from 2 years ago,
prioritizes Los Alamos cleanup.
Doesn't preclude anyone else,
but prioritizes legacy clean up
from Los Alamos. So that was the
idea, give us a runway, if you
recall, Mr. Chair and Senator,
um,
Prior to that permit being
renewed, the Department of
Energy gave priority to Idaho,
saying 55% of all shipments
needed to come from Idaho
National Labs, which put us in a
yeah, in, in the rears on, on
that. So, um, I can get a better
and succinct accounting for you
if that's of interest, uh, to
know what is left and what, what
is left at
Los Alamos and what remains in
the volume.
This morning in an earlier
discussion, um,
It was noted that there were
Like
80 shipment in the last 130
days, and got me to thinking
about
Um
Are we addressing the conditions
of the.
The renewal permit are we
looking at?
Are they, are we holding them
accountable for cleaning up Los
Alamos.
Um
cleaning up was the right term,
but getting rid of that waste,
uh, first.
And are we making sure that they
have capacity and we have to do
that.
And we thought through, I mean,
expanding.
Yeah
In order to be
Or should we be looking at
expanding a permit at width for
more panels for more ways.
I just want to make sure that
we're thinking through that and
doing it right, and if we're
gonna
If we're going to continue to
work with, which I am a big
supporter with. We should be
looking at making sure that New
Mexico sites have some.
I have um
place in the pecking order he
had cleaned up.
And Mr. Jar, uh,
Senator, you know, being an
engineer and thinking this as a
as a process flow diagram or a
mass balance is exactly how we
went into the permit, which is
how do we know if we quote our
prior prioritizing New Mexico
ways if we don't know what the
way the, the whole complex is
generating what the needs are,
so right, we need to understand
the big picture. We worked with
every other state that's a
shipping state to whip, and, and
got there, uh, comments on the
permit.
And that's exactly what our goal
was to do. I don't know that I
have the answer for you right
now. Part of it depends, right?
Los Alamos is a little bit uh
unhappy that we are saying you
have to clean up the cabin cover
is not an option for MD uh MDAC,
uh, area we're, we're not gonna
let them just in place things in
the middle of Los Alamos that
they actually have to dig it up
and clean it up. So that's
changing that.
That.
S Stoichiometry between
What the volume is at whip and
how much waste is going to be
shipped, but it's really
important, Mr. Chair and
Senator, that whenever we have
this talk about whip and whip
shipments that we talk about it
in volume because 80 shipments
doesn't, when, when the
denomination Congress set for
when, when it's finished, when
it's done is a volume.
So shipments and volume should
not be equated as, as they're,
they're moving things off the
hill. Volume from Los Alamos and
volume of what the whip is is
really the, the denomination we
need to talk about. So I'm not
prepared to, to, to, I want to
know the answer myself, but I'm
not prepared to answer today, so
let me get back to you with
Um
Where we stand.
from Los Alamos, and are we
moving, are they moving
increased volume to wad.
OK.
And I know, um,
Both of us, um, here have great
relationships with the
leadership of Halima.
I used to, um,
Cannon, but
It's not my district, but I know
represents more and, and.
Woods are.
are here to help. So if you need
help there, um.
This caucus is absolutely uh
geared up, and I think this
committee would be geared up to
help get to do what you need at
home.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
OK. Anyone else? Right,
I.
OK, Secretary, good to see you.
Thanks for making time. I know
you've been very busy and
welcome to, um, what's your name
again, ma'am?
May
Good to see you as well. and
secretary, congrats on your run
of successes this last year and
I think on our best days, no
matter what we try to accomplish
when we move the needle on
anything, we feel like we've
done something good and you have
moved the needle big time, once
again, you and your whole
department, so I hope you
extended out how much we
appreciate them and
Uh, you guys are doing great
work for the citizens of New
Mexico and
I want to just follow up on a
range of topics quickly.
Um
Starting off with Lano and the
consent order.
So, what would you summarize the
consent, the changes you got to
this consent order, what would
you say those changes
accomplished or New Mexico and
for Europe.
I just
job in hand of cleanup out
there.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, I, I think
importantly, uh, one, thank you,
uh, it's really important, I
think that we continue to um
thank.
Civil servants.
For the work that they do, uh,
especially now more than ever,
so I, I, I know my uh my staff
will definitely appreciate those
compliments. Um,
The, the changes to the consent
order, uh, you, one, we made it
enforceable.
That you, you, it's not moving
targets, it's a fixed target. So
it's enforceable, so we know
that there will be clean up
accomplished, and it won't be a
decade of
Of just moving things around or
saying we didn't achieve
results. 2, we made it, uh,
Such that there's real budget
going in, we, we going into the,
the, the clean up as much as
the, the federal government will
say we don't need an enforceable
document to get the budget they
do, they absolutely do, um.
Then we also, um,
Focused on we, we conceded that
when things are cleaned up, we
would give them certificates of
completion, right? So there's a
huge backlog. They, they have
cleaned up a lot of things, so I
have to give them credit where
credit's due, but we've not
closed those out and given them
certificates of completion
stating that they've actually
accomplished something and then
they can know that they're
moving on. There's some
certainty there, um.
So those are some of the biggest
and most important points, but
we're still in the we're still
working through uh campaigns
and, and, and milestones and and
things like that with them, um,
but we also have a dispute
resolution that doesn't go
through 3 or 4 tiers before we
actually get resolution if
either party is uh disgruntled
with the way things are moving
under the the consent order.
It's elevated a lot quicker. So
that's really important cause it
took us a a significant
an amount of time to have go
through dispute resolution and
to no progress.
Um, so that's also important.
Uh, so those are some of the
things that come to mind that I
think are real wins, uh, we did
negotiate a series of campaigns
as to which ones would go first
and which ones would go second,
um, more, more or less around
risk, uh,
And then there's more active
public engagement.
As well, which is a really
important for both New Mexicans
and sovereign nations.
Let me ask you if you follow up
questions. So,
I know from years past we would
get these briefings from them at
one point in time where they
would show us a list of all the
projects and
And you know, it's all limited
to budget authority and of
course a weaker consent order
back then under maybe previous
administration for that matter.
Um,
But it just felt to me like we
should be doing more, like we
should be tackling more items on
that list at one time, but
clearly we needed more money and
that's why the consent order was
weak because it did not drive
the bus. It did not drive a
harder bargain to demand that
really, especially
In part with what we're doing
for the national mission and
caught the contamination cost
that may come with that
sometimes.
So
Would you say that the new
consent order, I mean, it seems
like recollection, we were
always the cleanup was always
like 300 million, 350 million at
a federal level. Do we see an
increased budget for
environmental cleanup for the
lab.
So the consent order.
Mr. Chair, um,
You know, under the president's
skinny budget deal, he's gonna
get hit, but NNSA is going up.
So it'll depend on what happens
in Congress. We've also seen a
little bit of a dip in uh in Los
Alamos, lab funding as well. Uh,
I think the, the, we've seen
contractors change as well,
which is, which is a challenge,
right when you see that
happening. Um,
That said, I think we have a
really effective hazardous waste
Bureau, a new bureau chief who
you met, uh, existing staff who
are working on Los Alamos.
A dedicated staff working on
that. Um, I think the days of
them hiding $100 million and
rolling it over, which is what
happened a couple of years ago,
a few years ago. Uh, there was
about 100, it was more than a
few, but, uh, about $100 million
that was allocated for the, the
spending of of implementation of
the consent order basically
clean up that didn't get spent.
I think it was actually 121
million if I, I.
If I, if I'm remembering
correctly, uh, so, so that'll be
important that we're on.
Not only the cleanup, but the uh
the, the fiscal side of things
that we stay present on that,
um.
NSA and DOE have cut a little
bit of funding to our department
for 2 years in a row, um, that
it's not something that they
have, uh, that they're doing out
of.
They have an obligation. There's
a federal obligation found in
the 1995 Federal consent order,
uh, that they have to fund the
environment department's
oversight of, of all the, the
Lino Sandia, and whip, and when
they defaulted on that, we
warned them, they defaulted on
it again this year, and we set
an enforcement action is coming
unless you get us the money as
required, and there still might
be an enforcement action coming.
I think we have to change the
nature, as I said before, that,
that we can't.
With with the federal
government, we cannot be
permissive of delays. We can't.
To your point, it, it just
If they lose money, they lose
time.
and the risk grows. Yeah.
Yeah, well, I, I hope, you know,
it's good to hear that you feel
like there's progress being made
between your team and between
their team and.
Hopefully, we just keep the
Keep the pressure on and I
You know, it's funny, I, I
agree, you know, um, Senator
Townsend, your point about, you
know, the economic side of
things, and once upon a time,
this committee used to be only
about the economics, kind of a
cheerleader.
And it's tough because you have
those, just like maybe you'd say
the same about some industries
in the state, but you have to
kind of, uh, in my opinion, you
have to kind of have your
blinders on to that and and
still do the job of protecting
the environment and protecting
your state in the case of Los
Alamos, you got criticality
issues and literally public
safety that are just so
essential that you can't
compromise on. So,
When it comes to clean up, um,
You know, just
Keep up all the good work and
keep the foot on the pedal,
that's what I'd say predictably.
So, OK. Um,
And then I saw one of your
handouts that right now you're
negotiating milestones for FY 26
with them.
So
You know, as you said, you're
doing that based on risk and
everything else, but
How about on the, um, since you
guys came to agreement on the um
chromium.
spill actions. Do you feel like
gonna turn a page on that
anytime soon or you feel like
the site is
quantify and then we're moving
on to the next phase or or we
just kind of get back into it?
I think Mr. Ja, it's a good
question. Um, I think we're
making the, I think yes.
We're making progress.
Uh, I think additional
Uh, extraction and injection
wells, uh, better real-time
monitoring of what could be
leaving the site.
Um, should continue to drive.
The, the risk and, and, and the
dollar is going, it's, it, it's,
it's tough, Mr. Chair, in this
sense that
It's a pump and treat. It's
designed to last a while, but
it's also designed to contain
the plume, if done properly. So
we feel like we're now at the if
done properly stage, it we're
we're back on the, on the same
page. Um.
But accelerating it is, is tough
to do. It's, it's, these are
sort of delicate engineering
kind of.
beds, right? So
Um, I wanna be, I wanna, I want
to say.
More will be happening, but I'm
hesitant to promise that. Let me
ask you this, do you feel like
enough money that it's at all a
resource constrained in taking
the ideal approach, I know some
of these monitoring wells were
millions of dollars. So, but
they would say we're still
trying to characterize it, to
which a layman might go, do you
need more monitoring laws? Do we
need more?
valuation. So I mean, and that's
where you get to the budget
issue, like, well, they only got
10 amount of dollars, they've
got to manage that well.
So, do you feel like it's a
resource constrained
project at all or not really?
Well, absolutely, I feel like
it's a research constraint on
their end because I, I remember
having this conversation with my
own team.
34 years ago.
Saying that they needed to drill
an additional well, they were
saying, no, we don't have the
money or it's going to take
additional time, you know how
long it takes to drill a well,
etc. etc. etc. I mean, if
there's any state that can drill
it well.
It's this one,
so,
We had a big fight about it, and
lo and behold that around that
same time, they hadn't spent
$121 million. They rolled it
over to the next fiscal year. So
I, I don't think
I, I think they could be
spending money faster.
Um
To, you know, and that's a few
years ago at least where, where
that well could have been in and
uh facilitating a greater pump
and treat option.
Right, facilitating greater
greater monitoring to ensure
that there's no migration of the
plume off site.
Those are the types of things
that I think this department
needs to continue to press on.
There there cannot be.
You know, 5 days of a grace
period, let alone 5 months or 5
years.
So I, I'm committed to that. I'm
committed to, you know, 5 hours,
not 5 days even, but
It
I, I think we need to stay on
the, the, the fiscal side
because that will drive
everything technically right.
Yeah, thank you. Well, and I
just worry, you know, as long as
you've got this massive
contamination being out there
and we still don't really, we
say that we say not we, but like
the experts are still
characterizing it, and you know
you got nearby potential water
supplies, water supplies, you
just worry that.
You're in a race against the
clock to waking up the worst
case is actually happened.
He just
Got to move as fast as you can,
but I appreciate what you're
saying. It's a process and you
can't on a certain level.
Move beyond where the process is
telling you to go as you're
getting data. So,
Interesting. Thank you. OK,
moving on, um, to uranium mining
cleanup.
So we got the 20 million, which
is fantastic. That was a first
in our state and that's.
So exciting to for all of us. I
mean, because we've been talking
about this since I got elected
and all, all of you since you
here now, so, you know, seeing a
list of sites we're cleaning up
that was cool. But uh I had a
question. See like I read the
other day somewhere that you're,
there's other monies aside from
the 20 million, it seems like 67
million that are coming from
some other place that you were
going to apply towards.
up of abandoned sites.
get me, I don't remember.
Where that money was coming
from.
Is that true? Is there other
money aside from the 20 million?
It's going to be put towards
this. Mr. Chair, uh, the, so
while, while I, I need to pull
up my budget memo, but um.
There's, we have multiple
appropriations that could
special appropriations, uh.
That could be stacked.
to that end. We also have some
federal money that could go
towards this end, so it's, uh,
I, I'm not.
It's that yeah, I'm not
recalling the specific source of
money, but I, I, it just, uh,
maybe I've had too much time
since the session away from the,
the, the, the budget now that OU
was submitted, um,
But let me, let me look and get
back to you, but it is highly
plausible like the 20 million, I
think it's 12 or 20 million we
got for ripped the rural uh.
Uh, infrastructure program, that
money could be used, clean
water, state revolving fund
could be used. We have some
economic development money that
chair Small had provided to us a
couple of years ago that we
still have money remaining there
we could use, etc. So we are
very good at stacking.
Uh, funds to exceed.
Just curious how much was in the
the pot for this total and
Very exciting and then
I just want to follow up on this
idea that I think you guys had
recommended, but
I want to talk to you more about
this also with other
stakeholders, but the idea that
We would maybe be hiring
personnel to be doing the legal
research on who the owners of
all these sites are and.
Um,
Maybe attorneys and stuff are we
intending to use any of the
money for that, aside from just
clean up on those sites.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, I've already uh
talked to both our general
counsel and our water.
Uranium group and um we have
onboarded a outside council
firm, uh, they can do that work
for us, and we have the funding
to do it just under sort of
didn't have to come from the
special, we could use the
special, but we have money that
we can, we can do that with, um,
and Mr. Cha, just, you know,
again,
I'm not coming before you saying
that that I know this isn't
about budget, but when I
started, our budget was 90
million.
When, you know, I think we're at
about 235 million are general
from proportion is the same.
So we've gotten more in fees,
more in grants, etc. but we have
definitely gotten more in
general fund. And with that, we
are
We are in a good position.
We're a healthy agency. We're in
a good position to be doing the
work without me saying, Senator,
um, that'll cost me 130,000. Can
I get a, you know, but, but
we're in a good position to do
that work, yes. Well, and, you
know, we, we just appropriated
20 million for this work. So
part of my hope was that we,
well, because it's so expensive
that we wouldn't just, yeah, we
gotta fix 5 sites, but we
haven't learned anything about
the other.
990, you know, 5 sites, let
alone Bill using as a
springboard to the next
legislative session and battles
maybe with the federal
government and lawsuits or other
things that I might love to see
us do.
So anyway, so that's, I just
thought that was a really great
idea and, and
We're characterizing all these
other sites of the ownership and
the legal strategy and.
Available recourses because
they're not all maybe abandoned,
right? Some of them may have a
responsible party.
Hanging on out there and sitting
on some trust fund and.
This needs to get a visit from a
lawyer.
Um, but anyway, maybe be a court
document.
So, um,
To that end, um, what is your
thought about
How we
Um, present.
This appropriation and the
progress on it to the LFC and
then what thoughts, if any, do
you have at this moment for the
next legislative session to
continue this work and the next.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, I think uh when
July hits or, you know, about
that time and, and the money is
in our accounts, uh, let, we are
developing those scopes of work
and getting those contractors in
place, etc. I think we should,
we should
Formulate a what is a
Star 50% spent.
You know, with the results, and
what is 100% or 85% with the
results like is we can present
sort of that, uh, in a, in a
plain English kind of way. What
did we accomplish, uh, at each
step of the way.
Um
I think we'll do, we're gonna do
some really good work on number
4, like really good work up
there. And, and I think that'll
be a good test case, uh, for
what we can do. We'll learn a
lot too. We may have hiccups
we're not anticipating, so
we'll, we'll, we'll figure that
out as we go.
Um
I think what we could then be in
the position of doing Mr. Chair,
is putting together to
representative Lords Point, uh,
what other sites?
Can we be nimble about that we
have all the right alignment
with and or if it's just out of
reach and it's just the NRC has
to do something, or the state
land, you know, some where could
we work with you to just get
that last piece in place so that
we can move forward in the same
way. I think we can show the
feds.
That this is possible.
And
It takes a little bit of
organization. We have the staff
to do that, but I think we can
show that we can show that to
LFC as well. I mean, I know we
had sought $50 million which
that house actually put in $50
million.
produced on the scent.
Much too much chagrin, but you
all come up with a budget for 50
million. Now this is not just
abandoned uranium sites, but
this is the 1000 or 2000 other
contaminated sites in the safe
from all dry cleaners and
whatever. So, um,
You obviously had to tear that
down when it became $20 million
splitting it, but
And I know we had talked about
spending.
Some of the money on what we
call characterization, like not
just here's 5 sites we know when
we clean up today.
But spend
Frinkly several million or
millions on characterizing all
these other sites we're kind of
doing the groundwork and
building that plan on what would
be the next wave of things that
maybe were further out of reach.
So I, I mean, are we able to
spend some of that 20 million on
characterization.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I, I'd say no,
uh, that we're not going to
spend anything on
characterization of sites other
than the ones we've identified.
So the secretary, I mean, I, I
would love the course, fully
supports you on it, but I think
you have momentum, frankly in
the budget process and key
appropriators.
Um
You requested another 25 million
at a minimum in this next
session, 20 million, but uh
maybe it's a bigger number, I
mean the
Our mental community was really
successful last few sessions of
getting hundreds of millions for
Other funds and I would love to
see people champion this issue,
and so I mean,
So at any rate, are you thinking
in terms of coming back to the
legislature with another big
ask.
this issue.
Uh, Mr. Jerry, um,
Uh, haven't given much thought.
Uh, um, you don't have to decide
today, but yeah, no, I, I
appreciate that. It's, it's, um,
you know, relevant to this
committee. It's, it's been a
whirlwind of uh emergencies
around the state from sulfuric
acid spills and counting to, you
know, someone park arsenic
issues, uh, you know, fire and
flood issues up in Las Vegas
still with money not being spent
there that's been allocated,
it's just been a little bit of a
whirlwind for us, um, but I
think we'll
We also know that
Your confidence in us is ours to
lose at this point, because
you've allocated the money we
have to deliver. So I think what
I would like to say is we're
always thinking about what could
we do for the communities around
New Mexico, and we want to show
you that we continue to be a
good investment for you. And I
think with that in mind, we will
come back for more money. I
don't know the the.
The size and scale at the
moment, um, but if you have
items in your community or items
if you have a
sites in your community that
you're hearing from your
constituents or that are
uncharacterized and you want us
to characterize them, please
tell us so that we can think
about how to craft that.
Um, request in to be responsive
to you. Sure.
Well, and I appreciate that.
Having said that, you guys are
the experts, you know, you know
where all these sites are and
and I know that it's early days,
and I know I read every day
you're like involved in major
stuff, so I
You know, it's hard to, you can
only focus on so much.
So, I, I just want to kind of
put this on the radar for kind
of a preliminary conversation
that
You know, let's keep building,
let's keep asking, you know, the
planet's only aligned
financially in terms of
leadership, in terms of a lot of
factors, sometimes you only get
one shot or you can get, you
know, a couple good years. So,
but we don't want to appropriate
money just for the sake of
appropriating it if there's not
a plan, but this is where the
characterization, other things
matter and even though it might
delay clean up, but it might
also set the stage for a much
bigger.
So I would even urge.
Like, if that's
bottleneck that maybe we want to
rethink investing money into
that, if they're knowing that
we're, this is not the end, or
it shouldn't be the end. I hope
it's not. So anyway, this is why
I want to continue
conversations, but that's all
safe for today, but could work
on that you and we'll have your
back every year, we're gonna get
updates on where uranium mining
cleanup and that's part of the
law now, actually, that they
have to come and tell us, so
we'll get an update on that
later. Um,
Moving on down the line, cannon.
Um
was publicly reported that maybe
there's maybe it's Holloman that
that there was like a settlement
or something with DOD.
reached her that my rotten
honeus.
Uh, mis
Uh, Mr. Chair, no, with respect
to cannon or Hollman.
Uh, there's no settlements on
POS related issues. I can't
think of any other.
Active matters that recently
settled either.
But that's really it, OK, that's
really interesting to hear you
say though that that nothing's
been done.
Really
With uh with cannon that's
really disappointing and
Hopefully this new law stops the
bleeding, at least, right? Which
is, which is awesome.
So you had said earlier, you
kind of indicated it'd be
helpful to have a letter from
this committee on EPA or DOJ or
what, what letter would you like
us to do?
be helpful than anything.
So, Mr. Chair, um,
I think a letter to
Uh
Whether that is administrator,
uh, well, it, it would really
have to be a letter to
The
Uh, Department of Justice,
Department of Defense, um,
asking
Or requesting that
The legislature investing in
litigation.
As opposed to the federal
government investing in
remediation.
is an insane concept. Uh, you
know, that cannot continue. Uh,
and, and right now, that's
what's happening. So I think a
letter to that effect would be
helpful from the, the legislator
or the legislature or the
committee.
To point out that dichotomy does
not serve any, or put another
way, just urging them to do
remediation and work
collaboratively with the
Environment Department to
address these issues,
Mr. Chair, well said, OK.
So is anybody opposed to doing a
letter like that? I mean,
everyone's saying that they want
to support that.
OK.
OK. So what would, who would
that letter be to Secretary?
Uh, miss, I think depending on
the nature of the letter, uh,
the Department of Justice, um,
A, uh, Bondi.
Uh
Or um
But I can get you better, you
know, I can get you, uh, names
within the, uh,
Department of the Air Force and
the Department of Justice, so it
lands at the right level. OK.
Well, I support that. Is anybody
opposed to that idea and
provided that you will be,
you'll see a draft ahead of time
and we could collaborate on it.
OK.
Thank you, and you'll work with
ND.
We're keeping our strength of at
least one letter a committee
meeting.
Sorry
We're prolific in that way.
Just to um clarify, did you, um,
mention uh DOD.
Also.
Yes.
OK, cool. And maybe you need
multiple letters, I mean,
whatever, I mean.
Dealing with a lot of issues,
so.
And it was shared just as a
reminder, we're the only state
in the country that has a
federal lawsuit that is, you
know, taking away our authority,
uh, as, as opposed to any of the
other, uh, however many bases
that have been cleaned up
cooperatively with federal
dollars coming in to do that
work. OK.
Thank you. Exactly, um, PA in
the Ogallala, we heard that
today. That was kind of a uh
might dropped
And tell us about that and
what's
What's your concern level on
that one.
Yeah, Mr. chair, so again, all
the POS issues that can in are
affecting the ogallala, um, so
that is of significant concern,
uh, lots of dynamic, uh, issues
going on there, but, um,
You know, I, I think.
If we don't get the Department
of Defense to begin remediation
off base.
We are both contaminating a very
limited water supply.
As well as
Uh, continuing to use that
limited water supply for
everything from, you know,
agriculture.
which is what it's out, you
know, within proper allocations.
But I think we're just spreading
that POS around further.
So, um, the lifespan of the
Ogallala is short.
The contamination is high. I
think there's concern amongst uh
many of us at the Environment
department and probably others
in in the state of New Mexico
that the Department of Defense
might be writing off.
The, the Ogallala, um, simply
because it's contaminated and
the lifespan isn't long.
Uh, in years, so to speak, um.
So I think, I think we gotta, we
gotta fight for our water.
While it's here though, it's
being used as a public water
supply right for multiple states
and communities and
Wow, that's a big deal.
Big deal. Hopefully, are the
people in Texas, cause right,
doesn't Amarillo or Texans they
get.
What is
Mhm.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, so, um, to
Senator Townsend's point about
the gradient might actually be
in their favor that it's, it's
protecting them, uh, my, uh, I'm
acutely focused in Clovis, so I,
I can't necessarily answer your
question. It's moving southeast
through paleo channels towards
uh uh out 4 miles, and I, I'm so
centric there that I can't speak
to that, but it might very well
be true.
Just wonder if Texas is another
kind of.
That's all on this issue in a
way.
that out there.
Yeah, go ahead and
Yeah, go ahead
over the Ogallala is a really
interesting formation. There are
areas in the Austin area.
That you can
No cars that you can see the
water level, so I mean it's very
shallow so.
The, the likelihood of having
Great contaminants off the
streets and probably pretty
high, but oh lala.
is a huge source of water. So,
You know the old saying, uh,
what is it, uh.
Solution is the solution to
pollution, uh.
It's probably an effect in that,
in that regard is that it's just
yeah you can limit the amount
then
reduce it doesn't mean you
should continue to contaminate
it by stretching the imagination
to arrest that discharge into
it.
But you think in our state,
Canada is the big.
Depositor, yeah, Mr. Chair, I
mean, the, the levels that we're
seeing, I mean, when we talk
about 4 parts per trillion is
the drinking water standard,
right, that is EPA is put out,
and we think about like ours
there 56789, 10 parts per
trillion in someone's water,
we're talking hundreds if not
thousands of times that
concentration. So when, when I
get frustrated at
The, the, the way in which the
Department of Defense is
treating in Mexico and
specifically New Mexicans in
that area.
It's fully risk-based. It's the
concentration is.
Astronomically high compared to
what we would see elsewhere in
the state where we have Phos
pollution, not discounting their
concerns at all.
But the one thing that I've said
over and over and over again and
why I think people are paying
attention to what New Mexico is
doing is we are chasing the
risk.
Not chasing every molecule of
Phos, we, the risk of that
concentration is so much
greater.
Then elsewhere in the state,
and, and we'd be foolish to not
change that risk.
Yes.
Well
On that point, um, are there
things we can do, um, kind of
like our um
State land commissioner said,
well, we're not going to give
any more permits until we raise
the cost of what we charge.
Um
For oil and gas permits. Is
there something we can do to say
to DOD, um.
That we are going to let them
do.
Certain things on our base until
they clean up cannon.
Or do something demonstrative.
Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, I like the
question. I like the thinking,
uh, we will continue to think
about that often the state laws
that we derive from the federal
authorities have sovereign
immunity, uh, for federal
agencies, um, and in fact,
They, they don't have it under
our hazardous waste Act, which
is one saving grace, um,
But they, they claim that they
have sole authority under
Superfund law to both be the uh
polluter as well as the as the,
the regulator. Um, and, and that
dates back to when President
Reagan was in office, and, and
there is some
precedent for that, that they
have authority to both pollute
and clean it up.
So it, it is challenged to to
get to that point that you just
said, um,
But we think about
Uh, that those things do come
into mind as to uh related to
the, the, the focus area of POS,
yes. But I don't have an answer
for you. I don't know what that
tool is.
Oh, thank you.
OK, I just have a few more quick
questions cause I know we're
long and people have been
patient. Um.
We'd asked a question, a couple
of questions from the earlier
session was number one, when,
when you do a legal settlement,
whatever it's regarding the.
Whoever it is. Can you make
payments to individual
landowners.
Is that permissible in your
Penalty collection legal regime,
you know what I'm saying, like
Mr. Schlap or whatever or some
landowner who's harmed.
I know, uh, the Natural
Resources Council said no, we
can't trust you, he said we can
only do it to.
the resource, do you have
authority to?
people, individuals.
Mr. Ja, no, our, our penalties
for civil infractions go to
typically the general fund or if
the legislature has directed us
under state law to put them into
a different fund.
Uh, so hazardous waste goes to
the into the hazardous waste
emergency fund, which is
emergency response work that we
perform when there's a chemical,
biological or uh radiological
spill. Um,
So no, we don't really have that
ability to to do that kind of
individuals who are adversely
affected because their land's
been polluted or whatever,
they're just kind of
economically screwedinized.
There's there's no payment from
Unless they get paid directly
from the entity who's done the
injury, but we don't get to
facilitate that payment.
In a way.
I know what you're saying.
Uh, correct, Mr.
Um, and then
it also asked a question earlier
about disincentives like what is
our regime to encourage people
who pollute or have an
accidental discharge or whatever
to notify us before we
discovered and come down on
them. Do we?
We have that built into our
legal regime and all to where
people can come forward and
Hey, I did this and avoid a fine
or something of
Having to be busted.
Yeah, Mr. Ja, um, we have in
multiple programs a uh new owner
operator, or, or a self and a
self-disclosure policy that if
you acquire a new business,
expand or expand a business or
that you come into knowledge
through conducting an audit that
you can mitigate, um, 75 to 10
to 100% of the penalty provided
it's not criminal.
You know, with a, with a few
exceptions to that. Um, but
yeah, that, that we have people
doing audits all the time, in
fact, uh, a new company looking
to acquire other assets in New
Mexico, and I think we'll see
that with oil and gas as the
price right where we are in the
prices of uh per barrel we'll
see new owners wanting to
acquire versus drill. Um,
And we have that ability to do
that. We're just contacted by
somebody who wants to do an
audit with us, so.
Yeah, interesting. OK, last
question, secret, um,
We're asking everybody this. I
am, um, have you noticed any
posture change in the federal
agencies, departments that you
work with and under the new
administration that are
comparing our work at all or
your work at all.
E D O D.
CPS
Yeah.
Um, so Mr. chair, uh, I, I think
what's interesting about that
question is, um, you know, I've
been in the environmental space,
the federal government and now
the state for for a while and
our unfortunate that our EPA
regional administrator in Dallas
is somebody I've known since I
was at EPAS style person there.
Uh, we have a good relationship
and we've changed both have
recycled and upcycled into
different jobs, um, so I think I
have a good relationship and I
think that is favorable.
to New Mexico. Uh.
What I will say, what I'm, what
I am seeing that's adjacent to
your question is that with the
loss of so many federal workers
in the agencies that I deal
with, the EPA, Department of
Energy and NSA Department of
Labor, FDA, um,
We're seeing a loss of
institutional knowledge, a hurry
up and get here to get this
training done. A hurry up and uh
make sure you do X, Y, and Z
before this person leaves cause
we will not have the
institutional knowledge or
potentially someone in that
role, and for an agency like the
Environment department that I
just said has all those analogs,
88 plus federal grants with all
those different agencies. Um, we
have
Uh
Uh, agreements in various ways,
shapes and forms with all those
agencies for permitting
enforcement, etc. um.
We are seeing
A little bit of
Confusion
Disruption in in in sort of the
flow of work.
Um
And that makes me nervous cause
we are very dependent.
With 42% of our budget, my
budget.
that you appropriate coming from
federal grants, um,
It's important that I
That we have the ability to ask
certain questions. This is a
permissible use. Can I change my
terms and conditions? Can I do
X, Y, and Z. Uh, those are real
questions we have to deal with
to facilitate things like
contracts for uranium mining,
right?
Um
So, so that's where I'm seeing
it right now.
Uh
But, but yeah, that's where I
see most of it happening. OK.
Thank you.
on it
So I have, thank you. I know
it's a lot of questions. Anybody
else?
good work to you and your team.
You mentioned the canisters that
were at
Flannel, the pressurization. Do
we know what the pressure is? I
mean,
So I hate to keep throwing those
at you, but I guess we do you
said they might be overpressure,
and I'm just trying to figure
out what we know about them.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, so I think
their calculations, I think that
the pressure of those can go up
to about 300 PSI, uh, ones that
they could handle without my
involvement when they tested
them, they were about 5 PSI my
mountain bike tires.
You know, 8 times that, um,
So I, I'm, I'm not.
I, I say this now, I shouldn't
even say it, um.
I'm worried, but I'm not.
frantic.
OK.
Thank you, Secretary. Thank you,
ma'am. And real quick, we do
have just a couple of public
comments. I would ask your, you
guys to hang around just.
Leona Morgan, I know they have
to raise their hands, OK, I know
Lean wants to give a comment.
There's another person online if
you'd like to give a comment,
just raise your hand, but Leona,
the floor is yours, and you've
got, you know, a few minutes.
OK, thank you so much. Um.
Uh, good afternoon, chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
am a Denette and I've been
following a lot of nuclear
projects in our state for years,
and I have a few concerns, um,
recently there were hearings on
Triium releases and plutonium
pit production at Los Alamos
National Labs, with lots of
opposition from indigenous
communities and New Mexico
residents, so I just want to let
folks know that even though
there's probably not a lot of
folks making public comments,
there were a lot of folks
attending those hearings, and as
was discussed today, uh, folks
are also anticipating the
Supreme Court decision about
consolidated interim storage in
Texas, and how that may impact
wholetec's proposal in our
state, and I just want to take
the opportunity to thank
everyone who voted for SB 53,
which helped to push the state
to protect our
Not just New Mexico, but the
entire country, um, because
whole tech is still trying to,
you know, push for CIS, which
includes national transport by
rail, and one of the biggest
concerns I have as a D resident
is the status quo of uranium
mine cleanup, um, right now, the
Navajo Nation is considering a
technology called ablation, and
I do believe there are better
ways to address our abandoned
problem. And so this is
something I hope the state can
can help to look at what are
better technologies to deal with
clean up of abandoned uranium
mines, as well as the mills, and
with that, in the areas where
there's a lot of abandoned
mines, now we're facing the, the
two minds that were discussed,
um, so Roca Honda and Lehadama
west of Mount Taylor, which is a
sacred mountain to several of
the tribes. We, we call it so
um.
we are really concerned as they
were recently fast tracked by
the Trump administration, and so
we do need a lot of
eyes on those proposals and
definitely not to create any
kind of fund or tax on new
mining for cleanup, that doesn't
make any sense. We need to
prevent any new contamination
and clean up the old mess that
is still impacting our
communities, contaminating
water, land, sacred places, and
also impacting our, our public
health, and so that's my last,
um, I, I mean, I, I would love
to talk about whip and other
stuff, but
The main concern across the
board is the health of our
people and the environmental
integrity of our beautiful
state. So I just wanted to raise
these uh several concerns as the
new uranium mining is, is really
being pushed by the
administration. There's several
mines and transport that have
already started and proposals
for new milling in Utah and and
and Colorado. So we're just
keeping an eye on everything,
and I just wanted to
As all of you to also, you know,
help us out and, and paying and
paying attention to Rocahonda
and Lehadama and any other new
uranium mines, because we need
to clean up first before
allowing. We don't want to allow
new new mining, but the priority
should be clean up and, and
absolutely no discussion of new
mining. Thank you for your time
and uh I appreciate the work all
of you do. Yeah.
Thank you, Fiona. OK, the next
game I can't really read. Would
you all tell me the name of that
person.
What's that?
Inman
OK. The floor is yours. You have
3 minutes.
Well, thank you so much for
hearing me today. Um, these
things really concerned me
greatly. My mother was right
outside of Alamogordo when the
Trinity bomb went off.
I carry several genetic
mutations. My mother died of
cancer and so did my
grandmother.
Um, I, I think these things are
of great concern and the fast
tracking that the administration
is forcing everyone through
there is
There is a $1 trillion nuclear
budget and a full 19% of that is
specifically set aside to
modernize the supply chain, and
I'm gonna be very honest, this
is the supply chain.
Uh, Utah is the only mill that
there is in the country, so it
doesn't appear, it will be
stopping, so knowing that for
your, your highways, um, making
sure these things are inti
accident-proof containers. I
mean, there's so much that needs
to occur in a very short amount
of time. Um, I implore you all
to really think about how these
things should not be about clean
up or, you know, in my case, I
uh, have some sort of RECA.
But that's not on the table at
this moment, and I, I hope that
you would support that, but
prevention is the number one
thing, and according to the
EPA's own documents, um, and
high court precedents, the feds
are responsible for prevention
of contamination, and I ask that
you hold them to that, hold them
to that.
And it cannot be deregulated
according to these court
documents. So I feel like we
really do need to have a team
that keeps on these things on a
consistent basis, so thank you
very much for meeting and
allowing me to say my piece.
You betcha. Thanks for joining
us, Cindy.
Good day.
OK. Anything else? words?
Yeah, why don't we talk about it
after we'll kick it around.
Um, secretary, new party words?
Right, uh, Mr. Cha, parting
words are simply thank you to,
to the members of the
legislature, uh, you, you've
given us um a lot of authority,
a lot of budget, and again, we,
we plan to deliver. So thank you
very much. Appreciate it.
Thanks, Secretary.
OK, public, if you're listening
and you've endured,
congratulations. You have come
to the end of the meeting.
And I wish you a good day.
Committee, we are. Thank you to
the staff, folks.
