Representing District 23
Northwest Albuquerque, Bernlio
County. Happy to be here.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Peter Worth, Senate District 25.
And I also think, Mr. Chair,
this is uh Bill Jordan's.
Last meeting after 26 years with
Voices for Children, and I just
wanna thank him and I think
let's give him a hand for.
An amazing career and again, the
20 years I've been here, he has
always been
Being a champion and a fighter,
and we've done an awful lot.
And he's done an awful lot, so
thank you, Bill.
Good morning, as you were saying
that bill was shaking his head
no, so I don't know if that
means he's might still come to
meetings, but anyway, thank you
Bill too. Um, I'm a
representative of Joanne
Ferrari, and I'm from uh Las
Cruces, the kind of northeast
heights of Las Cruces, and I'm
uh glad to be here as a uh
filling in for someone who
couldn't be as a special
advisory member. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Good morning, everyone, um,
representative Chris Chandler,
District 43 from Los Alamos. Um,
this is one of my favorite
committees, so I'm looking
forward to a good discussion
today and good discussions going
forward. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. For
those that walked in a little
bit late, and we uh go and do
introductions with
Representative Laura Cadena.
And my name is CT representative
Adena from South Central New
Mexico. Glad to be here.
Representatives Martinez and
Harper, morning.
Yeah
Good morning, Chairman. Uh,
great to be here this morning,
Jason Harper representing the
northern part of Sanimot County,
Rio Rancho area.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman Alan
Martinez, uh, District 23.
I represent right next to
Representative Harper.
Northern part of Rior Rento in
the western part of the town of
Bernelio.
Very good, thank you. Good
morning, everybody.
Vice Chairman Campos.
Uh, thank you very much, uh,
Chairman Lent. It's really great
to be here to you, to the
committee members, to the uh
people, the presenters that are
here with us, the uh people that
are gonna be paying attention
throughout the day. Uh, it's
gonna be, and it has been a very
exciting interim as we continue
to deal with our tax and uh
revenue issues and as we
continue to go, if you will,
through this period, uh, this is
gonna give us a great
opportunity uh to come up with
some uh good things for the
people of New Mexico when we go.
In the 2025 session. I'm state
Senator Pete Campos representing
all parts of 7 counties in
northeastern New Mexico, and Mr.
Chairman, it's a delight and and
an honor to go ahead and sit
next to you during this interim
process. Thank you.
You.
Thank you, Senator Campos. It's
certainly an honor and a
pleasure to have, have served
with you and, and to serve with
you now as vice chair of this
committee. Uh you are a mentor
and a friend. Thank you for
your, for your leadership. I
also want to also extend my
gratitude to Mr. Bill Jordan for
your years of service to do
everything that you've done uh
and tax guidance for the state.
Thank you so much and to
everybody that is uh here this
morning, the committee members,
those in the audience, those
tuning in online. Thank you for
tuning in and taking an interest
in tax, a stable
and revenue. Uh, I'm Derek
Lente. I come from Sandia
Pueblo, New Mexico. I represent
House District 65 and I
represent parts of Sandoval
County, San Juan County, and Rio
Riba County, and it's an honor
and a pleasure to be able to
chair this committee as well as
the uh committee for uh taxation
in the House of Representatives.
So with that being said, uh,
without further ado, let's move
forward to the revenue forecast.
We have a number of presenters
this morning. We have uh
Secretary Chardon Clark, we have
Leonard Delgado.
And Ishmael Torres from the LFC.
Folks, whenever you're ready,
the floor is yours.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Stephanie Chardon Clark, the
secretary of the Taxation and
Revenue Department, and it's the
chair mentioned with me is Leo
Delgado, the chief economist
from DFA and Izzy Torres, the
chief economist from LFC, and um
we're pleased to present to you
the work of the consensus
revenue estimating Group, um,
and for those of you that have
heard this the second time, uh,
today, if you were at LFC we we
apologize. It's the same
presentation, but hopefully
you'll have had some time to
mull over questions and
And we can get deeper into the
numbers.
All right. Without further ado,
I'll be presenting from the
executive slide deck that looks
like this.
All right. So first, um, the
outline of this presentation is
familiar to many of you if
you've heard uh past iterations
of it. I'll cover the
macroeconomic indicators and
forecasts um from different
subscription services, and I'll
cover what's happening in some
of the state's general fund's
major revenue sources, and I'll
turn it over to Mr. Delgado for
the general fund overview. On
slide 3, as a reminder of, of
this work product comes from
career economists at 4
Agencies, Tchin Rev, DFA
Department of Transportation,
and LFC and we have the members
of staff here if you want to
stand or wave, we wanna thank
them for their participation in
the consensus revenue estimating
group and doing such a fantastic
job uh to inform the budget
process for the state.
Um, onto slide 4, we have the
baseline forecast, um, for the
national economy and for New
Mexico, um, we subscribe to
Moody's Analytics, S&P, and
Bieber at the University of New
Mexico, and just a couple of
highlights of the changes, um,
you know, a theme of the
forecast is to compare what's
changed since the December 2023
estimate, what's changed in the
macroeconomy and therefore
what's changed in the revenue
streams. So, um,
The Federal Reserve for Moody's
is now expected to reduce
interest rates by 25 basis
points at its next two meetings.
Those are in September and
December, and this is very
important to the economic
outlook. The Fed, of course, has
been trying to achieve the soft
landing for the US economy that
that everyone has been hoping
for and um currently, as a
result, they're expected to cut
rates by 50 basis points over
the next 6 months. The US labor
market has held up much better
than expected since the last.
It, uh, continuing to add more
jobs than expected. Inflation
has come down. There are still
some pain points, especially
having to do with shelter and
housing, but inflation has come
down and is anticipated to
stabilize early in 2025.
Um, energy prices, um, are
expected to slightly increase in
the second half of 2024, which
of course benefits our revenue
streams, but not inflation, um,
and overall we expect moderate
continued positive growth, but,
but much more moderate growth in
the US economy.
I'll, I'll go through um the
other parts of the slide pretty
quickly. They're somewhat
repetitive, but I'll just um
emphasize that S&P is only
projecting one rate cut from the
Fed in the next 6 months,
whereas Moody's is projecting
too, so that's the difference in
the forecast.
Um, and Bieber, um, uh, for New
Mexico, I'll just highlight that
Bieber does not anticipate a
recession and then New Mexico
economy and its baseline
forecast and, and in the
following slides you'll see that
Bieber has also revised upwards
some of its growth indicators
for New Mexico. So onto slide 5,
we um look at what's going on in
US um GDP growth, and you can
see there's been very slight but
positive revision from the Blue
Line, which was the December
forecast to the current
forecast, um, the
The most recent months of
actuals have come in just a
little stronger than
anticipated, and so therefore,
the forecast is somewhat higher,
but we are anticipated uh to
have positive but moderate
growth in the coming years. GDP
is expected to grow by 1.7% in
calendar year 25 and 1.9% in
that year.
Turning to the same figure, but
for the state economy, you have
gross state product growth, and
there we have a more marked
revision upwards since the
December estimate. Um, we've had
much stronger than anticipated
actuals in the last several
months and so we've shifted the
line upward, but it really
remains at the same slope, so
the percentage growth over the
higher baseline is expected to
remain moderate, about 1.5 to
1.6% growth in state GSP.
Turning on the slide 7, will
cover employment and for the US,
um, again, there's a slight but
positive revision to the
forecast that, as I mentioned on
the first slide, US job growth
has remained stronger than
expected, so the actuals came in
a little better and the line has
shifted upward, but you can
really see a flattening of the
the expected growth in US
employment. The labor market is
expected to really moderate and
and flatten out in job growth.
Turning to slide 8, you see the
same data, but for just New
Mexico and they're the, again,
the revision upward is more
pronounced than it was for the
US economy, the New Mexico
economy has continued to outpace
the last forecast, um, but
again, we expect very flat
growth in jobs in New Mexico in
the out years. Um, employment is
expected to grow just 0.6% in
calendar year 25 and 0.2% in
calendar year 26.
On slide 9, we can delve into
the changes in employment year
over year in each sector of New
Mexico, um, overall, the New
Mexico economy added 12,300 jobs
from June 2023 to June 2024, um.
Growth was across most sectors
with um the contractions shown
in construction, transportation,
and utilities and information
sectors.
And then onto unemployment on
slide 10, um, basically, we show
that both the New Mexico and US
economy peaked unemployment
during the COVID pandemic, but
have trended down nicely since
that time and are both on par
with each other and expected to
remain fairly flat in the out
years.
Inflation and interest rate
expectations are shown on slide
11.
Um, you can see that, uh, base,
uh, since the last forecast, we
have seen an upward revision to
the expectation for inflation.
That's a negative. That means
that inflation has held on a
little bit more strongly than
was expected in December.
And as a result of that sort of
tide, um, you can see on the
federal funds rate forecast to
the right hand side that the Fed
has held rates higher a little
bit longer than expected. And
so, um,
Those, those things kind of go
hand in hand. The Fed has been
timing those rate decreases
along with the cooling off of
the labor market and the US
economy in general.
OK, onto oil and natural gas.
We'll start talking about some
of the general fund's large
revenue streams and the impacts
on those. Uh, so slide 13 is
about oil prices and you can see
on the at the table, on the
bottom or in the chart that the
price forecast for oil has come
up a little bit. Um, it's not a,
a very marked revision, but for
the budget year FY 26, the price
of oil has come up by $2 per
barrel, and to put that in
context of the general fund, a
$1 change in the price of oil
equates
To about $50 million of revenue.
And I, I should rephrase that,
$50 million of revenue but with
new reserve laws, not all of it
goes to the general fund. So let
me rephrase that.
Um, I'll skip through the, the
impacts on oil prices and the
interest of time, um, onto slide
14, we go into detail on the
estimate for volumes of oil to
be produced in New Mexico. Um,
and so as always, um, recount is
very important and rig count
tends to follow prices. So as
prices have come up and stayed
high, our rig count has also
been historically high, um,
recount in New Mexico as, as of
the time of this forecast was
107.
Um, and it's consistently stayed
over 100 rigs since June 2022,
active in New Mexico. So that
flows into future production as
well as gross receipts activity,
especially in Eddie and Lee
counties.
And so we've um seen a somewhat
larger revision upward in the
volume expected to be produced
in New Mexico for the budget
year, um, the volume has been
increased from 7725 million
barrels to 7900 million barrels.
So both price and volume in
summary are up for oil in the
forecast.
Moving on slide 15 to natural
gas prices and production, um,
just natural gas in New Mexico
is so tightly linked to oil
production because the gas is
coming up along with uh the oil
for much of it. And so, um,
we've seen an upward revision of
10 cents per MCF to the price of
gas in the budget year FO 26 and
uh marked increase in the volume
following the increased um
expectation for oil volumes. The
volume has come up in the budget
year from
3340 BCF to 3,825 BCF.
Onto the gross receipts tax.
Let's skip to slide 17. Um, this
is a new slide in this
presentation, and the group has
put together this um visual of
the different magnitude of
sectors that make up the gross
receipts tax base, so that you
can kind of eyeball which
sectors are the most important
and which ones are changing the
most. You can see retail trade
is quite by far the largest
sector of the grocery seats tax
base, and it actually did grow
pretty remarkably. Um, another
big movement was in
mining and oil and gas
extraction industry, instruction
also exhibiting very strong
growth as a professional and
scientific and technical
services, and those are all
large sectors. So when they
grow, the gross receipts tax
revenue growth.
Onto um slide 18 there we drill
into just the grocery receipts
tax base in Eddie and Lee
counties. I mentioned a moment
ago that that's very closely
tied to rig count, and so, um,
think of rig count as a leading
indicator of gross receipts tax
in those counties and in the
state and also of production. So
there's that strong um
relationship continues.
Onto the gross receipts tax
outlook, how this actually um
translates into what will happen
with revenues. Um, we have to
take a moment to look at the not
just the underlying
macroeconomic factors but also
legislative changes that have
been um
Transitioned into the revenue.
So the estimate for FY 24, uh,
that's now complete increased by
1010, and that was mainly due to
the last quarter of FY 24 coming
in much stronger than expected
for the current year FY 25, the
forecast is increased by 104
million compared to the previous
estimate and um that would have
been 2% higher growth had it not
been from recent legislative
changes. So the 2% growth
expected in FY 25 is
would have been more like 4,
just based on the underlying
economy, but we've provided tax
relief and that's brought the
growth rate down to 2%.
And in the budget year FY 26,
we're up $135 million over the
prior estimate and both the out
years are expected to grow by
4%.
Onto the personal income tax on
slide 21, uh, we can look at the
underlying growth in
withholding, of course,
withholding reflects how many
New Mexicans are working and at
what wage level they're working
at. So as more people are
working, unemployment is lower,
um, but also there has been
inflation in wage. We've seen
really strong growth in
withholding. You can see um on
the chart to the left
on the graph 2, basically, you
can see the forecast for
and salary, and again, we see
high growth in the past couple
of years that is expected to
moderate at about 4% growth in
the out years.
Onto slide 22 is the revenue
outlook for Pitt and just like
gross receipts tax, we have to
look at both the underlying
economic factors as well as
legislative changes which have
been very significant in the
personal income tax base, and
then I'll, I'll also come to one
accounting change that's
affecting pit and sit and talk
about that in a second. Um, but
basically Pitt grew by 9% in FY
23, but contracted by 11% in
2024. That was
Do not to weakness in the
underlying economic conditions,
but to implementation of
legislative changes and an
accounting shift. There's a
pass-through entity withholding
tax that had been booked as
personal income tax revenue that
for various accounting reasons I
can get into it if anyone's
actually interested. It's been
shifted into the corporate
income tax base. So where you
see $190 downward revision to
pit, you see that same $190
million pop up in the corporate
income tax estimate.
So that is part of the 11%
contraction. Um FY 25 is
estimated to contract by 10%.
Again, having much to do with
legislative implementation and
that movement, um, of, of pastor
entity withholding tax over into
the corporate income tax base.
So,
Um, slide 23, um, provides
detail on all those legislative
adjustments that are impacting
the corporate income or the
personal income tax base. We do
have one positive legislative
change that's adding revenue
that would be the narrowing of
the capital gains deduction that
was enacted last year, but
reducing the pit um is a lot of
uh recurring tax relief that's
been made. We of course had
bracket um changes in the last
session that are being
implemented in that accounts for
35% of
The total reduction, um, the
Social Security exemption is in
there along with the child
income tax credit, clean car
credits.
And um
Expansion of the solar credit.
On to the corporate income tax
base on slide 25. There's a
little more detail of that
accounting shift that I
mentioned a moment ago. There's
190 million um that has just
been shifted for accounting
purposes from pit to sit, and
you can see that in the the
graphs on the side here.
Um, really what it's about is
that the past serenity tax comes
in, some of it on its own form,
but some of it comes in through
a corporate income tax form. So
the way that tax and receives
the returns and processes the
revenue if we want it all to end
up in the same place, we have to
book it under corporate income
tax. That's
Best way I can explain why that
happened.
On slide 26, we have the
corporate income tax outlook.
And so, um, a really marked
upward revision to the corporate
income tax estimate, mainly
because of that accounting
shift, but also because the
forecast for the film tax
credit, which is a reduction to
sit, uh, came down by $50
million per year. So we've up up
the forecast by about 50 million
per year because of that. And
then there's also um legislative
adjustments, of course we
created the single 5.9%
corporate income tax rate. So
that adds an average of 2000.
$21 million per year to the
forecast.
Right, on to severance taxes and
rents and royalties, um, slide
28 is really just a visual of
how the recent legislatively
enacted, um, movements of
windfall revenue to places
outside the general fund is, is
um coming to fruition. So you
can see on the the blue bars,
the amount that's going uh from
both oil and gas school tax and
federal mineral leasing. You can
see in blue the amount that
remains in the general fund in
gray, you have the amounts that
are scheduled to be.
Transferred to the severance tax
permanent fund, and in orange
you have the amounts going to
the Early Childhood Trust Fund.
So we've taken a lot of
volatility out of the general
fund and moved it into these
corpuses.
So with that, I'll turn it over
to Mr. Delgado.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. So I'll
be speaking to slide 30.
Uh, the New Mexico Consensus
revenue summary and what's
illustrated for you here is the
roll-up of all the revenue
programs as Secretary Chargeon
Clark discussed all the economic
indicators lay the foundation
for the uh revenue outlook.
As well as uh um all the
legislative changes detailed in
each revenue program that the
secretary discussed. So just
give a couple of highlights, um,
overall for the major revenue
programs. Um, general sales is
estimated to increase slightly
by 2% in FY 25, income taxes are
estimated to decline by 6.5%,
and the secretary did a great
job of discussing both the
macroeconomic conditions that
are influencing that as well as
the legislative changes that
are.
affecting both revenue programs.
In
Fiscal year 26 and 27, you can
see that uh both general sales
and personal income taxes both
uh returned back to moderate
trend growth rates.
Um, and, uh, a couple more
highlights for oil and gas
revenue. Oil and gas revenue, if
I could draw your attention to
the growth rates across the row
there, uh, much of the impact as
discussed by the secretary, um,
uh, the revenue growth in those
programs is now going to the
transfers to early childhood and
the 7 Sex Permanent Fund, with
oil and gas revenue being capped
to the general fund. Um, uh,
second highlight would be
investment income. If, uh, as
You see in the table and across
the revenue estimate, investment
income is becoming um a driver
of growth for general fund, uh,
general fund revenue.
Um, estimated to exceed, um, our
state's second largest revenue
program, personal income taxes
in fiscal year 26.
Lastly, overall total recurring
general fund revenues are
projected to grow moderately
with some risks and some
volatilities, of course, always
associated with the revenue
program.
Moving on to slide 31, this is a
new chart that we're
illustrating for you here. It's
total new money.
And it's um the visual is
depicting a uh a look at new
money through a an updated lens,
and what you see depicted here
is total estimated revenue for
FY 26 less total appropriations
for FY 25.
Um, giving us total new money of
$660 million. Now, how this,
this differs from the previous
um definition of new money is
total new money is taking into
account.
Total non-recurring
appropriations in the current
year.
And we're presenting this to you
for several reasons, uh, the
non-recurrent appropriations as
a share of total spending have
increased um over the years. If
we go back about 20 years, for
example, to fiscal year 5
non-recurrent appropriations
worth 325 million.
Um, or about 7% of total
spending.
In um the current current year
non-recurrent appropriations are
about 25, 27% of total spending.
So, in presenting total new
money to you, we believe this is
a more accurate picture of
what's available to spend in the
budget year on top of what was
spent in the current year or
fiscal year 25.
On slide 32, these are just high
level bullets and they are
summarizing the overall growth
for general fund from fiscal
year 24, 25, and um the new
money for 26 and also what that
means for the state's reserves,
uh, estimated reserves for
fiscal year 24 are 31.7% of
recurrent appropriations and in
FY 25, estimated reserves are
34.8% of recurrent
appropriations or
3 and $3.5 billion respectively.
Moving on to slide 33. This
table here is the uh high level
look at the general fund
financial summary. So it's a
high level look at the GFFS and
is mainly outlining for you
where the um appropriations,
revenues are for the state and
what that means for reserves,
they're at the bottom with a
little bit more detail.
Moving on to slide 34, the
forecast is not without its
risks and what we've outlined
for you here is many of the
risks that are potentially seen
by the national forecasters and
the consensus revenue estimating
group, uh, both on the downside
and the upside. Uh, one of the
main risks of
Or the forecast as outlined by
Moody's Analytics is the path of
inflation, and when the Federal
Reserve will ease that lever um
in cutting rates.
Moving on to slide 35.
Uh, this is, uh, also a slightly
updated, uh, chart.
This is uh the consensus revenue
estimating groups stress test
and what we've done for you here
is we've layered on top.
Both recurring and non-recurring
appropriations and um
Let me speak a little bit about
the alternative scenarios, then
I'll, I'll discuss the, the
impact to appropriations. Uh, so
in the stress test, we take uh
Moody's Analytics scenarios, an
upside scenario, which has the
economy performing slightly
better than the baseline, as
well as uh moderate recession
scenario and a low oil price
scenario where Moody's Analytics
takes those energy variables
such as oil prices and depresses
them for a substantial period of
time. And what's illustrated
is what's the path that the
state's general fund revenues
could take under these
alternative scenarios.
Under the low oil price
scenario, general fund revenue
could decrease by 1.2 billion in
FY 25, 1.7 billion in 26 and 1.9
billion in FY 27, and it mainly
illustrates um the sensitivity
that the state has to both a
recessionary event as well as a
um uh negative shock to the oil
markets. Uh, now on to the um uh
the new component of the slide,
which is the um addition
The appropriations and um Chief
Torres will have um uh a similar
slide to this stress test where
those non-recurrent
appropriations are pushed out a
bit further, but in ours you can
see a bracket there in the
middle of the visual, and what
that's illustrating to you is
the impact that um a low oil
price scenario would have on the
state's appropriations, um, in
fiscal year 25.
And if we move on to slide 36,
um, we, we discussed that in a
little bit more detail. As you
can see, recurring
appropriations under a low oil
price scenario are safely below
the impact of, of that negative
shock.
However, the non-recurrent
appropriations, which is the
gray bar, are impacted by a low
oil price scenario, by the by
the space that's occupied in
that bracket or approximately
$1.5 billion in non-recurrent
appropriations, and what that
essentially means is the, um,
there'd be less budget available
for the non-recurrent
appropriations which would uh
have to be addressed with either
legislative action or pulling
from reserves.
Moving on to slide 37. So this
is a 10 year trend analysis that
the uh Craig, um, we always do
round after round. It is a
recommended analysis by the Pew
Research Center, and it just um
outlines for you the state's
general fund revenues, um, and
contrasted against the path of
the 10-year trend, uh, it's
recommended analysis years above
trend are um uh may not be
sustainable. Years of below.
trend may stress resources and
the state's economy, and the
biggest highlight in this this
visual here is mainly how the
forecasted revenues slope back
downwards and returned to trend.
And I believe that concludes my
part of the presentation and
I'll turn it over to Chief
Doris.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning members of the
committee. My name is Ismael
Torres. I'm the chief economist
for the Legislative Finance
Committee, and I'll be speaking
to the brief titled Money
Matters. It has a blue heading
at the top. Uh, hopefully you
can find it in your stack of
papers there, the one that Mr.
Chair is holding up.
And
I think um throughout the
executive's presentation, the
point was made, but I want to
reiterate what I find to be the
story here. And I think that
really is a slowing down.
That's, that's ultimately the
bottom line, slowing down both
in economic indicators we're
seeing our economy slow down in
its growth pattern, but also in
our revenues. We're seeing that
slowdown and interestingly
enough, a kind of across the
board and economic indicators
and revenue items. So you'll
hear me repeat that a lot if you
didn't already hear me repeat
that a lot during the LSC
presentation.
Starting on page one, I'd like
to draw your attention to the
slowing of the total general
fund in the chart at the bottom
of the page here, and uh you can
see the dotted gray line there
is the December estimate for
year over year general fund
growth. The blue is the updated
August, and then the orange
reflects our 10 year trend prepa
from sort of that pre-pandemic
trend level and
Of course, coming out of the
pandemic, we had explosive
growth, record growth near 20%
in both 22 and 23, we saw about
half of that growth rate in 24.
We expected over 10%. It's
coming in around 12%, and then
as the secretary Sherdon Clark
mentioned, a lot of these tax
changes that you all have
implemented are taking effect
starting in 25. We have a small
decline in revenues, uh, revenue
growth or revenues in 25, that
goes negative, that's for the
first time since the pandemic,
but again not economic in nature
simply.
From legislative changes before
we expect our general fund
growth rate to start heading
back towards that pre-pandemic
trend in in general fund growth.
And what that translates to in
in dollar numbers is in the
table at the top of the page
here, we're estimating recurring
revenues for FY 25 at about $13
billion that's up $175 million
from the last estimate, um, but
in FY 25, about 21% less than an
FY 24.
And uh we expect an FY 26 that
our revenues will hit $13.4
billion and uh if you look at
the annual amount change here on
that table, you can see how that
really tremendous growth in FY
24, which was still half of the
growth rate in the previous
years, but still $1.4 billion a
year over year revenue growth in
24, slowing down again to about
$365 million in FY 26 or about
2.8%.
And I'd like to spend a little
more time speaking to what um
Chief Delgado mentioned with
total new money. So if you look
at the chart in the middle of
the page here titled Revenues
Less Appropriations. You can see
that demonstrated again in an
alternative way from from how
Chief Delgado um presented it,
but
As he mentioned, the traditional
way of measuring our new money
was revenues minus recurring
appropriations and that works
for a really long time when our
pro our non-recurring
appropriations were such a small
part of our total budget. It, it
didn't really um um take away
from the fact that the total
revenues minus the total
appropriations was X amount. But
as we've seen now that
non-recurring appropriations are
about 27, maybe a quarter of our
total budget, and I expect
that's before you all come into
the session and make additional
non.
expenses, which will also count
in that year. I would expect
that that might bump up to maybe
1/3 of the total budget. So of
course that old measure is
losing its usefulness. That
metric isn't so useful when you
have such a a new and
significant part of the total
budget. And so now what we're
doing is we're trying to keep
that in mind. We don't want to
come before you all and say you
have $3 billion because what
that can sound like is you have
$3 billion on top of what you
spent last year, and that's not
really the case. So what you do
have on top of what you spent
last year is about 66
$160 million. So, another way
that I explained this at LFC is
pieces of a pie. So I think
it's, it's pretty clear that the
recurring piece could grow $3.1
billion but that would mean
absolutely zero non-recurring
appropriations, which is pretty
much unrealistic. And so the
total pie is growing by $660
million but there's certainly a
lot of wiggle room within the
pie in how you all choose to
slice the non-recurring and
recurring amounts.
OK. If you turn to page 2, you
can see a general a small
general fund financial summary
or the state's balance sheet in
the middle of the page here,
about $3 billion or 31.7% in
reserves, um, in FY 24 and in FY
25 we're seeing reserve balances
estimated at 3.5 billion or
34.8%. But again, that's before
any additional spending that you
all make in the coming session,
so we expect it will be less
than that. And I want to
highlight an important point
here, the government
results in Opportunity Fund or
the Grow fund is included in
reserves in FY 25 that will no
longer be the case in FY 26.
There's about $500 million in
that account, about 5% of
reserves, so we can expect going
into 26 already starting a
little under 30% reserves before
any additional appropriations.
And I'll get into a little bit
more on how that plays into
maybe the stress test or how you
all think about reserves here in
a second.
If you look at the chart at the
top of the page, the change in
recurring general fund revenue
25/24. This is just um helping
to hopefully illustrate the
point a little more that
Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned about tax changes
being the the primary reason why
FY 25 revenues are seeing a
decline. You can see gross
receipts tax is growing by an
expected $884 million 100
million dollars growth expected
in investment earnings. Um, it's
called interest here, but that's
total investments and other the
primary decrease is coming from
that income tax.
Primarily that um reshuffling or
the readjustment of the pit
brackets that was a 180+ million
dollar tax cut for New Mexicans.
Moving on to the economic
forecast at the bottom of the
page is Secretary Chardon Clark
mentioned, inflation is
incredibly important to the
forecast if we see it come in
higher than expectations that
could mean higher revenue growth
because, of course, we collect
taxes on a nominal basis. So if
prices at the grocery store,
well, maybe the grocery store is
not a good example, but prices
at a retail uh location or
higher or grocer seats taxes
will be higher if wages are
higher, or personal income taxes
will be higher. So here we have
plotted out our previous
expectations.
For inflation, actuals in gray
there, and then our new
expectations for inflation. You
can still see that we expect
bumps in the road, but a general
trend back towards the 2% pre
pandemic average as the
secretary mentioned.
Um, if you turn to page 3, I
think these charts do a really
good job of illustrating that
slowdown that I'm talking about.
The employment forecast is good,
is being updated up, is being
revised upwards with our actual
data, but the growth rates are
pretty much similar in the out
years. I really want to draw
your attention to the chart in
the middle of the page here,
year over year employment
growth. You can see coming out
of the pandemic we had really
tremendous employment growth.
About 7%, and so more people
being employed means more wages
being taxed under the personal
income tax. It means more
personal income being spent in
the broader economy, which, of
course, is taxed on the gross
receipts tax. So higher
employment growth translates to
higher revenues for the general
fund. Of course, it makes sense
then that we were seeing 8% or
so personal income tax growth in
those early years, but as our
employment
is really hitting it's uh maybe
it's cap or or it's or its peak
because uh so many people are,
are already in the workforce.
It's hard to continue to recruit
more and more and more. So that
slowdown, that growth continues
to slow back towards that
pre-pandemic average about 1%.
And so similarly, we're seeing
our personal income tax slow
down and our gross receipts tax
slow down with it.
Um, the same story here with our
total wages and salaries
forecast at the bottom of the
page. We don't have growth
illustrated for you here, but um
in growth it does represent
about 10% in 22, that slowed
down to 8% and 23 again slowing
down to 6% in 24, a story of
slowing, slowing, slowing back.
We expect about 4% in 25 and
beyond.
Um, interestingly enough, we see
that same slowdown story
happening in oil and gas. If you
look at the charts here, these
are some of our favorite charts
on page 4.
Um,
New Mexico really solidifying
its place as the 2nd largest oil
producer in the country. If you
look at the charts at the bottom
of the page, you can see New
Mexico's nearly quintupled its
total oil production since 2017,
um, compared with the rest of
the country, really driving the
US's uh um oil production growth
along with Texas, North Dakota,
still um below its pre-pandemic
levels of production.
I want to point out here, uh,
some new analysis that we've
seen about break even prices in
the Permian Basin. We had
previously seen analysis, uh,
estimating that
In order to drill a new well and
turn a profit in New Mexico, you
might need prices around 35,
maybe mid $30 a barrel, and
we're now seeing that with
inflation drive up above $40 so
now in the low $40 to do a to
break even, to make a a new well
profitable, and so I just want
to highlight that for you all
because it presents a new or an
increasing risk to the forecast,
prices don't have to fall quite
as far before we start seeing
production impacts. So that's an
important update there.
Um, if you turn to page 5, you
can see how that uh uh new
break-even price, that new
higher break even price, but
also how this new trend in
financial discipline in the oil
basin that we're, we're seeing,
and that's these large companies
are prioritizing returning
profits to shareholders above
investing in new production
growth, or previously you might
have seen a lot of this profit
being turned back into new
drilling and new production. Now
it's being passed on uh in the
form of dividends or or other or
stock buybacks to to
shareholders.
And so that's part of the story
here on why growth is slowing,
and as we're seeing a tremendous
amount of consolidation in the
market, more and more of New
Mexico's oil production is
subject to this financial
discipline and prioritization of
shareholder value.
And and that's really playing
out in slowdown in growth, as
you can see in these two charts
here on on page 5.
Uh, we, we expect that oil
production.
Uh, will grow at about 4% in FY
25. That's a big slowdown from
the 7% in 23, the 30% in 22, and
the 23% in 23%. And we actually
expect that growth to continue
to slow to about 2% in the out
years, sort of hitting that
plateau or that mesa before we
expect peak oil production in
New Mexico, maybe the early
2030s.
Similarly with natural gas, it's
an associated product with oil,
so we expect a similar slowing
story here. We saw 25% growth in
FY 22, 9% in 23, 3%.
Um.
About 3% in the out years before
slowing to 1% in 28 and 29.
You can see our total
expectations or our forecasts
for prices and production in the
table in the middle of the page
here, we expect that New Mexico
surpassed 700 million barrels
per year in FY 24 for the first
time in state history.
Moving on to the gross receipts
tax. Again, we see that slowing
story playing out here. We are
estimating about 6% gross
receipts tax growth in FY 24.
Compare that with 14%, sorry,
excuse me, that's match taxable
gross receipts. So that's the
economic activity, not the
taxable activity, not the tax
revenue to the general fund. The
taxable activity, the economic
activity slowed down to 6% in
24. That's down from 14.5% in 23
and 21.7% in 22, so slowing,
slowing.
Going
Um, into the future, we expect
our largest growth to come from
sectors other than mining, if
you turn to page 6, we have a
couple of charts here showing
our, our match taxable gross
receipt, the economic base
growth here.
Um, if you look at the chart at
the top of the page you can see
in 23 mining was our largest
driver of grocere seats tax
growth in New Mexico, that's
really changed to now about
construction is leading. If you
look at the table in the middle
of the page, you can see a
nominal dollars. Construction is
have experienced the largest
growth in FY 24, followed
closely by professional
scientific and technical
services, as Secretary Shardon
Clark had mentioned. So, most of
that growth now shifting to
other sectors.
Um, I want to highlight
something here, similar to what
we're talking about in personal
income taxes where legislative
changes are reducing the
personal income tax collections.
We're also seeing that here with
the gross receipts tax, the
final one-eight reduction phased
in in FY 24, we expect that the
total impact of that quarter
rate reduction is about $250
million to the general fund,
though our gross receipts taxes
would be about $250 million
higher if uh those changes had
never taken place.
Moving on to page 7.
Um,
As I mentioned, a couple of
pages ago, oil production grew
tremendously, FY 21, 22, 23, uh,
but prices were also
dramatically higher coming out
of the pandemic, uh, with the
invasion of Ukraine and other
global conflict, and so we saw a
spike in our oil and gas related
revenues reflected here by these
two bar charts on the right. The
sum of these bars, the blue, the
orange, and the green reflect
total collections in these
categories. You can see they
spiked in 23, and they've since
come back down, not because of
production decline.
lines, but because of price
declines, but we do expect them
to start growing again in the
out years, and as Secretary
Chardon Clark mentioned, those
peaks being taken out of the
general fund and moved to other
funds like the Early Childhood
Trust Fund and the severance tax
permanent fund.
And what that is contributing to
on page 8.
is the largest growth in the
general fund, which is now
investment earnings. So it used
to be oil and gas was our
fastest growing revenue in the
general fund. Now we've traded
that for investment earnings,
which are certainly a lot more
stable, actually the most stable
revenue in the general fund, and
you can see reflected in the
green bars here at the top of
the page. It's labeled interest,
but these are total investment
earnings going into the general
fund. You can see not just the
fastest, but maybe 2 to 3 times
faster growing than our other
revenues, and as um Chief
Dougala mentioned for the first
time in the budget year.
We expect our investments to
actually be producing more for
the general fund than our
personal income taxes. And so,
in, in other words, our personal
income taxes for the same level
of spending could be 2 times
higher if we didn't have these
investment earnings, so just
making the point here that those
investments are really helping
to reduce New Mexicans' tax
burdens for the same level of
services that we're, they're
currently receiving today.
Um, I, I do want to highlight
some analysis that the LFC staff
have conducted this year in
regards to revenue volatility,
the chart in the middle of the
page here reflects the state
treasurer's office distributions
to the general fund. So the
state treasurer's office manages
the state general fund
investment pool for the benefit
of the general fund and as the
balance of that fund has grown
to surpass $110 billion and as
interest rates have climbed
quite dramatically in recent
years. We've seen those
distributions from the state
treasurer's office to the
general fund
dramatically as well, but
because the um distributions are
in part influenced by market
expectations and market
valuations of the holdings of
the state treasurer's office.
This revenue is incredibly
volatile, just like the markets
are, just like the bond markets
are. And so as we see
expectations for interest rates
go up and down, we see these
distributions the general fund
fluctuate quite wildly. So this
is a a large source of
volatility in the general fund,
a new source of volatility in
the general fund that I want to
highlight for you all here and
um.
We start thinking about ways
that maybe we can mitigate the
volatility in this revenue item
as we have in other revenue
items.
Um, if you turn to page 9.
Moving on to income taxes, this
is another way to illustrate the
point that Secretary Chardon
Clarke made at the top here, the
green bars reflecting what
personal income taxes would have
been had no legislative actions
taken effect, and where they are
now, that reduction in FY 25
represented by the red bars, and
you can see tax actions, um,
since 2019 reflect about $1
billion worth of tax cuts for
New Mexicans, and that's showing
up on these bar charts here.
Uh, moving on to the corporate
income tax, the sum of these
bars reflects gross corporate
income tax collections. Uh, we
are expecting a decline in gross
collections starting in 24, in
large part because our corporate
income tax is also heavily
reliant on the oil and gas
industry and as we see prices
come down, we expect those
profits to come down with them
and uh our gross receipts or or
sorry, excuse me, the corporate
income tax collections with
them, and then the film tax
credits as well, taking a bite
out of the general fund, so we
don't expect to see general fund
growth in the corporate income
tax until FY20.
7.
Moving on to page 10.
Uh, another update in this
forecast is reflected at the top
of the page here, general fund
reversions from state agencies
as
The budget for state agencies
grows. We're also seeing the
reversions from those state
agencies grow. We have already
received about $117 million
worth of reversions through
March of this year, of course,
the bulk of the reversions will
come in in June with the close
of the audit, so we expect that
number will rise, but we have
updated our reversion
expectations into the future, in
accordance with that budget
growth, reflecting about one, a
little over 1% of every uh
general fund agency budget is
what we're expecting to be
reverted into the future.
Moving on to forecast risks.
Oil and gas remains the largest
risk to the forecast, as you all
know, as is very familiar as
Secretary Seton Clark mentioned
a $1 change reflects about a
$500 million revenue impact. So
a significant um risk presented
there. If you turn to page 11,
we're also thinking about
recession risks, although those
risks have diminished in recent
years, you can see in the chart
at the bottom of the page a
survey of economists by the Wall
Street Journal, and their
expectation for recession risks
in the coming years, that's
dropped to about half of what it
was only
A year ago.
Um, of course, we're also
worrying about inflation and how
that could impact the economy.
You can see the federal funds
rate up at the top. Our previous
expectations and our new
expectations if that continues
to shift, that can certainly be
a risk to the forecast. But
similarly, federal policy, as
you all know, uh, the tax cut
and Jobs Act is expiring soon,
if that isn't renewed or if
significant changes are made as
New Mexico piggybacks on the
federal tax return that could
also have implications for New
Mexico's revenues.
Um, Lastly, if you turn to page
12, this is more of that
volatility analysis, the LFC
staff have been working on, um,
depicted at the top of the page
here, our new sources of revenue
volatility are corporate income
tax and the state treasurer's
office distributions to the
general fund. They're now uh uh
expected their their standard
revenue change is significant.
They can go negative with little
warning, um, because of
Many factors, interest rate
changes, oil and gas busts, um,
market expectations for interest
rates, and even though those are
small revenues in the general
fund, the corporate income tax,
maybe about 3% of the general
fund, the state treasurer's
office distributions general
fund similarly about 3%, but
that cumulative about 7% revenue
could go negative quite quickly
and without with little warning.
And when we're estimating maybe
2.5, 3% revenue growth, you can
see how that revenue growth
could quickly go negative with
short notice, and that's
something that we are worried
about at the LFC.
Moving on to the stress test,
I'm gonna flip back and forth a
little bit here. If you'll turn
to page 13,
Um, as Chief Delgado mentioned,
we have a new way of
illustrating our stress test,
hopefully making it a little
more helpful to you all as you.
mull over our reserve targets to
illustrate how much of a budget
impact some of these stress
scenarios could have. So that
red line representing revenues
under a low oil price scenario.
And the bars in blue reflect
recurring appropriations in gray
reflect no non-recurring
appropriations under a flat
budget scenario, and you can see
that even under the worst case
scenario, the recurring budgets
aren't affected. So that's
really good news. We don't
expect that recurring budgets
will have to be pulled back
under a severe scenario, but as
again, those non-recurring
appropriations become such a
significant part of the budget,
you may need reserves to cover
some of these appropriations
that you all are making, so that
say
Apple Outlay project isn't
stranded halfway through or
maybe temporary employees hired
on some of these special
appropriations aren't having to
be furloughed. So if you turn
back a page to page 12,
This bar graph at the bottom
here reflects sort of the sum or
the difference, you know, how
much does that gray bar go above
the red line, and it's about 33%
of appropriations or maybe $3.3
billion that might need to be
made up with reserves or other
funds or appropriation, um,
appropriations being pulled
back. So I mentioned that
because reserves, of course,
aren't the only tool in the
toolbox for you all if this
scenario were to occur, if you
say, had 25% reserves, you
could certainly make a good deal
of that up over the over the
budget years, but you also have
uh funds like the government
results and opportunity fund,
the growth fund, which has $500
million as an and is intended to
be a backup reserve, so that's
another 5% there. And even with
just those two funds, the
reserves and the grow, you might
need to pull back maybe 3% or
$300 million of those special
appropriations in the future
years. So certainly a number of
options available to you all and
I just wanted to highlight
multiple ways that um you all
could use some of the money that
you've saved in recent years.
To approach uh a downside
scenario like this.
If you turn to page 14 now.
Just wanna close with this with
these charts about the trend as
Chief Delgado mentioned, trends
are really powerful forecasting
tool, as you all know, but also
a best practice recommended for
a lot of states, for all states,
by some of these um fiscal um
think tanks, national think
tanks.
That way it can help to identify
unsustainable, potentially
unsustainable revenues, and also
indicate to you all when you
might be more seeing revenue
growth more aligned with your
long term trend, and you are
seeing, as I mentioned earlier,
a slowdown in that growth. We
went from above trend revenues
to about on trend revenues that
demonstrates to us as your
economists that this is a
sustainable path of growth that
we are more comfortable counting
on into the future versus those
above trend years.
If you turn finally to page 31
at the end of this.
Brief
For those of you who may be
interested and for those in the
audience who may be interested,
um, the LFC has a new
downloadable dashboard on our
website with revenue history
going back to like 1965, so if
anyone's interested in looking
deeper into the data, it's
disaggregated and downloadable,
and you can find that on our
website at nmlegi.gov/econ.
And with that, Mr. Chair, happy
to answer questions.
Thank you, Secretary Chardon
Clark. Thank you, Chief Delgado.
Thank you, Chief Torres for that
informational and educational
session. We will not open it up
for questions and comments from
the committee members, first on
my list I have Senator Burke.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation. Um,
Overall good news, you know,
that's, that's a good thing,
especially, uh, as we
Rely on oil and gas yet, uh,
it's, we have other areas that
are helping to buffer that and,
and mix that up and that's I
think something that I think all
of us.
I've been interested in for a
long time, not just solely
relying on.
On the oil and gas industry, a
couple of questions, Mr. Chair,
on, on page 9,
Secretary on your presentation.
The employment growth.
Um, is a state government, uh,
larger numbers in state
government, local government,
and then you have government,
the third.
Uh, government item down there.
Can, can you explain what that?
nails. I'd be happy to, Mr.
Chair, and Senator Burt. So
government includes all
different levels of government,
um, and then we separately.
Chart, state, local, and federal
government, so state and local
are higher and federal is, I
think Fed was lower, where is it
on here?
The Federal government is at 0%
growth, so the government line
is the combination of all.
OK, OK, well, I, I appreciate
that. I just
Um,
not understanding that. Uh, also
in state and local government,
where, where's that growth
coming from if I may ask, are
the agencies going? What's,
where are we getting those
numbers? Um, in state
government, I think it would be
a combination of um a little bit
of growth in positions, but
probably more so filling
vacancies.
Um, and local, I didn't have to
defer to the.
if they have more detail on
that.
Mr. Chair, Senator Burt, so, um,
I, I would agree with the
secretary and part of the um uh
the trend there for government
is through COVID, uh, the
private sector was really quick
to um adjust their employment
practices, the public sector
lagged and post COVID, what
you're seeing is the public
sector catching up there, um,
uh, both in state and local
government, uh, in adjusting to
the conditions of employment as
far as the detail.
for where it's, where, where um
the employment is coming from in
local, um, I'd have to follow up
with you to be able to get more
detail for you.
And Mr. Chair, I appreciate
that, um, I just was, uh,
Kind of curious, so it's, it's
more FTEs agencies filling those
empty positions and may
increases uh in salary for those
particular position, not
necessarily additional numbers
within those agencies. Is, is
that a first statement?
Mr. Chairman, Senator Burt, my
apologies. Can you repeat the
question?
Oh yeah, um, the numbers uh seem
to be filling vacant FTEs and
increasing salaries for uh
certain positions rather than
adding positions. Is that a fair
statement?
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator Burt,
I would say it's it we'd have to
follow up on the number filled
and versus the number of total.
Um, I know that some agencies
have had growth in positions,
but in general, state agencies
have been more filling vacancies
than adding FTE, um, but I do
think it's probably some mix of
the two, and then as to local
governments change um our chief
economist Lucinda pointed out
that local includes school
districts, so to the extent
school districts are adding, um,
Um
Teachers or aides or
administrators, anything like
that. Local also includes
tribal, so it could be in there
as well. OK.
So
Uh, you mentioned education and
and uh as we increase salaries
and uh
I guess benefits.
3 or 4 years back. Now we're
starting to actually see the
results of something like that,
get past COVID, I guess.
Really see the results on that.
So I appreciate the
clarification on that. Um, also,
let's see, page 30.
Uh, investment income.
And uh I'm, I'm glad to see, you
know, that is a category that's
growing and becoming.
Uh, very important to the state
of New Mexico. Investment is
always a good thing, but can you
clarify a little bit more
investment in where's what
categories is that coming from,
uh, where are we seeing the
growth in, in the investment
income? Sure, Mr. Chair and
Senator Burt, um, if we could go
to page 39 of the appendix.
The executives deck.
Um, I, I apologize that the
numbers are pretty small, but we
can see a full detail there and
so the investment income line
includes 3 distinct sources.
It's um,
Distributions from the land
grant permanent fund, which of
course increased
constitutionally recently. The
severance tax permanent fund and
then state treasurer's office
earnings. So the two permanent
funds, their distribution into
the general fund is a percentage
of the five-year average market
value. So the more the fun
corpus grows and the more the
investments perform, the higher
those get, but also in the LGPF
we've increased the
constitutional percentage to the
general fund and other
beneficiaries, and then
severance tax or or I'm sorry,
um.
State treasurer's office
earnings as a chief tortoise
kind of went into they're
dependent on a few different
things. One, the the amount of
invested in the general fund
investment pool has grown as
reserves have grown.
Um, but also rates have been
higher than traditionally in the
last decades, um, but also there
is an impact, I wanted to point
out that we haven't mentioned of
unrealized gains and losses. So
when interest rates come up and
down, the portfolio you hold
becomes more or less valuable.
And if I'm thinking about it
right, there's unrealized gains
right now, adding to the
distributions because rates are
falling. So that is adding to
the volatility that the general
fund receives from treasurer's
earnings. OK.
I appreciate the clarification
on that too. That's a, a big
help. um.
See
Um, I noticed, uh,
non-reoccurring, we talked a lot
about non-reoccurring funds and
and programs and uh.
It just seems like in the last,
Mr. Chair and the last two are.
3 or maybe more years than that
as we've gotten COVID money,
we've gotten uh other
non-reoccurring thing or no oil
and gas has produced so well,
uh, certain agencies have, have
taken, uh,
Um,
This one time money, if you
will, and started the programs
and things within their
agencies, uh, you know, the, the
The argument is that, well, when
the money runs out, so will the
program, but the programs
oftentimes become successful, so
they need to move those into
reoccurring programs and um do
we have any idea?
You know how many programs or
how much just a ballpark on uh
moving from reoccurring now into
uh I mean sorry for
non-reoccurring into reoccurring
programs that we've had to
adjust, uh, and how much it's,
it's impacted our overall
budget.
I know that's a big ask.
Uh, but I'm just kind of
curious, is, is it significant?
Is it small, um,
It just seems like those are the
things that we were cautioning
everyone about.
Using that non-reoccurring money
to to put together programs, um.
And now it's coming to fruition
where now we're going to have
to, if we, we get rid of the
program or we're gonna move them
into reoccurring, which is gonna
grow the budget a little bit. So
I don't know how much impact on
the budget that will have.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Senator Burke. I, I can.
Do my best to work on a a
Specific number for you, but I
think generally thinking about
recurring budget growth could
help get to your point or maybe
give you a size of magnitude on
what that impact could be. So,
for example, some of these large
non-recurring appropriations
mentioned as you started 21,
maybe more like 22, and so
they're they're starting to come
due, right? 23 and 24 is when
we're seeing those end, so we
might not have seen the bulk of
these non-recurring requests
come back as recurring yet, uh,
our last recurring budget growth
It was about 6%.
And a large chunk of that was
Medicaid and education. So you
take those off the table, maybe
it's something more along the
lines of less than 4%. So, you
know, in the portion of that
could be non-recurring projects
coming back for recurring
appropriations. So I would
estimate below.
3% maybe even below 2%. So we're
not seeing a large impact on
that yet. I will also add that
you all um are attempting to
tackle this problem that you're
mentioning with this government
results and opportunity fund.
The awareness that
A lot of these non-recurring,
maybe pilot projects, maybe
coming back to seek recurring
appropriations, uh, is hopefully
addressed by this government
results and Opportunity fund by
agencies coming forward with
these new projects, new pilots,
um, new potentially recurring
programs.
Requesting the funds through a
non-recurring source to begin
with. They have 3 years to
expand these funds, and as a
requirement of these funds, must
measure the success of the
program, must come up with a
mission, with a, you know, clear
definable goals and and
milestones that they must reach,
so that way when the funding
ends in 3 years, hopefully they
have something to show for it
before requesting that recurring
funds and hopefully make the
decision a little clearer for
you all on what
It is best to be considered for
recurring funds based on their
performance with that
non-recurring appropriation. So,
uh, uh, maybe a not simple
answer for a simple question,
but hopefully that gets at your
question and I, I appreciate
that. Is he the, uh,
Uh, it's, it is kind of a
complicated question. I
understand that and I appreciate
your
You're feeling it for me. Um, I,
I just cautioned us, you know,
as a legislature.
Uh, to be cautious about taking
non-recurring money.
And applying it to potentially
uh programs and, and operations
that will turn into reoccurring
because that'll grow uh the
budget and also appreciate
Um, LFC and some of their
evaluation, their analysis, and
uh
Look into the agencies to uh
maybe evaluate whether or not
those programs are doing well or
not, and then that becomes a
discussion certainly with the
secretary or that particular
agency about uh whether or not
we can afford to continue
funding those programs. Um, it,
it is just a cautionary way uh
that we can, we can hold down.
Overall budget growth uh by
being very cautious how we
originally apply those
non-recurring funds.
So, um, I hope we will all be
Aware of that and cautious as we
get to the budgeting cycle next
year.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's all
I have. Thank you, Senator Burt.
Before we continue with
questions and answers, I'd like
to introduce and have those
introduce themselves as well
that uh even a little bit late,
we can begin to my right with uh
Representative Gallegos.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh Dorian
Gallego's, uh, District 52 down
in Las Cruces, um, happy to be
here with you all today.
Thank you. Good morning. To my
left, beginning with the Senator
Tollman.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everyone.
Senator Bill Toman representing
Senate District 18 when portion
of the Northeast heights.
Thank you, Mr.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. It's a
pleasure to be here. um Lisanix.
The Senate District 39 parts of
six counties Berlio, Lincoln,
San Miguel, Santa Fe, Florence
and Valencia. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. uh
Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, the Southwest
Quadrant to Bernallio County and
Happy Friday to everybody.
Again, good morning. Thank you
for introducing yourselves.
Let's move on then, next on the
list, we have Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for the presentation.
Um,
Someone who's been around for a
while, um.
Feels like
We're in a pretty good place
when you look at the overall
picture. I do have a question
for Chief Delgado. I was a
little confused, I think I
figured it out, but on, on slide
35.
Uh, there's a statement there.
You say under the low oil price
scenario or the recurring
revenue of the general fund
could decrease by 1.2 billion in
FY 25, 1.7 billion in FY 26 and
1.9 billion in FY 27.
And I guess on the next slide,
you make it clear that under the
low oil scenario, it's
It's
The non-recurring that's
impacted, I just
So, so basically, if we didn't
Move, use the reserves.
This is what would happen. I'm
not correct in the way I'm, I'm
reading that.
Mr. Chair, um, Senator, Senator
Wirth, yes, that's correct. On
slide 35, the bullet is
highlighting only the revenue
impact, and if you want to see
the detail, the table on the um
to the right on the bottom,
highlights the total general
fund impact, and that's what
that bullet point is
highlighting on slide 36.
That is the estimated impact of
To non-recurrent appropriations.
And I guess that that's, yeah,
super important because
obviously as we look at.
What our reserves are, what the
non-recurring is and when I look
at the chart on page 30, the
roller coaster, David Abbey's
roller coaster, uh,
So FY 9, we had 11%.
Recurring reduction.
I'm not sure if and then FY 16,
it was 7.8% FY20 was 1.9%. I'm
trying to remember the 11.6,
which is the big one. What did
that translate to? Do you, do
you all remember dollar wise,
what that was.
Mr. Chair, um, so we'd have to
follow up with you in terms of
the dollar impact of of uh to
the general fund in that year.
Um, I can tell you when you see
those dips, those were uh in
2016, um, that was related to
the oil prices collapsing, if we
go further back, the Great
Recessions illustrated there and
then you also have, of course,
COVID in the more near term, but
for the exact dollar we'd have
to follow.
Mr. Chair and Senator Worth,
we're at about $5 billion worth
of revenue, so that likely
reflected around $500 million
worth of loss.
Yeah, so that's why that's
helpful because it puts it into
perspective. I mean, it, it was
brutal. I mean we were cutting
education money, but it was $500
million and look at where we are
now. Um, Mr. Chair, just 11
other thing I wanted to just
follow up a little bit on, and
that's the early childhood fund.
What's the balance now in the
early childhood,
um, and, and how is that spinoff
gonna work as following up with
Senator By.
I mean this is an example of a
fund that's gonna spin off, uh,
and have recurring
Out of the the fun, not out of
the.
Out of the uh
General fund appropriation.
Mr. Chair and Senator Wirth,
there are a couple of examples
here in in both presentations on
the LFC presentation, it's on
page 22.
And we're expecting that the
calendar year ending balance for
this last year, the fund was
about $5.7 billion. Um, we
expect it will exceed 8 billion
this year.
And continue climbing from
there, uh, the
Distributions from the fund in
the coming budget year, we're
estimating about 280, almost
$288 million as you mentioned,
not counted in the general fund.
And, and Mr. Chair, the formula
for the distribution is, is it a
5 year this, Mr. Chair and
Senator Wirth, this is a 3 year
average for this.
So it's, it climbs a lot more
quickly than the permanent funds
do.
So Mr. Chair, we're gonna see
substantial increase then in the
distributions given an $8
billion.10 billion dollar
number. Mr. Chair, just one
final thing that I always like
to point out, there is language
in the early childhood fund.
That allows us in a worst case
scenario to use that as a backup
reserve, correct?
Mr. Chair and Senator Worth,
after all the reserve funds are
depleted, but that's correct,
yeah. So, just one final thing,
if you take the early childhood
amount which let's use 8
billion.
Um, the current reserve number
is 3.
33.3, so that's
11.3 billion and you add in 500
million grow.
I mean, we're almost, we we have
a reserve.
Capacity that exceeds the amount
of the whole recurring budget.
And I just, again, it's an
extraordinary place to be given.
In 2017, I think we were writing
questionable checks.
And literally sweeping.
I'll never forget David Abbey
basically saying I've run out of
places to find money.
And so here we are today, and I
think the, the threat to the
recurring
Uh, seems very, very small given
that what we've done in terms of
our savings. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Let's move
on to Representative Harper.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
And thank you, Secretary, and uh
Chief Delgado and Chief Torres,
I, I love these presentations. I
love the data, um, and I really
appreciate the new ways that you
try to present them, uh, to help
us understand.
And I think I really only have
um.
Maybe just two observations that
I wanted to.
Share and make sure I've got
these right or get your thoughts
on.
Um, the, the first one is
Um,
We seem to be breaking some
pretty historical trends.
And
And state revenue that I've seen
in two ways. Um,
Uh, the first is
Um, when you look at New
Mexico's economy.
With regards to the
Greater average US economy.
For the last several decades,
the trend has been that we lag
by a couple of years.
Or maybe a year or so, right?
If, if the US economy goes into
recession. New Mexico is usually
not in a recession. We're doing
pretty good for a year or two.
We actually see a bunch of
people moving here who have lost
jobs elsewhere.
And then, of course, the other
side of that coin is true as
well, right? When, when the US
picks up.
Usually New Mexico is, we've
entered our recession, and we're
still doing, still doing badly
for a year or two.
Um, but it seems like that trend
may have been broken here
recently, and I'm,
I'm I'm
If you wanna, uh,
Flip to um
I think it's uh
Um,
Let's see which slide was it on
in
Your
Presentation secretary.
Um,
It only shows the last few
years, sadly, so page 10.
Um,
Right, if, if we, if we put this
chart back, maybe another 2 or 3
decades, you would be.
Easier to see kind of that trend
that I was talking about, but
now it looks like
Um, well, COVID was obviously a
factor here. It looks like we
really entered the recession at
the exact same time the feds
did, and it took us a lot or the
rest of the US did, and it took
us a really long time to get
out.
So
Um,
I know, I guess I'll, I'll stop
and, and ask if
That change in trend is
something that you and your
staff have been observing as
well or if I'm misreading
things.
Chair and Representative Harper,
I'll, I'll start with that, but
you know, happy to hear from the
economists as well. Um, I think
you're right, if we took this
chart on slide 10 back further,
you would see that New Mexico is
much slower to recover from the
Great Recession and the national
economy, and for example, in
unemployment or unemployment
rate stayed high longer, took
longer to get back to trend, but
uh we didn't peak nearly as high
as the US economy during COVID,
and then we um
You know, have uh been a little
slower to come back down, but
we've, we've reached par with
the US economy and.
I would, I would tend to agree.
Mr. Chair and Represent Harper,
I'll, I'll add that I don't
know, I, I think we may still be
lagged.
The the difference is that I
think you're picking up on, it
took us 10 years to recover from
the Great Recession, and it took
us maybe a year and a half this
time around, which is a great
improvement, certainly still
slower than the the national
economy, but
Uh, a new
new upside to to our recovery.
Yeah.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair and
Chief Torres and thank you Mr.
Chair. So, I guess, you know,
what we can maybe learn from
that is
You know, as there are hints
about
Um, you know, there's, there's
some indicators that the US
could be entering a recession,
you know, could not, right?
Um, we should just really be
cautious that not to
Say, OK, but New Mexico will
take a couple of years to go in
and um and we'll
Get out in a reasonable time
frame. So we want to be careful
when we're
You know, looking at
reserves and economic trends
just to understand that.
The world's a little bit
different now, and that, that's,
I feel like that's a trend that
was, that's been broken.
Uh, another interesting one, and
I think we've talked about this
before, um.
Mr. Chair and and panel, if we
go to page 14.
Um, this one does go back a
little bit further, um.
Uh
There, if you start in this in
this plot and and you look at
Oil prices versus recount.
Um, they, they were very tightly
coupled, um.
Uh, you know, 10 years ago,
right?
Right in that fall in the uh
July, October 2014 time frame
when
Um,
You've got oil prices falling
just a couple months later, the
red cow falls.
Right with it.
Right? And you see the same
thing kind of in
You know, October 15, January
16, um, then it's also very
clear in
April 2020 in July of 2020,
right when the oil and gas price
fell, that rig count fell right
with it. If you put this chart
back in another
Several decades you'd you'd see
that trend.
Um,
But I'm now looking at April 22.
And
We don't see that at all.
Uh, I mean, if
Anything that price fell,
recount stayed the same, and
production continues to
increase.
Um,
So
Chairman and sectarian chiefs,
would you say we've broken that
trend and this is something new,
or is this an aberration?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Harper, I think that's a really
astute observation and you know,
we, we go over this slide each
time and say, look, the these
trends are closely linked, but
right, there are two parts of,
of this time series, most
recently, but also from the 2017
to COVID period, where rigs in
New Mexico stayed elevated even
despite price drops in uh WTI
and I think what you're seeing
there is that amongst all the
different oil production plays
in the United States.
And globally, New Mexico's
geography lends itself and, and
so, you know, we'll talk about
how New Mexico's production has
surpassed other states where,
you know, we're, we've been
growing in the Permian much more
than um some of our other like
states where you see in North
Dakota or Texas, um, and, and
the investment in um drilling
activity is happening more so in
the New Mexico part of the
Permian Basin and the Texas
Basin, and I don't know if um
either of the chiefs want to add
to that.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Harper, I'll just add that it,
I, I also believe that it
relates to that financial
discipline I was referencing
earlier and, and that cuts both
ways. It on on the positive
side.
Uh, if prices decline, they keep
drilling at the same pace, but
that also means that prices
shoot up. We also don't expect
to see rigs climb with it, and
that's because of that
prioritization for profits to
shareholders, and, and that
steady steadiness of capital
expenditures and recounts
regardless of price. So it can
be good and bad depending on the
direction of the price.
That's, and sorry to clarify,
that's geology, not geography.
I'm getting, I'm getting my 8th
grade topics mixed up today
uh, chairman and searching
economist, uh, thank you for
that. Um.
I think maybe just the last
thing I'll mention here, and I
don't know this, if this is, if
you have enough data to say this
is a broken trend yet, but
Um, you know, going back to
Senator Burt's comment, you
know, about local versus state
versus federal government
growth.
Um,
I picked up on hearing that we
really are not seeing federal
growth right now, even though we
see some growth in state and
local.
And I'll just tell you, um,
You know, where I work, um, we
essentially have a, have had a
hiring freeze for the last year
and are expecting that to go
into the future.
Um,
So
Yeah, I'm getting a little more,
a few more data points before
I'll say that we now have a
decoupling between state and
local government growths and
federal government growth.
I guess the point I'm trying to
to bring with these, these
breaking trends is
Um,
I'm, I'm feeling a little
uncomfortable looking into the
future.
Um, I really feel like, um, a
lot of the things that we relied
on in the past to guide our
understanding of the future, we
are, are not things that I would
trust anymore.
Um, and so, yeah, it's great to
say we've had this incredible
growth over the last several
years, and now we see the growth
leveling off.
Um,
So we're in a great place,
right?
I don't know, are we gonna
some new growth period, or we
gonna hit some crazy um falling
off, like we saw the last, you
know, they're they're I've only
been here 12 years and we've
seen two bad ones.
Um, so I just wanna
So yeah, I think we're in a good
place financially, but I'm
really
Just honestly kind of
butterflies and a little worried
about the future because there
are so many fundamental changes
here that
I can't really point to an
understanding of what it'll look
like in the future.
Um, so that said, I guess the,
the last point I wanted to make.
And I really appreciate it, uh,
Mr. Chairman, and, uh.
Chief Torres, you discussion
about reserves at the end, um,
because I was, I was doing some
of that math here based off of
what you had, um.
Before you got there, and if we
just kind of
Um, go to that stress.
Uh
Test plot, um, I just love and I
I like the different way that
you've presented it here.
Um,
There is slide 35.
Um,
I mean, this is, this is great
to look at and to get some
perspective on, but I think it
should also
Drive some of our decisions.
Right? And so,
So let's just assume, right,
this is a stress test. If
We have a moderate recession and
a low oil price scenario, both
of those together.
In 25 and 26.
Um, that's roughly a minus $3.9
billion is what I calculated,
which
would equate to about 33% of our
General fund, so the 33% you
mentioned of reserves we would
need. I was like, OK, good, I, I
can do math here. Um, that's
what I calculated was that if we
only had reserve fund to protect
us if bad things happen over the
next two years, we would need
33%. Um, but I also appreciate
what um
Senator Wurth mentioned and also
you mentioned that we have other
sources besides reserves to go
to if we have problems. We could
also cut our spending.
Um,
I, I do think all of us would
cringe and uh the press would
eat us alive if we started
dipping into the early childhood
Trust fund.
So I hope we, we never go to
that place. So in my mind,
that's, even though that is an
emergency, that's kind of off
the table.
Right.
Um,
And, and again, with some of
these other funds, right, with
Grow and such, you know, these
are all things that are
important to us and we really
would not like to.
Dip into those things.
And so I really do think having
a strong healthy reserve.
It's something that we should
still prioritize.
Especially considering the fact
that
Not knowing what the future
really could look like if we
have a precipitous drop, will we
not all be kicking ourselves?
Why didn't we keep a 30% reserve
and why did we go to 25%?
So
I just want to share that
hopefully we um
Or just being prudent and
disciplined in our spending.
We've increased our spending a
ton over the last several years.
Um, there's nothing wrong with
having a healthy reserve,
especially in this period of
uncertainty.
So
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Harper.
Are there any other members with
questions or comments?
Senator Tollman.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters.
For being here. Thank you for
your
Excellent.
Presentations.
Very comprehensive.
Uh, page 15 of Money Matters.
Are you this that there are 5
accounts.
Where you have to keep them,
keep it liquid.
Which reduces the forum.
you can
En
So you, you mentioned the
No tobacco.
On the appropriation contingency
state tax stabilization.
So those 5 funds.
Um, what would it be the total?
Mr. Chair and Senator Tollman,
if I could ask you to turn to
page 19.
Of that money matters brief.
can see the
Balances by fund in the
reserves.
And as you mentioned, the
tobacco, you all have pulled out
of reserves starting in FY 25,
so that can get uh invested more
aggressively. And then as I
mentioned, the the growth fund
there $500 million is only in
reserves in 25.
And you can see the other funds,
the operating reserve is really
the primary reserve fund.
For the state, that's sort of
the checking account.
The tax stabilization reserve is
the savings account. That's a
big one. That's where most of
your reserves are, and then the
other funds, the appropriation
contingency and the state sport
are very small. They, they have
very little impact on the total
reserve balances, and then those
two other large funds are no
longer going to be included in
reserves here in the next budget
year. So it's.
How many billion is that?
So like this is my question is
I guess you, you already, you
said you've already taken.
Mr. Chair, you say you've
already taken two of those
funds.
And uh
Out of uh
The uh funds that you
intending to be liquid.
I know what you're saying?
I guess my question was,
But we need
Who was a total.
And
Do we really need that much?
The liquid.
otherwise we could get those
funds into a higher interest
rate.
I guess you've already thought
of that.
Is that what you're saying? 3.5
billion is the answer. There's
about 3.5 billion in liquid
assets currently, it'll be about
3 billion in the next year, and,
and part of the reason why they
need to stay liquid is so that
they're available for use in the
event of an emergency. For
example, the Early Childhood
Trust Fund is not kept in a
liquid uh um investment, and so
it it would be a little more
difficult to access that funds
and it would take longer to
access those funds in the event
of an emergency. So that's why
um these are, are
So liquid
Um, the emergencies can come
fast and may not have time to
liquidate.
Um, maybe more long term
investments.
Oh, thank you for that answer
and thank you, Mr. Chair, and
the second question is uh
the early childhood.
Well, you know, start out with
300 million and now it's what, 8
billion.
In 4 years. That's
extraordinary.
Well, you must be investing in
high flying hedge funds.
Um, so
of that 8 billion, how much is
I um
Contributions and how much is
earnings.
Mr. Chair, Senator Tollman, you
can find that on page 22.
Um, doing some quick math here,
1.5 plus 1.6 is 3.1 plus 2 is
5.1 plus another 2.3.
is 7.4 billion are
contributions, so maybe $700
million in investment earnings.
700 million and what? In
investment earnings is what my
quick math would suggest. OK.
So I guess it's not as
extraordinary as I thought. I
didn't realize we're putting
that much money into it.
Oh OK.
Well thank you for that answer,
Mr. Chair. And finally,
Uh,
You know, we have an
extraordinary amount of money
and, and, uh, you know,
permanent funds, reserve funds.
And
I don't made any predictions on
how long that.
It's gonna last where we
Reach a point where
We won't be able to rely on
those funds to.
Make up for a lack of
Revenues from other sources. Mr.
Chair and Senator Tollman, um,
hopefully I'm not confusing your
question, but the reserves are
are short term in nature, so in
the short term downturn, um.
I think depending on the
severity of the downturn.
Reserves could last you maybe 2
years, 1 year and a half.
Um, if you're asking more long
term the permanent funds, with
the permanent funds, uh, the
consensus revenue estimating
group is going to publish a
longer term estimate during the
next month in September.
Where you can get a little more
detailed look at.
How that will look. Um, our
last, our previous analysis
suggested that the permanent
funds would be um pretty
successful, not quite 100%, but
maybe say 95% successful in in
fully offsetting.
Oil and gas declining revenues
into the future, but again, um
Presentation shortly with the
publication to come.
Well, thank you, thank you
again.
That's something to look forward
to, but.
So again, thank you for being
here. Excellent report and in
the states really getting their
money's worth from the three of
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Tollman.
Let's go to Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
you guys, I wanna, wanna talk
just real quickly about about
grocery receipts tax growth.
And I think there may be in
there, there has been.
I guess there may be uh thoughts
about.
Maybe reducing the grosser seats
tax rate.
Uh, and Miss chair and, and
members, I want everybody to, to
think about this, we're looking
at what the state does.
Right here. We're not looking
into what's happening with
municipality.
And we, there may be a thought
that well, as the state goes up
X amount all municipalities go
away, so X amount.
And I don't believe that's an
accurate statement to uh to
make.
So when we, when we get ready to
consider something like that.
We also need to look at what
we're doing.
In municipal government.
How are we addressing hold
harmless.
Or, or are we?
In the reduction of the whole
harmless payments and what, what
impact is that having on on
communities.
And I'll, I'll bring up this
right now, uh since representing
Ferrari sitting right over there
and I looked right at her. uh
Las Cruces in Donana County
imposed the whole harmless
taxes.
Right away.
But yet
Just recently, the city of Las
Cruces is looking at an
additional
Grocery sheets tax increase.
It's because those communities
have, have needs and they're
trying to figure out.
How to meet those needs.
I think it becomes important for
the state and for the
For the members
To remember that when they're
doing some of these things or
some of those things are being
discussed.
What impact
There might be on, on municipal
government and how they can
maybe address some of those.
Because these communities,
especially with those old
harmless payments, as they fade
away.
They're going to be uh charged
with
Fiction that, yeah.
Uh, one of the things you could
just hit her with uh uh
groceryfe taxes is that you
change the distribution.
Change the distribution on what
goes to municipalities, uh,
On that, on that entire amount
of GRT distribution because
right, right now it's like
1.225.
And
But if you could raise that uh
an amount which would make them
whole and you can eliminate
whole har.
Um
Just need to consider some of,
some of those things.
And, and Mr. Chair, I think that
When we look at gross receipts
tax and we see that oil and gas
also provides a ton of gross
receipts tax revenue too.
Um,
Only gas is a big deal for us.
And it's volatility is a big
deal for me.
The change in the industry that
you guys are seeing today.
Where you're seeing more
companies consolidate.
And they're consolidating with
more large companies.
Large companies who are
integrated.
You don't just produce.
Who produce and market.
New Mexico, a lot of this, this
real growth in years past were
driven by companies that weren't
integrated.
That only made money by
producing.
And so when we got to COVID.
Y'all remember.
We were actually in an
oversupply situation.
So the price was going down and
COVID hit and and collapsed it.
Uh, so I hope that everybody
pays attention to.
And those things as well, and
I'm, I'm hopeful LFC is because
it's, it's just part of the
equation.
Um
And I think that, I think better
days are ahead.
If we can get this all, all kind
of, kind of lined out, but I
certainly hope, Mr. Chair, we
can find additional
opportunities for our state.
There's oil and gas. I mean, oil
and gas is here for a long, long
time.
What else is there?
And those other things are gonna
be important to people who live
here and opportunity for those
people.
Well thank you for sharing.
Thank you guys for all of this
information.
Thank you, Senator Griggs.
Anyone else who questions or
comments from the committee?
If not, let's go to vice
chairman Campos. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, and of course
to the panelists.
Uh, I really believe we're at
the crossroads of opportunity
and to go to a Representative
Harper's.
Uh, questioning and, and well
thought, well thought out uh uh
points as we deal with it, let's
go into uh some of the
projections for the next 10
years as we're really taking a
look at this and we see the rate
of inflation and of course, uh,
what the feds have done over the
last 4 years to continue to
increase interest rates, uh, and
we might be looking, if you
will, at having those lowered.
How do you foresee for
particularly this generation of
uh entrepreneurs and, and uh
people within government, uh,
how can we
Work to assure that that
inflationary cost will maybe be
at least
Uh, kept under control, but at
the same time as we deal with
lower interest rates, uh,
stimulate the economy in my line
of questioning is, question is
gonna go ahead and be, how do we
address the issues of poverty
and 50% of the population that
is highly dependent on, on
Medicaid and some of these other
issues. If we're going to grow
as a state, the key is going to
be, uh, what level of confidence
can we bring forward and so
these, these questions that I
pose.
are going to be such that uh any
one of you can answer them, uh,
but to help us to go and build
that level of confidence that uh
members of the committee and
others, of course, uh, will be
posing.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Vice Chair
Compost, um.
If I, if I take your correction
or your question, right? It's
sort of along the lines of how
do we diversify New Mexico's
not, not just revenue stream but
economy or next generation and
that's certainly something that
all of you have grappled with as
long as there's been a
legislature and every governor
has grappled with, um.
I mean, as, as the tax
secretary, I can't count how
many times I've said sort of
something in the nature of
The tax policy isn't everything
though we also need all these
other things to be working to
bring opportunity to New Mexico,
so I would probably just
highlight the workforce
development being so key, which
also builds upon our education
system in higher ed and bringing
companies to New Mexico has a
lot to do with quality of life,
which means we need safe
communities, um, and then of
course just opportunity, you
know, clearing roadblocks for
entrepreneurship and and whatnot
in New Mexico. So outside of tax
policy, which of course is
Important. There's all these
other things that we need to
make sure are covered to, to
provide that um right climate
for
Economic diversification and
resilience in the future.
Any other responses?
If not, go, go ahead. That's
fine. Mr. Chair, Senator, I
just, um, from my perspective,
would add that
I think wages are are really the
key higher wages, not
unnecessarily just more jobs as
we're seeing, we may be
approaching full employment, but
really making sure that the jobs
that are being attracted have a
higher wage than the the current
average wages that New Mexicans
are earning, and that is like
through secretary um Sherdon
Clark mentioned my skilling up
New Mexicans by educating New
Mexicans training programs that
um
Uh, can help them qualify for
jobs with higher wages. So, and
that's also through quality of
life, which meaning that you can
attract companies that want to
offer higher wages. I, I really
think that that's a big
Part of the
or the part of the answer that
you're looking for.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, I, I
would agree with both the
secretary's comments and Chito's
comments.
So, so in instance where I'm
going with this as we continue
to go ahead and plan our budgets
for the future and look at the
uh interest uh investments that
we've made over the years as
well, and we continue to go
ahead and if you will, park
resources for using, if you
will, the uh interest uh income
that we can generate uh to take
care of that sustainability.
But again, in leveling off the
resources that we have, and as
we invest those dollars and we
take a look at what the growing
needs for the state happen to
be.
What are some of the things that
you've taken a look at as either
people with tax and rev or
economists and and how this
future is going to affect us.
What, what do you see right now
as the as the balances in order
to go ahead and move forward
with that.
Mr. Chair and Senator Campos, at
least as it relates to your
previous question, um, LFC did
some economic analysis earlier
this year on, you know,
opportunities for higher wages
or or job creation in New
Mexico.
And there is a lot of research
that suggests
Creating those jobs and
providing that training to
people in the most affected
communities with the highest
unemployment or the lowest wages
has the biggest bang for your
buck. So I think focusing
investments on high unemployment
communities, um, that's, that's
one strategy that you all could
employ that.
Could have a higher or a highest
return on, on your investment.
And Senator Campo's chair, I'll
just add, you know, sort of
reflecting the comments they
just made a moment ago about the
other things that make quality
of life are wonderful in New
Mexico, you know, and that we
need to have a workforce that's
trained for the jobs of the
future and we need these safe
communities. I will reflect back
on the work that the legislature
and the executive have done um
in our tax code in the last 5
years that has really moved the
needle um when it comes to
lifting families out of poverty
and creating that opportunity,
um.
You have a speaker, I believe,
from ITEP later today and, and
we talk a lot right now about
the new who pays report that
came out from ITEP and in the
last 3 or so years, New Mexico
moved from 27th up to 9th in
terms of having the most
progressive tax code in the
nation. So we've really done a
lot to target, and we have about
$1 billion of recurring tax
relief that's well targeted
towards low and middle income
New Mexicans, and it doesn't
come across in all the rankings
if you're looking at.
Um, you know, for, for example,
I know a lot of folks in this
room, um, pay a lot of attention
to the kids count report and we
need to work on getting that,
um, that kind of metric included
there because it's not coming
through even though it is making
a huge difference in the lives
of New Mexicans, working
families tax credit has been
increased and expanded twice.
Lichter has been increased in in
indexed for inflation. Uh, we've
taken the tax off about 85% of
Social Security benefits. Um,
we've reduced the GRT
By the, you know, for the first
time in 40 years, and now we've
done this massive pit bracket
reform, all of that well
targeted to make the tax system
more progressive. So, um,
because we're talking tax policy
here today, I think that is, is
another answer to your question
as we go ahead and take a look
at the tax burden and we
continue to go ahead and spread
that so that it's gonna be less
of a burden on individuals and
in order for us to move forward,
the, the, the big key then
becomes, how are we going to
work our way through.
The poverty level. Are we going
to take care of people in our
small communities and create the
stimulus in order for us to move
forward, which
Leads to another point when we
really talk about the, the
investment dollars that we have
with the various funds that we
set up, and then we see the the
rate of interest that is
returned and we're using those
dollars. We're trying to go
ahead and create a rate of
stability when it comes to not
only our state budget but future
planning.
But in but in doing that,
How many more funds as an
example, and we sustain. I go
back 30+ years to indicate we
had 225 funding sources, and
when you have all these buckets,
these pots with the resources
are there, and then of course,
2007 2008 and 2009, we started
to go, if you will, through the
downturn, but we don't want to
get to that point.
What we really want to do is to
be able to create sustainability
and, and more of the prosperity
for people in, in, in all of our
communities and that's gonna be
a big concern because the
numbers that we see today.
are impressive. They're, they
give us hope.
But, but that doesn't last if we
don't find ways, uh, has it
already been mentioned by by
several of, of the members of
this committee, uh, if we don't
find ways to create.
That new level of sustainability
in order for us to go forward. I
don't know if anyone wants to
respond to that, but if not, I,
I just have one other question.
OK, so in terms of the uh uh
setting up additional funds, are
your thoughts?
Uh, that we can continue to go
ahead and do this because I'm
already hearing conversation
about setting up additional
trust funds using that term.
Or if you will, uh, revenue
streams or uh funds that we can
use interest for other purposes.
Are there, are there any
thoughts in regard to that in
terms of where is the stopgap,
if we're gonna be moving forward
in that direction.
Well, let me start, uh, Mr.
Chair and Senator Campost, just
by saying um the challenge I
think of this generation of
policymakers has been to find
ways to responsibly transfer
this all this now money then
it's more than we can handle
intom money and so, for example,
creating up a higher ed
endowment, the Early Childhood
trust fund, uh, fully funding
the opportunities scholarship,
all, all kinds of things of that
nature, things related to our
environment, our safety, um, I
think those are all.
Ideas that should be considered
again, just how do we plan to
use all this revenue that we're
experiencing today that we
recognize is not sustainable and
transfer it into something that
will benefit us for years to
come. I, I think I would turn to
either of the other folks about
future, you know, uses of funds,
that's more on the appropriation
side than the tax side, but I, I
would just want to reflect that
we've done an amazing job of
planning for that in the last um
several years together.
Mr. Chan, Senator, I'll just add
that, you know, turning this
into a more of a revenue
question that I'm comfortable
with, uh, the, the
gap of revenues between or the
gap between revenues and
appropriations has certainly
shrunk.
So the opportunity, um, I would
say is certainly still there,
but maybe a little more
complicated or a little harder,
um.
You know, the non-recurring
appropriations to Secretary
Chardon Clark's point is one way
to manage a surge of current
non-recurring funds that we may
be experiencing due to oil and
gas production or other um
one-time sort of boosts. So you
can, there's sort of this.
Um, set of strategies to handle
those one-time surges in
revenues, you can make
non-recurring appropriations
now, you can convert them into
trust funds instead of spending
now and save them for the
future, and with this new
strategy in the growth fund, you
can sort of stretch them over
several years' worth of
appropriation. So they're sort
of the, you have a choice with a
lot of this funding, you want to
use it now, you want to save it
for the midterm, or do you want
to use it later in the future or
or invest it for the future, and
I think all three of those
Opportunities still exist with
this revenue source, but they
may um be increasingly competing
with each other and, and uh a
choice for you all.
Mr. Chairman, I, I, I, I'll just
only add that um.
Along with the comments that
were made, another viable option
would be to continue to invest
in the current.
funds that are there. Uh, for
example, if we look at in the
current forecast what's going to
be invested in the severance tax
permanent fund from those
triggers from uh OA and FML over
the forecast period is
cumulative of $8 billion just in
our current forecast. And as
policymakers, as Chief daughters
mentioned, there's multiple
options that you could pursue,
uh, such as modifying that
investment, increasing it um in
these funds or others.
Thank you. Uh, the, the last
question that I have is
Related in a sense to tax
forgiveness and you have
communities like uh Riodoso, Las
Vegas, some of these others that
have dealt with the issues of
fires and floods over the the
the last uh season, if you will.
As we've we've gone through this
and
In that these communities
continue to see, if you will,
um, a decline not only in the
economy, but as we talked about
earlier.
Possibly the loss of wages,
jobs, and uh a change in their
economy. Are there some thoughts
or ideas that you all might have
that as we go into uh the 2025
session, uh, that we'd be able
to offer additional relief.
Uh, to the communities in our
state when they're faced with
some of the uh destructive, if
you will, or, or, or just these.
Uh, devastating situations that
that have already occurred. I
can start with that, Mr. Chair
and Vice Chair Compost, um,
certainly your community of Las
Vegas is familiar with um the
impacts across all parts of life
that a devastating fire can have
on a community and uh Las Vegas
is is a year or so ahead of
Riodoso and Mescalero and and
some other areas of the state in
recovering from that sort of
event. Um, I do want to note.
That the taxation and revenue
Department used its own
authority to extend the
deadlines of the taxes due in
those communities, so any
business or or person who had um
gro receipts tax or estimated
payments or anything of that
nature due in the months after
the fire had about a 3 month
extension, which hopefully, um,
you know, took care of.
At a time of disaster, they
weren't having to worry about
getting on and filing their
taxes, at least, um, but of
course we can't relieve the tax
that's owed without an act of
the legislature, um, looking
back to the last session, of
course, we passed a couple um
fire recovery related items in
the tax bill, there was a credit
related to home recovery that um
regulation and licensing
department is gearing up to
certify, and then of course
there's the um GRT credit
related to legal services.
Both of those are concepts we
could revisit, um, they wouldn't
apply to the new fires in Rio in
Mescalero, um, and I, I, I will
just say um that Taxin Rev would
recommend if, if we look at
anything related to that that we
look at deductions rather than
credits, GRT credits that we're
administering or
More difficult than they need to
be. I'll just, I'll just kind of
leave it simple like that, but
um, but I think we would plan to
talk about those types of things
again.
Mr. Chair and Senator Campos,
um, LFC is also
Looking into, I, I think
emergency funding, the way the
state.
Appropriates or manages
emergency funding is, is really
ripe for refresh, um, the
process is, is old and, and
unclear. I think there is a lot
of opportunity to um do better
when it comes to the process or
accessing and uh um
appropriating emergency funding
and mitigating for emergencies.
So I think uh LFC is certainly
considering it and I'm, I would
expect to see recommendations
throughout the fall.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, just uh in closing, I
want to indicate that as we deal
with our young families, uh,
they're facing in one that
obstacles as they move forward.
And so the more that we can find
ways to develop, if you will,
innovation for them to help them
so that we can incentivize, if
you will, um, them so that they
stay in, in, in state so that
they continue to build upon uh
the jobs, the wages that you all
are talking about and most
importantly, as we move forward.
Our, our tax base so that uh we
not only advance.
But we definitely work on uh
That part of the population, uh,
that has, um, great need, so
thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you very much, Vice
Chairman Campost, and thank you,
Secretary, and thank you Chiefs
for your presentation this
morning. I
Want to follow up on on the
questions from Vice Chairman
Campos in regards to
Tax expenditures, right? And,
and, and, in my assessment and
what I've heard from the, from
the past week in LFC is tax
expenditures are, are simply a
drawdown.
On, on, on the state, right? And
he, he made mention of
What's the return on the
investment that that we're
receiving as a state that as
lawmakers we can be proud of
when we say we have um
Looked at uh increases in the
child income tax credit. We have
done things in regards to
lowering GRT. We have done
things in regards to opening up
brackets and making our our our
tax brackets much more
progressive and targeting lower
it's not just a drag, but it's
actually something that's an
incentive for people here in New
Mexico.
And is it a messaging thing?
Because at this point in time,
as the chair for tax in the
House,
Where do we go from here?
You know, if, if, if we're not
gonna be given a line of a line
of credit to spend anymore, you
know, where do we go in regards
to doing good things for the
people in our state that there
are much more incentives to be
had, but where do we begin to
target? Is that looking at those
types of exemptions that people
no longer use to try to save
money there? Is it um
There's a number of things I, I
can see, but what do you all
think?
Um
Mr. Chair, I'll take a stab at
that and say that.
I as as the head of Tin Rabbi
probably look at it a little bit
differently. I, I sort of wear
two hats. I think about what
behaviors and activities or tax
code incentivizes, but I also
look at the complexity of the
tax code and the impacts of that
complexity has on the cost of
administrating the tax code, but
also the cost of compliance of
all our individuals and
businesses, and we're out of
line of what's kind of normal in
terms of how complex our tax
code and particularly how
complex our distribution.
are to
You know, hundreds of different
places um that we distribute to
every month. And so, um, I'll
look at it that way, but I think
your question is, is more about
incentivizing behavior, um.
And the hard part is that, you
know, you mentioned should we
repeal some of the tax
expenditures that people aren't
using much anymore. And yes, I
would say we should, but because
people aren't using them very
much, it doesn't really raise
much revenue to do so. It just
cleans up, makes the blue book a
little thinner, um, but, you
know, I, I'm always gonna be to
the extent possible, advocating
for broad-based changes to the
tax system rather than narrow
carve outs for one group or
another. Now, don't get me
wrong, there are certainly times
where there's.
A time and a place for that, but
for example, to reform the pit
brackets to um decrease the
statewide GRT rate, those are
going to have more meaningful
impact than potentially some of
the carveouts that we put in the
tax code.
Mr. Chair, I would highlight
that simplicity, uh,
conversation that you and the
Secretary made, um, not just
Or, you know, I, I think it's
particularly important for new
businesses and business owners
who are trying to start a
business, the complexity of the
tax system can be intimidating,
daunting, and I, I wouldn't
underestimate um um the benefit
of cleaning up the tax code. You
may not net a lot of revenue
from it, but it's certainly a
benefit to New Mexicans to have
a much simpler tax code. Um, I
also think that there's a lot of
work still to be done on revenue
stabilization. I highlighted a
couple of those areas, um, in my
presentation, and that's certain
was in the purview of your
committee to try to tackle and
and uh make sure that the state
is on more stable footing. I
think there's plenty of
opportunities there. Um, the
property tax, I, I think that's
been something that's maybe um
not a focus of the legislature
for some time that could use
some updates. Um, I think
there's a lot of opportunity for
improvement, even, even without
necessarily a large budget for
revenue reduction.
Thank you. And, and one last
question, and it, it focuses on
a lot of things that we've
talked about today and knowing
that oil and gas is the major
contributor to what we have in
this state. Uh, I, I did see a
report on one of the local news
channels recently in regards to
the land commissioner talking
about um
The state potentially leaving
leaving about $405 million on
the table because of the rate we
charge, which uh it could be
raised from 20% to 25%, which
would be more on trend with
what.
I understand Texas is doing.
I'm, I'm not, I'm not
suggesting.
One way or another, but what
Is your sentiment and, and, and
should we bring the land
commissioner into a form like
this and, and have her discuss
it more on a broad-based scale
during the interim versus.
In the middle of a session.
Mr. Chair, um,
I think that would be a great
conversation to have. We have a
lot of analysis comparing those
royalty rates across states and
and our total tax burden on oil
and gas producers in New Mexico
that we would be happy to
contribute to that conversation,
but I will note just for, for
the committee's clarification
that those royalties don't go to
the general fund, so they
wouldn't, um, there's certainly
worth thinking about and
absolutely worth the
conversation, but they do go to
the land grant permanent fund.
So, uh, a slightly separate
conversation from um a revenue
neutral tax pack.
to the general fund just want to
make that clarification.
OK. Anyone else questions or
comments before we
Let them go, yes, ma'am.
In phonics. Uh, going, thank
you, Mr. Chair, going back to
what Senator Campos was talking
about in investments and
pensions, we were looking at the
permanent funds in state
investment, um.
Uh, holdings and
If you look at the permanent
funds.
We are missing a few topics.
And one of the topics is water.
And one of the topics is health
and human services.
And I would just like to bring
that to our attention for the
future and how we might protect
some of our services. Thank you.
Good. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you folks for your presentation
this morning. We appreciate you
and all you do for us.
Next on our agenda we have and
we can move up Mr. Carl Davis,
who's a research director for
the Institute of Taxation and
Economic Policy to discuss
taxpayer media
he does know that we are running
ahead of schedule. It's 10:30.
He's not scheduled to 11
o'clock, but he's here online
with us. Good morning, Mr.
Davis. Thank you for joining us
earlier than we thought, but
whenever you are ready, sir, the
floor is yours to begin your
presentation.
Yeah, absolutely. Thank you and
good morning. Um.
I am gonna share my screen. It
doesn't look like I have the
ability to share my screen right
now. It says the host disabled.
Um, sharing
Just one second, we'll, we'll
work on that.
OK. All right. Well, yeah, good
morning again. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, members of the
committee for inviting me to
speak with you today. Um,
I'm gonna apologize up front for
not being there in person,
although I'm guessing I, I might
actually be more disappointed
about that than you are. I've
had the pleasure of visiting New
Mexico 3 times in the last year
or so, and it's, I just always
enjoy it so much, I think the
people are great, the food's
great, the scenery is great, and
it's so varied. I think a lot of
people don't realize that about
New Mexico. It's just such an
incredibly uh beautiful state.
Um, but anyway, I couldn't come
in person today cause I had a
conflicting travel plan, but
hopefully I can come back again
soon.
For those of you who aren't
familiar, and it looks like I do
have screen sharing now, so let
me.
Put these up. OK, did that work?
Yes, that's working. OK,
fantastic. All right. So for
those of you who aren't familiar
with ITEP, um, a little bit of a
refresher on our, our
organization. We're a nonprofit
and a nonpartisan research shop.
Our headquarters is in DC, uh,
but our largest team works on
state level policy and we have a
significant remote presence
around the country. We have
folks in Arizona and California,
Louisiana, and so on. Um, a lot
of our work goes into tax policy
modeling, and I've presented to
you before, um,
Last year on some of those
results, particularly in our
Hupei study, um, but today is a
little different, and the issue
at hand, I'm gonna be talking
about is a little bit less
numbers heavy. I'm gonna focus
more on some of the concepts
specifically around taxing
business inputs under the GRT.
So slide number 3 here, this is
meant to give you a road map on,
on where I'm hoping to take you
today. Um, I'm gonna be talking
about pyramidding under the GRT.
What it is and what it isn't,
and I want to get into some of
the problems with pyramidding,
particularly those that are
showing up in in the more
theoretical economic literature,
um, but I also want to try to
give you a really practical
perspective on this question,
which I think is crucial to
understanding why pyramidding is
so common, not
In New Mexico, but really all
around the country. Um, and, and
finally I'm gonna wrap up by
comparing and contrasting a
couple of alternative approaches
to this issues, um, specifically
looking at tamping down on
pyramidting by keeping rates low
versus pursuing a more tailored
approach, uh, with exemptions
for certain kinds of business
purchases.
So, starting with the, you know,
some, some definitions to, to
kick us off, you know,
pyramidding arises out of the
taxation of business inputs
through a sales tax or a gross
receipts tax, um, we were
talking here not about the GRT
being charged on the final sale
to you as a customer, but it's
the amount of GRT being
collected upstream when a
business is paying GRT on maybe
some kind of utility bill or a
service or or some kind of, you
know, equipment in their office,
some
Kind of uh input into their into
their uh business process. And
I, I wanna hammer home here that
taxing business inputs is not
the same thing as pyramidding.
Pyramidding is really a subset
of that broader issue, and I
think both the quotes I have
here um on slide number 4,
helpful in in pointing this out.
The first one is, is coming from
one of the most widely cited
national papers attempting to
measure taxes on business
inputs.
And the second one is from one
of the most widely used books
for for teaching tax policy in
the US today. It's actually a
book that was required reading
many years ago when I took my
first public finance class and
um when I was taught this
concept actually I wasn't taught
of it, I taught it as as as
being called pyramidding. Uh, we
were, we use the word cascading,
um, that's what Joel Slimrod
uses his in his book. As far as
I know, those two terms are
interchangeable. I don't see any
kind of technical difference
between them. The key point
Is that in in both of these
quotes I've underlined the key
passage which is meant to
pyramid refers to a case.
We're the same value of a
product is taxed more than one
time. And, and, and that's
crucial to, to understanding why
not every business input tax um
leads to pyramid, um, because on
slide number 5, you can see from
New Mexico's perspective there
are at least 2 very common
scenarios where, where you can
see an input tax that's not
paired with the final tax at the
retail level. Um, the first
scenario is if the final retail
sale is just exempt.
Um, this is very common. Tom
Clifford, who I know many of you
know, did a presentation on this
back in 2010, where he estimated
that around two-thirds of final
sales um in, in New Mexico were
exempt. Um, this is very common
in the states because we see so
much spending on things like
shelter, education, healthcare,
groceries, so on, things that
are, are largely exempt from
sales tax on the on the final
sale. And if you're taxing the
input.
Without applying an additional
layer tax later at the at the
final sale, it's a whole lot
less likely that there's a
stacking going on and, and
pyramidding just isn't the right
word to describe what's going on
in that case. Um, the second
scenario.
From a New Mexico perspective,
if you're talking about an input
to a product, like say, oil and
gas, just as an example, where
the final sale is likely to be
outside the state, then from
your perspective of New Mexico
taxes, you, you may not be
applying an input level tax
because you may not be applying
a second layer on the final sale
because you don't have the
authority to tax the final sale
anyway. It's happening in in
some other state or some other
country. And so you're not
creating pyramidding within your
own New Mexico.
system. Now, nationally, there
may be some pyramidding going
on, uh, or internationally, but
that's less of a concern to you
if your aim is, is, is to
collect some tax on the activity
that's occurring within your
state before the exporting
occurs and the activity moves
outside um of your borders.
So slide number 6, this is, I,
I'd like to just reflect briefly
on how pyramidding is being
talked about and, and
represented in in the dialogue
over this issue. This is a
visual representation put
together by a very prominent
national organization trying to
show how pyramidding works in
practice. A lot of folks have
seen this before. The idea here
is to show the different stages
of the supply chain.
And how applying tax more than
once in the supply chain leads
to the ultimate tax amount paid
being higher than what the
customer is gonna expect. Um,
the problem with this chart,
which, which again, I, I, I said
it's, it's been seen by a lot of
folks is that I, I think it
leaves the reader with an
exaggerated view of the
pyramidding problem. Um, we have
an example here where the the
final consumer is paying a tax
that's 3 times as large as they
expect. Um, they're facing a tax
bill that's swallowing up about
a
of the tax-inclusive purchase
price that'd be like a 33% tax
rate relative to the pre-tax
price, which is how we usually
think of a sales tax or GRT, um,
I think when you, when you lead
with something like this,
People are inclined to think
that pyramidding is, is a very
daunting problem. This does not
look like a good setup by any
means. Um,
The reality though, I, I think
looks a bit different and and
slide number 7, to be clear,
this is a national finding from
EY I combed through um all the
various New Mexico specific
publications on pyramidding that
I could find, and there are
several good ones, but I
couldn't find an equivalent
version of this chart, and and
so I wanted to go with this one
cause I really think this is a
pretty intuitive way um to
present it. Um, a couple of key
takeaways here are that first a
lot of business input tax.
is falling on these industries
like real estate and health care
and social assistance where they
tend not to be so many taxes at
the final sale level, so there's
not really a pyramidding problem
in those particular industries.
We don't see layered taxation.
The second thing is that when
you look at the industries that
are taxed on final sale like say
retail trade or food services,
the business input tax even then
is typically quite a bit less
than half the picture off it's a
3 or even less than that. So,
you know, for example, the
authors they were looking at
retail here, they show an an
advertised average tax rate of
4.3% nationwide, that's boosted
by about a percentage point by
the business input taxes that
you can't see on
Your receipt that you get at the
cash register. Um, so it's, it's
really about a 5.3% tax you can
only see 4.3% of it. In New
Mexico, the effects probably a
bit larger than that just
because you do have such an
exceptionally broad tax base,
particularly in regard to
services, um, but even so, I
don't think there's any reason
to think that most of the retail
tax um is is being hidden hidden
as this embedded input tax and,
and, and, and why is that, you
know, I, I mean, you've probably
seen um the numbers we know that
Something like 50, maybe as much
as 60%.
Of the GRT base in New Mexico is
coming from business purchases.
Um,
I think a reasonable off the
cuff reaction to that might be
to say, oh well, you know, half
the taxes is happening earlier
in the supply chain, um, you
know, half the tax is hidden and
I'm actually being twice taxed
as much, twice as much as I
think I am. I don't think that's
really an accurate way to think
about it though for some of
these for for some of these
reasons I've been touching on,
the 50 to 60%.
Business input slice of the GRT,
it spread across a much broader
base of purchase types than just
taxable final consumption in New
Mexico. It's falling on things
again where say the the final
sale is tax free under statute,
it's falling on products that
are getting exported anyway,
particularly in the energy
sector. Um, I don't think it's
really much of a surprise that
um when you look at the EI
report for the top 10 states.
When it comes to their reliance
on business input taxes through
the sales tax for the top 10 are
oil and gas states. So when
you're comparing to New Mexico
to to its peer states in terms
of this energy production, um,
it ends up looking, uh, not so
much like an outlier really.
Slide number 8 is is talking
about something we hear very
often uh with pyramidding and
that's that it's a tax on a tax.
And I, I think that message
resonates with a lot of people,
and I think there's some amount
of truth behind it.
But I also think it's something
that we see exaggerated very
often and, and to show you that
why that is. I'm gonna walk
through an example here. Um,
this is an example where I, it's
actually a pretty high
pyramidding scenario. This is a
scenario where where a lot of
business inputs are being taxed,
and even so,
Most of the problem going on
here is not a tax on a tax, a
tax applying a tax to itself.
That's not most of the problem.
So we, I mean, briefly, we have
a three layer uh production
process here, saying in the
first layer of the raw material
stage, you have a company
spending $150 on inputs, paying
an 8% tax, that's $12 in tax in
stage one.
Um, the product is moving
through the production process.
It, it gains value as it does,
and say in stage 2 you have $600
of inputs.
Much larger amount getting hit
with that 8% tax. That's gonna
be $48 right there. And then on
top of that, the, the $12 in tax
from stage one is also subject
to that 8% tax, um, potentially
depending on the, on the
particular input we're talking
about. And so that's gonna be
about another $1 of tax there.
That's $1 of the tax on a tax,
taxing that $12. And then
finally stage 3, the goods
selling for $1000. That's a, um,
that's a price where you're
going to cover all these input
costs I've been talking about.
It's gonna cover the input
taxes, it's gonna turn a bit of
a profit, and there's an 8% tax
on the final sale that that
everyone can see. Um, that's $80
on the, on the $1000 sales
price.
So what just happened in in this
relatively again, pretty high.
Uh, intense pyramidding
scenario. Well, you can see the,
the effective rate.
I almost doubling. Folks think
they're paying an 8% rate, and
yet, really if you have these
input taxes it's closer to 15%.
So again, high pitting scenario,
Um, but despite that, even in
this case, the vast majority of
what's going on here is not
applying a tax to itself. I mean
the middle pie chart is showing
you that just 4%.
Of the overall tax applied in
this case is that tax on a tax.
The other 96% is something else
entirely. Um, that's applying
tax to the final sale or to the
to the value of the economic
value of inputs going into it.
Um, and then the, the chart on
the right, if you want to focus
just on the input taxes and put
aside that final retail sales
tax. Even then, more than $9.10
dollars of the input taxes being
collected are on economic value
of the input, not, not on the
tax itself. So this isn't to say
I don't, you know, I don't think
that necessarily applying a tax
to itself is a good idea. Um,
but this is really just putting
the problem in perspective. I
think sometimes this is lost and
and and we'll hear the tax on
the attack.
Uh, kind of bumper sticker
slogan put right up at the top
of the debate, um, when I think
maybe that should be a little
lower on the list of concerns
because that's not the primary
effect of, of what uh pyramiddy
is doing.
So yeah, and slide number 10.
Just zooming out slightly for a
minute, um.
Alright, let's let's go beyond
just pyramidding and talk about
the broader concept of taxing
business inputs.
You know, if you look at what's
being written on this subject,
you know, both by industry and
in the public finance
literature. I think the most
common arguments uh can be
sorted into maybe 6 or 7
categories. The first is that
taxing business inputs is
contrary to the fundamental
principle of of a retail sales
tax or even a GRT what uh as as
New Mexico defines it, what they
mean by that is that these taxes
are supposed to apply to final
sales, not to the production
process.
And I think that criticism
personally is based on on an
overly theoretical view of what
business input taxes are
actually doing in our real
world, um, but it, it's not.
A meritless critique, and I'll,
I'll elaborate on that in a
minute, but this is definitely
part of the dialogue, so I
wanted to put that front and
center. Um, the second critique
we hear a lot is that business
input taxes are distortionary.
They can encourage firms to
vertically integrate.
They'll bring more of their
business functions in-house, so
they don't have to buy as many
things from other companies and
pay GRT on those purchases. I'm
sure you've heard this before.
Um, I, I think it's a fair
point. Um, it's not one that I'm
aware of a whole lot of deep
analysis on that can really let
us quantify the significance of
that distortion in practice, um,
but, but there, there are good
reasons to, you know, to expect
the uh effect exists.
The third thing is that
depending on how your sales or
GRT structure is set up.
You can get divergent impacts
across industries. If you have
an industry that's really buying
a lot of um inputs as part of
this process. Um, it's gonna see
a higher effective rate than an
industry that doesn't have to do
that.
The 4th argument though,
actually cuts in a different
direction.
And says, well, maybe in, you
know, neutrality across
industries, maybe we don't need
to worry about that and we
should actually care about
pyramidding.
And in certain sectors,
especially places like
manufacturing or agriculture
where they're competing in a
national market or even an
international market, and maybe
they don't have the pricing
power they need to pass along a
business input tax to customers
and I can put them in a tough
spot.
Um, the fifth argument, business
input taxes are opaque, you
know, again, they're not showing
up on your, on your receipts
when you buy something, and I
think that's a fair point. Um,
these taxes are mostly falling
on, on final consumers, but they
can't, they can't see it, they
can't see the full cost to
government that they're paying
for. They can't see the full
scope of what is in particular a
regressive tax being used to
fund government.
Um, a 6th point is that taxing
business inputs, it can add
complexity in some situations,
particularly if you have a
business that's early in the in
the production process it's
primarily selling B2B. If you
weren't taxing business inputs,
it might not have to, to bother
with collecting and remitting
GRT at all. Um, for those
businesses, I think the
complexity argument does have
some merit. They have to fill
out a return they wouldn't
otherwise. Um, of course, we
also know, and, and as the
secretary was allud
I, I believe there's, there's
complexity in business
exemptions as well. So I think
that that argument is a is a
little um
Uh, there's a lot to unpack
there and I'll get to that a
little more later. And then
finally the tax on the tax
argument, as I said, I would put
this closer to the bottom of my
list as opposed to the top, but
it, it is, it is an effect
that's going on.
So
We have, you know, we have all
these arguments.
Agains taxing business purchases
and, and to be clear, these
aren't new. These have been
around for
Probably more than a century
now. I mean, I've seen writing
on this that goes back to the
1930s when the very first
general sales taxes uh were
being created in the United
States.
And
Despite that long history, and
we look around the country,
there's no state that's really
taken the quest to end
pyramidding all that seriously.
I mean every state with a broad
sales tax, um, again, according
to EY is getting at least 3 of
its revenue from taxing business
inputs. Um, a reasonable figure
for New Mexico's is is uh
probably closer to 50, maybe as
high as 60%. That sounds high at
first glance. It's a little less
of an outlier when you consider,
well, the national average is
42.
So this is something we we're
really seeing everywhere. Um, I
also think the New Mexico share
is very likely being driven up
by economic factors just as much
as statutory ones. So say the
fact that your state has a big
oil and gas presence and a big
federal government presence and
that you're able to raise
revenue from taxing inputs into
those industries. I expect
that's contributing to to New
Mexico's relatively uh higher
business input reliance.
Um, but anyway,
The question is that I want to
pose is we have this list of
reasons not to tax business
inputs, but it turns out there's
not a single state that's found
them compelling enough to really
fully embrace them and scrap the
business and put tax entirely.
And why is that?
And I, I think the answer is
because the issue is really
More complicated and the
trade-offs are more stark than
The very neat textbook version
of this debate would would make
them sound.
And so this slide here, it's
one.
Um, you know, I'd like to pause
and, and discuss this for a few
minutes. Uh, this is slide
number 12, and this is a new
thing I just put together for
this presentation, so I'm, I'm
curious to hear what you think
of it. Um, hopefully it's a tool
for thinking through some of the
trade-offs and maybe sparking
conversation. We have 3 rows
here, um, the first is taxing
business inputs broadly. That's
one approach to this issue. The
second is taking a piecemeal
approach and exempting business
inputs in part, but not
entirely, and then the
would be more of a purist's
approach and exempting business
inputs entirely. And the reality
here is every state, as I said,
it's gonna fall more in that
middle row to one degree or
another. The top and bottom rows
are meant to help you think
through.
The advantages or the
disadvantages of tilting more or
less in either of those two
directions, um.
We start in the first column as
an example, hopefully that this
can make the exercise a little
more clear. You know, if you
As I said, if you're taxing
business inputs, you're giving
an advantage.
vertically integrated firms,
which most people would consider
to be a downside to that policy
choice. So I've saved the all
red to show that as a weakness
of of taxing business inputs.
Um, exemptions, if you're doing
exemptions that can uh lessen
the advantage, so the business
exemption scenario is shaded
green. There's less of an effect
on vertical integration choices,
and then the partial exemption
scenario, the middle ground is
shaded yellow. Some exemptions
are going to matter more to
vertical integration than
So there's a lot of murkiness
here about, you know, how, you
know, there, there's a lot of
variation across states and in
in the exemption approach and
how much it really would matter
to vertical integration, um, the
devil's in the details as it, as
it so often is in tax policy.
I, I, I'm not gonna talk through
every single square on this
slide, but I'm gonna hit on a
few of the trade-offs, uh, that
I think are, are notable and,
and maybe some of which have
been a little bit um under under
examined. Um,
In the second column,
We see this idea that the tax
code should be
Neutral
Toward the kinds of inputs that
go into producing a good or
service. I think that's a a
reasonable principle, um, but
Short of a full sweeping
business exemption, which again
no state does, there's potential
for meaningful distortion even
under a a approach where you
start doing selective exemptions
um of inputs to try to, to, to
try to um lessen your lessen
your reliance on business input
tax. So, you know, the example I
have in mind here is you think
of a shopping mall, you have a
shopping mall that wants to to.
Boosted sales or ways you could
go about doing that, maybe it
launches a new advertising
campaign, maybe it, you know,
beefs up its landscaping to give
it more curb appeal. Maybe
there's, you know, repairs and,
and, uh, remodeling done on the
interior just to make it a more
pleasant place to shop, you
know, as a legislator, if you're
picking and choosing which of
those things you're going to
tax, which ones of those get
exemptions, uh, you are
inevitably putting your thumb on
the scale and you could
potentially end up with a
situation that's even more
distortionary than if you had a
very broad
Uh, uh, tax on business inputs
to begin with. So the point here
is that adding more exemptions
isn't necessarily going to get
you more uh neutrality, even if
it gets you closer to that
textbook version um of of what
an economist would want a GRT
base to look like.
The 3rd column, this is talking
here about firms that compete
with an out of state business,
whether they have to pay input
taxes and, and whether that's
making them uncompetitive. Um,
the data from, from EY that's
been presented to this committee
in years past. It, it seems to
suggest that New Mexico has
prioritized those kind of
industries to a to a pretty
significant degree already. Um,
the classic examples of a
national market business would
be say manufacturing or
agriculture, um, and according
to the the the presentation.
that have been given something
around like 3/4 of those
industries inputs are already
exempt, um, so that seems to be
something that that the state's
already pursuing and that you're
you've already pursued through
um the, the targeted exemption
approach. Now way over in column
number 8, which I realized I
should have numbered after I put
this together, but it's the um
it's the column labeled evasion
potential. I think there's a few
notable things here. You can see
that there's less likelihood.
For gaming and evasion under a
very broad-based system where
you're doing less line drawing
where you're saying, hey, we're
gonna tax this kind of purchase
but not that kind. It's a very
common thing in tax where you
draw lines and, and there's
there's gaming that's gonna
occur. Um, the Florida
Department of Revenue, they
looked into this, it's been many
years ago now, but when they
looked into this, they estimated
that about 5% of the exemptions
claimed using business
certificates involved some kind
of abuse or misuse.
You know, 11 pretty common way
that happens is you'll have
smaller businesses that are
making purchases, um, for
personal use, or oftentimes it
may be a purchase that's made
for a combination of personal
use and business use, um, but
they'll claim that the, the
purchase is entirely a business
input, entirely business use and
it should get an exemption.
That's the kind of uh gray areas
you create inevitably with with
line drawing.
Um, the column after that on
exportability, um, there's some
notable research out of Hawaii,
um, suggesting that taxing
inputs is an is an effective
means of raising more revenue
from non-residents, and I think
there are good reasons to think
that's true in New Mexico as
well. I mean, especially if
you're taxing inputs to the oil
and gas industries or the
federal government purchases
happening at Los Alamos and
elsewhere, the ultimate
incidence of that is largely
going to fall outside the state.
And so what that means
if you're exempting more
business inputs depending on
what it is you're exempting that
could result in uh New Mexicans
having to carry a larger
relative share of the state's
tax loan that's left over after
those exemptions that go into
place.
Volatility, um, that's the
second to last column here.
I think this is worth unpacking.
I know volatility is a huge
concern in New Mexico. Um, if we
put aside the energy sector just
for a moment.
Typically the most volatile
part.
Of a sales tax or a GRT is going
to be the tax levied on this big
ticket purchases. So if the
economy is slowing down,
consumer sentiment sentiment is
going south. We often see a
bigger slowdown in areas like
buying motor vehicles, like
buying appliances, potentially
some of the big invest big uh
business investment purchases
too. Um, so from a volatility
perspective, one question to ask
is if you're gonna do a new
exemption, is it gonna make you
more reliant on taxing those big
ticket items.
Um, think about, say, you know,
a new exemption for accounting
services. Um, I don't have data
on this, but uh, you know, if we
think that accounting services
are relatively stable part of
the economy. You have to keep
books no matter what, um, taking
the sales, the GRT off of
accounting services would mean
that the pie, the tax base
that's left over is gonna be a
little more uh big ticket and
durables heavy uh than it was
before, you could potentially
see an uptick in volatility
there. Um, also
If you're taking, say that
you're not, not particularly
interested in taking GRT off the
oil and gas industries and you
want to do um more exemptions
for other, other kinds of um
businesses, more local
businesses, that sort of thing.
Well, again, if you're
If you're carving out, you know,
the more stable businesses,
which almost all of them are
more stable than oil and gas.
Um, you end up with oil and gas
being a a larger share of your
GRT uh revenue, and, and so
that's another potential source
of of added volatility. So, um,
different exemptions could will
impact your volatility in
different ways.
And so the last column here,
getting to this question of
sales tax principles because I
we very often hear.
You know, an appeal to principle
as part of a pitch for exempting
business inputs.
I, I think the reality is
actually pretty complicated
though. The, the purists in the
economics profession, they
always make this argument in two
parts. First, they say, well,
first, all business input should
be exempt.
And second,
You know, all consumer purchases
or nearly all consumer purchases
should be taxed. And
I don't feel like I'm going out
on much of a limb here to say
that second thing is, is just
isn't gonna happen, you know,
you have, you're, you're talking
here about taxing people's homes
and their rent and their
groceries and their healthcare
and their education and all this
stuff that that no state does,
and, and it's, it's unpopular,
it's very difficult to tax, um,
in some cases, it's
administrative difficult tax
too. Um, so if we accept this
idea that the second half.
Of the economic purists uh
argument isn't gonna happen and
it's ideal form just because of
the uh political barriers, but
also some, some, you know, real
policy concerns around taxing
some of those things.
That has big implications, I
would argue for the first half
of what they're saying, um,
because I showed you earlier, I
think it was slide 7.
A lot of business input taxes
are falling on areas of the
economy where the final sale is
exempt, and so the theory in
this case might lead you to say,
well, you know, in a second best
world, maybe taxing business
inputs as some appeal to theory
if we're able to broaden our tax
base out to sectors that are
otherwise going to be left fully
exempt.
Uh, you know, I hopefully that
makes sense, but of course, I
mean, I know you know full well
you're operating in the real
world, you're, you're probably
not as inclined as I am to get
bogged down in some of this
theory stuff anyway, but I
wanted to raise this because I
just don't think it's true that
proponents of new business
exemptions have a monopoly on
the economic theory here. I
mean, we live in a messy world,
we need to to try to make our
decisions in a way.
That balances a lot of competing
considerations and, and one of
the biggest competing
considerations this probably
won't be a surprise to you
either, um, is shown here on
slide 13.
It's probably the most discussed
trade-off when it comes to sales
taxes and GRTs, and that's that
narrowing the tax base often
leads to higher tax rates in
order to get an adequate amount
of revenue. So we can see
looking at the lowest line in
this chart, um, nationally since
the 1970s, most state sales tax
bases have been eroding because
we've gradually become a country
with a more service-oriented
economy and outside of New
Mexico, most states aren't doing
a very good job of taxing
service.
And the top line here.
The dotted line, it shows you
the policy response. Um, a lot
of states have responded to this
tax base erosion by raising
their tax rates, sometimes
pretty significantly over this
period. Um, you know, the
states, they have to pay for
education, they have to pay for
infrastructure, and, and in the
face of a narrowing base they've
been raising rates.
And uh slide 14 can help you see
how this is playing out across
states.
All the light green states here,
they've enacted modest sales tax
increases since the turn of the
century comparing today to the
year 2000. All the dark green
states have pursued larger
increases, which I'm defining as
a percentage point or more.
Um, and then we only have one
outlier here, and it's you, it's
New Mexico. You're, you're the
only state in the country where
the state level sales tax rate,
putting aside the local rates,
where the state level rate is
lower today than it was in the
year 2000.
Um, back in 2000, New Mexico was
exactly at the national median
with a 5% GRT rate, and you've
pushed that down slightly since
then. Um, but meanwhile, the
national media is going all the
way up to 6% at the state level.
And I know local GRTs have gone
up in New Mexico. They've gone
up in a lot of other states as
well. Um, the data that I have
available don't allow me to add
that to this map. I would if I
could, but I think even the
state story here is is quite
instructive.
So I'm gonna turn to my last
slide, slide number 15.
Um, just, this is really just
elaborating more on the question
of rates and specifically how
they compare to exemptions on
this, on this issue. If you're
concerned about taxing business
inputs.
It's worth being aware, of
course, that both of these tools
can be used to address that
issue to some degree or another.
Um, on the rate cut side, if we
think that something like 50 or
60% of the current tax base's
business inputs, then most of
any rate cut is gonna go toward
lowering the tax on business
inputs 50 or 60 cents on the
dollar.
On the exemption side, of
course, you could tailor it
toward business purchases you
can direct an even higher share
of any tax cutting you do toward
business inputs. Again, though,
I would, I would caution that
it's even then it's gonna be
less than 100%, um, you know,
there's almost always some, some
leakage to the household center,
to the household sector, say for
example, um, for the reasons I I
described in the Florida data,
um, it might be, um, just
because of complexities and
definitions and trying it's,
it's not always easy to bar
households from benefiting.
There might be a behavioral
response. There might be some
outright evasion, but usually
the the even a business
exemption is gonna have some
amount of leakage.
In New Mexico though, you're
very substantial local GRTs, um.
The local policy differences
between these, these two
approaches are, are potentially
large. The immediate effect of a
new state exemption, of course,
is, is gonna be a lower uh tax
revenue for New Mexico
localities as well because
they're their tax bases are
shrinking, and based on what I
just showed you over the last
couple of slides, when you see a
shrinking tax base, um, the
eventual result, not, not
overnight, but the eventual long
run result tends to be a higher
tax rate. And one upshot.
Of narrowing your base,
potentially encouraging higher
local tax rates is that if
you're doing it through
exemptions,
Businesses and industries who
don't have much use for the new
exemptions are actually gonna
end up facing more pyramidding
than they did before because the
local rates they face are likely
to go up. They're not getting
much benefit from the new
exemption and so I think with
this state local interplay here,
it's very apparent that new
business exemptions are going to
create winners and losers.
And, you know, if you're doing
that, you're, you need to be
absolutely certain and very
deliberate about who's gonna end
up on the winner's list and
who's ending up on the loser's
list. So I think it's a peril of
of going too deep deeply into
the, into the business exemption
um route. Um, anyway, I think
hopefully that's a fine place to
leave it. I'm really looking
forward to any questions you
have, Mr. Chair, and, and
members of the committee, and
again, I do appreciate you
taking the time to listen to, to
what I have to say about this.
Thank you.
Mr. Davis, thank you. Thank you
for joining us this morning.
Let's go to questions and
comments from the committee. I,
I don't have anyone on the list
so far, looking to my right.
Let's go to Representative
Harper.
Thank you, Chairman, um,
um, so, uh, and thank you, Mr.
Davies for your presentation. I
I actually really enjoyed a lot
of your comments and I'm just
gonna
I mean, obviously I could talk
about this for a very long time,
but um I
I'm gonna
Be very short cause I know we
have lunch on the way, um, and
we've talked about this a lot,
but
Maybe just a couple quick
points. Um, so I really like
your slide 13.
I think
All of us have seen a very
similar thing with New Mexico.
Um,
And what this slide shows is
that when you narrow the base,
the rates go up.
And we know that, right? I mean,
government doesn't spend less
when we cut taxes, right?
So that money has to come from
somewhere, so
When you narrow what you're
taxing, the tax on everything
else has to go up.
And I think the greatest example
in recent history of this is the
food tax.
Um,
The average statewide average
for
Ross receives tax, state and
local.
When we cut the gross receipts
tax was 5%.
And since then,
You know, withhold harmless
increments and etc. for counties
and municipalities, our average
is now roughly 8%.
Right? So, I mean, that's
That's what we see, right, when,
when you narrow the base, when
you're taxing less things.
Um, but you still need revenue
and you're
And you're increasing spending,
you're gonna have to increase
the tax rate.
Um, so, so I think that's why
this committee and, and the
committees in the House and the
Senate.
Um, over the time I've been
here, I've always talked about
are there ways that we can
broaden the base and, and then
Um, that helps with stability of
your revenues.
Um,
And also use some of that
newfound revenue to lower the
rate.
Um, which I think, uh, Mr.
Chairman and Mr. Davies, you
made a great argument here that
lowering the rate.
Addresses
Pyramidding and also helps not
just a particular set of
businesses, but
Many businesses and families,
right? So lowering the rate is a
good thing.
I think we should all really be
proud of that.
Um,
Chart on slide 14. That's pretty
cool.
Right, it's nice to see New
Mexico leading in tax,
um, here and here and there once
in a while, so that, that's
great.
Um, and I think the really the
Maybe the the other point I'll
I'll I'll make is I also very
much appreciate your slide 12.
Um, spent it looks like you
really spent a lot of time
thoughtfully looking at the pros
and cons.
Of how we tax things, um.
Uh, you know, here, here it's
business inputs, but really.
Um, to me, this is almost
exactly the thought process that
I and some of my colleagues went
through and we're trying to
figure out what to do with our
gross receipts tax.
Right? There's one extreme that,
you know, um,
Senator Scherr really pushes
that I kind of fell in love with
early on before I, I learned a
lot, which is let's just go back
to a pure gross receipts tax,
eliminate all of our exemptions,
deductions, credits, and, and
tax all business inputs, just
tax everything.
And, and then use that to lower
the rate.
And so that's kind of the top
line here, right? It shows it
helps, you know, it prevents the
issue of the disparity that you
see, um, um.
Um, you know, with regards to
Um
I'm sorry here. I'm trying to
read your, your chart with my,
my glasses, but
Um, you know, you have, you have
higher revenue, you have a lower
tax rate, um,
There's less transparency
because there's a lot of
pyramidding, um.
You know, there's problems with
the vertical immigration because
there's lots of pyramidding, so
the, the red and the green and
the yellow here. I, I, I really
feel like you've done a great
job kind of capturing the pros
and cons of
A pure gross receipts tax.
And then you go to the other
extreme. What if we just go to a
pure sales tax.
And that's the, the lower line
here. So you've got the, the
green and red kind of flip,
right? So you're not taxing
business inputs, you, you,
there's more transparency, um,
but your revenue is lower and so
usually you have to raise your
rates and, you know, so I, I
think you've done really kind of
a a nice job here of summarizing
the pros and cons of either
extreme.
And uh kind of the
The sad realization I came to is
that
Um, even though
Like you said, you know, the tax
purists, the, the, the, uh, you
know, the academics, you know,
you know, would say that, you
know, it'd be really nice to
have a pure tax system.
Really what you
Right the the best way is to
compromise and come in the
middle here, you kind of see
the, the bunch of yellows here
in the middle, you know,
somewhat moderate.
You know, but it's not high or
low on either extreme.
And so that's why I think we've
been
Um, moving here as a state in
the last, you know, decade is
trying to be a a good hybrid of
the two approaches.
Where we do have some taxation
on business inputs like other
states do, but we don't tax
others that make us look really
weird, um, and are especially
painful to small businesses
where we don't have a super high
tax rate if we had a pure sales
tax.
Um, but on the other side, um,
You know, this, this effectively
lower tax rate that we would get
with the pure grocery fees tax
comes with a lot of pain because
of all the pyramidding that is
introduced because you now tax
everything.
So
Anyway, I really like
This chart um I I I think says
to us that we've been going in
the right direction, which is to
try to be a hybrid, and a good
hybrid taking the best of both.
And in some cases we've taken
the worst of both. I feel like
we're we're moving in a better
direction with, with our tax
code.
So
Anyway, um,
Like I said, I, I try to be
brief. I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll
pause there, Chairman, and I
just want to thank you, Mr.
Davis for your
Um,
For your thoughtful presentation
and I do think there's
More work for New Mexico to do
to address Loring the rate and
addressing pyramidding, but it's
nice to see that.
You know, like that chart on
page 14 that
You know, we, we are making a
difference in the positive in
some ways.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Representative. Let's go to
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I just
have one question. Uh, Mr.
Davis, in theory,
Um, is it better to lower the
tax rate?
Or to offer more exemptions.
I'm talking in benefit to the,
to the consumer.
Lower tax rates or
Exemptions that will flow down
to
The consumer what would be the
best approach?
Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez, that's
Hugely important question, very
Difficult for me to answer. I
think what I would say is that
My presumption going into and
And and I, my presumption going
into answering a question like
that would typically be
That the rate is the place to
look first, and that for a new
exemption to go into place, it
would have to clear a relatively
high bar. There would have to be
some kind of clear inequity,
some clear economic purpose.
There'd have to be a real case
for it. It can't just be, you
know, this industry, you know,
was the loudest and so they get
an exemption and then this other
one doesn't. So I think, you
know, the exemptions they the
If you start from a presumption
of it not being a good idea, but
if someone can really make a
case for it, um, as, as
Representative Harper was
saying, I think there are
instances where business
exemption might make sense.
Like, for example, I think it's
broadly sensible that New Mexico
has done more to tamp down on
pyramidding and the
manufacturing sector, then it's
done in say the hospitality
sector, I think, or the oil and
gas sector. Um, I, I think
there's, there, there's good
economic development reasons you
might do something like that.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and
I understand, Mr. Davis, you're
probably write a book or a
series of books on
This, this topic, but I
appreciate the appreciate the
input.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez. Let's go anywhere
else? Questions or comments?
Shaman Campos. Uh, thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman. I'm,
I'm really intrigued by the fact
uh how are we gonna deal if you
will, if we consider it, uh,
with a final tax and it goes
back to some of the comments
that have already been made.
And, and so, uh, uh, Mr. Davis,
maybe you can help us a little
bit in terms of
As we take a look at as we've
done food in the past and now
possibly uh construction and
housing definitely is a, is a
significant issue in New Mexico.
What are some of the other ways
that we would be able to provide
incentives so that housing can
become more affordable uh to
this generation.
Mr. Chair, uh, Vice Chair of
compost, yeah, very, um, this is
a hugely, this is a question at
the top of a lot of people's
minds right now. I think a lot
of especially young people are
very frustrated with this, this
combination of high housing
prices and high interest rates
and it makes it very difficult
for them to to achieve the
American dream and achieve home
ownership. Um, I think
You know, a lot of the
more intriguing proposals to me
lately have been focused on
ideas of, hey, how do we help
people um with the initial down
payment.
Um, with the initial cost of
getting into the home, I mean,
it needs to be a mortgage that
can afford over the long run, of
course, but there are hurdles to
getting into the home, paying
the realtor fees and the down
payment and the inspection costs
and all, there's a lot of
upfront cost to buying a home, I
know. So, um I think focusing
on, on that moment.
is, is, is really important, um.
Yes,
a lot of um
So I, I don't know, in terms of
I've thought less about what
what impact the GRT deduction
would have, I guess it'd be very
case by case, but I think from
the, from the from the American.
Uh, consumer's perspective, I, I
think it's that moment of of
becoming a homeowner that's been
the main hurdle for a lot of
folks.
So, so as we go forward, uh, Mr.
Chairman, we talk about the
supply and demand and within
that if we're gonna be talking
about uh the pyramid in tax
system.
And, and it's very difficult to,
to separate, uh, if you will,
one tax, uh, at one level from
another.
What, what would definitely help
us as we go forward as a state.
Uh, that would provide, if you
will, more of the incentives so
that we stimulate the economy,
and I, I.
I don't know if you've thought,
uh.
Very much in depth in terms of.
What it is that we can do within
this as part of it, and, and we
definitely don't want to become
too selective so that we narrow,
if you will, the uh the tax base
and the tax burden, and then we
find ourselves, if you will,
create an additional problems,
but have you thought a little
bit about
Uh, how we could better address,
if you will, the, uh, the
pyramidting tax system for New
Mexico.
You know, 111 additional uh Mr.
Chair and Vice Chair compost,
one additional um thought.
On the housing issue in
particular, I mean, you are
already a state with with
especially low property taxes.
So I think if you were to look
at the all in taxation on real
estate relative to other states,
I would expect that.
You're, you're quite competitive
State in that regard. So to me
that suggests that maybe the,
the first place.
To look isn't more tax code
tinkering and, and, and think
about well, what are these tax
dollars we're raising? What can
they be?
Um, invested in that's, that's
gonna make
Uh, as some of the prior
presenters were saying that's
going to make New Mexico a very
desirable place to live, and
it's gonna draw people in and
draw economic growth in that
way.
So, so as we deal with this,
is part of what what I'm
hearing.
Uh, with our pyramid tax system.
Um,
It's difficult to deal with, but
there are other areas that we
may consider.
Uh, if you will make an
adjustments and as you indicate,
possibly not to tinker much with
our tax code because we have
made some, some great progress
there. What, what are some of
the other areas then tied into,
if you will, uh, our consumers'
sales and uh the future, if you
will, of what our economy can
look like.
Have you possibly considered?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and Vice Chair
compost. I mean, that's, I think
that's a fascinating question. I
think I could, I have some
personal opinions on that. My,
my professional expertise is
more squarely on the tax side,
so I'm always a little reluctant
to wander too far beyond that
because it's slightly less
evidence based than my than my
tax work, but I mean, I would
just broadly speaking, I think,
you know, the um levying a a a
fair.
And neutral and as stable as you
can.
Tax system and just being a good
steward of the money, using the
money wisely to invest in, in,
in New Mexicans' needs. I think
that's the most important uh
thing that the most important
purpose that that government can
serve, it's, it's not gonna that
that that's the government's
contribution to the to the
broader issue of economic
growth.
So as we've gone forward, Mr.
Chair, and one of the things
that of course going back to
Representative Harper years ago
as we were taking a look at our
exemptions, um,
And as we evaluate if you will,
the tax system for possibly
modification, streamlining, and
in particularly with the
exemptions, uh, how we may be
able to take a look at that and
those that are already archaic,
those that aren't necessarily
serving our purpose, uh, as we
move forward.
Are there
Are there some suggestions there
because oftentimes, uh, with the
advocacy groups as they move
forward with their particular
industry, uh, the issue then
becomes for us, uh, how do we
balance that? And so, I don't
know if you, uh, delved into to
those parts that really affect
the uh the overall future tax
system for uh for our state.
Yes.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, Vice Chair of
compass, yeah, I mean the um.
Again, I'll try, you know, I, I,
I think I'm a uh less help on
some of these broader economic
questions. I do think some of
the work that's being done.
Thinking through the long term
trajectory of the state's budget
is just so absolutely essential.
I think, I mean, I've been
really encouraged from all my
conversations with folks in New
Mexico, how future oriented.
The, the, the, and how um how
how folks are willing to look
beyond say the next budget
cycle, and, and, and think about
well how do we set ourselves up
for the long run. I think a lot
of the things that really do
pay, you know, that that isn't
just the the things that aren't
just a sugar high or a quick
fix, and that really matter over
the long run. They operate on a
very long time horizon, things
like getting kids into high
quality pre-K and, you know,
high quality uh early education
and and just education through
all that, that's not, you know,
it.
These, these kids, they don't
enter the workforce next year
and boost your GDP and
productivity that way. These are
long term investments that are
really, you know, um,
You you have to be willing to
play the long game to, to really
realize some of the biggest
economic potential of
government.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much,
Mr. Davis, for those responses.
Thank you, Vice Chairman. Let's
go to Sinderworth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
couple of thoughts and comments,
um, again, I also was struck by
the slide on page 14.
Um,
And I think that's a really good
thing.
Because again, we're, we've got
such a unique
A code in New Mexico.
That
You know, this GRT is something
we have to be very careful with
because it's such a regressive
tax.
And over the years, we've done a
very good job at
Carving out exemptions and
narrowing the base and that rate
gets higher and higher, and that
just accelerates pouring
gasoline on the pyramid problem.
Uh, and so,
Again, when this system was set
up by Franklin Jones back in the
60s, it was
Completely novel and
I think it was the envy of lots
of other states, and it had
pyramidding.
pyramidding because the rate was
at 2% and the base was
incredibly broad.
And it and it and it was, you
could absorb that when the when
the rate is down at 2%.
And so I do think that one of
the things and, and Mr. Chair,
you kind of asked this question,
you know, given where we are and
where we're going, how do we put
together a package and what do
we do? I just think there's a
real opportunity to
Put together a revenue neutral
package that may pull some
Buns from one place.
And focus it on continuing to
lower this GRT rate. I think
that's something we've done.
It's hard to do because you've
seen that, I mean, to move at an
8, the impact is huge.
But I think that that's, that's
good tax policy and, and it's
really evolved here.
From when I was first here and
2005 through 8, I mean every
year there was a Christmas tree
bill and just lobbyists grabbing
onto that and they want their
piece of it and and we created
this Swiss cheese.
And so
fact that we're yellow on this
slide 14, I think is a movement
in the right direction cause
lowering the rate.
Alps, the pyramidding problem.
And so I just wanted to
emphasize.
And Represent Harper was saying
that and and it's also
consistent.
And with the history of the GRT
but it's a, it's a very, very
regressive tax. So when it gets
like this and it gets super
high, it really hurts.
You know, those who are
least able to pay, they're
getting hit the hardest. So,
again, I think this is a helpful
presentation. I appreciate it a
bunch. I don't really have a
question. I just want to make
that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else,
questions or comments?
Mr. Davis, thank you for your
presentation this morning, you
know, to
Look at the charge of this
committee as the revenue
stabilization and tax policy
Committee.
Being able to be responsible in
regards to how we move forward
but also be responsive in how we
are doing things here and at
least for the state, looking at
the larger picture is why I
think
Discussions like this are are
really important that we not be
afraid to have candid and honest
discussions objective ones so
that we can look at things so
that we can make sure that we're
making the, the best choices
possible on behalf of our
constituents on behalf of New
Mexico. So, Mr. Davis, again,
your presentation, amazing.
Thank you for enlightening us
and uh we appreciate you being
here.
Have a great day.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you. Folks, we
are ahead of schedule, so it's
11:30, uh, if we can break for
lunch and be back by 12:30. Is
that fine? And we can break for
the day earlier than we
discussed or at least it's on
the agenda. Will that work? OK,
so let's break now, 11:30 and we
will return at 12:30 and get
started with the afternoon
session. Thank you.
