Committee and it's also a
pleasure to introduce you to one
of our relatively new division
directors at Taxin Rev, although
Ira Pierce and I were just
saying that he's now been there
a year, so he's really not that
new, but um Ira Pearson joined
us as the property tax division
director about a year ago after
being a county manager in
Lincoln County and Luna County,
and if you want to talk a little
bit more about your background.
Sure,
I,
uh, Ira Pearson and I came from
county government and um
Having to switch out and I tell
the cabinet secretary all the
time that as a.
As I come up state government,
I'm, I'm thinking like a county
and I have to take that hat back
off and remember that we work
for the state, but I'm glad to
be here and thank you all for
allowing us to present today.
And I, I can't say enough how
much it also benefits tax and
rev to have that county hat
inside the department to be
troubleshooting things as
counties might see them. So we
appreciate that about Iran as
well.
All right, so we'll be starting
with a slide deck that looks
like this and um towards the end
too I have just a couple sort of
informal remarks about
technology and tax
administration. I'll turn to
after, but um basically we uh
will be uh the outline is on
slide 2. We'll first talk a
little bit about the property
tax division and the property
tax code before going through
some national comparisons
related to property tax in New
Mexico and then a few policy
considerations, and so I'll turn
it over to Mr. Pierson.
And uh chairman and, and
members, we, we do realize that
you had some tax or property tax
discussion earlier, so we're, if
we're tell me to speed it up if
we're repeating anything if
anything goes on.
But starting on slide 4, just
want to give you an overview of
the actual property tax
division. There's 3 bureaus. You
have the appraisal bureau, the
state assessed Bureau, and the
delinquent bureau under the
appraisal Bureau.
And the first poor, uh, 1st 4
bullet points you'll see it
provides technical assistance to
county assessors and appraiser
certification training.
Uh, perform and review
appraisals as requested by
public entities, any New Mexican
public entity, provides a member
for each county's valuation
protest board.
And performs annual county
assessor performance
evaluations. Uh, you heard
assessor Laura earlier talk
about how we over we oversee we
do do a yearly uh performance
evaluation on each 33 of
assessors.
The state Assess Bureau assesses
valuation of certain
non-residential properties for
Avalorum taxes.
In 2024, we had 531 centrally
assessed properties totaled $32
billion in valuation.
It represents 17% of the
statewide tax base for property
tax. It's the 2nd largest
assessor behind Berlio County.
Properties assessed include
railroad, telecom, pipelines,
utilities, airlines, electric
generation, mineral properties,
and multi-county construction.
Under our delinquent bureau.
They collect property taxes
reported from county treasurers
that are delinquent after a full
3 years.
They notified delinquent
taxpayers about payment options
and planned delinquent auctions.
The statute requires an auction
in each county of each calendar
year, and we distribute past due
taxes, penalties and interest to
each taxing entity.
Anybody who wants me to stop or
has questions about anything,
just.
Please do.
Mr. Pierson, we'll probably wait
for for questions, comments
until after you're finished.
Sure.
Chapter 7, Articles 35 through
38 are the property tax code.
Um, property taxes imposed on
real property, tangible personal
property include livestock,
manufactured homes, and certain
personal property used for
business are exempt. Certain oil
and gas production equipment is
subject to a separate oil and
gas production equipment at
Velorum tax. County assessors
value.
Non-residential and residential
property, payments are made to
county treasurers.
Property tax division may
suspend the county assessors may
suspend County assessors for
non-performance.
DFA may suspend county treasures
for non-performance.
This provides acceptable methods
of evaluation. It provides for
acceptable methods of
evaluation. Generally, the
market value based on sales
comparable properties, income,
or cost.
Special evaluation methods for
certain minerals manufactured
homes, industrial uh industrial
assets, agriculture and
livestock.
Residential assessments may not
rise more than 3% per year,
unless the property changes
ownership, is improved or
rezoned.
Properties are valued as of
January 1.
Changes after that date cannot
be reflected until the following
January 1.
Taxable value of a property is
33.3% of the assessed value and
assessed values can be protested
the county protest board. If
county assessed or to the
administrative hearings office
if centrally assessed.
By PTD or by paying and then
filing a refund, uh, refund
claim in district court.
Yield control adjust tax rates
as the tax rate base changes to
stabilize taxes paid and
revenues received.
On slide 6, you'll see the
property tax rates that are
subject to yield control.
Um, this is out of section
7377.1 and if anybody has any
questions later, we can talk
about it, but under the state
operations is just to point out
when uh earlier assessor Lata
was talking about the 20 mLs
maximum if you look at the state
operation as a 4 mil max county
operations have 11.85. You go
through hospitals, flood control
districts, small assistants, um,
there's, there's multiple uh
properties that or I'm
Multiple programs out there that
can be subject to mail levy and
yield control under the
municipal operations, they have
a maximum of 7.65.
Uh, school districts, uh, have a
5 mil maximum at a 0.5.
Am I reading that correctly?
Half male maximum on on the
operations and then the school
improvements are 2 m.
Uh, higher education is the 5
mil maximum, and then if you
look under all those special
districts, there's all.
Ones that can impose mill
levies, and those are subject to
yield control.
You look at slide 7, we're on
Uh, data that will show you that
the next net taxable values and
where the money comes in and
where it's actually spent, the
revenue.
Um, for tax year 2022 with a
total of 2.58 billion and it
shows you in that eye that
county operating higher ed, um,
hospital debt service, schools.
Uh, county debt, municipal kind
of gives you a breakdown, a
visual of where, where the
property taxes, where the money
is actually going to.
Uh, residential properties, a
good bullet point on there
residential properties comprise
nearly half of the property tax
base. OK, on slide 9, we're
gonna look at some national
comparisons. Where does, where
does New Mexico stand
comparative to other states.
And slide 9 shows us New Mexico
has the lowest property tax
nationally. We're ranked number
one for the lowest property tax.
Like Tim.
New Mexico relies less on
property tax, um.
All but 4 states, so we are, we
are ranked at number 46 on
relying on property taxes.
And then if you want to through
those you can see each, each
state and the percentage of how
much their state relies on the
property tax.
Slide 11.
The average property tax rate of
0.67% is thirty-fifth in the
nation. So how high are your
property taxes in New Mexico, we
rank thirty-fifth in the nation
on how high our property taxes
are.
Slide 12.
New Mexico collects $770 per
capita.
On property tax, lower than all
but 3 states.
So we see we ranked number 47
out of anybody there.
And at that point, I'm gonna
stop and turn it over to Cabinet
secretary.
Thanks. Um, OK, members of the
committee, Mr. Chair, I'll pick
up on slide 13. Uh, we've
already provided you some
national comparisons about our
property tax that came from the
tax foundation. Now we're going
to turn our attention to more of
the administrative side and
taxpayer rights and the property
tax code. So there's, there's a
group called Cost, the Council
on State Taxation that rates not
every year, but, but every so
often they rate the states and
international entities on their
administration of the property
tax. The purpose of the
scorecard is to
Provide tax policymakers with an
indication of best practices in
areas basically where we could
choose to improve if if these
rankings are, um, you know,
given, given that much weight.
So on slide 14, you'll see that
New Mexico is in the majority of
states that is rated a C rating,
or blue, like the majority of
states, um, and if you delve
down into the detail, we have a
C+, but there's not a different
color for that. Um, and on the
next slide on 15 and on, I, I
can highlight for you some of
the grading areas and it might
just serve as a little bit of
Food for thought, for things
that we could look to do
differently, um, to adopt more
best practices and potentially
increase that grade if and when
cost revises the report. So
again on slide 15, I highlighted
in in red a couple of the areas,
um, we got to be in
transparency. It's one of our
stronger areas, um, but one of
the areas where it looks like we
can improve. The question is,
does the state have a website
with clear explanations about
property taxation. And so, no,
we, we do have the tax and rev
um area.
But it's not comprehensive. It's
focused on central assessed and
property tax division's role in
it. So potentially we could look
at improving that grade by
Having a website that
incorporates also the county
role, the county assessor and
treasurer role. That's something
that we could work on under
consistency, we get a worse
grade, a D, um, two of the areas
that where we look like we could
earn points on this ranking, we
could um have standardized forms
for uh for property taxation.
Right now there are standard
forms from central assessed, but
Taxin Rev doesn't have the
authority to impose standardized
forms on all the counties, so
there is slight difference
Between county forms. There's an
area that we could potentially
improve. Um, there's a question
whether a taxpayer can challenge
the valuation.
As out of line with comparable
properties. This kind of gets
back to that disclosure question
that you discussed with other
presenters this morning. Um,
it's hard to consistently apply
comparisons if we're a
nondisclosure state. So that
might be something that would
have to change for us to earn
points there. Um, in fairness,
we do pretty well. We have a
bee. I didn't highlight any of
those things to come back to.
Uh, and the next slide, slide
16, I wanted to highlight um.
Under
Uh, this is a statutory deadline
in the red circle they asked,
does the taxpayer have at least
60 days to appeal to an
independent tribunal. Director
Pearson mentioned a moment ago
that um individuals can protest
their property taxes either to
the county protest board or
through the administrative
hearings process if it's
centrally assessed, uh, but we
don't give 60 days, we give 30.
So I know there's a lot of
sensitivity though around the
deadlines and they're difficult
for all the different
administrative agencies to meet.
So if we wanted to look at.
that best practice, I think we
would have to look at other
states and see how they're using
their time to make that annual
process work and give the 60
days for protest, so something
that we could do.
On the next slide, I wanted to
highlight under assessor
training and outreach. Um, one
of the questions Cos asked are
are assessors or appraisers
required to hold recognized
professional qualifications. Um,
the previous statute in New
Mexico exempted government
workers from these requirements
and they were just unclear if
the exemption exists. So that's
something that we could look
into again and maybe it's an
issue of just publicizing what
what the state law does require.
And so we'll follow up and, and
tackle that.
Um,
Right. And um slide 18, I'll go
through this really quickly
because they know this morning
you had a whole discussion about
being a disclosure state or not,
um, but as of the, the this
source that we have, which is
retipster.com, New Mexico was
one of 10 non-disclosure states,
and in other states have, there
has been a trend to moving
towards that and that number of
10 has been coming down
gradually, I think over the last
several years.
So onto um the end of this
presentation, um, of a couple
policy considerations.
So I kind of wanted to frame um
New Mexico's revenue basket and
and our diversification of
revenue with consideration of
the property tax. Um, you know,
usually we talk in tax policy
about a three-legged stool, and
that would mean that um taxing
entity has a stable mix of
income tax, sales tax, and
property tax. But New Mexico is
very unique because we don't um
rely on any um property tax for
state operations although the
Constitution does allow the
state to impose up to 4 mills.
We do.
And we have not um for I think
maybe about 40 years, something
like that.
OK.
Thanks
Um, so that, again, um, the
state possibly could diversify
its general fund, make it a
little less volatile, a little
more diversified. There are a
lot of considerations that go
along with that. But you know,
right now, the third leg of the
states, um, the state's revenue
stool has got to be called the
severance tax, which up until a
few years ago when some
statutory changes were made, um,
that take the windfall revenue
to other places, endowments,
reserves, permanent funds. So
the severance tax has become a
lot less volatile to the
General fund, but that
volatility, of course, still
does exist. Perhaps more
importantly, the severance tax
is going to be declining in
coming years and in the long
term revenue forecast that was
delivered last week to the LFC
and we saw that over the long
term we expect investment
earnings on the permanent funds
to become a larger source of
revenue that at a certain point
will become the third leg of the
three-legged stool. So,
You know, it's it's, um, and
that's just the state's
perspective. There are other
perspectives we could talk about
with regard to counties,
especially, but also schools and
special districts and and
municipalities. But um from the
state's perspective, it's worth
talking, I think about whether
we should diversify our revenue
mix into that. On slide 21, you
go into a little more detail
about what that could look like.
I want to be cautious to say
this isn't a recommendation.
It's just sort of here's the
back of the envelope math of
what that could look like.
Um, as I mentioned, the
constitution allows the state to
impose up to 4 mills on the
statewide property tax base for
operations that could go to the
general fund and just a rough
estimate is if the property tax
value, the net taxable values
are about $900 billion.04 mills
would generate about $3600
million per year.
Um, not a huge amount of money
compared to the grocery seats
tax or the income tax, larger
probably than the corporate
income tax most years. So it's,
it's uh it's a large amount of
money, but not the largest. Um,
I did the back of the envelope
math again to to say, well, if
you imposed 4 mills for general
fund operating, how much of a
gross receipts tax rate buy
down. Could that buy you?
Answers about 38%. Um, you know,
we've recently cut the statewide
grocery seats tax by 2528, we
could um
offset another 38 if we wanted
to with with that 4 meals.
Um, some of the plus sides of
the property tax are that it
tends to be more stable and it's
more enforceable than than
sources like the gross receipts
tax or the income tax because
people's homes, businesses,
assets are, are more closely
tied to it.
But, um, as I, I think we
probably all know the property
tax is incredibly unpopular.
Even in New Mexico, where we
have the lowest property tax
rate in the entire nation,
there's still incredible
sensitivity to, to changes in
people's property tax bills, and
I personally kind of chalk that
up to sticker shock, you know,
we get the the mail uh about our
property tax of our home or our
business once a year or, and we
see all the money at once. I
might not realize that I'm
paying just as much in grocery
seats tax, if not more, just on.
Little purchases here and there
all year long. Um, so that
sticker shock, I think is is
really hard on folks. Um, you
know what I want to say to you
that both the property tax and
the gross receipts tax are are
by nature pretty regressive. Um,
we've done a lot of work
together to make the personal
income tax especially less
regressive in in the in the last
4 or 5 years, um, and you could
do similar work in the property
tax than we have in the gross
receipts tax as well. Um, so for
example, if, if there was an
appetite to
create a
State village for operating, you
could combine that with
exemptions or deductions that
sort of shield um the lowest
income New Mexicans from the
property tax.
And make sure that it's imposed
in a more progressive fashion.
But it's not easy because when
you start messing with the state
revenue and the exemptions and
things like that. Then you also
have a trickle down effect on
all the other taxing
authorities, counties,
municipalities, everybody else.
So it, it wouldn't necessarily
be easy, but it's just something
to think about, I think.
Um, I wanted to talk a little
bit more on slide 22 about the
head of family exemption, and I
know this came up in your, in
your morning presentation as
well, but, um, you know, I was
uh sort of surprised. I, I knew
that the head of family
exemption was $2000 but I was
surprised to learn in
preparation for this that that
hadn't been adjusted for
inflation since 1993. So if one
wanted to adjust that for
inflation, it would be worth
about $4500 about $4300 today to
make it equal to what was
offered
In 1993, um, about 280,000
property owners in New Mexico do
claim that exemption annually
and the benefit to each family,
each head of family is about
$60. So all told, the 280,000
had a family exemptions cost
about 16.8 million per year.
Um, and if you want to know
who's, you know, who's revenue
is being foregone, you would go
back to that pie chart we had
earlier in the slide of and just
sort of parse it out to all the
different entities that receive
it, about 5% of the state, a lot
to counties, bit to schools
across the board.
Um, if, if one were to increase
the head of family exemption for
inflation since 1993.
$4500 exemption would increase
the per family benefit from
about $60 per year to about $141
per year, and the revenue cost
of that would be somewhere
around 22.7 million again parsed
out to all the different taxing
entities on that pie chart.
So, um,
You know, the, the good thing I
think about the head of family
exemption is that
You only benefit from it if
you're living in your home. If
it's your primary residence. So
to the extent there's interest
in making sure that those with
second homes here or uh short
term rentals, for example, I
know those come up a lot. I had
a family exemption would not
benefit those folks if the if
property tax rates at some point
increased.
You wouldn't be able to offset
part of that increase with the
head of family exemption, if
that makes sense. Um, so it
they're pairing the two things
together could be a way to
shield regular low and moderate
income New Mexicans from any
kind of changes in the rates. If
there was an appetite to do
that.
And with that, um, that's the
last on our property tax over
you, we've got our sources
listed here and I'll leave it to
the chair if you want to pause
for questions or if you want me
to talk a little bit about
technology first.
Let's take some questions on
what we covered so far and then
we'll go through technology
after. Is there anybody, there's
no one on the list, so I think
we're.
Uh
Senator Maestas chairman,
Madam Secretary, thank you so
much. The um
Uh,
Quick question, I always thought
of property taxes as a
A somewhat progressive
Because a lot of folks don't own
property, and then if you, if
your property is bigger
theoretically, you pay more, but
I don't think it's a direct.
Correlation like
If you, you say, uh, this is how
much your property is valued at,
it's not a clear line with
regards to taxes. Why, why do
you, why did, on page 2021, why
do you suggest, uh, the property
taxes are inherently regressive.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator
Maestas, I, I guess for two
reasons.
Um, remember that those that
don't own a home, rent a home,
and the property tax is really
passed along to them in the in
the form of their rent, more or
less, it might not be a perfect
correlation. So there's that,
and there's the fact that
basically the property tax mill
rate is what it is in a given
area, you know, your meal rate
might be 2020 mLs in in a given
neighborhood, and so regardless
of um the income of the person
and their ability to pay the
property tax, they're going to
pay the same tax.
Right, as opposed to, for
example, the, the graduated
marginal income tax rates.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Secretary. So in
that, in that scenario, it would
be like a flat tax which would,
which would not be progressive.
And then, uh Mr. Chairman, um,
Madam Secretary, the, the, we
have a mill and then it's
defined and then there's.
You tax the
Taxable
Value, I mean, it's a, it's a
weird formula. Is there any
states that have just
Gone to a simpler formula of a
percentage of the total market
value of the house or it's all
in these.
Old school
Words and and formulas.
Chairman, uh, Senator, I, I
don't know of any, it seems that
most of them have some mix of
similar to what we have.
But I will look into it to see
if there's other stuff out
there. No, I'd be thank you, Mr.
Chen. Thank you, gentlemen. It
would be just a nightmare to
undo.
You know, just given the
difficulties of like passing,
you know, the status quo is
always gonna have a.
Longer chance of. Right.
And then.
The concern and the reason I
don't think we'll find that when
we look at other states,
Chairman and senators, is that,
you know, there, there's an
autonomy in in rate setting that
goes on by each of the different
types of of governmental
entities that impose the
property tax and so to to roll
it back and have a flat rate.
Across the board, you would be
taking away that autonomy.
If not, please proceed next.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And so
I was working with staff, uh,
as, as I think the committee was
developing this agenda and
Martin mentioned that the
committee was hearing about
technology in in different
areas. And so I wanted to just
touch informally a little bit
about
Technology and tax
administration and, and
Specific to Tin Rev but also
generally to to a lot of the
different taxing entities, other
states and federally, so I don't
have slides on this. It's just
sort of informal, um, you know,
the main thing that uh resonates
with me all the time is that
Taxin Rev, like many state
agencies, um, but maybe somewhat
more so we're constantly needing
to look for ways to work
smarter, not harder. And um last
year for our budget
presentation, I put together a
chart that was sort of like it
showed the number of FTE attacks
in Rhoing at about
About 800, 800, 820 or so
positions filled for decades,
while the amount of revenue we
collect disperse, audit, all
the, all of that has tripled.
It's, it's grown exponentially,
especially since the oil boom.
We've we've gone from collecting
and distributing somewhere
around $9 billion in that time
to about 22 $23 billion when
it's all told. And so that
means, you know, you know, the
really the only way that we
could possibly be doing that is
by relying a lot on good.
Automation and so if you were to
look at our budget, it's very IT
heavy and the difficult position
it puts us in is that
Some of the growth factors and
our costs of our systems are
somewhat out of our control,
right? We're think of us uh
similar to DFA and the SHR
system. It's people soft. You
can't change it every year. Uh,
I think of like the, the system
at HSD or some of the huge IT
systems are gentech and tapestry
systems are very much the same,
so we're, we have a wonderful
vendor, but we're also beholden
to that vendor. It's a sole
source vendor, and so it's
expensive, but we are constantly
needing to automate and rely on
the systems.
Because there just simply isn't
growth in our staff, and for the
most part, you know, I think it
does go OK for us, but where it
doesn't is things that require
the human touch like call
center.
Um, we have 30 or so FTE at our
tax call center, whether they
get 5000 calls a week, which
sounds like a lot, but that's
the best we've ever seen, or if
they get 40,000 calls a week. I
know a lot of uh constituent
calls that you all and your
colleagues receive are like I
can't get through to the call
center.
That's why, and we can't
automate it much more than we
have. So, um,
But anyway, from a, from a
technology standpoint, we're
very heavily dependent on our
systems. Want to highlight um
the track record we have in this
administration with finishing
projects on time and on budget,
every single one, and then
preview for you a little bit.
There's 3 IT related requests
we're gonna be making in the
upcoming session. Since 2019,
just some of the highlights of,
of what we've implemented and
done, um, every legislative
mandate that's come our way,
starting with House Bill 6 in
2019, which many of you will
remember.
Um, that had an estimated
implementation price tag of
about $27 million. We scrambled
and got aboard a finance loan
and I think did it all for more
like $8 million. That was a
tough time. And since then it
hasn't been quite such a heavy
lift, but we've implemented
every legislative mandate on
time and on budget. Um, we
issued, if you recall, about 4
rounds of rebates along with the
economic relief payments to
non-fiers. Um, we moved the GRT
to destination sourcing. We
implemented the.
Cannabis tax, the health
insurance health care quality
surcharge. We took over the
insurance premiums tax from the
superintendent of insurance.
We're doing the healthcare
delivery and Access Act now. So
our number of tax programs that
we administer has risen from
maybe about 35 to about 40 or 42
in in just about 5 years. Um, we
redesigned the entire business
tax filing system, um, and then
we've got along along the lines
more of, of technology and where
that's headed we've implemented
advanced data analytics in some
of our operations.
audit selection, for example, in
the GRT isn't um based on an
individual auditor's thoughts or
opinions or where they think
there might be money, it's all
scored based on a sophisticated
algorithm of not just which
returns are likely to have tax
due, but also which are most
likely to have a collectible
balance. So we don't just assess
and not collect, um, and we have
the state's very first ever
governance risk and compliance
software that we just closed out
through Do it, um, basically
this is something that
is looking at doing for the
state on an enterprise-wide
basis, but think about a system
that can um basically
automatically give you
monitoring boots on the ground
24/7 for anomalies, and it's
very helpful, like, so if it
sees something happened that
that's abnormal, it'll flag the
human being to it right away,
24/7. It's also super effective
for us to automate our audit
responses. We get audit. I, I
know everyone knows that state
agencies have an annual audit,
but agencies like ours.
That have federal data, we get
audited also every 3 years by
the IRS every 3 years by the
Social Security Administration
every quarter and year for PCI
credit card handling compliance.
It's kind of nonstop. So this
governance risk and compliance
sort of organizes all your audit
artifacts and make them readily
available, so I think you're
gonna be seeing more agencies
going that way.
Um, so with all that behind us,
the next steps we're taking one
MVD related to tax related. Um.
The MVD one states are moving to
e-titling of vehicles, and we
would like to do the same. So
one of the requests is to create
an e-title that people can have
electronic on their phone, it
won't get stolen from your car.
It won't get destroyed in a
flood.
Things like that. Um, so that's,
that's one of the things MVD
wants to do, um, and then the
second is replacing a 12 year
old imaging software, uh,
basically, we receive more
incoming correspondence than
anybody else in the state. We
have to open it, scan it, get it
to the taxpayer's account and
try to respond within a couple
business days. Right now, we're
working with a 12 year old
imaging software that doesn't
recognize text optically, for
example, you can imagine all the
extra labor that goes into that
and error correction and what
was
What was scanned and imaged. The
placement for that, and then
along the lines of um advanced
machine learning and data
analytics, we want to um put in
place a return processing data
analytics software that helps
us, it it'll basically score an
incoming tax return or how much
we need a human being to look at
it. How likely is there an error
on this return? How likely is
there significant money
attached?
So that with those um scarce
number of people that we have,
we can put them to, you know, to
better use with some technology.
Um, so I, I think the last thing
I'll leave you with on, on
Technology where it comes to us,
you know, I started off by
saying we're an incredibly tech
heavy agency. Um, it really
comes into play a lot in bill
implementation and drafting, and
uh we appreciate that the
committee members and the
legislature as a whole do read
our FIRs and, you know, sort of
like, well, administratively
this really won't work for us. I
always sort of explained that.
First step is for amazing
drafters like Pam and others to
put the words on a page and mean
what they're supposed to mean
legally, but then if it passes,
we have to turn it into an IT
project, and that might not
always be simple or cost
effective. So we appreciate you
looking at that and, and
appreciate you having patience
with us when we're always the
ones coming back saying this is
too complicated, this is really
complicated. This is gonna
triple the cost of this thing.
This is gonna reach require, you
know, require too many auditors,
too many people.
And so, um, we'll always keep
pushing to try to keep things
simple.
Um, where possible.
And that's in the interest of
keeping our technology more
agile, less prone to error.
That stand for questions.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Are there any other questions or
comments and first on our list
we have
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, just a
quick comment, um.
I do a lot of constituent
services stuff.
And I deal with state agencies a
lot.
And sometimes the frustration
level is.
Uh, redlining, but I have to
say,
That in the issues that I've
brought to Taxin Rev.
Never had to worry about.
Somebody contacting the
constituent, fixing the problem.
And not only that, but getting
back to me and saying,
what we did
This is good news or this is bad
news.
But the commu the return
communication, and I just wanted
to
Thank you and the rest of your
staff.
For the great work that you do.
I know it's very complicated.
It's not always a good phone
call.
But
You do it professionally, you do
it timely.
Um, and I just wanted to
Publicly thank you for the hard
work that you and the agency.
Mr. Chair and Representative, I
thank you so much for that, and
I want to give a shout out to
one of our long-term staffers,
April Ve Hill. If anyone doesn't
have her number and needs it for
constituent work, let me know,
but she's, she works magic
behind the scenes on those
things. Great comment. Thank
you. Other questions or comments
from the committee?
Vice Chairman Campos, thank you
very much, Mr. Chairman, of
course, members of the committee
and to the people that are
listening today, uh, Madam
Secretary, I want to thank you
very much for the ongoing
efforts and of course the vision
building that even of course
your staff continue to work
towards in it.
Truly relates to what we were
going through this morning when
we started talking about AI and
the kind of things that uh we're
approaching and so with that as
you move forward, particularly
with the amount of work that
Um, has gone to your particular
department.
As, as you go forward with
legislation and with the uh the
fiscal requests.
Please keep us informed. That's
gonna be uh imminent in terms of
how we're going to continue to
stay ahead if you will, of the,
uh, the transition and the
changes that are occurring in
technology, but the, the
question that I have as we deal
with this.
And, and you bring up the
situation, how do we make it
simpler?
So as we take a look at
exemptions and the kind of
things that are really out
there.
How are we going to make this
simpler for not only your
department, but for the uh
taxpayers of New Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and Senator
Campos, I thank you for that
comment, um, because, yes,
you're right, um.
If it's hard for the department,
it's just as hard for taxpayers
and so we also need to keep in
mind their burden. Uh,
sometimes, you know, we'll,
we'll see legislative uh or, or
otherwise, you know.
I don't mean to say legislative
initiatives, they could be
coming from anywhere, but we'll
see uh initiatives to, you know,
require a certain new type of
reporting so that we can get
some more data. It's like we
have to keep in mind that the
data might be valuable. It also
might not, it might be garbage,
but we'll get this data and
maybe it's valuable, but is it
worth?
The extra effort that we require
the taxpayer or a business or
somebody else to go through just
to collect that data and so I, I
appreciate your comment about
keeping it simple for them too,
um.
Some of the things I would say
is one, we need to clean up the
tax code and and we'll be coming
to you with a discussion draft
soon to do just that. Um, we
think we can repeal many, many,
many, many pages that are in
there because they're just no
longer.
Applicable. That helps a little
bit. Um, for example, we don't
need an old version of a tax
credit that's no longer in
effect.
Getting in the way of the new
one, so that somebody, you know,
a new person in New Mexico comes
in and spends.
You know, a day looking at the
2015 sustainable Building tax
credit before they realize
that's not what they need to be
looking at. So that's part of
it. Um, I also think, you know,
that when we do um
Uh,
5 year, you know, repeals of
something. I get why we do it,
um, we wanna, we wanna see it if
it's effective, we wanna measure
it for a while if it costs what
we thought it would. We also get
a reputation for being fickle.
And we have to think about how,
you know, OK, if I, if we, let's
say we're trying to lure people
to New Mexico to start their
business here. Is it going to be
effective if they can only have
the benefit for
For years, and then the tax on
that will go back up. So I just
caution us against doing that
too often.
Mr. Chairman, Madam Secretary,
and that's what leads to the uh
The, the big question, so here
we are with a C+ and we want to
go ahead and clean up some of
these things that that you're
talking about, and, and it would
behoove us to truly pay close
attention to that comprehensive.
change that you're talking about
because
That attracts businesses that
improves the economy and more
importantly as we move forward,
that helps us to better
understand and balance if you
will, the haves and the have
nots and, and, and how to make
that uh much more equitable as
we move forward. So, again, I
just really appreciate the
thoughtfulness and the candor as
you move forward and we're
looking forward to uh clean up
legislation and some of the
other things that you'll be
bringing for us. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman. If
I may, Madam Secretary, uh, Vice
Chairman mentioned, uh, here we
are with a C+. So Mexico has a
C+ based on the calculations by
the Council on State Taxation,
uh, and Texas has a B.
Right, that's, that's not based
on the amount of taxation for
property that's simply based on
their practices of
What they implement on page 15,
for instance, right. Correct.
OK.
They're, they're not really
better than us.
Correct. OK, thank you. That's
all I wanted to hear.
Good answer. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Thank you for making your
presentation this afternoon. We
appreciate you and thank you for
engaging in, in this as well.
Thank you again. OK, thank you.
Next on our agenda, we have the
overview of New Mexico tax
policy, income tax, and grocery
seats have a number of guests
invited, some are here, some are
not here yet because we have.
Blown through the agenda this
afternoon. So, uh, if I can
have, uh, Miss Green, the
program manager of uh education
designed to generate excellence
in the public sector.
Um, Ms. Tassa Young instructor
in the Mexico edge.
Kevin Powers, Mexico edge member
as well.
Uh, James O'Neill and Richard
Anklam, president and executive
director of the Mexico Tax
Research Institute.
Good afternoon, ladies and
gentlemen, and the floor is
yours whenever you want to
begin.
Good afternoon, everyone. Uh my
name is Christy Green. I'm the
program director with New Mexico
Edge, uh, I presented uh a
little overview of New Mexico
edge last September, uh, when
you all were in Las Cruces, so
some of you have heard this
information before, but there
are some new faces that I would
uh do a quick uh brief overview
about New Mexico edge, and then
uh discuss um what we're going
to be talking about for the rest
So this afternoon.
So, uh, for those of you who may
not be familiar with New Mexico
edge, uh, we are uh under the
umbrella of New Mexico State
University and specifically the
College of extension uh at NMSU
and our charter is to deliver
classes uh and certifications to
New Mexico's elected appointed
and public officials.
We just have a pretty simple
mission in our, in our mind,
it's better government through
education, and we try to achieve
this by offering classes that
are affordable, accessible, and
meaningful uh to public
officials.
Just a brief history overview of
New Mexico edge. Uh, it started
out in 2002. It was the idea of
the late New Mexico county's
executive director Sam Montoya,
who wanted to develop uh what
was then known as County
College uh to serve as a
professional development
organization uh for county
officials and employees.
In 2008, uh, New Mexico, uh,
what was then uh County College,
uh became New Mexico Edge, and
one of the primary reasons for
that is we became a part of a
national certified public
manager consortium. Uh we are
nationally accredited through
this national organization, um,
and since the, the foundings of,
uh, what was then County College
and now New Mexico edge, um,
we've grown to offer 19
different uh certifications.
Uh, on slide 5, just a little
information about FY 24, all of
our classes are 3 hours in
length, and the majority of them
are delivered live and online,
although we do offer some
in-person classes. Uh, so in FY
24, we delivered 452 classes, to
close to 1300 public employees
totaling a little over 24,000
professional development hours.
163 students earned one of those
19 certifications that we offer.
And then we also work with Chief
procurement officers in the
state, um, for those who are the
primary purchasers for their
entity, uh, based on statute,
they go through our
certification program and then
recertification every 2 years,
and in FY 24, about 700 chief
procurement officers went
through the program.
As I said last year, it's pretty
hard to uh
Condense uh create a one slide
profile of New Mexico edge
students, but slide 6 gives you
that profile. We work with
municipalities, counties, state
employees, colleges,
universities in K through 12
organizations.
This next slide, slide 7, those
are our original um county
college certification, so we
have, uh, we have a certified
public assessment officer,
county clerk, commissionerer and
treasury official. I saw a Mr.
Laura was presenting earlier
today, he's actually one of our
um assessor he he teaches some
of our assessor classes and is a
great asset to New Mexico edge.
We'd offer also the certified
public official certified Public
supervisor, and certified public
manager.
Slide 9 just gives an overview
of our specialization
certifications and the one that
we are here to highlight today,
uh, which is our certified tax
policy professional. It's one of
our newest certifications it
launched last in June of 2023,
and, uh, you know, one thing
that I want to say about the
curriculum, the process of the
curriculum development, those
who participated at Tain Rev was
very instrumental in putting
together this
Certification. It's a
nonpartisan uh certification, a
group of folks coming together,
uh, to, to work on it. Uh at New
Mexico Edge, of course, we are
not the subject matter experts.
We couldn't offer the range of
certifications that we do if we
tried to be, uh, our job is to
bring the best and brightest in
the state of New Mexico, those
who know the most about
particular subjects together to
create these certifications.
Uh, I don't know, secretary, uh,
Shardine Clark may have left,
but she's a board member, uh, a
very, um, uh, large, a big
supporter of New Mexico Edge,
um, and Ira Pearson, who was
just here, teaches our property
tax class.
Um, on slide 11, uh, just some
information about our tax policy
certification. We have 9 classes
that focus on uh different
aspects of tax policy uh for a
total of the 27 hours of
professional development, and
then we have, uh, in addition to
that, the certification has 15
classes that um
And there's a second handout,
uh here with some more
information about the tax policy
certification, uh, but covering
classes like the public
policy making process, public
finance, public finance law,
several classes that are
included in that certification.
Today, uh, I, I promise you we
aren't going to go through all
87 slides that are listed on
this, um, our, our purpose today
is to uh invite some of our
instructors who teach these
classes for us, not only to
provide you uh a snippet, some
insight into the material that
is covered in these classes also
help uh provide educational
opportunity for you all as well
today. We've added in these
extra slides to
To give you a sense of the scope
and the breadth of what is
covered in some of these classes
and also to serve as a reference
for any questions that you might
wanna ask. Um, so in a few
moments I'll be introducing you
to a couple of our instructors
who will each be spending just
2025 minutes or so covering
different topics uh that we
cover in the certification.
Unfortunately, Doctor Tasha
Young could not be here today,
um, yeah, but we appreciate her.
She's a, a member of the tax
policy, a curriculum committee.
She's also a CPM advisory board
member and uh are sorry that she
can't be here today. Uh, but at
this time, before we uh turn it
over to our instructors, I'd
like to introduce an and turn
the microphone over to Mr. Kevin
Powers, um, who is
Also one of our curriculum
committee members.
Thank you. Um, members of, uh,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, Kevin Powers, um,
The House members of this
committee will recognize me.
I've had to put up with me for
the last 10 years on the uh on
the uh tax committee. um.
And uh in, in the last uh 3 or 4
years I've been working with
Tasha. Tasha and I kind of.
Both sides of the aisle,
different sides of the aisle,
um, analyzing tax bills and it's
been uh been really uh a great
experience.
But um prior to the, the last 10
years, I was an investment
banker, uh, did, uh, public
finance around the state for 30,
almost 30 years.
Um, and, uh,
For about 20 years of that, um,
I, I participated in uh in the
county college and then the edge
program. So I've, I've, I've
taught uh
Uh, different, uh, public
finance classes, uh, prior to,
uh, becoming involved in the
development of the tax
curriculum and uh currently I
teach uh tax 107. Um, it's a,
it's a workshop on uh sources of
uh
Of uh information for uh
analyzing uh tax policy, so, uh,
kind of something I, I do on a
regular basis, but uh it's been
very uh rewarding. I, I, I find
the Edge program to be an
exceptional program, uh, very
beneficial to, um, local
governments and the state as a
whole, so a very supportive of
that, um, and I'm looking
forward to hearing what uh uh
some of our instructors have to
say today. Thank you.
Thank you, Kevin. Uh, before I
turn it over to the instructors,
uh, any questions regarding New
Mexico edge or the New Mexico
edge program.
Why don't we get the questions
and comments till the end and
then go ahead and go through
your presentation.
All right. Well, at this time,
uh, I'd like to uh introduce to
you Mr. Richard Anklam. He, uh,
teaches our tax 102 class, uh,
which is our groce seats and
compensating tax class.
Mhm
Is that better? Yeah, OK.
Sorry about that. Um,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, I want to introduce
my co-presenter, Mr. Jim
O'Neill. Um, we were part of the
curriculum development of this.
Particular project that uh that
Kevin and Christie just
described to you, um, the
counties do a phenomenal
phenomenal job focusing on
education and New Mexico edge is
a big part of that and, and
therefore, I'm
Honored and privileged to be
able to support their efforts.
What we're doing today is just
giving you a, a flavor of a
couple of the classes. I think
Christy mentioned that these are
3 hour classes that they provide
and we're not going to give you
6 hours of instruction this
afternoon, thankfully, I'm sure.
Um, but I'm gonna walk through
the first few slides of the
gross receipts tax.
Program, um, the rest are in
your materials or most of the
rest are in your materials for
your own reference, but, but
fear not, we're not going to
walk through them all. And, and,
and I think the same can be said
for the personal income tax
slides, there's more slides in
there than Jim's gonna talk
about, um, but we just wanted
you to have an idea of the kind
of content and information. Um,
some of this information you may
have heard last week from LFC
and Taxin Rev, um, but
I guess we're gonna repeat it
because it bears repeating, um,
you know, the fundamentals of
our tax system are important.
So, um,
And I see they've got the first
slide pulled up for me, so, uh,
I will, uh
Kick it off with that. And by
the way, thank you for the
breakfast burrito. I'm, I'm
wearing it for your amusement
this afternoon, um, but it was
pretty good.
Um, so our gross receipts tax,
the much maligned gross receipts
tax, which actually has more
positive benefits than negative
ones, uh, was imposed in 1935 as
the emergency school tax. The,
the joke is we still have an
emergency because we still have
the tax, right? Um, but it's,
it's been around, um, you know,
since my father was born. It's
our largest source of revenue,
um, for the state's general
fund. It's also the largest
source of revenue, um.
Or the 2nd largest source of
revenue for municipal and county
governments, depending on their
particular circumstances. Um,
it's imposed on the privilege of
engaging in business, so you
don't have to worry about paying
the tax unless you're engaged in
business. Um,
And engaging in business just
means trying to carry on
something for benefit, you know,
um.
But it's broad-based, it's not
as broad as it used to be, um,
but it's still a broader tax
than most state sales taxes. Um,
it's seller imposed as opposed
to buyer imposed. A lot of state
sales taxes are actually imposed
on the buyer, and they deem the
seller to be a collector of the
tax on behalf of the state,
similar to when they take
withholding out of your
paycheck, um, and you get a W-2
and they tell you how much they
took out. But in that case, the
employer is, is a fiduciary, you
know, for the, for the state,
um, in New Mexico.
It's actually the seller that
the taxes imposed on, and that's
important because in New Mexico,
um, we like to tax things like
the federal government, right?
And there's a thing called the
supremacy clause in the US
Constitution that would prevent
you from doing that if you were
to try to tax them directly,
which is what a lot of state
sales taxes would do. We tax the
contractors. We tax the people
that sell to the government and
the courts have said that's OK,
that's different than taxing the
government directly. So that's
one of the benefits of New
Mexico
Those gross receipts tax
structure. Um, we can talk about
the detriments too, but it's,
it's broad-based, um, a lot of
old sales taxes only tax
tangible personal property, you
know, pencils, paper,
microphones, uh, New Mexico is
always taxed everything in part
because we didn't have a lot to
tax, so we had to tax everything
and that includes leases, um,
not real property leases, but uh
um services.
For those of you that are
accountants or.
Attorneys, you know, uh, we're
one of the few states that taxed
those services because we tax
everything.
It's not a bad thing. It's not a
bad thing. Um, our rates, if you
look at any jurisdiction's rate,
it includes local option taxes
imposed by counties,
municipalities, and others. So
it's combined rate following one
set of rules, which is another
benefit to our tax structure is
it's simpler than some because
we don't have 2 or 3 taxes
imposed differently and layered
on top of each other. We have
one tax, one rate, um, and it
gets distributed on the back
end.
Based on who's imposed.
What increments to the
beneficiaries besides the
general fund.
The starting point for our tax
is gross receipts. That's I'm,
I'm air quoting here because
that's a defined term, um, and
it means the total amount of
money or other consideration
received for basically doing
anything, selling property,
leasing property, selling
services, etc.
Next slide please. Um.
The state share is 3.775. So if
you're in, you know, say Roswell
and you're paying 8%.
Um, about half of that is going
to the general fund. The other
half is going to the city and
county and, and perhaps other
imposers.
Um, the rates can range fairly
dramatically. Um, the base.
Out of state rate, which almost
applies to no one is, is 4.875%.
Um, however,
Um,
The actual GRT rate range goes
from 5.25%, and that's in Lee
and Lincoln County. They're the
lowest tax imposers in, in the
state.
Um, remainder of county, not,
not in Riodoso or some place
like that. The 9.4375%, almost
10%, and who is that? Um, it's
always the same. It's Taski
Valley, um.
And they impose it on themselves
and everybody that enjoys Toski
Valley. So it's, it's, it's,
it's not a bad thing. Um, you
also see places like Espanola
ranked pretty high on the list,
and that's a little scarier
because that's a little
different kind of community than
Towski Valley.
Um, but suffice it to say,
You know, the rates vary a lot.
The seller's location, um.
is what used to determine the
rate in the slide, you'll see it
was July 2021 when we changed
you all, um, changed our rules
and we went to what we call
destination-based sourcing. So
now it's the buyer's location
that determines.
The rate of tax and who gets
The tax, um.
Most of the time. There's,
there's, there's a few
exceptions, but typically it's
the buyer. So if I buy something
from Amazon, and I live in
Bernallio County, um, Amazon
collects.
The Bernalio County tax and the
state tax and remits it
accordingly, reports it
accordingly, and, and that's
how, how we're funded.
You hear talk about pyramidding?
What is, what is pyramidding?
That's, that's business to
business transactions typically,
uh, when you have a, a, a
consumption tax, which is
basically what a sales tax is.
It's a poor man's consumption
tax, but like a value added tax
in Europe. The goal is to tax
retail consumption.
So the fact that we have a broad
tax is good because we tax more
retail consumption than some
states. The downside is we also
tax what we call intermediate
transactions, business to
business transactions, and the,
the problem with that is it's
not very transparent, um, it's
harder on small business than
big business because they can't.
Insource certain services, um,
so it creates some problem, but
there's plenty of debate on how
big of a problem it is. What we
can all agree on is it's an
expensive problem to fix if you
ever choose to. So we've, we've
added some anti-pyramiding
mechanisms over the years to our
statutes, um, but, um, it, it
still remains an issue that
You know, the wonks would, would
complain about relative to New
Mexico.
Uh, next slide, the, uh,
Compensating tax.
is our companion tax. So you
hear the term generically sales
and use taxes.
Um, our gross receipts taxes,
the sale side of that term and
are compensating taxes, the use
tax side of that equation. Um,
the use tax is it or in our
case, the compensating tax, it,
it compensates for the absence
of the applicability of the
grosser seats tax. So if you're
not subject to one, you're
subject to the other. I
mentioned earlier that our
grocery receipts taxes still are
imposed. Well, let's say we
don't have the constitutional
jurisdiction to reach out and
tax the person's
it
OK, we can tax the buyer.
Because
They're here in New Mexico, and
that's the relationship between
sales and use taxes typically
whether it's seller or buyer
imposed.
Most states have both mechanisms
in place. Increasingly, the
constitutional limitations on
jurisdiction to attacks are
falling. You've heard of
Wayfair, the internet stuff that
we did, all of that. Um, so, so
those standards are falling, but
nevertheless, the, the companion
tax are compensating tax is what
makes up
For the difference, if, if, if
we lack that jurisdiction to tax
the seller.
Um,
Municipal and grocery receipts
and county gross receipts taxes,
um,
You won't control what our
locals do fairly tightly. We
loosened up the kinds of
increments that local
governments could impose a few
years ago. They used to be very
specific and now they're a
little bit more general purpose,
but nevertheless, um, as I
mentioned earlier, the local
governments are completely tied
to our GRT system. They can't
change the rules. They can't
decide to exempt this or not
exempt that. All they can do is
kind of piggyback along for the
ride and impose certain rate
increments, and that's what they
do.
So, you know, Santa Fe collects
so much, Albuquerque collects so
much, it's all based on
Most of it is voter approved,
not all of it. Some of it can be
done by local government.
Representation, um, but, but
that's why you see that
variation that I showed you
earlier in our rates that are
almost
You know,
Contrast by about 100% actually
from 4.7.
to almost 10, um.
But again, the bases are
identical. Um, one thing to keep
in mind, um,
And you saw it in an earlier
slide because you saw two
different rates in terms of what
the general fund gets.
If you're in a municipal
jurisdiction. Let's say I buy
something from Amazon in
Albuquerque. Um,
I get the state gets that base
rate that 4775, but 1.225% of
that also goes back to the
municipality. That doesn't
happen.
If you're in the remainder of
county area. So what changes,
it's not the rate of the tax,
it's the amount that the general
fund gets. It gets less in
municipal juris in municipal
areas, there's an old history
behind that when they merged the
the taxes together a long time
ago. Um, but the counties, I
think.
Yeah, Joy would attest to that.
They do not get a 1.225%
distribution from the state
share the way the municipalities
do. So the numbers add up
differently. Municipalities do
tend to be more reliant on
grocery re seats taxes than um
than counties.
Uh, for that reason, the, the
latter is.
Typically more reliant on
property taxes. I think
Farmington is a big um exception
to that rule. Um, but
nevertheless, um,
Tribal taxes, um,
Same thing, um, I think this
number is correct. I, I have 16
tribal entities imposed a gross
receipts tax, uh, where they've
entered into what we call inter
intergovernmental, uh,
Revenue sharing agreements so
that
You know, for a business, a
taxpayer, it's, it's fairly
seamless. The state will collect
the money and distribute it to
the tribe, just like they do to
local governments. The revenue
sharing is different, you know,
the tribe gets the the lion's
share of it in that case, but
it's a good mechanism for
everybody involved. It saves the
administrative headache for the,
for the tribal government. It,
it makes life easier for
taxpayers because it's all the
same, um, so it's just a better
deal. It's a, it, it's a better
deal, um.
I'm not trying to brag on our
system, but it's not, not always
the terrible ugly system that we
tend to.
You know, wanna
Pretend it is sometimes,
although I can go there too. Um.
The GRCT system includes special
state taxes, and Jim can talk
about this more than I can
because he's, he's been around
the block a few more times, but
we have a plethora of grocery
seats taxes. It's not just our
vanilla tax. Um, some could be
folded into the regular GRT, um,
how many people knew we had an
interstate telecommunication
grocery seats tax. Well, yeah,
Pam and Clinton did
but not, most people don't, and
you, and most people don't,
don't see that stuff, and I
think the secretary was talking
about cleaning up some stuff,
you know, that's
These are some of the things
that you could probably consider
in conjunction with that
cleanup. Um,
We have a leased vehicle, GRT
tax and surtax. I think that
dates back to Manny Oregon.
Anyone remember Manny? Um, I
think he went to Florida as the
story goes, and he got whacked
on taxes and he thought, what a
great idea. Why don't I do that?
Why? I'm gonna take this home to
New Mexico and share it, you
know, with the Texans. Um, and
that's what he did. Uh, we have
a telecommunications relay
service recharge at the rate of
0.33% to fund um
Uh, services for the deaf, um,
so there's, there's lots of
little moving parts like that
and, and quite honestly, most of
it gets ignored, um, and it's
always, you know,
Good to review that occasionally
and perhaps clean it up where
appropriate and I know the tax
department's been working on
some of that, but, uh, you all
too, as members of the interim
tax committee, it's, it's, it's
important work. It's not always
sexy, but it's important. Um,
and I promise I'm gonna, I'm
gonna shut up here in just a
second, but, but back to the
compensating tax.
Um, it's now imposed imposed on
the value of property and
services and licenses and
intangibles before we did the
Wayfair changes in 21, it was
just imposed on tangible
personal property. Again, these
kinds of things. So what did
that mean?
It meant
We only taxed widgets.
But if I wanted to hire legal
counsel or an engineer or an
accountant. I could save 8% by
making sure I hired somebody
that wasn't in New Mexico.
Well that's
What you might call a perverse
incentive, right? You're
incentivizing buying services
out of state. Um,
Or other things, um.
And we don't do that anymore.
The destination sourcing, the,
the playing field is much more
level. There's a a sourcing
exception for professional
services and there's a story
behind that. But for the most
part, the, the
The playing field has been
leveled. Now everyone's taxes
probably went up a little bit,
and I think local government
collections went up a little
bit. Um, but, uh,
But it's a fairer
More rational system if you want
to think of it in that term, um.
The rate of the compensating tax
is now the same as the GRT. It
used to be cheaper. So when I
said you had an incentive to buy
things out of state, pay no tax,
but even if you bought a widget
from an out of state seller and
you paid the comp tax, you would
still pay a lower rate of tax.
You would pay the state rate
instead of the local rate, um.
Much to the chagrin of local
governments, but now, again,
It's more complicated because as
a buyer you have to figure out
where you are to report your
compensating tax correctly if
you owe it. And we also made it
easier for both sides of the
transaction to report the tax.
um, because no one wants to
collect the tax twice, but if
the if the if the seller paid
it, I don't want to accrue a use
tax on it, or compensating tax,
right, cause then I'd pay it
twice and vice versa. So it's,
it's, it's become easier. I
don't, I, I think that's less
and less of an issue.
Um, small cities, um, and
counties assistance funds also.
Feet out of the compensating
tax, but I think over time you
see the collections fall. I
mentioned earlier, the
jurisdiction jurisdiction to tax
and make everything fall under
the GRT is easier than it used
to be.
And I think that's a trend
that's going to continue.
Generally speaking, and I will
shut up with this and turn it
over to my younger, better
looking compatriot here, um.
Exemptions and deductions define
the base. So,
When you hear the term and and
credits.
But those are things that
modify, so in the, in the GRT
we've broadly defined
everything, including what is
gross receipts, but that doesn't
mean we want to tax everything.
We don't want to tax sales for
resale.
We don't want you to have to pay
GRT on your W-2 wages or on your
dividends and interest.
So guess what, we have
deductions and exemptions for
that. And those are appropriate.
Sometimes you hear some of us
complaining about having too
many, and we probably do, but
some of them are very
appropriate and part and parcel
of
You know,
A good
Structure, a good tax structure,
and things like sell to resale
transactions fall into that
category. We actually have an
exemption for wages, um.
Without that exemption, the, the
breadth of our definition that I
mentioned earlier of gross
receipts tax would, would cause
that to fall into our tax
structure. And if it weren't
exempt.
Um, you would have to report it,
even if it were deductible. The
difference between exemptions
and deductions or deductions are
reported, which is great, you
get the data, um.
But exemptions aren't, which
means all of us that get W-2s
don't have to file monthly
returns with the secretary over
here, um.
You know, for no reason, for no
dollars. So there's a trade-off
between information, uh,
administrative compliance and
burden on taxpayers and the
state. But uh with that, I'll
stop talking about gross
receipts tax, stand for
questions when the time comes
and turn it over to Mr. Jim
O'Neill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members.
And staff, um, I'm gonna be
talking.
About the tax 105.
course, which is covers income
taxes, both the corporate and
the personal.
Um,
Let's just start off.
When we get there, he's gonna go
through a lot of GRT slides.
Uh,
It be page 40.
847. OK, now 48.
OK, there.
There are a number of tax
statutes in the income tax area
I listed them there.
Uh, there used to be one more.
It went away in 1981. Tain Rev
administers everything to do
with income taxes. No local
government has anything to do
with any of this.
All state function.
A show what we're gonna cover,
we, we cover in the course of
the tax base and then there's
exemptions, deductions, uh, what
are the issues?
Uh, where the money goes, well,
that's easy. It all goes to the
state, so.
That's uh something that local
governments sometimes complain
about.
So, one point I like to mention
here is that New Mexico, like
all the other states, is part of
a federal system.
Federal government sets
boundaries on what states can
and cannot do.
There's certain things
That we may not do and it shows
up particularly in income tax.
I
We have two general rules. One
is we can text all the income of
our residents.
You're a resident in Mexico, New
Mexico has the right to tax
every cent of your income.
2, the other general was.
If uh any income that arises in
the state, for example, we're
pumping oil. There's royalties
generated with it. And those
royalties go to a lot of
different places, a lot of
residents of other states.
Well, we get to tax that too.
But that's the same as Oklahoma.
They can do the same thing, you
know, if we're I'm in New Mexico
resident and I get royalties
from New Mexico or Oklahoma oil
production.
Oklahoma can tax that too.
As well as New Mexico because
I'm in New Mexico resident.
So there's a conflict here. It's
built into these rules.
Some states
Some income may be taxed by more
than one state. So that means
the states have to work out.
System
Of
Giving each other credit, so you
don't double tax, as it were.
OK.
As I mentioned,
T and Rev does everything.
There's a couple of websites you
can look up.
Uh, about the data.
Related to the income tax
systems. Oddly enough, well,
it's not odd, I know why it
would happen.
Uh, it's costly to produce this.
And not a high priority, but
there's not a lot of
Information put out to the
public about the tax system. DFA
puts out.
The revenue is collected.
Uh, uh, uh, through the sunshine
portal.
But
This is a low function, low
priority function.
And we don't do income tax stats
like the federal government
does, for example.
talent, takes machines, it takes
a lot of resources, so we just
don't do it. It's been.
Something that uh little
priority.
New Mexico's income taxes.
Like
Many states, but not all states.
Is a progressive tax.
It's meant to apply.
More heavily as your income
rises, so too does the rate, the
proportion of your income you're
gonna pay in income tax rises.
As your income rises.
That's not true of any other tax
in the state, or all the other
taxes are regressive.
That as your income grows, you
pay less.
Percentage wise,
all those other taxes including
property tax.
Um,
Yeah, let's see.
OK.
One more
Do more
OK, back up, piggyback tax.
Mexico, like most states,
Income taxes are piggyback.
Start off with the federal base.
There's several places where you
can connect to the federal base.
New Mexico can accept the
adjusted gross income
definition. Why does every state
do that? Because it's so much
easier. The feds work out all
the definitional issues, and all
you have to do is say, well,
we're the same as the feds. All
right, uh, it makes it easier
for the practitioners and the
taxpayers to figure out what it
is you have to file.
Um,
Adjusted gross income is the
most common base.
There is one danger to that is
that when the feds change their
tax system, it changes our base
too.
Sometimes it's OK. Sometimes it
doesn't make it much difference
one way or the other, and
sometimes we really don't like
what the feds did.
And so the state then has a
choice.
We want to keep the convenience
of the federal tax, or do we
want to
Make the tax, our text look like
what we want it to look like.
That's called the process of
decoupling, and we did that a
few years ago when the feds
Uh, decided to increase the
standard deduction at the same
time.
They got rid of the personal
attention or I shouldn't say he
got rid of, but they reduced its
value to 0.
That had an impact on a lot of
our low income people.
have raised their taxes.
the legislature said, no, we
don't want to do that.
But we decoupled and we created
our own exemption.
Um,
At the back end of the text, so
we have an exemption.
It will last as long as the
federal government stays in its
particular
Uh
Zero value for the personal
exemption.
Our stacks will just
Our exemption will last as long
as they that condition lasts.
Now I will mention that this
because the federal budget
rules, the
The change that they made by
raising the standard deduction
and lowering the personal
exemption amounts. I think only
has 1 or 2 more years to go.
Then Congress has to do
something.
Is there a law that did that
expires.
No, OK.
Now surely Congress will do the
right thing.
And there will be no pressure on
anybody. Now, they could just
decide to do the easy thing and
say, OK, well,
Uh, we're just gonna continue
what it is for another 10 years.
I would, I would probably bet
that's what's going to happen,
but there will be
Something starting next year.
As the feds are gonna start
running out of time.
To get it fixed.
But that's what
That is an issue that we have to
be concerned with.
Albeit indirectly because if
they don't do something or they
do something that we don't like,
then in
The 26th session or the 27
session, we're going to have to
react to it.
After that, because we want no,
we won't know what they're going
to do until they do it.
Um, so that's a possible issue
that may come up.
Uh, so we tax whatever the feds
do.
Um,
What's in their base, but we
The federal government also has
the rules of saying states.
There's certain kinds of income,
you may not tax.
So, uh,
We, we get thrown out, uh, let's
see, where are we
slide.
56?
OK.
Those are some of the things the
feds say we cannot tax.
But we don't.
And those are
Things that in Mexico taxpayer
will have to deduct from.
Just to Josenko.
On the other hand, unless the
feds say we can't do it, we can
tax things that the federal
government doesn't.
For example, I think the only
example actually is interest on
municipal bonds issued by other
states.
We decided, why should we give
tax break to the other states
are selling these bonds because
by lowering
Our attacks on the, on the
interest from those bonds. We're
giving them a little bit of a
market break. Why should we do
that?
And so we decided, well, we're
not.
So if you have a
Topeka, Kansas municipal bond,
for example, and you get
interest from that.
Uh, that's taxable in New
Mexico.
It wouldn't be for the feds, but
it will be in Mexico.
It doesn't mean you have to sell
your box.
It's just tax.
All right, now, Mexico.
tax scheme is fairly simple. We
start off with just a gross
income, plus there, uh, those
adjustments I just thought, plus
or minus.
And then there's, we subtract.
standard deduction and personal
exemptions. We left by doing it
this way, we left ourselves the
freedom to change standard
deduction. We have higher or
lower than the Fed, we can do
that because that's the way our
tax is structured.
We have for years and years and
years used the federal standard
deduction and the federal uh
Um, itemized deductions.
I don't think I, we have ever
done anything different.
But we've left ourselves the
opportunity to easily do it. And
as I mentioned before, we've
created our own personal
exemption amounts, $4000 times
the number of dependents minus
1.
If you had predependence, you
get $8000 worth of personal
exemption.
That equals the Mexico taxable
income. Now, in the normal
state, almost every other state.
OK, that's your tax base, and
you must take the tax rate.
Whether it's a single rate or
tax table like we have, then you
figure it out and right out to
Jack and send it in, but that's
not what Mexico does. So we're
gonna have to take a little
break.
For a moment, New Mexico, that's
only part of the program.
Um,
And on page, uh.
62 is is our current.
There's a tax rate that's
effective.
Or
Last year.
The 2024.
Taxable tax taxable year 2024.
This year, you passed an
adjustment.
This rate table.
Earlier this year, which will be
effective next year.
But this is the current team.
There'll be another table later
on.
OK.
to take age 63.
All right.
New Mexico has to take account
of cross-border income,
somewhere along the line. We do
it after you.
Calculated in Mexico taxable.
Other states do this before you
get the taxable income.
Um,
Basically
Cross-border income you can have
either business or
you run a, you have receipts
from a business.
Uh, which can be broken down
into two categories, so called
business income.
And non-business income, it does
those distinctions are in the
law. They've been there forever.
They don't make any difference,
and they have no meaning. What
differences is
The income eligible.
Or abortionable if it's
elicable, and there's certain
types of income, interest, for
example,
it's
It's assigned to the state in
which you live.
It's a state of residence of the
state of commercial domicile.
OK.
All of that, 100% of it,
whatever it is, goes to
That state
So if you, uh,
Portionable income means that
you have income from a number of
states and
you by a by a formula.
Which is on uh
66
Each state that you, that your
business operates in.
It's a piece of it next base.
But only a piece of it, and it
depends on.
Uh, usually Mexico stands with a
3 factor formula.
How much
Property, the value of the
property.
That the business owns in the
various states.
Sales, it makes to the various
states.
And the person the uh payroll
that it has in the various
states.
Figure that out as a percentage
of 100%.
The 3 factors
Uh, add them together, divide by
3, and that's how much New
Mexico gets.
Is that clear? It's just a
formula.
way of dividing up 100% of the
business activity.
All right, so New Mexico gets a
piece of this.
Plus any applicable income
that's assigned to New Mexico.
That's our tax base. This works
for personal.
Uh returns too because
As a business. It was mentioned
earlier, that more and more
businesses are adopting the
partnership form.
So,
The partnership's income will be
divided up among the partners.
We have to report it on their
personal income tax.
So you could have business
income would be most of your
income.
Coming to you that way.
Um,
There's a distribution from the
partnership.
Rather than wages or something
else.
So this allocation in a portion
of regime will apply to all of
those.
Forms of income that come to you
personally, that you must report
on your personal income tax.
So this is becoming more and
more important for individuals
too.
Um,
All right.
New Mexico
I have a few exceptions.
Uh, for that.
A lot of states have now gone to
a single factor, which is
usually sales. Where did you
sell those stuff? OK. If you
sold 50% of your your uh
property or your maybe 50% of
your sales in Texas, fine, Texas
gets the tax 50% of this income,
whether or not they do, it
doesn't make any difference.
Just they're right.
50%.
And if 10% is in New Mexico,
fine, New Mexico gets 10%. Now,
OK.
So you've got that. New Mexico
does.
We've come to taxable income.
Right
You've got the income and
allocated in apportioned to New
Mextract, income hellable.
Uh
Washington, Mexico, from the
total taxable income.
And the residual.
I
Income that gets assigned by
apportionment.
Or allocation to other states.
Or what we call here the non-Ne
Mexico percentage by that
remainder by the total.
You you get
and then New Mexico percentage.
You take the non-Ne Mexico
percentage and you multiply that
times the taxable income, and
that's are the times taxable
income and that becomes the tax
or tax base in New Mexico. We
reduced the amount of taxable
income.
Um, and
So to take account of the
Cross-border income because it's
insist that we can't tax
everything. We can only tax.
Income generated by
Uh, in, in activity in New
Mexico or income that's earned
by Mexico residents. So this is
how we get there.
Why do we do it that way? Hardly
any other state doesn't.
But New York is one of them.
It's because
When you have a progressive
great table.
The rate
Each slice of income.
What's that?
Is your income
Right
Looking at it the other way is
you reduce the amount of taxable
income.
do
falls more than proportionally.
quicker
And the taxable income.
The consequence of that is when
you have taxpayers to get income
from more than one state. If you
don't do something like this, if
you just text.
Via text table to the taxable
income.
The taxable income falls and
you're giving a break.
taxpayers that have income for
more than one state.
Simply for that reason, having
income from more than one state.
No other reason, not because
they're poor, not because
they're doing anything wonderful
for Mexico. It's simply because
You have income from more than
one source, you're giving tax
break that you don't intend,
because if you intended it, it
would be in the tax code
already.
OK.
Is it constitutional to do it
this way? Yes.
The reason why is because we
waited until New York.
OK, car cases back in the 80s
sometime.
All the way up to their courts
of appeals and the US Supreme
Court decided to hear, not to
hear.
So
Yeah.
New York New York Spring Court
of Appeals said it's OK. Supreme
Court said, you're not wrong.
So we said, OK, fine, we'll do
it too.
This only works, only necessary.
If you have a progressive grade
table, if you had a flat rate,
it wouldn't make any difference.
You come to the same result no
matter which way it calculate
the tax. But this is probably
the one thing in our tax system
that most people say, what?
It's a lot of work, but what it
does is make sure New Mexico
gets its its proportional.
You're the tax.
OK, there's much credits against
tax.
Mostly for prepayments, wage
withholding.
gas proceeds withholding, etc.
The non New Mexico credit which
I just talked about the credit
for tax.
to other states.
Um, which is um
69
Um,
Because I mentioned earlier,
You could wind up if you go,
I think represents phonics
talked about this. One thing I
have a taxpayer that has a job
that requires the taxpayer to go
to different states, you know, a
few days here, a couple of weeks
there.
And those states can tax that
income.
From the that you got for
spending time in their state
earning, doing whatever you're
doing.
All right, so, uh,
Since it is more common on the
personal side, to be subject to
multiple texts.
From different states.
Even though with his allocation
and enforcement business cause
it's not business income, it's
personal income. Wages are
personal income. They're not
business.
Then
You can wind up getting taxed by
more than one state and nobody
wants that.
What we do in New Mexico is give
you a credit.
On the wage income that was
subject to tax in the other
state.
And we'll give you a text. It's
a little bit limited because we
won't give you.
Uh, we won't overpay you. Let's
say if the other state's tax
rate is higher than ours.
We're not going to give you
Uh, a credit for that extra
piece. I wanna give you credit
up to what our tax would have
been.
And text, uh, does not apply to
add-on taxes like county
amissible taxes, which some
states have.
Uh, we, we won't give a credit
for those.
Because they're not, uh, whether
or not you think that's right.
who ends up paying that?
You're a constituent.
OK, so you got all those.
Taxes, the allocation abortion
rules credited on wages.
And let's say you overpaid.
If you know, more wage, you had
more withholding than you have
tax due.
You have to take the check.
No, you don't.
The tax and rev will give you a
check.
Then you a warrant
for the amount of the excess
tax.
You don't have to cash it.
If you don't, it winds up as
unclaimed property and goes into
another system.
We stay there forever, uh, and
you can claim it whenever you
want, or you can donate.
There are 16 different
Causes that you can donate part
of your refund too.
You want to simplify the tax
system, you might want to look
at some of these, because there
is a mechanism in there that if,
if
particular worthy causes raises
less than $5000 for each of
three consecutive years.
Then the secretary of tax can
write a letter to, I think the
Secretary of State or somebody
that says, OK, these are void.
And just take him out of the
system.
Uh,
No Secretary of Tax has been
willing to incur the wrath of
the author of those credits, so
it's never happened.
So you might want to look at
them and, and uh actually can
probably give you a list of how
much they raised over the last,
say, 4 or 5 years.
Because you're using state
resources essentially to make
donation.
Charitable donations.
OK, that's it for.
Personal income, corporate
income tax works a lot the same
way the corporate income and
Corporate income tax is actually
Full name is corporate income
and franchise Tax Act because
there's two taxes, corporate
income tax and the franchise
tax. Mr. O'Neill, if I can ask
you for the corporate income tax
section. If you can give us a
Cliff Notes version of, of the
corporate income tax, we can,
OK, corporate income tax works
much the same way, has the same
rules about um
Post spoil her income.
Um, it's a little more
complicated because
corporations, unlike the
personal income tax, you can
have multiple corporations, some
here, some in other states. And
there's rules about
Uh,
In Mexico
This is a combined return that
means all the states that are
subject to Mexico.
Taxation
That are owned by the same
interests and have
Um,
Common business
Uh, the, one or more common
businesses. You have to have
both. You have to have common
ownership and you have to have a
business relationship in order
to get into a combined return
and then you allocate a portion
just, just like first.
Um,
That's because each corporate
each corporation is a legal
person, and they all have
An obligation as a legal person
to file an income tax return.
If they're doing business in New
Mexico.
It's a piggyback tax like the
piggyback on the fiddle.
Corporate income tax.
We cannot piggyback on the
federal consolidated returns
because consolidated returns and
include
Corporations whose income is not
taxable by the state.
That's why we have the combined
returns. We have deductions.
Uh, come from US obligations is
out.
Income from foreign sources,
particularly if you were filing
on a water's edge basis.
Um
I always liked this dividends
and now subpar death income you,
you dealt with last session.
And have changed that.
Guilty?
Love the name. Uh, it's global
intangible low taxed income.
Uh, it gets ed and
Unlike personal income tax,
there is a form of income,
income averaging for
corporations. Personal used to
have it, say 25 years ago, the
feds in the 90s, I think, that
you could average income over a
series of years.
Um, you can't do that anymore
and the personal income tax, but
corporations can and always have
uh that operating lost
carryovers.
Uh, and
After you figure out uh
essentially adjusted gross
income for corporations, then
you can add in or subtract uh
that upbring loss deductions.
You also, and the next slide in
81, you've changed this, this
is, this is the, what's
currently in effect the tax
table, but you've changed it,
it's 5.9% for everybody now.
There's no step right table.
Um,
A lot of credits
Points of the credits would be a
separate presentation, but we
don't.
Um,
One of the things, uh, there is
a credit on the books.
It was designed for
The Navajo
Once upon a time we're going to
have potato processing plant.
And they're gonna sell most of
the product to Mexico.
Um
I was willing to set aside
80,000 acres to grow potatoes.
this plant.
Uh,
And eventually crater, and so
this deduction was a part of it.
Again we would Mexico would
recede from its tax to allow the
tribe to impose a corporate
income tax.
Um,
created because they couldn't
figure out how to get rid of
the, the potato residue.
Um, there's only so much they
could put back on the fields as
fertilizer, and they couldn't
figure out a way of disposing it
so that the plant kind of create
it.
Uh, but anyway, that credit is
still there.
And for any manufacturer,
Or processor.
In New Mexico, who sets up on
tribal land.
The credit's still there.
OK. Um,
There's a long term issue here.
Corporate income tax. The
federal government most mainly
European governments is trying
to figure out a way of having
kind of a
Global corporate income tax, so
they, they don't get these
guilties.
Uh, uh.
So that the federal government
doesn't get
None of them
Get screwed by corporations
doing what they do. They find if
we can take this income and take
it out of a high-tech low
texture jurisdiction, that's
what we're gonna do. This is a
way of combating that. If they
do that.
Uh, there might be some issues
down at the state level that
you'll have to deal with, but
that probably several years away
if it ever happens.
Mr. O'Neill make Anklem, thank
you for your presentation this
afternoon. Uh, does that
conclude the presentation?
Um, OK, very good. Let's go now
to the uh members of our
committee for questions or
comments. Anyone? There's no one
on the list so far.
And there's no on the list.
After
Senator
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. I just
have a comment. I do know that
New Mexico Edge has provided a
great deal um to our county
employees all over the state.
And I, um,
I'm very glad that it's uh
progressing.
And that it continues. Uh, I
know it has offered
opportunities for state
legislators as well.
So I think it's great.
And just this comment. Thank
you.
Thank you. Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Uh presenters very much the um
But from a practical standpoint,
how do folks, how, how can folks
sign up for the classes.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator my
assist, thank you for that
question. Uh, they can go to our
website or just do a search for
New Mexico or in edge at
inimSU.edu and uh all of the
information is located on, on
the website.
And that information will tell
me what. Uh, it will tell you,
uh, so, uh, our classes are
normally offered through uh what
we call our honing events that
happened quarterly, uh, January,
March, June and September. And
so, uh, the information that can
be found online is how to
register as a new student, uh,
what the enrollment process is,
when the classes are offered,
the cost of the classes and that
Mr. Chairman, generally the, uh,
if you were, if someone were to
want to knock out all
classes, how quickly do you
think they'd be able to do that.
So, uh, we, um, for if they're
interested in just in the 9
classes, it would probably take
64 months, 4 to 6 months just
because uh we would offer half
of them in January, half of them
in March, uh through those
honing events.
Awesome. Thank you. And then uh
do you think, Mr. Chairman, do
you think the um
The curriculum will
Maybe be modified from year to
year as as conversations
progress, you anticipate that
happening?
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Maes this each time these
classes are taught, uh, we have
the instructors go over the
content to make sure that they
are still up to date and
relevant, and we do teach them,
uh, somewhere between 2 and 4
times a year, and then every 2
to 3 years we pull the
curriculum committee back
together as a whole to make sure
that the content that we are um
presenting as a the entire body
of work still makes sense and is
still relevant.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I think um
Yeah, I look forward to talking
with you more about it. This is
a
And then maybe uh over time
there may maybe consider a
modification of tax 105.
You have income tax, corporate
income tax, all rolled in.
There may be a time and place
for a class specific to a crude
oil drilling industry and the
taxation of that industry.
This is so huge and prominent,
not just the
The attacks that go into the
general fund with the royalties
and all that it would be what uh
those taxes haven't been
adjusted for a long, long, long
time and um
I think we might be able to.
Redefine that relationship with
with those industries uh and not
disincentivize the incentives.
That those businesses are
current or the investments
rather, those businesses are
currently.
Thank you.
I think he's in my this. Next we
have Senator Campos, Vice
Chairman Campos.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and of course to the
presenters, thank you very much
for the work that you've
continued to go ahead and uh
And push forward a couple of
things and, and first of all, I
just, I go back to the
institutional knowledge that you
bring to the state of New Mexico
for this one particular issue,
and I'm um curious in terms of
uh possibly how you can expand
if you will, over a period of
time, the curriculum for these
particular reasons. So, um, a
while back I was thinking it'd
be nice to go ahead and
institute a leadership.
program uh at one of our
institutions and the reason for
that as we deal with
municipalities or county
governments, school districts,
and others, uh, to totally
prepare, if you will, our
leaders for the roles that
they're undertaking.
And and when it was indicated
that
As we, we move forward that we
go ahead and we see uh uh tax,
let's just say for example, is
one of the low priority
functions, uh, I believe it's
one of the higher priority
functions, and let me explain
why.
Because in dealing with it,
people that are trained to
become leaders.
Go to institutions and for the
most part,
They're spending resources but
not really having, if you will,
a full understanding of the
cause and effect. In other
words, they spend the resources
from there, here come the, the
tax liabilities and, and then
from there, they're caught in a
situation with.
How did we get here? How, how
are we gonna go ahead and
functionality uh or work through
if you will, the functionalities
of, of, of working through it.
So, so 3 things that I was just
thinking about and, and seeking
comment number one would be the
leadership.
And if you will, the, the uh tax
improvements.
And then the second would be the
financing and the incremental
usage of the resources to help
us get there with all
institutions.
And then, and then the third
basically is gonna go ahead and
be the full tax implementation.
So as we heard in the previous
presentation, if we work
smarter, we combine these type
of efforts.
And I believe if you will, the
leadership that does come in
utilizing the institutional
knowledge, the work that you all
have already done, but we expand
it.
In essence, then we make better
leaders out of the people within
the institutions uh that are
here in the state, and again
going back to how do we uh
capture, if you will, a better
economy for the state, as people
do come in, then we're able to
uh better access, if you will,
not only their knowledge, but uh
their investments, and more than
that, what we can do,
particularly through government,
uh, and the taxation process for
our state.
I don't know if they want any of
you want to comment on that.
That basically is my statement.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I can cover uh both the, um
The content as far as uh as how
New Mexico edge works and the
and the expansion of offerings
that we have. Um, so, yes,
normally that's exactly what
happens. We will have folks such
as yourself come to us and say,
um.
You have this current
curriculum, this current
information, how do we expand
upon it and, and bring in other
classes, uh, at that point, we
would pull the curriculum
committee together, uh, figure
out if our current way that we
present these classes, so those
3 hours, uh, several times a
year is the best way to do that,
or we also have other options
that we can look at. So outside
of those honing events outside
we have our some public finance
classes that we offer that are
separate.
Even, uh, we have worked with
entities to come in and present
information in person, uh, to a
specified group. Uh there are
all kinds of, of ways that we
can work, uh, to meet, uh, uh,
the needs and address those gaps
in the curriculum. And so Mr.
Chair, if I can just very
quickly because I'm sure it's
gonna be some other comments. So
let's say for example,
Um, in the, in the area of
auditing, and I know that that's
a real big issue with uh with
local governments as we deal
with it.
Who is as entities are preparing
that a lot of times leadership
doesn't have the full
understanding of the the
importance of, of that audit. So
dealing with, if you will, gaps
and then moving along, dealing
with some of the other issues
that we, we deal with that. So
the accounting principles and
then from there, talking about
the economics of it, again, and
I know this is very
platitudinal, but the point I'm
trying to get to is
In order for this to truly work
overall, because we do have
different institutions that are
trying some of these things.
How do we make it as such with
the investment you've already
made, uh, to make that much more
significant because you, you're
definitely making a positive
impact in New Mexico.
But we want that to go ahead and
be widespread, and I really
believe that this would be one
of the entities that would be
able to go ahead and do that.
Any further comment?
And, and that's our goal as
well. Um, so I would say uh for,
for me, where that point starts
is to have those conversations
with uh either specific entities
or leadership uh within the
state about how the best way to
move forward with that is
whether and and I I know I just
said it earlier, but just to, to
make the point that um
Traditionally how New Mexico
edge has presented its classes
as we continue to grow and
expand, we're seeing that that
doesn't always work, right? So
we need to um think about more.
I'm not, um, if you're familiar
with Leadership New Mexico, how
they come together, um, you
know, 3 or 4 times a year for 2
or 3 day workshops, that's
something that we're looking at
as well, and so really our job
is uh to do whatever it takes to
meet those needs.
And fill those gaps, whatever
that might be, um, and, and so I
feel like I'm kind of, you know,
speaking around your question a
little, but there are just so
many variables to that, that as
we start to talk about who, who
are the people that need, you
know, where the gaps are, um,
what's the best way to present
the information and distribute
the information, then we can
come up with a plan for best how
to do that. So, Mr. Chairman,
I'm gonna go ahead and close
with this then the
line with it. Leadership New
Mexico, we have several others
as we tie it all together. The
bottom line is we still have
those gaps.
And in dealing with it, if we're
able to go ahead and have those
conversations.
Then from there, what we can do
is bring people together so that
we can address not only those
gaps, but help help more of our
future leaders in order to go
ahead and address everything
from uh management, leadership,
vision building all the way
through the accountability
process and, and, and those are
the, and in context, those are
the pieces that definitely will
help us to move forward when we
really start talking about tax
policy and the improvements. So
thank you very much for the
indulgence.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman,
and I want once again, thank you
for the presentation this
afternoon. I wanna say
especially recognize Mr. Ilam
who gives our committee at the
beginning of every session, an
overview or an update of the tax
policy matters for the state and
is well respected around the
around the state in regards to
tax policy matters and also want
to also recognize Mr. Powers and
and Doctor Young who represent
uh our tax committee as well in
the house, uh.
Mr. Powers is the minority
analyst, and he does a great job
and Doctor Young is our majority
analyst and she does a great job
in the fact that they both work
together in in capacities like
this.
Just go to help strengthen the
matter that we are all striving
to do here in this legislature
and that's create good tax
policy irregardless of where you
stand on the political scale. So
once again, thank you all so
much for the uh presentation
this afternoon. We appreciate
it.
Members we have.
Thank you.
Uh, members, we do have one last
matter, and that is public
comment. We have one person
signed up if I can have Nancy
Burst, who is the Bernliu County
treasurer, please approach the
uh
The desk and uh
Make your public comment. We
appreciate you being here all
day and waiting your turn.
So whenever you're ready.
Madam Treasurer, the floor is,
is yours.
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, thank you very much.
Um, I was gonna be here all day
anyway today, so I appreciate
you fitting in my comments. Uh,
they're very quick and short. I
know we've had a long day, um,
and as you stated, yes, I am
Nancy Burst, the Berlio County
treasurer. I'm also former chair
of the New Mexico County's
treasures affiliate. So I did
talk with our affiliate, and we
had several meetings.
where we did discuss uh what the
assessor brought forward to you
today, uh, talking about
disclosure and exemptions, and
uh associated with the
disclosure, because when you
talk about taxes that were
involved in as a county
treasurer, um, you know, you
want fairness.
Um, we have the policies of what
makes good tax policy, and we
want to make sure that we follow
those. So we do support uh
unofficially, we did not take a
vote of the affiliate, but as we
talked through it, uh, none of
the county, uh, treasures had to
be heartburn over the disclosure
subject. When you talk about
exemptions, that's very
different.
Um,
You know that when you get your
tax bill.
You're gonna see
Your taxes.
And what's your property tax
bill is for that year.
Um, and the first person or the
first office you're gonna call,
it's gonna be the county
treasurer.
Um, it's very difficult for us,
very difficult for me, quite
frankly, to always put that
burden of proof and say, you
know, that's not my authority,
uh,
Statutorily, that's the
assessor. Let me get you that
number and transfer you out.
I hate doing that.
Quite frankly,
Um, you have a former county
treasurer on your committee, uh,
Representative Duncan, and I'm
sure he never liked to pass the
buck either.
When you're talking to your
constituents when you're talking
to your property owners, where
as you saw, uh, with assessor
Lata's presentation, you know,
property taxes make up a lot of
money in Bernlio County.
Uh, so you never wanna pass the
buck to another official, you
want to be able to head on
directly talk to that customer.
Talk to that constituent.
So it puts us in a bind because
again when you're talking about
uh the disabled veteran
exemption. I have heartburn. I
had heartburn when you passed
it. Um,
And went
I hope you read the fur.
I hope you read the fur.
Because it was estimated at $18
million for Bernalio County.
Alone in the first year,
was gonna have to shift in yield
control.
I think 18 million is a lot of
money.
I think our constituents think
that.
So when you talk about what's
fair,
You're shifting $18 million.
In my county alone.
You, you saw other counties that
put forth the numbers, and I'm
glad that property tax division
of tax and Rav has come forward
more to look at where are those
disabled veterans. How much is
this going to impact our local
governments.
It's gonna be tough.
It's gonna be very tough.
We talk about the head of
household exemption.
When I was treasured, uh,
affiliate chair in my eight
years, we brought up to the
legislator 4 different times.
To increase that head of
household, exemption from 2000,
we said, this match it with the
veterans to 4000.
Because again, it hasn't been
increased since the late
Mid to late 70s, I believe.
And it's valueless, really, at
$2000.
Really?
We have't increased it.
In that long.
So, I have heartburn with that,
but I do want it increased. I
know there'll be more yield
control.
But
We have to keep up.
With our economy.
We have to keep up and put peg
it to inflation, because right
now it's meaningless to people.
Um,
Let's see, uh, talking about
edge, uh, I will tell you I'm
very proud to have taken all my
all my edge classes for the
treasures affiliate, um, so, uh,
I think it was a great program,
uh, even though I had 12 years
with the state, I had several
years with APS. So, uh, I knew a
lot about
Uh, public government, um, it
still was very helpful as an
elected official, so I
appreciate them and uh I think I
took 24 classes and I did it in
2.5 years. So, I encourage you
to take your classes. Thank you
very much. I know I've gone
over.
Thank you, Madam chair. There
was no going over that popped
up.
It's helpful, um, Senator Ma,
Mr. Chairman, Ms. Bruce, before
you leave the, uh, just wanna,
as you may know what Berlin
County waspis is leaving, uh,
you know, the strike of
midnight, New Year's Eve, and
she's put in tremendous time,
her staff is fully trained and
it's gonna be a smooth
transition. I just want to thank
you for your years of work and
your leadership in my home
county, as well as the state. So
be sure to come up here and
share some knowledge even after
you're gone from the.
Treasurer's office. Thank you,
Mr. B.
Thank you again for your, for
your public comment. Thank you
