Uh, quickly go around our table
to provide again introductions
to our members. If I can start
with my right, uh,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
good to be here. Mark Duncan. I
represent, uh, San Juan County
District 2.
Glad to be here.
Thank you, Representative, to my
left.
S
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Herpo Junior, District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque, Bernal
Leo County.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, which is the
Southwest quadrant of Enna.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Representative Christine
Chandler from Moscow.
Very good. Thank you all for,
for making time this morning.
Thank you all for those tuning
in online, uh, for making time
this morning and having an
interest in our discussions
today. So our first agenda topic
is uh gonna be presented by
Jennifer Fabian, who is the
economist for the Legislative
Finance Council, and the topic
is property taxes in New Mexico
and the practical impacts of the
property tax code on local
governments. So with that, Ms
Fabian, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, as the
chairman said, my name is
Jennifer Fabian. I'm a uh
economist for the LFC, and I'm
gonna be giving kind of an
overview of the property taxes
in New Mexico, how they work,
um, give you a lot of statistics
on where they're going, how
they're used, uh, and then move
into some of the policy choices
the state has made in the past,
how those trickle down through
to the local governments um and
some options for reform. So I
wish I could have given this
yesterday. I was on the road for
another committee. I know you
guys talked about property taxes
a lot.
Yesterday. So hopefully this
will help um those discussions
as well.
So I'm working off this money
matters brief. I believe you all
have it. Um, so money matters
and now just by the LFC
economists, property taxes in
New Mexico. So property taxes
are one of the three major taxes
imposed on New Mexicans along
with the grocery seats taxes
that New Mexicans pay when they
purchase um items and services
throughout the state and
personal income taxes um applied
on wages and salaries.
Property taxes almost entirely
flow to local governments and
therefore the state and the
legislature has largely left it
alone, there have not been
really any meaningful reforms
scrappy tax in at least 25
years.
I'm gonna start with a couple of
definitions. I'm gonna be using
property tax lingo today. Um, if
taxes aren't complicated enough,
property tax decides to add a
whole new lexicon to this. So
I'm gonna be speaking a lot
about mills and speaking about
the tax in terms of a meal rate.
The middle rate is the amount of
tax owed for every $1000 of
property tax value or property
value.
So one mill is $1 on $1000 of
your property tax value.
Um, there's
For principal recipients of
property tax revenue.
The state, counties,
municipalities, and school
districts.
And since 1933, the New Mexico
constitution has limited the
combined operating levies, um,
of mills that can be applied
throughout across these entities
to 20 mLs. That's 2% of values
of property.
The state stopped levying its
own property tax mill in 1980,
and since 1986, the statutory
split of those 20 mills that are
allowed by the Constitution.
Has been 11.85 for counties,
7.65 mils for municipalities and
0.5 mils for school districts.
That's been the split for a very
long time.
Um, that's in that box on the
right side of the first page.
The property tax is generated
about $2.1 billion in revenue
statewide in 2021. In 2023,
those revenues grew 60% um over
2021, so a massive growth in
just two years, through to $3.3
billion from 2021 to 2023.
Uh, of those revenues,
approximately 30% went to
counties, 14% went to
municipalities.
33% to school districts, 10% to
higher education, and the
remaining 13% went to hospitals
and state debt services. Um,
you'll notice that's more than
the 4
governments that I said were
allowed to levy these. A lot of
these are these special
districts, um, their debt and
special districts, um, levied on
top of those 20 miles and I'm
gonna get into that in just a
moment.
So like I said, um, school
districts and local governments
have these operating mills
capped at 20. They can also levy
special districts, um, that
that's outside of the
traditional state debt capital
outlay, um, process, and these
have to be approved by the
voters in the district in which
they will be imposed.
Uh, just to note these debt and
special meals are not.
Capped and they're not subject
to some of the kind of runaway
growth control measures that the
state's imposed. I'll talk about
those a little bit later.
So because of the overlay of
special districts, debt services
on top of counties,
municipality, and school
district boundaries. The state
has 240 distinct property tax
districts in the state, because
all of these kind of layer on
top of each other, depending on
which districts overlapping your
property, you might have a
different tax rate than just
down the street.
Each district has a different
tax rates ranging from 55.8 mils
for a district in Albuquerque.
To 10.8 mils for a real tax
district in Chavez County. So I
combed the tax code or the tax
um.
The property tax, I think they
call them like the rate
schedules online. That's the
highest I found and the lowest I
found. You can see the range is
quite wide.
On the top of page 2.
This graph shows the weighted
average residential meal rate
across counties. Again, Berdelio
being the highest, their
weighted average is over 45 mL
down to Karan County under 20
mills, um for their weighted
average.
And again, operating meals are
capped at 20. Anything on top of
that are these special
districts, um.
That in Special district mills.
So you can see these non-general
males have a drastic impact on
some New Mexicans tax bill.
Um, a texter in Albuquerque that
I found imposes 30 debt in
special meals compared to only
8.4 operating mills.
So that's the special districts
that the voters have approved
have more than quadrupled this
tax district's tax rate.
On average across counties in
2023, 50% over 50% of tax levied
was for special levies.
41.9 was for operating budgets
and only 2.6% for debt service.
About 5% goes to the state for
general obligation bonds.
You can see on the bottom of
page 2, some select counties
that I pulled their makeup of
these different mills, as you
can see, Bernalio County has
quite a lot of special meals,
um, a lot of meals for colleges
or hospitals, um, sometimes
these are for um parks for
trails, uh, different
investments that county or that
tax district wants to invest in.
And then somewhere like Katan
County, the majority of their
tax rates are going towards
county operating uses.
So moving on to the types of
property that can be taxed in
the tax base in New Mexico. So
New Mexico imposes property tax
on 3 different types of assets,
residential property,
non-residential property, and
some capital equipment and
livestock.
We also tax oil and gas
properties under the Avalorum
tax. It technically is a
separate tax. We report it with
property because it's in lieu of
property taxes. The value of an
oil and gas property is not the
land. Um, it's the extraction,
the minerals that lie underneath
the land is really deriving the
value of that property. Um, so
these empty spots of land out in
in Lee County wouldn't be worth
a lot if you were just looking
at them to build a house on, um,
but they're worth a lot of money
because of the oil, natural gas
that resides underneath.
The surface. So we tax it based
on the value of the oil and the
gas that is being extracted out
of it.
Um, very similar to like a
severance tax.
In 2023, residential property
made up over 42% of the
statewide property tax base,
property tax base is measured by
the total net taxable value of
the properties within a
district.
Um, 21% were non-residential
properties and 37% were these
oil and gas producing
properties. In terms of value of
the properties.
And this property tax base has
shifted and changed pretty
dramatically in just the last 5
years because of the oil and gas
production boom we've been
seeing in the Permian Basin.
Total taxable values have grown
122% in the last 15 years, more
than doubling in that time
period.
And while historically volatile,
these oil and gas aloum taxes
ranged from 8% to 15% of the tax
base.
Since 2018, those property
values and the
base of those property taxes
have grown 526%.
And so like direct oil and gas
taxes aorum taxes inject a lot
of volatility into property tax
revenue for local governments
that have oil and gas
properties, as well as the state
general obligation bonds.
13 counties have these A Lan
property taxes. Obviously we're
primarily talking about Eddie
and Lee counties. They've
experienced massive booms in
their net taxable values and
revenues in 22 and 23.
Currently, oil and gas
properties make up 78% of
taxable value in Eddie County,
and 87% in Lee County. Their
property taxes are
Very, very predominant,
predominantly dependent on these
oil and gas properties.
Other counties reliance is a
little bit less. Rio Ripa, 45%,
is advelorium Harding's 26, San
Juan's County is 28% and all
other counties reliance is below
10%.
Moving on to page 3, you can see
some of this um movement in
these charts on the top of page
3.
So taxable value in billions,
you can see residential kind of
chugging along, non-residential,
a little bit slower, and then
oil and gas really exploding in
the last 3 to 4 years.
Really driving the total growth
in net tax value across the
state.
Since 2018, all oil and gas
counties net tax value has grown
188%, while the value outside of
those counties has grown only
28% in the same time period. You
can see that in that second
graph on the page in the middle.
Idily really pulling up the
averages of the oil and gas
county growth, the blue lines
are all the other counties with
their average in the dark blue
line.
Moving away from the oil and gas
discussion, the split of
aggregate property values
between residential and non
residential properties has also
significantly shifted over time.
And this has really been a shift
of the tax burden away from
commercial and nonresidential
properties to residential
properties. So prior to 1987,
non-residential properties were
more than half the property tax
base in the state, excluding
those oil and gas properties.
But it has since shifted since
that time period. You can see
the bottom graph on page 3 that
divergence of residential and
non-residential property tax
values underpinning our property
taxes, um, really shifting to
residential properties to
homeowners away from industry. I
know the county assessors talked
about this a little bit when
they were talking about
nondisclosure and how it's very
hard to assess commercial
properties in the state because
we don't require them to
disclose their their purchase
price or what they sold a
property for.
Um, that's underpinning some of
this shift, as well as,
especially since COVID,
residential properties have
grown much faster than
non-residential properties.
There's two things kind of
driving this, but that
nondisclosure um is certainly a
key piece.
Now I want to talk about growth
controls, um, what options
they'd have, um, states have to
kind of control runaway property
growth, property tax growth in
their states, what New Mexico
does, what other states do, um,
and then move to a discussion of
kind of how those growth
controls might play out, um.
In kind of adverse effects.
So nationally, states can use a
combination of essentially 3
methods to control runaway
property taxes. A meal limit, an
assessment limit, and a levy
limit or a revenue limit. In New
Mexico, we call that yield
control.
Each limitation targets a
different component of property
tax. So me limit caps the tax
rate able to be imposed.
That's our 20, we have that in
our Constitution, 20 mills, um,
is all that we are able to tax
for operational uses. I will
caveat that though the special
districts are not subject to
this cap, um, but we do have a
form of a mill rate cap.
The assessment limits, those cap
the assessed value of a
property. So it, it limits how
much your property value is
assessed every year in New
Mexico, we have an assessment
limit.
Uh, on residential properties
only of 3% a year.
Your property value that
underpins the property tax that
will be imposed on that value is
capped at 3% a year, the growth.
And then lastly,
Yield controls limit the revenue
collected by the taxing entity.
And we have one called yield
Control. I'll go into how that
works in just a moment.
New Mexico is one of only 9
states that I found to implement
all three of these uh growth
controls on property tax. So
moving on to page 4.
I'm gonna talk about these in a
little bit more detail.
So again, New Mexico has an
assessment limit cap of 3% a
year.
When a home is sold, that
valuation is reset to the
current incorrect market value.
It can also be reset when the
use of a property is changed or
if the zoning changes, uh, it
can be reset to the current
correct value. And this is
really put in place, I think the
illustration of the little old
lady on Canyon Road, who had
maybe a generational property,
and then as Santa Fe and
especially Canyon Road property
values began to balloon and grow
quite rapidly, um, you know.
Someone on a fixed income,
therefore is priced out of their
home due to appreciating rates.
So the intent is good, um, and
it certainly achieves that
effect, keeps property values
low.
That's not actual property
values. I will say that the
taxable property value of the
property quite low.
I'm gonna go into yield control
just a little bit to explain
that. It's quite a complicated
mechanism, kind of hard to
understand.
Um,
But it's a revenue collection
growth cap.
And it's explained here on page
4 and I'm going to kind of walk
through this a little bit.
So annual growth of property tax
revenues for the taxing entity
is limited to match the
inflation of local government
expenditure, and that's a
measure that's pulled from the
feds, it's an inflation
indicator that the Census Bureau
and the Labor Statistics, um,
puts out every year, um, or 5%.
So essentially, in times of high
inflation or high property value
growth yield control really
prevents the collection of mills
by local entities that have
imposed them.
So even if they're allowed to
impose, for example, counties
can have 11.5 mills.
If that yield control measure
says, uh,
You can't collect more than 5%
even if property values have
gone up 6%, 7%, 8%, we were
seeing 12% growth, um just a
couple of years ago. Those local
entities cannot impose those
mills on those properties and
collect all of that tax revenue.
The tax revenue is capped at 5%
growth.
And so this really
In effect, hinders local
governments from effectively
setting their own mill rate,
which they are constitutionally
and statutorily allowed to do.
So in practice, the Department
of Finance and Administration
ultimately sets the mill rates
for each city and county.
By calculating how much each
locality can go revenues, given
this inflation factor in the
growth of the values in their
district.
So it increases in district-wide
taxable values is greater than
the inflation factor, the mill
rate actually has to be reduced.
The tax has to be reduced on all
properties in that district to
keep revenue growth at that
inflation factor, regardless of
what the governing body has
voted to tax their district.
You can see on the graph on page
4.
This is the difference between
what these counties governing
body have imposed as their mill
rate versus what the the yield
controlled mills actually are.
So you can see in a couple
counties, Catch and Curry and
Torrance County, they're able to
collect all of the mills their
governing body has imposed
because their property taxes
haven't exceeded their property
value growth has not exceeded
that inflation factor year over
year every year, but yield
control is doing nothing
essentially at keeping those
mills down, it hasn't needed to
come into effect. However, at
the bottom of the graph, you can
see some high growth areas, some
high growth counties, Tao, San
Miguel, Rio Riba, Santa Fe.
Lincoln, their governing bodies
have imposed mills that they're
not able to collect because
underlying property tax values
have grown above um that yield
control level.
So in Lincoln and Santa Fe, over
half of their allowed mills are
being restricted by this sealed
control measure.
So I want to shift now. I'm on
page 4 and 5.
Just generally how New Mexico
ranks kind of went over our
basic structure, how our
different growth control
measures work.
Um, now I wanna kind of compare
us to the rest of the country.
Generally, New Mexico property
taxes rank among the lowest in
the country across a handful of
different measures.
Um, these are summarized on the
top of page 5 in the table.
Our our per capita property tax
rate is 47th.
And in this measure, the, the
higher the number, the lower the
tax.
Drinking, right? So if we're 50,
that means we have the lowest,
um, ranked forty-seventh on that
measure. Property tax is a
percent of income, 44th,
property tax as a percent of
state and local income, 50th.
Um, are kind of raw numbers,
our, our median real estate
taxes paid for an owner-occupied
home. We're ranked 40th.
Uh, and our effective tax rate
um is
Low but not quite as low as the
other measures, around 34% as
our property values are a little
bit lower than the rest of the
country as well.
I want to talk a little bit
about this state and local
government share of our revenues
coming from property taxes.
The state and local governments
combined rely much less on
property taxes than the rest of
the country.
Uh, only about 6.5% of general
revenue for state and local
entities comes from property
taxes.
And this has resulted in a shift
of our reliance to some more
volatile sources like GRT, which
is really
Kind of depending on the
underlying winds of the economy
on the oil and gas industry,
while property taxes are
generally a lot more stable.
Local governments excluding the
state.
generate about 18.9% of their
revenue from property taxes and
that's much, much less than the
national average of about 30%.
Overall, property taxes in New
Mexico, it is a regressive tax.
Um, a larger share, we always
talk about regressivity and
progressivity and tax code, and
that essentially is as your
income rises, you pay a larger
share of your income to taxes,
property taxes tend to be
regressive as homes generally
represent a larger share of a
lower income families's wealth,
um, versus someone who has a lot
of income, generally their home
is only a small share of their
wealth. They have a lot more of
their income or their wealth
stashed away into stock
portfolios and
To um kind of long term savings.
They have a lot more trust, you
know, they have a lot more
financial flexibility to move
things around. Oftentimes for a
low income family, especially in
New Mexico, their home is really
their nest egg, um, and a large
share of their kind of overall
picture of wealth and therefore
property tax might and usually
does generate or represent a lot
higher share of their income
each year.
Analysis by the Institute of
Taxation and Economic Policy
shows the poorest 20% of people
in New Mexico pay about 3.9% of
their income in property taxes
every year.
While the wealthiest New
Mexicans pay about 1.2% of their
income in property taxes.
And the state does have some
relief programs that target low
income families, and I'll talk
about some of those a little bit
later. Many of those have
additional requirements such as
disability, age, and veteran
status and able to utilize
those. Um, we have no relief
measures that target, um,
Only income without additional
requirements.
So I want to talk about kind of
how these implications, how this
structure in New Mexico plays
out, um.
Some of the unintended effects,
possibly of some of these growth
control measures.
So I'm gonna start with
assessment limits.
Again, that's the 3% cap on the
assessed value of a property,
residential properties only, and
this is intended to limit
property taxes from becoming
overly burdensome to New
Mexicans, especially those on
fixed incomes.
However, assessment limits can
have the unintended results of
creating inequity in property
valuations based solely on the
length of ownership, with no
consideration for occupancy
status, whether it's your
primary home, whether you live
in that home, whether it's your
second home or a vacation home.
Um, your income level or your
ability to pay that tax.
First-time home buyers and young
homeowners tend to have more
churn as they purchase starter
homes, uh, maybe upgrade a
couple of years later, um,
upsize as they start families,
uh, and that will reset those
property valuations every time
they move, they're paying
current and correct uh value.
Established homeowners staying
in their homes longer, including
landlords who own long-term
investment properties.
Reap the benefit of this 3%
assessment limit year after year
after year as property values
have grown faster than 3%.
Additionally, higher priced
homes and higher priced
neighborhoods tend to appreciate
more rapidly, year over year and
then lower priced homes.
As a result, assessment limits
actually shift the distribution
of property taxes away from
faster appreciating homes and
longer duration homeowners, um,
and on to shorter term
homeowners, um, and
Those who are typically lower
income residents.
Assessment limits can also lead
to the lock-in effect where
homeowners with depressed
property taxes are
trapped in their current home
because of the increased
property taxes should they move,
even if they were to downsize. A
lot of people talk about this as
tax lightning. So if you have a
property that you've been living
in for a long time, and you've
been reaping that 3% assessment
limit cap, and even if you want
to move into a smaller home or a
home that's worth less, your
property taxes might double,
might triple overnight just by
moving. Um, this can
To me, the supply of homes in a
market leading to increased
prices. Um, we like to see some
churn in in the home market. It
puts things out on the market.
Obviously, when we saw supply
crunch during the pandemic,
that's when we saw home prices
really go up.
And I will just note, when
assessment limits were put into
place in 2000.
The median duration of home
ownership was 6 years.
Now it's 13 years.
So that problem is being exacer
exacerbated by people staying in
their homes a little bit longer,
or a lot longer, more than
double the duration that it was
when this
Provision was put into statute.
So I want to illustrate
assessment limits with a
hypothetical. They're considered
two neighbors with identical
homes, identical values. Let's
put it at the median home price,
$385,000 and that's the meeting
home price in the state of New
Mexico.
Both neighbors have the same
income. They both have a wife
and 2.5 kids and a white picket
fence. Let's just say they're
identical.
Um, the exact same job, they
drive the same car. They're
twins, they married twins, all
right? They're the exact same
neighbors.
But one neighbor purchased their
home this year. The other
neighbor purchased their home in
2000.
And in 2000, the median home
price was $108,000.
So despite the homes being of
equal value and these families
having the same household
income,
The longer term homeowner's home
value is assessed at only
$213,000 down from the actual
value of $385,000.
And that's 45% lower than his
identical neighbor.
At the statewide average
property tax rate of 34 m.
The short term neighbor will pay
almost $2000 more in property
taxes in that year than his
identical neighbor.
Just based on length of home
ownership.
Statewide, the average tenured
homeowner of 13 years as a 25%
reduction in assessessed value
of their home compared to a new
homeowner.
His impact varies across
counties, obviously, in places
where values have gone up
rapidly. This is, uh, this
effect is a lot stronger. You
can see this on page 6.
This is a 2023 assessed value of
$100,000 home purchased in 2010.
So you can see the difference
between
Uh, in each county.
The value of that home with
assessment limits and without
assessment limits, those
percentages are the differences.
Roosevelt, Lee, McKinley, um,
Over 13 years.
About a 10 to 15% difference
between the assessed value of a
home purchased then versus now.
However, in places like Lincoln,
Los Alamos, Sierra, the
difference can be as high as
42%.
quite drastic um impacts on
this. And again, this has
Uh, it's just based on length of
ownership. It has no bearing on
your ability to pay your income
level, um, or anything that we
would typically think of how we
would want to structure tax cuts
or tax relief. Now I want to
move on to yield control. It
also has some adverse effects
similarly to assessment limits.
Over time and especially after
periods of rapid housing growth,
yield control suppresses the
mill rates and hinders uh local
government's ability to collect
taxes on the value of the
property.
It removes the taxing authority
given to local governments,
because the imposition of mill
rates basically becomes
meaningless and is overruled by
the yield control mill rate.
Two-thirds of counties have
imposed all 11.85 of their
meals. However, only 3 of them
are able to collect tax at that
mill rate.
For municipalities, 73% of local
governments have remaining mill
rate capacity with only 33
imposing at the maximum rate.
Um, on average, yield control
has suppressed the county tax
rate on residential properties
by 3.3 mills.
And municipal by 1.2 mLs.
That's a statewide revenue loss
of approximately $152 million
for counties and 34 million for
cities.
Again, this has led some local
governments to shift their
property tax reliance from the
very stable property tax to
revenues like GRT, um, which can
ebb and flow, um, obviously a
lot more volatile than property
tax values.
Assessment limits and yield
control interact with each other
during high evaluation growth
periods to favor higher pushing
properties and to shift the tax
burden to lower appreciating
properties.
So, uh, Jim O'Neill, who has
been around in tech circles for
a while, describe this
phenomenon in a 2019 uh
presentation.
I have it here edited. I want to
walk through it because I think
it illustrates this effects
quite well. This is on the top
of page 7.
So we can assume a districtwide
increase in property market
values is 4%. That's quite
modest. We've been seeing very,
very high market value
increases.
Um, and the inflation index used
by yield control formula that
year is 2%.
So by itself, yield control
would force the district's tax
rate down by almost 2%. His
revenues cannot grow more than
2%. Therefore, we have to
suppress the tax rate in order
to not exceed those revenues.
However, valuations on
individual homes are also capped
at 3%.
So that means that around 25% of
this valuation increase does not
get booked to local governments,
uh, revenues.
So yield control rate
suppressing effects shrinks to
less than 1%.
Throw in another complicating
factor that
Holmes appreciate at different
rates.
So owners whose valuation
increased by less than 3% are
only receiving the benefits from
yield control.
However, people whose market
value rose over 3% enjoyed both
yield control and assessment
limits, uh, and essentially
shifting some of that burden
over to lower income, uh, or
less quickly appreciating homes.
The chart on page 7 also kind of
shows for a general home a
$400,000 home imposed at 20 mLs.
About 20 years of home value
growth on this first column and
yield control growth factors
used in the state, um, on
average, this is, um, a select
county. This is not the yield
control growth factor used for
everybody. But you can see in
periods where home value growth
is exceeding yield control
factor, those yield-controlled
mills are going down.
Everybody's tax rate goes down
because
Local governments are being
restricted on how much revenue
they can collect.
During the Great Recession 2009,
um, through about 2014, property
values actually
Uh, decreased. We were seeing
home values uh drop.
You can see those mills actually
tick back up, um, over the.
Uh, mill rate of 20.
Same thing with assessment
limits, um, you can see these
things kind of operating in in
opposite directions of that home
value growth.
And I want to point you to 22 to
23 at the bottom. We had really
massive home value growth, or
yield control was much lower. We
actually reached the 5% cap in
22 and 23, and you can see these
yield controlled mills go from
20 to 15.5, and the assessed
limit mills go from 19 to 14.9,
resulting in
Um,
Over $1000 almost $1500 of
savings um for homeowners in
those years. But again,
This is distorted across
homeowners depending on the rate
of appreciation.
So moving on to property tax
relief and incentives to talking
about much more targeted, not
talking about these overarching
growth control measures, but
really, who are we targeting
property tax relief at
And so while broad and
overreaching growth control
measures are effective at
limiting property tax growth on
a whole. They don't target those
most in need, and they can shift
properties away um from
lowerreing properties, they can
hamper uh local government
taxing authority as I talked
about. There are other forms of
more targeted tax relief.
Um, to target those in need
without creating horizontal tax
inequities and hamstringing
local budgets. New Mexico
already provides several of
these forms, but there's an
opportunity for further reform
on these.
The first are value freezes or
exemptions. The state does allow
low income elderly or disabled
homeowners to freeze their
valuation of their property when
they turn 65 or at the 2009 um
property level depending on how
long they've owned their home.
Um, but this doesn't, it also
has an income threshold, you
have to have income less than
$41.9,000 in 2024. This income
level is indexed to inflation,
so it will go up um as we move
into higher inflation
environments. Um, however,
You have to have um this kind of
secondary eligibility of being
elderly or disabled, which means
low income residents who might
earn less than $41.9,000 also
cannot use this, um, even though
their ability to pay is similar
to those who are elderly or
disabled at the same income
level.
The state also created several
exemptions for military
veterans. I believe you talked
about this yesterday. I'm not
gonna go into a lot of detail
here because I think the county
assessors covered um this quite
in depth, but we do offer some
of those. I'm happy to go into
that um during questions. They
are, there will be a
constitutional amendment
proposed in November, um, that
would expand some of these,
which would shift some tax
burden to other homeowners away
from veterans regardless of
ability to pay.
Another uh avenue states use to
offer relief for local
homeowners. It's called the
Homestead Preferential
treatment, um, we call it.
Our
What do we call it?
Head of household, there it is.
Um, most people call it a
homestead preferential treatment
or homestead exemption. It
doesn't have to be a homestead.
You you don't have to be raising
chickens and like churning
butter to use this, um,
sometimes it's a lower tax rate,
sometimes it's a flat rate. We
do have one, it's $2000
exemption on the taxable value
of your property, um.
This is not adjusted for
inflation. It hasn't been
increased in a very long time
and it really does very little
to differentiate primary
homeowners or owner-occupied
homes or somebody who's renting
for primary place of residence
from people that are um
You know, that have a second
home, that might be a landlord,
um, that has multiple homes or
an investment property. Um, it's
really too low to make any
significant dent. I think for
most people it's probably a $50
tax savings. Um, it really does
very little because of how low
it is. This really could be
expanded.
What I like about Homestead
exemptions or for head of
household exemptions is that
because it can be structured as
a nominal rate, it actually
disproportionately helps those
with lower home values versus
higher home values, um.
If this, for example, if this
head of household exemption were
increased to $30,000 up from
$2000.
For all owner-occupied primary
residences, net taxable value
would decrease by approximately
$8 billion across the state.
This would trigger yield control
measures and mill levies would
actually have to increase.
To maintain local budgets.
They would have to increase by
an average of 7.3 mLs to keep
revenues flat.
However, what that does is it's
kind of a seesaw.
Is that for a homeowner with a
value right around the median.
It would basically be a wash.
You would have tax savings of
about $118 a year, 3% decrease.
However, someone with a $20,000
home, because of this offset of
the property value and the
increase of mills, they would
save $572 nearly 30% of their
current tax bill.
Conversely, someone with a
higher priced home valued at
$600,000 with see taxes
increased by about $400 a year,
about a 7% increase. So really
trying to figure out where that
tax exemption or that head of
household exemption could sit
where you could target the tax
cuts to the lower income and the
tax increases to higher income
could be a really effective way
to target tax relief to those
who really need it.
Another version of a homestead
provision was actually
introduced in 2022.
House Bill 71, it increased
those assessment limits on
non-primary homeowners to 10%.
So in periods of rapid housing,
um, valuation increases.
They would essentially catch up
much, much faster than primary
owners. If it was not your
primary home. The second
homeowners, their value would go
up 10% a year instead of 3 and
come up to market value a lot
faster.
Moving on to page 10, a lot of
states provide circuit breakers
for property taxes, and this is
essentially a shutoff valve for
property taxes. Once your
property taxes reach a certain
share of your income.
So here we have on the left, we
have different states, property
tax as a percentage of personal
income. Ours is already quite
low, but for people on a very
fixed income for people on the
lower spectrum of the income
scale, even 2% of their income
is quite burdensome. So what
these some states do is once
your property tax reaches 2%,
once your property tax reach,
you know, 1.5% of your total
income that year, you don't have
to pay anymore. That's as much
as you'll pay the property
taxes.
It just basically shuts off at a
certain level.
This in combination with
possibly repealing assessment
limits is really a good
indicator of your ability to
pay. Um, if you are a
multimillionaire that has a
house in Santa Fe, but you live
in Dallas, um, there's really no
reason that you couldn't pay
property taxes on the current
and correct value of your home.
Um, and we wouldn't need to
apply a circuit breaker to
somebody like that. However, the
way our structure is now, we're
offering a lot of tax incentives
across the board for people that
don't really need them.
I like circuit breakers and I
like homestead exemptions. Um,
they have a lot of benefits over
these broader property tax
relief.
Um, circuit breakers can be
targeted at specific groups that
we want to, um, they're much
less expensive than across the
board property tax breaks, even
uh the homestead exemption,
which would apply to all primary
homeowners regardless of income.
This one we could really target
to specific income levels.
Additionally, circuit breakers
can help rein in these high
special and debt levies that are
not subject to assessment limits
or yield control, um.
Basically, even if these special
limits would push you over the
edge of the circuit breaker
income, you wouldn't have to pay
them.
Just a quick note again on
revenue stability, um, property
taxes are quite stable, even
with the influx of oil and gas
in the larger share of that
property taxes are still more
stable than GRT, um.
A little bit less stable
recently than personal income
tax, um, but still one of the
more stable revenue streams over
time. And again, New Mexico
relies on it much less heavily
than the rest of the country,
causing local governments um to
shift their reliance to GRT.
So some opportunities for reform
moving into the last section of
my brief and presentation.
I think an easy um win that
would really help some of this
information distortion that I'm,
I'm sure the county assessors
talked about is enacting a full
or partial disclosure for
non-residential properties.
Um, this would help shift the
tax burden back to industry off
of homeowners, um, and really
equal the playing field across
two different property
taxpayers. Um, I don't think
information has ever, ever hurt
in this type of situation, um,
it seems like.
Something the legislature should
consider.
The other, um, expanding
targeted tax relief again.
Trying to target based on income
instead of other demographics,
keeping that horizontal equity
of our tax code, um, again, I
like the Homestead exemption. I
like circuit breakers.
Here on page 12 is a quick
scenario of a homestead
exemption by Home Value.
Um, if we raised it to $30,000
exemption on your values. Again,
a home price of $200,000 which
see almost 30% decrease in their
property tax rate, while a
$600,000 home would see about a
7% increase. Um, this would have
to be this type of analysis
would have to be done across
counties and across tax
districts. It would vary across
the state, um, so much more
analysis would be needed to be
done to really see the impact on
specific places, um, but I think
it could be something, and I
think it's something the county.
or s are also interested in.
It's also very easy to
administer, um, it's not overly
burdensome for county assessors
to implement.
A provision like that.
Additionally, introducing
circuit breakers which provide
tax credits when property tax
burdens exceed a certain
percentage of income can offer
targeted approach for easing tax
burdens for low or fixed income
property owners and renters.
I think doing a circuit breaker
or homestead exemption in
conjunction with larger reforms
such as repealing assessment
limits could really help
rebalance property taxes to
benefit New Mexicans and export
some of the tax to out of state
owners or second homeowners that
invest in New Mexico, they can
afford to pay higher property
taxes. I would not suggest
repealing assessment limits
without also implementing some
kind of protection for low
income, um, high appreciating
homeowners that might be caught
in gent gentrification of their
neighborhoods. Um, those two
things basically have to come in
tandem to not uh adversely
affect some low income
homeowners whose property values
have increased to a point where
if they were taxed on their
market value of their home,
would not be able to afford it.
But I do think assessment limits
any of control, especially
together and create some
distortions in property tax that
the legislature could consider
um addressing.
And the last is simply looking
at rebalancing revenue sources.
Um, for example, if the state
repealed yield control, um,
local governments could
Rebalance their property or
rebound their tax revenue. They
could collect more in property
taxes and decrease GRT um rates
at the same time, while
maintaining um budget solvency.
But really shift to a more
stable, um, and
Less regressive property or less
regressive revenue stream, um,
but again,
The state is imposing i control
on locals, and they don't have
that option currently, which is
increasing their reliance on
GRT.
So with that, I will stand for
questions, and now I threw a lot
at you, and hopefully we have
Um, time and interest to answer
a couple questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Ms Fabian. Again, I'm
just impressed by your wealth of
knowledge and what you can bring
to the table, uh, at this point,
I have uh one person on the list
but we'll open it up to the rest
of the committee members for
questions or comments. First on
the list, we have Representative
Martinez.
You, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for the
Lots of information.
I
My first question, I'm kind of.
Confused on the the
Imposition from the state level,
is that by rule or is that by
statute?
Both assessment limits and yield
control, Mr. Chair and
Representative are statutory, so
they were laws passed by the
state legislature that imposed
these restrictions on local
governments.
This thing returning that power
to the local government is.
Much better idea.
My next question is the, the 3%
cap on residential.
Why
Why is it a bad idea to do that
for commercial?
Mr. Chair, uh, representative, I
think that's a, it's a a policy
decision, um.
Typically commercial properties.
Our valued based on
The structure on them, so a
business, the value of a
business is not necessarily the
land that it's on, it's usually
the value of that business
itself. And when that value of
that business goes up, it
usually increases their
profitability. Um, this
assessment limit, um, doesn't
typically target commercial
properties for that reason, um,
as property values in a
commercial sector goes up,
typically their profitability is
also going up. Um, it's
assessment limits are really
intended to keep people in their
homes, um, if a
Commercial property becomes
unviable because of the property
they're in, um, kind of free
market dynamics typically
dictates that that business is
not viable. Um, so that's
typically why assessment limits
are really geared to keep people
in homes as their as their
houses appreciate.
for that, um.
I know a small family owned
restaurant.
Um, the lady was planning on
adding 3 more.
Uh
to later.
Um, until she opened her taxes.
And then had to change plans.
She's not.
Anywhere
Close to being a millionaire,
she was providing local jobs.
Um, and I just think that
There is something that we could
do to help.
Commercial property owner, she
poured her savings into buying
this building.
Wanting to build something for
the for the local.
Community
Hopefully leave something to
their.
Children
And now they've had to kind of
retool.
I just think, I think there is
something that we could do.
To protect those
Business.
You know, those businesses are
the ones that create jobs in the
local economy.
They're the ones who pay the
taxes. They're the ones that
Sponsor Little League teams,
they're the ones that
Do all these things.
But
There's I'm constantly learning
of ways that we're gonna punish
business.
And it just seems to me, I, I
totally agree.
Uh
Protecting residential property
is a priority.
Um, I disagree with you. I think
the longer time somebody stays
in the home is a better idea for
the neighborhood.
Understand on the tax issue, I
can understand that.
But I think we need to protect
our business.
I mean, this lady's afraid that
Because she's had to cut back.
Gonna have to cut back hours, no
longer stay open for dinner.
Eventually this business is
gonna go away and that that.
Makes me sad.
Not only because I love the food
there.
But because this was a legacy
for the.
But you know what, let's raise.
Property taxes on a business as
much as we can.
And not worry about the
consequences.
So
I think that, you know, we need
to, we need to look at balance
at some point.
Mm.
I think everybody needs to pay
their fair share of taxes.
I
But a much more expensive house
a few years ago and
Painted when I opened the tax
bill, but I understood that.
Um, I just don't want to see
what happened in Santa Fe in the
90s.
Where people have been living in
their house for 40 years.
And are forced to sell because
Property taxes went up.
5 and 6 times.
Um, I knew a good family that
lived.
Off of the check or that.
And the cell and moved to
Albuquerque.
They didn't like Albuquerque,
they grew up here.
You know, we just
We need to be really careful
about how we go about it.
Because we owe it to the
residents, but we also owe it to
those people that have poured
their lives into
Trying to build a business, so.
My commentary for the day, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez. Let's go to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
I'm gonna follow a little bit uh
With my friend, uh.
Mr. Martinez here.
You know, I, I think everybody
ought to pay their pay their
fair share.
That being said, I think, uh,
flat tax type of guy too.
You gotta be able to figure out
how we
operate within our means.
A taxi, yeah.
One
I'm sorry, Senator, I, I will do
so. Um.
With that being said,
Uh, I, I think that um one of
the, one of the problems when
we, we give to local control and
I'm aware of a community that
this happened in.
That uh people were elected in
that position that we're all
very wealthy.
And all of a sudden those that
were not wealthy and, and no
longer win a race because they
didn't have the money to run the
race. All of a sudden their
taxes went up sky high because
the 5 guys.
People sitting on the board
could make that happen.
And and so I, we need to be
very, very careful.
What we do, because my action
causes consequence somewhere.
And maybe down the road, 5,
1015, 20 years, but it's going
to cause an accident.
Consequence
Um, on the assessment limits,
um,
You know, as a, if, if I'm a 65
year old.
Individual, and when I was 22
and looking at my first home, I
had the same problems then these
young people have today.
Trying to get into a home.
Back then,
2 2.25 an hour I was getting,
didn't go very far.
In the $16 an hour doesn't go
very far today.
I wonder at what point in time.
are trying to save.
Oaks
What the harm is going to be as
a result of that.
So I, uh,
That's the first statement and
then on the rebalanced revenue.
Um,
I
I think that um
If we do that,
We might be back in the same
situation that I mentioned with
the 5.
Group of 5
That
One goes up and the other goes
down where if I'm living in.
Portland, New Mexico, and, and
folks out of Colorado come into
my community and spend money and
HRT. I'm happy to take their
funds.
It doesn't impact my community
much, so I'd be concerned about
that as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Duncan, thank you
very much. Let's go to Senator
Stefani.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair. Could
you go back, um, and talk a
little bit about yieldld
control?
And um,
Clarify its relationships to um
amount of housing available.
Um, any bond debt.
Uh, just talk to us about.
What it's related to, please.
Sure, Mr. Chair, Senator
Stefaniks, yield control is
essentially a revenue.
that local governments have to
adhere to.
So essentially, it's an
inflation factor.
Um, the state says a local
government cannot raise more
revenue.
From property taxes than this
inflation factor. That inflation
factor is capped at 5%.
So for example, in the last
couple of years where inflation
has been, you know, between 7
and 11%, um, local government
expenses have gone up, um.
By more than 5%, and yet their
property tax revenue is capped
at 5%, even though home values
also went up.
Higher than 5%.
So, what it really does is it
can lower the ultimate tax rate
on homes because the revenue is
capped on the back end.
Um, in terms of housing stock,
uh, it doesn't, it doesn't
affect that as much as
assessment limits might, um, it
doesn't create the lock-in
effect that assessment limits
might, because it's not
affecting an individual
taxpayer, um, in terms of the
valuation of their home, they're
not experiencing tax lightning
from yield control as much as
assessment limits, um, bond
capacity is also not affected by
yield control. This is only
operating uh mills that are
affected by yield.
for counties, municipalities,
school districts, um, so bonding
is not affected by yield control
either. It's really um a cap on
the amount of revenue locals can
bring in from property taxes.
Thank you. So, Mr. Chair, um,
Just to continue clarifying for
me and maybe anybody listening
who doesn't know.
The state sets
The 5%.
And you, the state cannot go up
or down.
Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, the
state has tied yield control to
local government spending
inflation measures capped at 5%.
That's a statutory cap and the
legislature could change that
cap um for local government
revenue collection for state
finances, if you're asking about
money the state might garner
from property taxes. We have
1.36 mils that the state has
been imposing on properties for
our general obligation debt, um.
That's really the only revenue
the state generates from
property taxes goes right into
our um.
Our obligation that pool um gets
bonded out for capital projects
every other year. Um, that's not
affected by yield control
either.
Mr. Chair, I think um when I was
on the county commission,
I think people thought.
That's a county commissioners
were making up.
The tax rates.
Or their property taxes, whereas
The state was really sending us,
yes.
formulated rate, and we would
look at it in our finance people
would assess whether it was
correct and we could appeal it
to the state or we could sign
off.
But we really had very little.
Opportunity to adjust that.
So the opportunity for a county.
Or a city to adjust or just the
county. Both.
Both is at 5%.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, so your,
your county commissions and your
city councils do you have the
authority to set mill rates up
to that constitutional cap. So
counties have 11.5, for example,
mills, they are allowed to
impose.
After they imposed that meal
rate. That's when DFA comes in,
they look at how much property
values have gone up? Has it gone
up larger than this inflation
factor that we are tied to, um,
And then might lower those mills
like you're saying basically DFA
has that authority, although it
is a formulaic authority.
They're not arbitrarily picking
a mill levees or counties, but
you're right, it does take that
authority away in a sense, um,
by this yield control measure.
The 5% is the cap. Um, I have a
history of
Uh, these yield growth control
factors on page 7, and I also
think in the appendix.
Um, we've only reached the cap a
handful of times, um, but the
last two years have been 5%.
So essentially
In a county or any tax district.
If property values have gone up
over 5%.
And the county has implemented,
for example, all 11.85 mLs. DFA
will come back and say, you
can't impose 11.85 mLs because
then you would collect more
revenue than you're allowed to
collect. So what we're gonna do
is we're gonna drop the mills so
that you reach that 5%, but no
more. And so then the mills
imposed might be 10 mLs, might
be 9 mLs. It depends on, on the
level of
Property evaluation increases.
So you're right, it is usually
DFA setting meal rates based on
valuation growth and based on
the yield control formula.
Um, kind of removing that
authority from county
commissions, and you'll see city
councils and county commissions
typically are just approving the
highest meal rate of year over
year over year, um, because
ultimately they say DFA is going
to tell us what our mill rate is
anyway.
That's correct. So, Mr. Chair,
uh, one going back to what I was
commenting on the housing stock.
I was asking the reverse of what
you were answering.
I was asking
Mr. Chair, if there is more
housing available, like
If we start looking at infill or
we start looking at more
affordable housing, how would
that affect?
The um
Available rates and the yield
control.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, um, senator, so
any new construction or any uh
addition on a home that
increases the value over just
general. So if I, you know,
finish out my attic, which I'm
planning on doing in a couple of
years, um, that is not affected
by yield control. That can be
added to local government
revenue. So if you build new
housing stock, and then start
taxing those properties, that
can be added over the yield
control level for local
governments. That's what I'm
asking.
So that is not included in the
yield control formula. It's
basically existing housing
stock, um, minus any additions
or improvements on the home that
actually raise um valuations,
um.
So yeah, any new housing stock
can actually increase local
government revenue.
So, Mr. Chair, I would just
suggest that um as we do this,
this forecasting.
In the future that we look
probably at communities that
plan to drop to
Drop in 500 more units or 2000
more units or whatever, so that
we could start.
Planning and maybe not so much
at the state level but at the
county level.
But
You've given us some ideas of
what we could do at the state.
Thank you so much, Mr. Thank
you, Senator. Let's go to
representative.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, super interesting and
thorough and much appreciated. I
think property.
Or
Um
Um,
Can a local government set
different rates?
For residential and
non-residential.
Uh, Mr. Chas Chandler, I would
have to check if they are
allowed to set differential
rates. I don't believe so.
However, the yield control
formula applies to residential
and non-residential separately.
So if those um valuations are
growing at different paces, the
yield controlled mill rate will
be different. You often find
commercial properties are
imposed at the full mills that
that um municipality or county
have implemented.
because
it has grown a lot slower than
residential rates, so yield
control has not had as big an
effect on commercial properties
as non-commercial properties as
residential.
I, well, while you're looking
into that, could you also, Mr.
Chair, look into
Whether that's constitutionally
driven or just a choice that
we've made.
The yield control differential
rate whether or not you can have
different property rates for
residential and non-residential.
I'd like to know that.
Um, and the reason I'm asking
that is, you know, I, Mr. Chair,
you know, the theme that we've
had today and we have it on in
so many um discussions we have
across the board on so many
policies is the state is like
the big brother to local
government.
And I see it in the tax policy,
Mr. Chair, and we see it in
other things.
And I guess the question I have
is why aren't we giving more
latitude to local governments to
make their own decisions and and
to um Representative Martinez's
point, you know, maybe we could
actually have the correct value
of a business because that's
really what they're required to
do by the Constitution, but the
the the county or the city could
or county, I guess it would be,
to decide to have a somewhat
lower rate.
Or, you know, depending on the
size of the, you know, we could,
we could have those kinds of
conversations instead of being
jammed into these ridiculous
paradigms that make no sense,
but we're trying to adjust for
the for the elderly person on
Canyon Road and we're, you know,
we're doing this and that and
the small business versus intel
and you know, what the heck, you
know, so that, I mean, I'm
surprised we don't know the
answer to that question, Mr.
Chair. I mean, it seems to me
like the, you know, maybe we
could look at things like that
and.
So we can give local
governments, Mr. Chair, a little
bit more latitude instead of
saying pretending they actually
said something, and then DFA Big
Brother tells them what their
true answer is, just like the
DFA Big Brother tells us whether
we're not we can give our
capital money to some small um
city because they haven't gotten
their last um audit reporting.
So, um, you know, I just, I'm
just, I guess I'm venting a
little bit, having worked in
local government as you have and
as you have.
There and, uh, you know,
If you want people to govern
responsibly give them the tools
so they can govern on. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
With no one else on the list, if
I may have a couple of.
Questions and comments, I can
appreciate the comments from
Representative Chandler about
the local
The local authority aspect of it
all because I think that goes a
long way and in my tenure as a
member of this body, um, it's a
snapshot, it's a blink of an eye
when you think about.
Where we are here in this
legislature, the fact that we're
here as a member of the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee.
And what we can do to help
facilitate
Growth and change and and and
positivity in New Mexico and it
wasn't until I was a member of
this committee and really a
member of the task me when I
felt like I had.
A little bit more
Ability to be an influence on
making sure that things aren't
simply just status quo.
Right? Because I think for a lot
of, a lot of my time here.
I was given the answer of that's
just the way it is.
We, we inherit these policies
and that's just the way it is.
That's why now, uh, being able
to to steward the chair position
here in this committee and, and,
and that of the House Tax
Committee.
I, I, I like the aspect of being
able to say everything's on the
table, that we shouldn't have to
expect that it's just the way
that it is that sometimes things
have to change for the
betterment of of all New Mexico.
And it's not a matter of trying
to protect.
Members of our party, it's not a
matter of trying to protect our
friends and our family. It's not
a matter of a take businesses
versus versus families, for
instance, it's a matter of
making sure that we're
protecting the Mexicans.
Wholeheartedly, right?
And, and when I think about
things that have been presented
over the past couple of
Of days and I think about, and
I, I'm looking uh to the
audience members now looking at
improving poverty with policy,
but I'm looking at property
taxes, um, and Miss Fabian, you
made the mention earlier that
there has been really no
meaningful reforms for property
taxes in a long while.
Again, going back to that's just
the way it is. That's what we
inherit, so let's just continue
to kick the can down the road as
to not offend anybody.
Right?
And sometimes it, it's not, it's
that's not OK, and I say that.
I guess cautiously because how
can we talk about
Manipulating or changing tax
policy, in this case, property
tax policy when the state is
awash in in cash, right? How do
you how do you talk about that
and not feel like somebody's
gonna come down on you with a
hammer to say, how dare you.
But the point is that with
Good tax policy comes change.
And with policies that are going
to be presented hopefully next
month with with new ideas with
with ways to perhaps in some
cases protect individuals, in
some cases provide equity to
some individuals, that's what we
should look forward to because I
For all of us sitting at this
table today, there are those
that are coming up behind us.
In their teens, in their 20s, in
their 30s, in their 40s that are
are chomping at the bit to wanna
see.
Change
I want to take over for us
because they just feel the need
that
We're just stagnant.
We don't have no ideas.
And that's not fair.
To us, that's not fair to them.
That's not fair to New Mexico.
And so, um, I would invite that,
you know, when, when we talk
about these things that
You know, if we're having a
conversation as simple as this
that we not come down and say,
No, I don't like that, or, or I
I I'm against this, or I'm
against that versus, you know,
well, I have an idea, perhaps we
can do this and I can present it
and I can work with staff and we
can, we can massage something in
advance of the next legislative
session, um, you know,
Because at the end of the day,
The fact that
On page 5 you have property
taxes tend to be regressive,
right?
Personally,
That that's, that's a red flag.
Because we've we've done a lot
of work on personal income
taxes, personal income taxes to
make it progressive.
And, and as we look forward to,
you know, this discussion about
full or partial disclosure
requirements for non-residential
properties.
Is is is that a hands off, or is
it a, well, let's let's look at
things in terms of how maybe we
can look at things differently
and how can we develop ideas and
how can we move away from the,
from, from the notions of, uh,
that's just the way it is.
And so as you move forward, uh,
members of this committee, I
look forward to the discussions
that we might be having next
month, uh, in those endorsement
discussions of legislation
because that's where we can talk
about things, um, and have more
concrete ideas, at least things
to read off of on pages that we
can then debate about maybe not
fully here, but as we move into
the legislative session because
those are, those are the things
that are important to New
Mexico, that we can make sure
that, that we can be equitable
with people all across
State and, and again, I, I, I
give all credit to our staff,
Jennifer and, and Izzy and LFC
as young as you are, uh, I, I
still continue to believe that
we have the best.
And smartest economists
anywhere.
And, and, and, and I trust in,
in, in your judgment I trust in
your leadership to be able to
provide us the, the most um
Beneficial
Information possible, but also
provide us with options that
Young minds.
That that that that that isn't
me.
And maybe not
Anyone around this table can
provide us that you all think
outside the box.
With matters of like the
severance tax permanent fund
with with other things
regarding, you know, capital
outlay and how you've thought
about things differently that
maybe all of us wouldn't have
thought of until you all came
along. So, uh, I will look
forward to maybe helping us to
develop good policy as we move
forward. So, Jennifer, thanks a
lot for your presentation and,
and, and uh there's no other
questions or comments, um.
We can move on to the next topic
for today. Thanks again, Ms.
Fabian.
That being said, books.
We're almost right on time.
We're 2 minutes early. Uh, we
have our last presentation for
this.
Committee, and that is improving
poverty with policy, tax credits
and sustainable investments.
Hage Knight, deputy policy
director for New Mexico Voices,
and Emily.
Wild
Well now, excuse me, senior
research and policy analyst also
with New Mexico Voices.
Gentle lady, the floor is yours
whenever you are ready to begin.
Hi, good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee, thanks
so much for having us here today
to talk about the role tax and
budget policy plays in
alleviating poverty and
improving family economic
security and providing
opportunities for kids and
families in New Mexico. My name
is Paige Knight, and I am a
deputy policy director with New
Mexico Voices for Children, and
with me is Emily Wilda, our
senior research and policy
analyst, data enthusiast, and
Kids Count coordinator.
Moving on to the next side, side
2, our mission at Voices is to
advocate for policies that
improve the well-being of
children, families and
communities in New Mexico. So we
do a lot of work on a variety of
policy issues around education,
health, and economics, um, and
we also focus a lot of our work
on tax and budget policy, and we
often get asked why as a
childhood advocacy organization,
do you work on tax policy?
What's the connection there?
Well, that's because over 20
years ago, our wonderful
recently retired Bill Jordan,
who in retirement might be
listening into this. Um, would
be up in Santa Fe advocating for
education, healthcare,
childcare, and other supports
for kids and families, and
lawmakers would often say, you
know, that sounds great, but how
do you expect us to pay for it,
or where, where should we find
the money for this program?
And so that was then that we
knew we needed to become experts
in where to find the revenue,
where to find the money to make
those investments in the
programs and services that
matter most for kids and
families.
So the next slide, slide 3,
you'll see, we got into tax
policy initially to first make
sure that there was adequate,
reliable revenues to support a
stable state budget.
But as we look deeper at New
Mexico's tax system.
We realized that our tax
policies themselves were
contributing to many of the
hardships felt by families. Our
tax system was so inequitable
that it was asking more from
families who had less, and
asking a lot less of families
who had a lot more.
So over these last few years,
we've focused not only on
revenue adequacy, but also on
equity using tax policy as a
tool to advance racial and
gender equity in New Mexico.
And we made a lot of really good
progress in these last few
years, which we'll touch on a
little bit later.
With that, we just have a few
items on our agenda today which
you'll see on slide 4.
To better understand poverty and
its impacts on families, we want
to share some background first
on how it's measured.
What policy choices affect those
measures of poverty?
The importance of tax credits
and other investments.
And then we'll close with some
recommendations for continuing
to support and improve the
strong anti-poverty policy work
that we know you all are so
committed to.
So to kick us off and talk about
poverty, I'll turn it over to
Emily.
Thank you Page and good morning,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, um, on our next slide
on slide 5 before we really jump
into those impacts of tax
credits and other policies on
poverty.
I want to spend some time
talking to you about how it is
that we measure policy, uh,
poverty, and what policies are
counted by which of those
measures. So,
There are two different poverty
measures that are most commonly
used, and they tell us different
things. The official poverty
measure or the OPM is the one
you're likely most familiar
with, and it's the one that is
used to determine eligibility
for benefit programs. Um, most
likely you've seen that table
with the number of people in the
household in those different
thresholds of income, um, that
show how much money somebody has
to have to be considered above
the poverty line or below it.
Um, and that's made the OPM
really salient that and the fact
that it was created in the
1960s, so it's been around for
quite a while.
Um, and back in the 60s, they
used the cost of a minimum food
plan, which was the budget
expense for food designed for
short-term emergency situations.
And they multiplied that by 3
based on the consumer spending
habits at the time. Um, so the
opium poverty threshold is
actually still based on that
same calculation from the 60s.
The only adjustment made every
year is for inflation.
And then any household with
income below that threshold is
determined to be living in
poverty.
Then you have the supplemental
poverty measure or the SPM and
that was created in 2009. It was
designed specifically to address
some of the flaws that had been
um discussed about the OM really
since its creation.
The SPM is intended to provide a
much more complete measure of
the experience of poverty. Um,
it's a modernized measure, so
it's more reflective of our
current day household expenses,
what we're actually looking at
for folks, um, to need to get
by, and it's intended to be more
flexible and adjustable as
various factors shift in our
society and the way that we
spend our money in the way that
we perceive and experience
poverty.
Like the OM, but using a
different calculation. The SPM
sets its own separate poverty
thresholds, and then it accounts
for income and other factors.
To determine how many households
fall below and above that
threshold line. The determines
who lives in poverty by a
different set of measures.
And this is actually the measure
that's preferred by researchers
and policy analysts.
Because it helps us determine
the efficacy of various income
support programs.
And tax credits.
So, on to slide 6, after
calculating the poverty
threshold, the OPM only measures
pre-tax money income to
determine who's in poverty.
The list of items included in
this calculation are all on the
slide, but the main factor that
goes into the OPM is income from
wages and salaries.
And this category makes up the
majority of the measure because
it's the most well reported,
it's the most common source of
money income that families have.
Um, and it, it has the largest
effect. We know that there are
lots of households that aren't
drawing down retirement income
yet, um, or don't have any
retirement income.
Um, and lots of folks don't have
interest in dividends to worry
about.
So we, we know that the main
Impact there is income from
salaries and wages.
On slide 7, after following a
different set of calculations to
establish that SPM specific
poverty threshold.
SPM measures.
A family's money income, but it
also subtracts out several
common expenses?
And it adds in the benefit of
tax credits and non-cash
government benefits to determine
who's in poverty. So the text on
this graphic might be a little
hard to read, but basically it's
showing the full set of
household resources that are
included in the SPM and so you
start in the center there with
that standard income and wages.
And then you look.
To the right side, you can see
the SPM subtracts the cost of
childcare expenses, work
expenses like transportation
costs.
State and federal taxes paid.
Child support paid and medical
out of pocket expenses. And then
on the left you see the benefits
that help lift families above
the poverty threshold.
Those include housing subsidies,
SNAP benefits, utility
assistance, the national school
lunch program.
WIC and state and federal tax
credits.
The National SPM calculates how
many households are lifted out
of poverty by each of those
benefits listed on the left.
It can tell us which of the
expenses on the right push the
most people into poverty.
The SPM's poverty thresholds.
Also make geographic adjustments
based on differences in housing
costs, um, and it includes not
only that estimated food expense
for a household, but also
expenses for clothing, shelter,
utilities, and internet.
It averages those expenses for
consumers over the past 5 years
that comes from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics Consumer
Expenditure survey.
And really what this means is
that this calculation for the
SPM poverty threshold is a lot
more representative of what
current households are expanding
to get by, and it also provides
us that um account of a wide
range of housing costs we see
nationally.
On the next slide, slide 8, so
you might be wondering now what
policies actually move the
needle according to each of
these measures.
For the OPM, the main way to see
our poverty rate improve would
be through higher wages, and
this can be accomplished most
immediately and obviously by
requiring higher minimum wages.
Um, but passing something like
the paid family and Medical
Leave Act would also have some
impact on the OPM since families
would not have to forego wages
to care for themselves or family
member in case of sickness or to
bond with a new child.
And if you're looking at the
long term impacts you could have
on the OPM. You would not see
them quickly, but investing in
job training and education, um.
are still valuable investments
to break generational cycles of
poverty, although they won't be
reflected in the short term in
the OPM.
The SPM poverty rate is improved
by all of these things too, but
really key to lowering um
poverty through this measure are
stronger tax credits, and more
fair tax system.
Strong investments in income
support programs like Snap, TAF
and others, and keeping our
housing costs and other living
expenses low.
On slide 9, you can see um this
chart of national data and the
national data shows us directly
the importance of refundable tax
credits and reducing poverty. So
the darkest blue on the bars
here represents the number of
children under 18 who are lifted
out of poverty by a specific
policies on those buyers that
are moving to the left.
And the number pushed into
poverty by various expenses on
the bars moving to the right.
And what you'll notice on that
first highlighted line is that
refundable tax credits lift the
largest number of children out
of poverty, lifts about 3.4
million kids nationally out of
poverty.
And when you look specifically
at just the refundable portion
of the CTC alone on that second
highlighted line. Um, it's
responsible for lifting a
significant number of children
out of poverty all on its own.
And the CTC is responsible for a
third of those overall lifted
out of poverty by tax credits.
Moving on to the next slide.
While it is important and it's
helpful for us to understand all
of these numbers and specific
data points. We really want to
draw it back to the people of
New Mexico and most importantly
our children.
There's no question that poverty
is an all too common experience
for our communities, um, but we
really want to have that deeper
understanding and more nuanced
perspective.
What poverty is and what's
helping our kids and families to
be economically stable and
secure.
Poverty is the experience of
lacking the resources to meet
our basic needs, and we can see
in our supplemental poverty
measure how our tax credits and
income support policies.
are making a difference in the
everyday lives of our children.
Um, we know poverty has many,
many cascading and
intersectional impacts on child
well-being.
If we can lower poverty for kids
and families, children have
better outcomes across the
board.
Specifically economic security
can mean lower rates of child
maltreatment, improved maternal
and child health, and improved
educational outcomes.
So while ideally we really want
to see in the long term our kids
lifted out of poverty by giving
families more opportunities to
earn higher wages.
In the short term, our strong
network of tax credits and
benefit programs are clearly
critical to help improve child
well-being in the short term.
On slide 11, I want to talk a
little bit about how both
federal and state anti-poverty
policies greatly improve the
poverty rates in New Mexico, so.
If you compare New Mexico and
the national official poverty
measure and supplemental poverty
measure over time. You see this
really powerful story of our
lawmakers working to respond to
the needs of families in New
Mexico.
The dotted lines show the OPMs
for New Mexico in blue and the
US in that yellow orange.
And obviously by this measure,
we have significantly higher
rates of poverty for our whole
population. This is that most
common narrative of poverty that
we all here in our state, and it
is a really important measure.
It tells us that families here
have very low wages.
And by the traditional poverty
threshold produced by the OPM,
people do not have the bare
minimum of income needed to
cover very limited basic needs.
But if you look at the New
Mexico SPM, which is that solid
blue line, you can see we've
always had a lower rate of
poverty by that measure that
puts us very close to the
national SPM, the solid yellow
orange line.
And you can also see that
Mexico's always had an SPM
counter to the national rate
because the SPM includes more
expenses and measures benefit
programs. It typically reveals
that the OM underestimates
poverty.
But New Mexico, we've
traditionally had some
combination of lower expenses
and stronger benefit programs.
And that shows we're having a
more successful response to
addressing poverty than many
other states.
So in New Mexico, we've always
had this lower SPM poverty rate,
and the only time the US SPM
rate dropped below its OPM rate.
Uh, that was during the pandemic
and pande pandemic era benefits,
specifically the temporarily
expanded federal CTC.
Significantly cut poverty for
children, especially, and that
tells us that poverty is often a
policy choice.
From the most current data,
which averages the year 2021 to
2023. New Mexico's official
poverty measure sits at 18.5%
compared to the US at 11.4%.
But our SPM sits at 10.9%
compared to the US at 11%. And
that puts us right at the
national average poverty rate
when you account for our tax
credits and benefit programs.
And this year, the census
provided the three-year average
state SPM and OPM disaggregated
by age for the first time, and
that means that we can finally
see our 3 year average child
poverty rates for both of these
measures.
And New Mexico's child poverty
rate, according to the OPM over
this time period is 27.4%. It's
the worst in the nation. It's
again the story that we are used
to hearing.
Uh, the US meanwhile sits at
15.1%.
However, New Mexico's child
poverty rate by the SPM is only
8.9%. While for the US it's
actually 10.4%.
So when we look at the SPM
measuring the impact of our tax
credits and benefits. New
Mexico's child poverty rate is
actually lower than the national
average because of the response
we have had here to try to
address these issues of poverty
in our communities.
So what this means and
straightforward terms is that
many New Mexicans, especially
our children, are seeing real
and meaningful benefits in their
day to day lives because of your
work to make our tax system more
fair.
To create an increased strong
targeted tax credits and because
of state investments and income
support programs.
With that
I will turn it back over to
Paige to get more into the
details of our tax policies.
Thanks, Emily.
Um, as Emily discussed, there's
so many policies and programs
that help support families and
improve poverty and provide
families with the resources they
need.
So tax policies, especially tax
credits, play an important role
as well. And nowhere do we see
that more clearly than with the
federal um temporary expansion
of the child tax credit that
Emily mentioned.
So on the next slide, slide 13.
During that year, uh, the
temporary expanded federal CTC
decreased the national poverty
rate by nearly 50%.
It did this by increasing the
credit amount, allowing for a
larger credit for young children
and making it fully refundable,
which fixed a flaw in the tax
code that kept um families
earning the lowest income from
receiving the full child tax
credit.
In New Mexico, that meant over
450,000 or 95% of the child
population benefited from that
expansion, and it lifted an
additional 32,000 kids out of
poverty in New Mexico.
Another component that was
particularly helpful was that
families could opt to receive
their CTC in monthly payments.
So families who opted to receive
their CTC and monthly payments,
they reported lower rates of
food insecurity, and most use
the CTC to pay for essential and
routine household expenses.
Other families improve their
financial well-being by using
the CTC to save and pay off
debt.
Unfortunately, policymakers let
that expansion expire, and we
saw in the data the following
year in inverse of the prior
year's improvements with
millions of children falling
back into poverty.
So on the federal level, we're
back to prior law, and since the
credit is not fully refundable,
families earning the lowest
incomes are not able to take
advantage of the full federal
credit, including 36.5% of
children in New Mexico. While at
the same time, a married couple
making up to 400,000 receives
the full amount of the tax
credit.
With in action at the federal
level to reinstate or at least
to some degree that federal CTC
um expansion.
This really underscores the
importance of our new state,
CTC, which is fully refundable
and progressively structured,
meaning those with less receive
a higher credit per child.
Moving on to slide 14, I also
want to talk a little bit about
the Federal earned income tax
credit.
Which boosts low paid workers'
incomes, helping lower income
families achieve greater
economic security and has kept
millions of Americans out of
poverty since its enactment in
the mid-1970s.
So the EITC was also expanded
during the pandemic for one
year, but with the focus on
younger workers and seniors in
the workforce.
Together, they expanded EITC and
CTC lifted an estimated 9.6
million people out of poverty in
2021, compared to 6.4 million in
2023 when they were no longer
expanded.
Now the EITC has been well
researched for decades and has
been shown to have many economic
and health benefits and to
amplify the effectiveness of
those benefits, many states
including New Mexico, have
enacted their own version of the
federal EITC.
In our case that's the working
families tax credit, which like
many of our tax policies and
credits that we have, we've made
such important strides in making
it more impactful, making it
more inclusive.
And supportive of families in
New Mexico.
Slide 15 shows a list of some of
those other recent tax policy
wins for families and children
that improve financial security.
So in addition to that creation
and expansion of the new state
level child tax credit, we also
have that increase in the
working families tax credit. We
also increased the low income
comprehensive tax rebate and
other targeted tax relief
measures and rebates for those
most in need. Um, so what all
those increases have meant is
that's about 350 million more
annually in additional support
that will be returned.
to families.
In addition to that 1.7 billion
in one-time tax rebates that was
also returned over the past few
years.
It's important to note that
while we like to emphasize that
these improvements are for
families, they provide a boost
for uh our local economy and
small businesses as well, so low
and middle, middle income
families are likely to spend
that money quickly on local
goods and services, and that
helps boost our economy as well.
I also want to note that this
table reflects only those tax
changes that directly benefit
families. He did much more with
tax policy, of course, that
benefit both families and
businesses like lowering the
grocery seats tax rate.
So all these changes plus some
of the progressive revenue
raising measures that you all
have enacted in the past few
years, also brought about
national kudos earlier this year
when the Institute on Taxation
and Economic Policy release
their who pays report, which is
a distributional analysis of who
pays what share of taxes in each
of the state.
So their report found that New
Mexico
is the most improved state in
the nation when it comes to
improving the fairness or
progressivity of our tax code.
So on size 16, you can see that
according to ITEP's tax
inequality index. We now have
the 9th most progressive tax
code in the nation compared to
what would have been
twenty-seventh in the nation if
we had not enacted all of these
um tax policy changes and
improvements in the past few
years.
And this chart here shows a
visual representation of that
progress. And this one also
includes improvements from this
year's omnibus tax package.
So it shows the share of family
income paid in state and local
taxes by income quintile.
And what that effective tax rate
was back in 2018 and the light
yellow and a dotted bars and
where we are now in 2024 with
the darker yellow salad bars.
So you'll see that in 2018,
those New Mexicans with the
lowest incomes on the far left.
We're paying a much higher rate
of state and local taxes in the
very rich.
So over 12% of their income.
Thanks to these recent policy
changes in tax credits, they now
pay a much lower share. So
closer to 7% of their income in
state and local taxes.
And this chart also shows that
on a whole, more than 95% of New
Mexicans are paying a lower
effective rate of taxes. Now,
than they were in 2018, with
only the richest 1 or 2% paying
slightly more.
So you all have made some really
incredible progress these past
few years in family passing
family focused tax policy that
helps support families with more
of the resources they need to
provide opportunities for their
kids.
So to build on that progress, we
wanted to discuss some
recommendations that we believe
are necessary to keep investing
in families, reducing the number
of children experiencing poverty
and continue looking for fair
diversified, uh, revenues to
ensure that we are poised as a
state to always have the
resources available to invest in
every child's opportunities for
generations to come.
So to begin, I'll go over some
tax policy proposals that we
think are most important for
improving child well-being,
fairness, and economic security.
So on slide 18, like previously
mentioned, you have done great
work creating and then
increasing our own state child
tax credit. Uh, we know this
action was incredibly important
because credits like CTCs are
not only linked to reducing
poverty, but also a host of
improvements in child and
maternal health and educational
outcomes and economic outcomes
as well.
Now looking forward, we can
continue to build on that
progress, increase the impact of
the state CTC by boosting to
some degree or doubling the
credit amount for young
children, so children under 6.
Of the 14 states that have child
tax credits, half of them
currently have them focused on
or boosted for these early
years.
This is important to consider
for um a variety of reasons. So
first, evidence shows that a
child's early years are crucial
for brain growth and their
development, including long term
socio socio-emotional and health
outcomes.
In addition, research has found
links between poor nutrition and
severe stress in early childhood
and worse health outcomes later
in life. And we know the CTC
decreases those rates of food
insecurity.
Families with very young
children also tend to have lower
incomes, and experience higher
poverty rates than households
without children, as they are
earlier on in their careers and
can find difficulty balancing
caregiving needs and the need to
earn income.
Um, so finally, an increased
child tax credit for families
with young children can boost
family incomes when families
most need that support.
On side 19.
Another consideration for you
all is to amplify those many
benefits of the working families
tax credit by increasing our
matching percentage, which is
currently 25% of the federal
EITC.
This would help more working
families put food on the table,
pay their bills and be better
positioned to secure economic
stability.
So of the 31 states that have
state level EITCs 11 amount to a
matching percentage greater than
25%.
And like I mentioned previously,
because the EITC has been in
existence for so long, it is
very well researched and well
studied, and that research shows
that children whose family
received the EITC have better
educational employment and
health outcomes.
It's also been shown to
encourage increased earnings and
workforce participation, given
the unique unique way it's
designed and structured.
And an additional bonus is that
due to how the EITC is
structured to gradually phase
out as income increases after a
certain level. Um, it really
helps mitigate cliff effects,
which are the last of certain
benefits that may arise with
increased income.
In LFC report this spring on
workforce participation also
highlighted the many benefits of
the federal and the state EITC
saying that New Mexico may wish
to explore a broader expansion
of the working families tax
credit for families and
children, and for childless
workers and non-custodial
parents.
Uh, moving on to slide 20 so in
addition to tax credits, you
know, we'd also urge the
legislature to sustain and
commit to increased investments
in non-tax credit anti-poverty
policies as well. Um, many of
these which Emily went over
earlier.
So most of these all impact the
supplemental poverty measure,
but more importantly, they
improve the ability for families
to meet the food, housing, child
care, and other basic needs that
arise and that many families
need support in while they are
working to secure more financial
stability for themselves and
their children.
And before moving on to a few
additional recommendations. I
also want to underscore the
importance of uh maximizing the
efficacy and uptake of tax
credits and income support
programs on site 21.
I first supporting new and
existing initiatives that make
tax filing simple, free and
accessible, a little bit less of
a headache. Uh, we know that
unfortunately many families who
would benefit from these tax
credits, don't file their taxes
because they don't have a tax
liability and either may not be
aware of the tax credits that
exist and they're eligible for,
or if they do may opt out of
filing because it is cumbersome
and time consuming.
Now the exciting news here is
that New Mexico will be
partnering with the IRS to
implement the new federal direct
file program.
And that makes tax filing free
and simple for New Mexicans,
following a successful pilot
program in 12 other states is
passed filing season. So we're
thankful to TRD for this
partnership.
And we're hopeful that this will
mean more financial assistance
back into the pockets of New
Mexicans who are struggling the
most financially.
And second, we know that state
agencies and staff need more
support to remove existing
enrollment barriers to the
various income support programs
that are offered, uh, like the
time it takes to apply, being
aware, unaware of their
eligibility for programs or
having a hard time finding
program info.
this problem certainly is not
unique to New Mexico, but
reducing the barriers that are
keeping families from obtaining
much needed support should
continue to be a priority in our
budget and our policies.
And we also know that uh
considering these tax credits
and meeting the needs of our
children and families when it
comes to anti-poverty programs,
uh, that takes revenue, and just
like we learned we needed to do
back when Bill was first asking
for support for programs that
cost money. We have various
revenue raising recommendations
for you all to consider to help
pay for some of these
initiatives.
So but before moving on to these
revenue recommendations. I just
want to revisit on site 22, um,
what our current state and local
tax picture looks like.
Again, we have made tremendous
progress, but there's still more
we can do to bring down the
effective rate for the middle
class and address that lingering
regressivity, um, that we see on
the, the top of the income
distribution.
And you can see that about 80%
of New Mexicans are still paying
a greater share of their income
in state and local taxes in the
top 1% are.
So there are a number of
recommendations we think are
most important for improving
equity, creating a truly
progressive tax code and for
ensuring that we do have stable,
sustainable revenue, um, that
allow us to make the needed
investment in our families and
communities now and far into the
future.
And we also recognize that, you
know, revenues are still pretty
strong, you know, there's
certainly anticipated to
moderate in growth, but we are
by no means, you know, facing a
shortage when we have such
strong reserves and we have
taken steps to stabilize our
revenues through various funds
and distributions.
But we think it's still
important to think about and
consider raising revenue for a
variety of reasons.
So our revenues are still
extremely volatile, uh, the 7th
most volatile revenues in the
country, according to Pew
Charitable Trusts.
We also shouldn't wait for when
we hit the next uh deep dip in
the oil and gas roller coaster.
And we also know that our state
still has many unmet needs that
have gone from, you know, a
history of disinvestment that
last decade when revenues were
not so good. And we have future
anticipated needs to meet as
well.
And lastly, when you all
consider the tax package for
this coming um session.
And the many worthy initiatives
in it. You can have some revenue
raising components that help
bring down that overall cost,
uh, to make it more revenue
neutral and fiscally sustainable
in the long term.
So on the next slide,
You know, these are just a few
of our, our top recommendations
for raising revenues to sustain
those meaningful investments.
So we can consider an increase
to the personal income tax for
high income earners. Um, as many
of you know, in 2003, New Mexico
cut the top 3 personal income
tax brackets, which benefited
the higher income earners in
this state.
Um, this failed to create the
promised jobs and made our
income tax system essentially
flat. You know, in 2019
legislators restored some
progressivity by introducing a
new bracket, but that only
impacted the highest 3% of
earners.
This past legislative session,
we saw a long overdue
restructuring of our tax rates
that fortunately were most
targeted to benefit low and
middle income earners.
But it did ultimately reduce
everyone's tax liability. So we
still think that there's plenty
of room to introduce additional
brackets at the high end of the
income scale. Since the personal
income tax is the only tax based
on one's ability to pay.
This will help ensure everyone
is paying their fair share for
the goods and services that
benefit us all.
Um, another really important
option to consider is enacting
mandatory worldwide combined
reporting. So in 2019, we made
some really good progress on
that by closing a corporate tax
loophole. Um, that required
mandatory combined reporting,
but it was only water's edge
combined reporting. So what that
means is that it only required
corporations to report the
combined profits from companies
and subsidiaries in the US.
Uh, we know that many
corporations can and do form
subsidiaries and tax havens in
other countries.
Um, so states are increasingly
interested in reforming their
corporate tax bases to start
from a more comprehensive
measure of worldwide profit.
Um, so this provides a more
accurate and less chemable
starting point for calculating
corporate profits subject to a
state corporate tax.
Mandating worldwide combined
reporting would be
transformative, and it would all
but eliminate state corporate
tax avoidance.
We can also enact a real estate
transfer tax in second a high
value homes. New Mexico is yet
to join the 37 other states that
have a real estate transfer tax,
which is a one-time tax that is
collected after a home is sold,
and typically a percentage of
the sale price.
So New Mexico could levy a real
estate transfer tax to be paid
at the time of sale for a 2nd or
high value home, which would
help ensure that a larger
percentage of the revenue comes
from higher income, wealthier
households.
Uh, New Mexico could also
consider enacting a wealth tax
like an estate or inheritance
tax. So we know that a large
share of the nation's wealth is
concentrated in the hands of
very few.
Um, a state or inheritance taxes
can help build more broadly
shared prosperity.
An estate tax is a tax on
property before it is
transferred to the hair.
Um, while an inheritance taxes
levied on the recipients rather
than the state itself.
So most states, including New
Mexico, used to have such taxes,
but due to federal tax changes
in 2001, only 17 states in DC
now have an estate or an
inheritance tax.
We can also reform or repeal
itemized deductions, like the
home mortgage interest. I
itemized deductions are costly
and they provide little to no
benefit for most people earning
low and middle middle incomes,
um, and that's especially true
because of the 2017 federal
income tax, tax cuts and Jobs
Act, it significantly increases
standard deduction, um,
curtailing the number of
taxpayers to itemize so the
people who still itemize are,
are the mostly the the fluent
house.
We can also, you know, increase
the royalty rate on state lands.
So currently, New Mexico's
royalty rate on state lands are
below the rates on privately
owned land here and in Texas,
and 5% points lower than on
state-owned land in Texas.
So by leasing our oil-rich land
at below market rates, you know,
we're forgoing tens of millions
of dollars every year that
should be going to educate our
children via the land grant
permanent fund.
So by increasing the royalty
rate from 20% to 25%, that would
help ensure New Mexicans are
getting a fair return on the
public resources that belong to
all of.
And then lastly, we can explore,
you know, ending existing oil
and gas tax subsidies. So a
natural resources defense
Council report that was released
earlier this year on oil and gas
tax subsidies in New Mexico and
Texas identified primarily 3
existing ones in New Mexico that
were originally enacted decades
ago to incentivize the
production of oil and gas.
Currently, those 3 amount to
over 100 million in foregone
state revenue.
And so given the immense amount
of production happening, which
is leading to record profits for
oil and gas companies.
We really need to question
whether those are still
necessary, or if that money can
be better served on other
initiatives that support our
communities, our families, and
workforce.
And so with that, I wanna just
end by saying thank you again
for having us here today. And
again, for the progress you all
have made in reforming our tax
code, to one that advances
equity, reduces poverty, and
supports family and new families
in New Mexico. Um, please let us
know if we can provide any
additional resources ahead of
the session, um, or research as
you all plan for uh what's to
come in January. Um, and with
that, Mr. Chair, we're happy to
answer any questions that you
all have.
Thank you so much for the
presentation this morning. We do
have some folks, uh, too, uh,
immediately on the list.
My right, we have both
Representative Duncan and
Representative Martinez on the
list, and you have 7 bills that
you're welcome to sign up to
sponsor this coming legislative
session.
Uh, let's go first to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Man, I could go with this thing
for the next couple of weeks.
Um.
I'd like to start out on, on
page 7, if I could.
Mr. Chair on this, uh,
On this uh
Let's look at this chart. Can
you tell me anywhere on this
chart, uh,
Resources going towards
education.
Be it tech or schooling that
would help bring people out of
poverty as opposed to just
giving them a fish if I can use
that analogy.
Just, just to be clear, just
that there's um programs we can
fund in the education system to
do these things that would
affect this measure?
Yes, Mr. Chair. So I'm looking
at this and I, I see no
resources going toward education
via tech or or uh 2 year, 4 year
school at all. Yes, thank you,
Mr. Chair and representative.
That's a good question, um.
This measure is designed
specifically to look at the
household level, so it's not
looking into the resources being
put into uh systems like
education, it's looking at um
the resources that go into
programs that go directly to
households or the expenses that
households are paying, but not
directly at that. So this is not
a measure that includes that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I guess
my question would be why isn't
it?
That's hand in hand, and as I
teach my kids as I, as I taught
them skills, and as they were
able to either get an education,
uh, they were able to increase
their wages, uh, exponentially
in some cases. So why isn't that
built into this chart?
I'm not a
I'm, I'm all for helping people.
But if I'm gonna help you for 15
years or 20 years, let me teach
you how to fish, and you can
fish yourself. So why isn't that
included in this, it would have
to be.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
representative. Yes, so this is
a census Bureau measure.
Um, they've designed it around
households. That is an important
component of the bigger picture.
So what we're always trying to
talk about when we talk about
poverty measures is that there
are different pieces of this
puzzle that go together.
So this piece, this measure is
telling us the piece about the
giving the people the fish, um.
The ways that we determined to
measure how much we're investing
in our systems on the other
side, uh, would just require us
to look at our state budgets, to
look at our federal budgets, and
see what we're doing and and
evaluating those programs and
then aligning those two
together, um, over time when you
are doing good investments in
those long term educational
programs, for example,
Generationally over time, so
next generation you might see
that OPM that official measure
that just counts incomes
dropping as a result of those
long-term investments, um, but
they are not directly measured
by these two particular senses
indicators.
Thank you, Mr. I would love to
see um
Two charts.
One with that included in it so
that we could look at it and
say, OK, maybe we don't need to
do some of these other programs.
There, so thank you for that.
Ms. Cherkin, um, can you expand
on your statement that you made,
I think it was on page 14 where
you said it helps small
businesses as well. I think we
were on page 14 when you were
talking about that.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Turn
representative. Um, so yes, so
research shows that when low
middle income families get tax
credits when they get cash
assistance, they spend that on
local goods and services and
that just provides a boost um to
those small businesses if
they're going to buy more
groceries or if they're going to
buy goods and services that they
otherwise wouldn't be able to
afford that then provides
business um for those companies,
those small, small mom and pop
shops. OK. Thank you. That's
thank you.
For sure, that's what I was
wondering about if, if uh the do
just continue to circulate in
their communities.
My next question is about the
cliff effects.
Can you elaborate on how we can
um
Encourage
Um, education, again, be it
tech, be it just a job, um,
skill level a little higher.
Without getting to the cliff and
what we can do is, is uh leaders
to
Sustain that and, and I know
there's a, a very fine line
between what the cliff effects,
uh, the amount of money I can
make before that takes effect.
So, can you elaborate on that a
little bit for me and, and tell
us what we might be able to do
in that area to help that out.
Yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair and
representative. That's a great
question and it's something that
I think has been on a lot of um
advocates and policymakers' mind
is how do we mitigate that cliff
effect because it is very real
for for many families. Um, so
there are a number of
recommendations that the state
can do to help mitigate cliff
effects. Um,
What the working families tax
credit or their earned income
tax credit helps is that it has
a very, very gradual phase out
which helps in general with
cliff effects, but also the
income levels to where and when
it is phasing out, um.
Does not match where a lot of
those other cliffs for the other
programs are, so it kind of
helps make sure that resources
are continuing while families
are earning incomes, um, maybe
dropping off other benefits, but
it's still providing some
financial assistance when those
cliffs are. So one of the big
things is making sure that not
all income support programs, not
all tax credits end at the exact
same time cause that would
really cause a lot of damage and
create a very um big cliff. So
making sure that
Those programs, those
eligibility thresholds are at
different levels, um.
Another example of that is the
recent SNAP expansion to 200%.
That is something that also
helps it, it helps move one of
those cliffs, so it's not closer
to some of the other cliffs. Um,
that's another thing that um um
we can do, uh, we actually
worked with the Human Services
Department now HCA earlier this
spring.
To put together some other
recommendations as well. Um, so
there are a few other things
related to TAF, um, that the
state could do and and other
things related to tax credits.
Um, Emily, anything you would
want to highlight specifically
about cliff effect.
From that work.
Yeah, but we, we have more
research that we can share with
you too and recommendations on.
Thank you. I would like 3 items.
Give me, give me 3 items only.
So that, you know, I can chew on
those and and uh see what we can
do as well.
I'm gonna take you to um thank
you Mr. Chair on um on your
graph on page 22.
And I'm gonna get on my soapbox
here for a minute.
Can you tell me in dollars how
much that 1% pays?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, not off the top
of my head, but
Now you're going with that.
Thank you. I didn't, uh, I
didn't think you'd have that
number off the top of your head.
That 1% finances a whole lot of
programs we use in our state. I
just want to remember that.
I want everybody to know that.
And then on number 24.
Mr. Sherman, how, how long do
you want to stay today?
Mhm
My only thought, my only thought
here is, is
Um,
Do we hate people that are just
successful.
I just
We hammer at them, we hammer at
businesses, and uh
So anyway, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Martinez.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the
time, um.
Very interesting
Presentation
Um, I'd like to take you to page
9.
And I, I just
I have questions cause I'm
curious about it.
Page 9
You list a lot of
Things that
Have an impact on reducing
poverty.
But I don't see wages on here.
I see housing subsidies.
Tax credits or security.
Uh
Why is wages not included in it?
Yes, Mr. Chair, representative,
thank you for that question.
This is another one of those
distinctions between that
official poverty measure and the
supplemental poverty measure.
So, um, this charts created by
the census with their national
data and it specifically looking
at measuring those benefit
programs and tax credits as
opposed to measuring the wages.
So this is specifically showing
us that measure of the impact of
each of those credits, um, and
programs in reducing poverty
specifically.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can you
tell me
again supplemental
Something
Yes, Mr. Chairs representative.
So the official poverty measure
is the one that does primarily
measure income and wages. That's
the only thing it really
measures and the supplemental
poverty measure was really
designed to look at the efficacy
of tax credits and benefit
programs, which is why they call
it out in this graph.
Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
think personally that
Wages is the best way to get
somebody out of poverty.
Now, let's go to page 13.
Um, you said on your 3rd.
They under current law.
36.5% of children in a Mexico
are ineligible for the full
credit.
Why is that?
Mm
Mr. Chair, representative,
that's a good question. Um, so
the, the federal child tax
credit is not fully refundable.
It's only um refundable up to a
certain amount. So if you don't
have, if you're not earning
enough or you don't have much of
a tax liability, you're not
being able to take advantage for
that $1 for dollar credits. Um,
so you're just not able to take
advantage of that full full CTC
like families who have higher
incomes are, they are able to
take advantage of that dollar
for dollar credit. Again, just
Because it's not fully
refundable.
So, for instance, Mr. Chair,
somebody on
Social Security or disability.
Um, they don't make
They don't meet the minimum
standard is what you're saying?
Mr. Chair Representative, it
just depends on what their
income level is and what their
tax liability looks like if
they're able and if they have
children, of course, if they, if
they have children that qualify
for the CTC. Um, it's just a
matter of, of mathematics of how
it works out if they're able to
take advantage of it. So for
example, right now the, the
child tax credit is $2000 per
child, um, but you can only have
a refundable amount up to 1600.
So that's the amount that would
be returned to you if it's an
excess of your tax liability.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and that's
federal, federal law.
Um, and lastly, let's
Flipped the page to number 14.
Um, I, I'm, I'm.
Curious the statement on your
2nd bullet.
Together, the expanded EITC and
CTC lifted an estimated 9.6
million people out of poverty.
Um,
Can you, can you tell me what
that means?
Mm
They're lifted out of poverty,
is it?
They get them just above the
poverty line.
It's permanent, it's temporary.
I'm, I'm, I'm curious about that
phrase right there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. That's a great
question. Um, when we talk about
this number of people lifted out
of poverty by these tax credits.
That is that measure of efficacy
of these programs and it does,
it means they are crossing the
threshold determined as the
minimum amount of resources a
household needs um to meet their
basic. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Is that, is that a
Permanent shift
Because, I mean, some of these
some of these are very fluid.
Yes, Mr. Chair Representative,
it is year by year, so we can
see the numbers of families that
are accessing these things each
year and it is dependent on
policies. So for example, when
you look at that 9.6 million
people lifted out of poverty in
2021, um, that has dropped
significantly by 2023 to 6.4
million people because of
expirations and temporary
expansions to the program during
the pandemic.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair.
Um,
Emily, I, I appreciate.
Your answers, you know, I.
I want to come up with policy
that's gonna lift everybody.
Uh
I was gonna say I, I, I don't
like the policy of targeting
people, but I spent 25 years of
targeting benefits for veterans.
Um,
But I think if we look at
Ernest.
We lift everybody up.
I have family members now that
are.
Thankfully able to take
advantage of some of these
programs.
And
Kind of get back on their.
I, I think we're the, the
chairman has
As uh allowed the legislature to
see a better picture of tax
policy.
Last session I
I learned a lot.
Watching his committee.
I mean, I, I think.
Slowly we're gonna start raising
all those boats.
But I appreciate your time. I
appreciate the answers.
A lot of notes
I may be reaching out to you for
For clarification.
Thank you for the time, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And uh I appreciate your
presentation as always, and
Uh, Bill, if you're watching,
go, you know.
Turn it off and go relax.
Uh, but thank you Bill also for
all that you've done for the
state.
Um, Mr. Tay, I just appreciate
all the information that we've
received yesterday and today, I
think there's some options that
we have to review and look at.
this upcoming session, and I'm
grateful that we have a 60 day
where we can introduce many
different measures, which is
good.
Um, we're not limited.
Uh, but what I wanted to
mention, um,
On, on page 24, the first one
increased the personal income
tax for high income earners. I
remember when that changed back
in the day under Bill
Richardson, Governor Richardson,
so we're still recovering.
Um,
The, uh, and, and of course to
some of the others of the um
estate tax and stuff, we've done
changes over the years and
Much too chagrin of some of us,
it's like, mm, we should never
have gone down that road, but
it's, it's what politics is and
what, you know, the, the fervor
that comes along with some of
the legislation.
Um, what I just wanted to
mention, um, Mr. Chair, is that
uh
Last week, um, I attended the
legislative education Study
Committee meeting and we had a
presentation um for New Mexico
apple seed.
And as you know, in Mexico,
Appleseed does some wonderful
work, especially working with
families that I call that are on
the brink or on the cliff.
Right, um, the information that
they shared with us, um.
And this is an estimate, but we
have over 9000 students.
In our school system, public
school systems that are
homeless.
That's a statewide number.
And this is estimate because uh
you know the differences of
where people are, whether you
have an actual roof over your
head or if you're sharing.
You know, 3 or 4 families or are
living or a bunch of folks are
living grandmar ground, but it
just, there's different ways,
but these are the count that
they gave and shared with us um
last week.
And what in Mexico apple seed
will be proposing as a basic
income for these families.
And uh there's, I mean, there's
still more information that'll
be forthcoming to us, Mr. Chair,
this coming session, but I think
that's something that we should
be looking at also that could
complement some of your
proposals here and what we've
done, right?
Um, the other thing too, Mr.
Chair, um, I've been working on
this since 2016.
Um, but
Now there's more persons who
have come on board. A
representative Herrera.
And soon to be Senator Linda
Trujillo, former state
representative, uh, Senator
Jaramillo and a few others that
are talking about what we can do
to support our grandparents or
kin who are raising
grandchildren.
I'd introduced a bill in 2016,
Senate Bill 86, um, that
actually proposed kind of like a
stipend.
Um, based on the number of
children that grandparents can
show, of course, you know,
taking them to school. I mean,
all the documentation, um, to
provide them some help also, and
it mirrors, I think what
Happened with regards to the um
The Federal tax credit.
And, and for those families, it
wasn't just a rebate that you
get in whenever you file your
taxes, but this was, if you
remember her child, but it was
during that 67 month time that
there was like 200 to $400 that
was coming in regularly.
And that's what helped those
parents, those families to, to
go above the
Um, the poverty line because you
could make your payments for
utilities, rent, or whichever
else you have the cash in hand
and not the one lump sum that we
get after you file taxes um in
the spring.
And what we're looking at, Mr.
Chair, to compliment again what
ever we decided in this
committee.
is um providing a stipend also
because children, children under
6 are expensive. The children
over 6 are expensive too, and
the older they get, as you know,
it, it just, um, yeah.
I have a 12 year old, so I'm
learning again.
Um, but it, it's, I think these
are some measures, Mr. Chair,
that I think if we look together
and see what.
Um,
How they complement and what we
can do to continue to help these
families that I call or living
on that cliff.
Depending on where they're
working, they may have a job,
even if you're earning $15 an
hour, Mr. Chair.
Um, it still doesn't pay
everything.
It doesn't pay
A lot of the expenses that we
incur.
So I just wanted to mention it
for information for those who
aren't on the other committees,
but it, it's forthcoming. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
with questions or comments from
the committee?
Yes ma'am. Representative
Chandler. Yeah, thank you. I, I
guess maybe I'm gonna reiterate
the obvious, Mr. Chair, um.
My take on this report is.
Um,
We hear a lot about how we
continue to rank the lowest in
the country on poverty measures.
And this report, I think, Mr.
And to point out that those
Reports are deficient.
Because they do not take into
account.
Number of really fabulous things
we've done in the last 5 years.
No
Governor, um, so I just wanna
You know, maybe it's obvious to
everyone, but maybe it's not.
Make them
Um, the other point is, I'm very
proud of the work we've done the
lift.
I don't need to
You know, somebody like me
doesn't need it.
And I certainly hope we don't
start moving in the direction
where we're lifting people who
need me
help or support.
our tax dollars.
More wisely. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else questions or
comments?
If not, gentle ladies, thank you
for your presentation. I again,
I appreciate your insight on
on what maybe we can do
proactively in this legislature
to help continue to lift up the
folks that need that assistance
and
In in in ways that um you may
provide some revenue neutral
options that, you know, a lot of
these
These types of initiatives, it
costs money, right? It it costs
the state a lot of money in some
cases, and I, I've been, I've
been, I've had those
conversations with folks in the
LFC about, you know, defining
our tax initiatives like a child
tax credit, for instance, uh,
that shouldn't be
That we need to get a, we need
to get away from the narrative
that it's, it's a, it's a drain
on our, on our, on our.
On our general funds, right? A
more, you know, how do we
redefine that in ways that it's
helping others in ways that are
in some cases not measurable at
this point in time that's
helping the small businesses,
that it's helping those
families, that it's doing
something different, right? And,
and it's, it's not gonna be,
it's gonna be.
Organizations like yours that
help to define that to provide
those public relations pieces
that say, these are the stats,
these are these are these are
the um narratives that we can
really gather around that are
making measurable impacts in
communities, and families, and
children's livelihoods, so that
we can feel good about the
things that we've done because
I, I, I agree with
Representative Chandler that I,
I, I stand proud and I'm, I'm
happy with the work that we've
done over the past several years
to uplift those children and
those families because I think
that's what matters at the end
of the day.
This for, for, for one legislate
in this entire body, but I I'm
sure I don't stand alone in that
type of comment. So again,
ladies, thank you for your
presentation this morning and we
appreciate the work that you've
done.
Have a great day.
Uh, ladies and gentlemen, on the
committee, we've come to the end
of our agenda. Uh, we don't have
enough today for
Uh, passing the minutes from the
last meeting because we don't
have a quorum, but we will,
we'll cover that in the next
meeting, uh, and again, reminder
that our, our next meeting is
October 17th and 18th. That's a
Thursday and Friday, and we do
intend to uh begin looking at
those endorsement pieces of
legislation uh for the next
upcoming legislative session. So
if there are, there are some
things that you want to work on
that maybe have been presented
this past uh interim committee
meeting or those that may have
been presented at other ones.
Please do uh come with those and
those that are tuning in online
that may have ideas or
proposals, uh, same goes to you.
So with that being said, if
there's no other question to
