of our members before we begin
the meeting itself so if I can
begin with those on my right?
Representative Duncan, good
morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. Uh.
Many members, uh, I'm Mark
Duncan. I serve in District 2,
San Juan County.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name
is Alan Martinez. I represent
District 23.
northern part of Rio Rancho in
the western edge of the town of
Burnham.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. I'm
Doreen Gallegos and I'm
representing District 52 down in
Las Cruces, um, down to Anthony,
close to the border, so, uh,
nice to see you all today.
Good morning.
To my left, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator
Harold Poe Jr. District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque Berlio
County.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. I'm
co-chair Linda Lopez, state
senator, district 11, Southwest
Quadrant of Bernal.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Vice
Chair, and everyone, um
Christine Chandler, state rep
from Los Alamos County, House
District 43.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, it's a pleasure to
be here, uh, Liz Stanix,
District 39, Berlio, Lincoln,
San Miguel, Santa Fe, Torrance,
and Valencia counties.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, and of
course members of the committee
to the audience to the people
that are paying attention this
morning. Gosh, what a, what a
very relevant agenda that we
have as we start to go and talk
about how we're gonna use
policy, if you will, to help us
to overcome poverty and more
importantly, as we move forward.
Uh, the issues that are
affecting each and every one of
us with a change in environment.
So this is a very relevant
agenda, and I really appreciate
staff for the ongoing efforts
that they put forward. It means
a lot to us, and in particularly
as we prepare for the upcoming
2025, 60 day legislative
session.
State Senator Pete Campos
representing all the parts of of
7 counties in northeastern New
Mexico, and it's a delight to be
here with you. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chairman.
Thank you again, as you
mentioned, uh, we want to thank
the staff for all your hard work
in helping us set up for today's
meeting or today and tomorrow's
meeting, and for all the work
that you put forth in, in making
sure that we are prepared and we
have the people in the, in the
audience and those presenters
prepared to help us to
understand better tax policy as
we move forward again as
mentioned to the next 60 day
legislative session, uh, as we
begin, I want to do, uh, provide
my sincere thank you to Mr.
Scott Scanlon and Singleton and
Tri.
for the breakfast burritos that
are in the room next to us, so
if you please, uh, at your will,
uh, make your way out that way
and grab a burrito and there's
some coffee in the next room as
well. Um, but as we begin, I
wanna again thank everybody for
tuning in and making your time
to be here and without further
ado, I'd like to get onto our
agenda, first on our agenda is
how work is changing. Effects of
remote work and artificial
intelligence on tax policy. With
us we have Helen Helen.
Good morning, and the floor is
yours whenever you're ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, uh, it's good to
be with you this morning. Uh, I
just want you to know when I was
contacted about speaking on the
subject, I knew that it would,
uh, there would be a lot to say,
uh, about the recent past,
especially, but also a lot of
uncertainty about the future.
Um, as I worked on this
presentation and I tried to
incorporate various information,
uh, some of which is a little
contradictory. I struggled a bit
about how best to present it,
uh, suffice it to say this is
going to be a pretty high level
discussion, uh, but I think
you'll see the importance of
these issues and why they're
worth following. Uh, first, let
me tell you just a little bit
about me and where I'm coming
from.
Uh, I grew up in New Mexico,
went to college here. I'm a CPA
lawyer by training, uh, I've
worked in government and in
private practice, and I've been
doing state tax work, uh, since
I was an intern for the taxation
revenue Department in 1980.
Uh, my mother used to, God rest
her, he used to say to me, uh,
what is it again that you do for
a living? And I would say state
tax, and she would say, really?
And that's, there's all that
much to do in state tax and
Uh, but I bet that doesn't
surprise the folks in this room.
Um.
I currently work for the
multi-state tax commission.
Uh, the MTC is a multi-state
governmental organization, and
New Mexico has been a member
since 1967 when the NPC was
founded.
Uh, our work, uh, focuses on
helping states develop tax
systems and rules, especially
when it comes to taxing
multi-state activity, right? So
we're all a little bit more
uniform and a little bit more
consistent, that's helpful.
Um, MTC also does joint audits
of some of the largest
businesses and we offer a
voluntary disclosure program
that allows multi-state
taxpayers to come to us when
they have a filing problem,
they've not filed the done
something in the past that they
need to correct, uh, and they
can do that uh with the MTC and
our member states.
Uh, I've been with the MTC now
for a little over 10 years, um,
and so that's the perspective
that I'm coming from uh today as
a tax administrator.
Um, let's see.
Um, I'm on slide just for those
who are following along. I'm on
slide, uh, the slide for general
terms now.
So if you can see that.
OK, thank you. You'll see that
um
Uh, I'm gonna talk about two
kinds of different, uh, sort of
remote work, we sometimes we use
different terms to refer to
these because they, they have
different effects depending.
Uh, one, is mobile workers or,
or, or mobile employees, um,
and, uh, and that's the um
Those are the employees who
travel around the country as
part of their job. So it's part
of their job to travel to
different places and as a
result, they may work in more
than one state over the course
of a year. Um, the other is
remote employees, employees who
work remotely on a regular
basis. Um, so not in the, in the
offices or at the operations of
their employer, uh, but
oftentimes out of their house or
somewhere else.
And you have two kinds of remote
workers now that we're
recognizing, um, hybrid, uh,
remote workers who go into the
office part of the time, but
work at home part of the time.
And typically they're working in
the same state, so they may not
create the same uh kinds of
issues.
But then we also have full-time
remote employees now, and those
are employees who, even though
their business has an office or
or a place of operation. They
don't go into that office, they
work remotely, uh, and they do
that on a full-time basis.
So we're gonna talk about all of
those changes in work, uh, that
have happened over the recent
years.
Uh, and why this is important,
um,
It's gonna have effects on both
the employer, right, and the
employee. So let's talk about
the employer first.
Uh, at the outset, um, we have
to talk a little bit about this
concept of tax nexus.
So, when it comes to the
jurisdiction to impose tax.
Um, businesses may or may not
have to pay tax in a particular
state depending on what kind of
relationship or activity they
have with that state.
Over the years, the US Supreme
Court had required businesses to
have a physical presence in a
state in order for that state to
impose um taxes on that at least
some kinds of taxes on that
business. The rule was always
questionable to some extent, um,
and it was overturned in 2018 in
the Wayfair case.
And there the court said, no,
you don't have to have a
physical presence in the state.
It's enough to have just an
economic presence. You have
sales into or other activity in
connection with that state.
So in the past, businesses would
often raise the issue of what
about jurisdiction to tax the
business if we have a remote or
a mobile worker in that state.
So does that create tax
obligation for a business that
wouldn't otherwise have an
obligation. That was the big
concern, but after Wayfair, I
think the concern with that
issue has gone away to some
extent, even if you have an
employee in New Mexico, for
example, who's working remotely,
but you don't have any other
activity associated with New
Mexico, no sales into the state,
no other operations here.
Even though you might have a
filing obligation to file an
income tax return here, you're
not gonna owe any tax.
So, the connection between this
issue of do we have employees
sitting somewhere in the state,
and what does that do for our
obligation to pay tax? That
issue has gone away to some
extent.
Um, but businesses with remote
workers will be subject to the
state and local employment laws,
obviously, and that includes
withholding on income tax, but
also uh unemployment and
workers' compensation taxes and
fees. So the presence of a
single employee in the state
does create some kind of uh
administrative, administrative
and regulatory obligation on the
part of the business.
Um,
And the business therefore, the
employer therefore needs to know
where the employees working. Uh,
we sometimes hear that that's
not reasonable from employers
that that that that's um a
requirement that they can no
longer meet, but this is not
new, um, in, in some ways the
tax law is always expected
employers to know where the
employee is, even when
traveling, for example, uh, with
respect to the reimbursement uh
for travel expenses, which is
tax free, provided that you can
that the employees traveling
from where they normally work,
uh, to someplace else and
getting reimbursed for that.
So there's always been a need to
uh have uh the employer know
where the employees working.
So now let's talk about the
important effects, uh, tax
effects, and other effects on
the worker on the employee.
Um,
Mm
First of all, I, I, I think
it's, I think we're all hearing
this and, and it's certainly
part of what I've heard and
read, um, a large percentage of
employees feel like they receive
a benefit from working at home
or working remotely, uh
employees may save money on a
commuting, child care services,
meals out, that sort of thing.
Uh, so as a result, a lot of
employers are reporting that
many of their employees are
willing to accept less in terms
of salary and other benefits,
sometimes significantly less, in
order to be able to work
remotely, at least part time.
And of course, during the
pandemic, many employees found
that they were required to work
at home, and so have adapted to
that either by moving or
organizing their lives in such a
way that they now prefer doing
it that way.
Um, but they're also downsides
to working at home in general,
employees could have fewer
resources or support from their
employers and their remo remote
working location.
Technology has helped this uh a
lot, um.
And it's another aspect of
adaptation during the pandemic
that a lot of that technology is
now uh much more pervasive.
Uh, employees have the
technology and the facilities in
their homes often, uh, so that
they can communicate and
interact and work with others
through that technology.
Uh, so that even though they
don't have an office, uh, or the
benefits that come from having
an office, working in an office,
uh, they're, they're able to
manage.
Um, there are some who believe
that remote work is more
prevalent in the United States
and North America generally,
because houses are bigger and
you can have an office in your
house, uh, and still work
remotely without imposing on the
rest of your life.
Um, all right, so now let's talk
about the tax effects of this,
um, and in particular the
taxation of wages.
Um,
That's the big tax effect is
where do these employees pay
income tax on their wages if
they're working remotely.
Um,
And uh if you're potentially
working outside your state of
residence, you know that you
could have a tax obligation for
reporting and paying tax in
whatever state you're in. There
are exceptions. There are 9
states that don't have a
personal income tax.
Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, uh,
and Washington State and
Wyoming.
Um, but other than that, uh,
when you're traveling as an
employee or you're working for
any length of time in another
state, you may owe tax there.
Let me talk a little bit about
how states generally impose tax
on wage income.
Um, and in the state tax world,
we often talk about sourcing.
Sourcing is just a term that we
use when we're, when there's
some multi-state activity or
income or sales, and we have to
decide what state gets to tax
those or what rules will a state
use in determining whether or
not they can tax a portion of
that.
When it comes to wages, the
first thing you have to know
about, uh, taxing wages is
whether or not the employee is a
resident, because if you're a
resident, then the state can
generally tax 100% of your
income, including your wages, no
matter what the source of those
of that income might be.
Um, residency is generally
defined in terms of uh both the
common law, you know, where are
you living? Where is your
family? All these factors that
go into a common law decision
about where your resident.
But also most states now have a
statutory days present in the
state kind of uh threshold or
rule, and if you meet that, then
you may be a resident under that
state's law.
Um, the, the common law rules
are not always clear, um, and
sometimes you get into disputes
with states residents get in
disputes or taxpayers get in
disputes about whether or not
they're resident.
Um, uh, with that state, because
again, that state can then tax
100% of the income uh of that
resident.
Um, the Supreme Court has said
that it's OK to tax 100% of the
revenue of a resident.
But if you're also as a state
going to tax the income of
non-residents.
Then you have to decide what
gives and what gives is usually
the states are required to
provide a credit.
Or the taxes residents paid to
other states. Um, so while it's
true that the state can tax 100%
of the income. If that resident
is working in another state and
owes tax in that state and pays
tax.
Uh, then that residency state
might have to give her credit
for the tax paid against the
liability in their state.
There are limitations on these
credits, however, um, the
easiest way to describe the
primary limit on the credit that
states give is to say.
If this were a non-resident
coming into our state,
Would we tax that income under
those same circumstances?
And to what extent?
And if the, if the state of
residency says, yep, we would
tax that if it was a
non-resident coming in our
state, and here's the extent to
which we tax it. We have a tax
rate of 5%.
And that's typically the amount
of credit that the state is
obligated to give to their
residents, and that's usually
where states.
Uh, draw the line.
Um,
So, can you have a uh a
situation in which uh an
employee is a mobile employee,
uh, working for periods in their
state of residence but also in
other states. Can you have a
situation in which that employee
pays tax.
more than one state on
essentially tax on more than
100% of their income, and the
answer is yes.
Um, if two states have different
rules for how they source that
income. So the residency state
might not give a credit, whereas
the uh the state in which
they're working says no you owe
tax here under these
circumstances.
So if the rules are not
compatible between the states,
then you can have this uh
situation.
Um, and, and primarily when
we're looking at the rules, um,
we're saying again, what, what
causes wages to be taxable in
this state, you know, what's,
what's the rule for that? How do
we determine that?
Um, and there are some
variations among the states.
While it's true that for the
most part states look to the
location of the work being done,
they say, OK, you're an employee
in this state, you're getting
wages for the work you do here.
You've been here for a
sufficient amount of time. You
owe tax here. Well, that's the
general rule. There are a
handful of states that vary the
rules a little bit.
Uh, in one case, um, when it
comes to residency, in addition
to these two tests, the common
law test and how many days have
you been here in the state
working, living.
Um, some states look at the
permanent place of abode, uh, as
a third kind of test.
Uh, and if you meet any of these
three tests, then you might be a
resident in that, in that state.
So the question, can you be a
resident in more than one state?
Yes, again, if the rules are not
consistent.
Uh, New Mexico and its
neighboring states uh typically
don't face this issue.
The other issue that impacts
residents living and working in
a particular state, is that a
handful of states don't look to
where the work is done when
you're traveling and doing work
in other states as the primary
factor of determining when that,
when those wages are taxable.
Instead, they look at the
employee's base of operations
and where that's located.
And that is what, what location,
what business location oversees
the work of that employee, where
would they report to if they
were to report to some location
belonging to that employer?
If that base of operations is in
that state, then regardless of
the fact that the employee is a
resident working in another
state, that state will say those
wages are taxable in that state.
In the primary state that
everyone thinks about when you
talk about this issue is New
York.
Um, and they've had this rule
for uh some, some time now.
And it's often called the
convenience rule.
Because if you're working in
another state because your
employer requires you to, then
New York would not subject those
wages to tax, but if you're
working for an employer based in
New York, and you're working out
of state because you choose to
and the employee allows you to
the employer allows you to.
Then that's when this rule kicks
in. Um, so situations where the
employee chooses to work
remotely.
Again, the employee where the
state is resident in that case
may not give a credit, uh, in
the case of that uh tax because
they wouldn't tax.
A non-resident under that same
circumstance.
Uh, this has been a perennial
issue for New Jersey, which has
had a lot of residents working
there whose base in operations
is in New York.
Um, also during the pandemic,
some states attempted to create
rules that would maintain the
sourcing of wages.
So, make everything stay the
same as it was before uh the
shutdown. So if you were having
to work at home during the
pandemic, there might be states
that said, OK, even though that
may be another state, we're
gonna continue to treat you as
though you're an employee in
this state and, and vice versa
among the states.
All right, so then the next
slide uh shows the rule for New
Mexico, which is uh section
72-11.
Um,
The default rule again for New
Mexico like most states is if
you're doing the work here,
you're taxable here.
There are 3 exceptions. There's
the day's threshold, which I
talked about, which is good to
have. Mexico's is 15 days or
work days, which translates to
about 3 weeks that you would be
here in the state working, but
the state wouldn't impose income
tax on those wages. So if you're
traveling on a regular basis,
you may be protected and a
number of states now have those
kinds of rules either formally
in their statutes or informally
as part of their administration.
Um, the second exception is for
manufacturing jobs here in, in
section 7211.
And the third is for services
performed by disaster or
emergency workers under certain
conditions.
Um,
OK. So,
Is it all of this working? Is it
all pretty much, you know, still
working now that we have so many
remote workers, um,
Uh, after the pandemic,
especially, it includes workers
full-time remote workers who are
not in the same state that their
employer uh is in, is this still
working?
The answer I think is yes, more
or less, um, the MTC had a model
for mobile employees that it
adopted uh some years ago, uh,
it's still out there, and again,
it, it's basically a threshold
to say it's not worth it for the
state to try and track down
employees that were traveling
into the state having meetings
or whatever for short periods of
time.
Uh, it's too much
administrative, uh, work for the
government. It's too much
compliance work for the
taxpayer. So let's just have a,
a threshold under which um it's
all good.
Um,
That model, uh, is out there.
There's also a model of the
Council on State Taxation has
put forward. It originally put
its model forward.
Um, before the pandemic in
Congress trying to get federal
legislation, and when it wasn't
successful, it's now taken to
promoting that model at the
state level.
If you were to ask me the
difference between the MTC model
and the cost model uh for this,
I would say.
Uh, the cost model makes the
assumption that the employer
sometimes can't know where the
employee is located and
therefore is much more flexible,
saying, well, you know, you
can't expect the employer to
know where the employee is at.
Uh, at least for most of the
time or some of the time.
Um, we don't think that
assumption makes sense, and so,
uh, our rules are a little bit
more, uh, sort of, um, uh, less
what we, we allow less
flexibility for employers to,
uh, put it that way. Uh, and
that translates into some
administrative requirements.
Um, the National Association of
State Tax or state legislators,
legislatures, the NCSL has also
published a white paper on
mobile and remote work.
And I sometimes think that those
who bring this issue up and are
still discussing it are really
concerned that more states will
adopt something like the New
York convenience rule where they
source wages not based on where
the work is done, but we, based
on where the employer's office
is located.
And honestly, from a policy
theoretical perspective, there
are pros and cons to both
approach, uh, but having, you
know, half the states with one
rule and half the states with
another rule would be a bad
thing.
Uh, so consistency here is, is
important.
All right, what about the
future? What's gonna happen with
remote work and what are its
other effects gonna be?
Um, that's the big question, and
I think we're starting to see a
little bit more clearly right
after the pandemic and the
shutdowns ended, uh, I think it
was it was much more uncertain
uh whether or not businesses
would continue to allow their
employees to work remotely, at
least part of the time.
So, in the, in the slides,
you've got uh some excerpts from
a Pew Research Center study from
2023.
And there, um, the study notes
that first of all,
Not all US workers have jobs
that allow them to work remotely
even.
Our time. So about 61% of
employees do not fall into a
category where remote work is
really feasible. And you're all
familiar with these jobs, um,
I'm guessing many are government
jobs, healthcare workers,
government workers, teachers,
police, obviously.
Those are not gonna be able to
work remotely on any regular
basis.
Um, also employees that do
services, uh, their personal
services are related to
property, uh, manufacturing,
construction, those kinds of
jobs.
Um, so as it turns out, many but
not uh uh of the jobs that
cannot be done remotely, uh,
also fall into a category of
being relatively low in terms of
income or wages. So it's the
lower income of the wage scale
that tends to have most of these
jobs.
Of the approximately 40% of the
jobs that can be done remotely.
The percentage of those who are
working remotely or split
between those who are working
remotely full time, and those
who are working a hybrid
schedule now, so, and again, a
lot of this has changed over the
last few years.
So those were working a hybrid
schedule are typically in the
same general location where
their employer is located. They
just don't go into that location
every day.
Um, there's another, uh, there's
a graphic in your slides that
shows another way of looking at
this information.
All right, so somewhere around
35% of the 40% of all workers
that can work remotely, so 35%
of 40%.
Um, are working remotely full
time.
Meaning they could be in a
different state than their
employer that amounts to around
10 to 15% of all the workers
that are now um that are working
today, uh, are these full-time
remote workers.
So what about the larger
economic effects of all this? It
doesn't just have an effect on
that employer or that employee,
but it also has an effect on
everything.
Uh, what's that effect gonna be
and the short answer is it's not
clear, um.
A number of jobs and industries
not compatible with remote work,
but that doesn't mean they're
not gonna be affected by it.
Um, through changes in the use
of real estate, where employees
are living, where they're, uh,
you know, hanging out where they
eat and shop, all of that
traffic flow, all of that sort
of thing can be affected by
this, even for those businesses
that don't.
Have uh employees working at
home.
Um, those jobs and industries
that are compatible with remote
work have seen a significant
increase in both the full-time
and hybrid remote work.
Especially after the pandemic.
Many groups and think tanks uh
have attempted to study and
assess how all this affects the
economy and especially
productivity.
But unfortunately, this really
depends on uh how that
productivity of that particular
job would be measured, OK? So
some jobs it's easier to measure
the productivity than others.
It also depends on other factors
related to the employer and how
they structured their workforce,
how they manage it.
Um, the way in which the
employees work together to the
extent to which they work
together.
It may depend on the status of
the employee, their experience,
their expertise, whether they
can work effectively by
themselves, that sort of thing.
Uh, and I'll just say in my own
organization, the MTC, we've had
employees working remotely uh
for a number of years, and it
has its challenges, um,
especially when it comes to
collaborating and problem
solving as a team. Um, but
It's also possible that we just
don't see the full impact of
this yet, and so, uh, it may be
hard to say what the impact is
going to be at this point, um,
but that's because things are
still sort of evolving.
Um, no matter how big some
changes are or how important
they are, the effects can take
time to work themselves out. For
example, a number of those
who've tried to study the
effects of remote work on other
things, I've been waiting to see
what the ultimate uh effects on
commercial real estate market
are gonna be.
Um, but those effects have been
mitigated by the fact that many
of the businesses with these
long, with these
lease arrangements have
long-term leases.
Uh, and so the lease is not up
yet and the employer is sort of
getting by with what they have
at the moment.
Um, and also the property owners
in, in many cases are making
accommodations to the businesses
to get them to stay, and so that
has slowed down uh the effect of
this on the real estate market.
It doesn't mean that the changes
aren't happening, just that the
effects are being drawn out
somewhat. And I'm guessing
another part of what's slowing
things down, uh, is, is this
sort of continuing uncertainty
on the part of businesses about
whether this remote work
situation is going to continue.
Uh, but I think that's something
that most businesses are finding
they're gonna probably need to
do um.
in the future if they can.
Um, so the bottom line is the
changes that we're seeing may
not feel all that dramatic yet,
but they're still happening and
likely to continue into the
future.
Um, so that's really what I
wanted to say about remote work,
um, and I know there are lots of
other impacts that it's going to
have.
Uh, in a lot of places, uh, but
I think we may have hit sort of
a little bit of a plateau at
this point. Um, so now let's
talk about a couple other big
changes that may affect uh
employment work.
Um, and the economy over time,
the two big trends that you hear
about all the time in this area,
uh, are 11 that's been going on
for a while now, and that's the
retirement of the baby boomers.
So the baby boom generation, the
biggest generation, starting to,
uh, it's been retiring now for
some period of time. The last
baby boomers are gonna retire
over the next probably 5, 10
years.
Um, and then there are fewer uh
of the of the following
generations following uh folks
coming up through the workforce,
what effect is that going to
have?
Um, this one, the effects are
really hard to see sometimes,
because not only is it happening
over a much longer period of
time, uh, but, you know, other
fluctuations in the economy,
cyclical fluctuations, etc. kind
of canceled this out a little
bit sometimes or we don't see
it, uh, we can't associate it
necessarily with this one
particular change.
Um, so this is a much slower
moving kind of change.
Um, but then looking down
looking further into the future,
the other big thing that
everyone's talking about, of
course.
Uh, is artificial intelligence.
And what effect that AI will
have on the kind of work that we
do now and how we do it. Um, The
Economist magazine had an
article on that, on this subject
this week, which I just got
around to reading uh yesterday.
And it's clear that the
development of AI itself, that
just the development of the
technology which is going on
right now, has already been
pretty disruptive to the
technology industry.
Um,
AI requires a different kind of
technology it's much more energy
intensive even than some of the
other technology that's out
there, it requires its own kind
of microchips. It requires its
own kind of inputs of various
kinds, and there's a little bit
of a bottleneck for, for that at
the moment.
But
Uh, there's also a minimum scale
that you need to be able to be
effective in this area. So this
is not the kind of thing that a
small business can kind of get
into and and do much with, it's
kind of like, you know, going
into space.
Yeah, small businesses may be
involved in this to some extent,
but it really takes an
organization that's got enough
size, uh, and capacity to
oversee um and really uh make
the changes in these, uh, that,
that need to be made in this
area and you're going to hear me
repeat this thing as I go
through. This is a different
kind of change that we're
seeing.
Um,
As to the precise effects that
AI will ultimately have on the
general workforce.
We're still debating that.
Um, same thing with the economy,
although that's, there's a
little bit more agreement there.
Uh, or government, we have to
think not only about how is this
AI going to affect businesses
and workers, but also the work
that government does.
Um, and I make a joke in the
slides that we don't, can't
predict the uh what the future
of AI is yet because AI isn't
powerful enough to tell us yet,
so, um, that's, that's all I can
say really about about the fact
that there are very differing
views on this subject.
Um, there's a slide in your, in
your hands out handouts about
um.
Information that came out of the
World Economic Forum in
February. So this is all across
the world, everyone looking at
these different issues, the
experts from all these different
areas, and they just basically
ask them, give us your input on
what you think is gonna happen.
Uh, the questions here are
ranked in order of where there
seems to be more certainty one
way or the other, it's gonna be
good, it's gonna be bad. More
certainty to less certainty as
you go down this list of
questions.
Um, and then they divide the,
the results between the high
income economies and the low
income economies.
So the question at the top of
the list, um,
Is it going to accelerate the
breakthrough of innovations in
various industries and fields,
most people think, yes, that's
gonna be significant. Uh, it's
gonna happen. We're gonna see
that. Healthcare is, is a field
that's that's often mentioned in
this context to say yes we're
going to have breakthroughs.
In treatment for disease, etc.
Um,
You're gonna see this, I think,
across all industries, though,
not just, you know, in one, in,
in a, in a few industries.
Um, the problem that everybody
wants to know though is how
disruptive is this going to be,
you know, is it, is it all gonna
be good or is there gonna be so
much disruption that we can't
sort of adapt to it. It's far
less certain among these experts
at least.
Um, what the impact will be on
employment in general. That's
the last question uh that you
see here, so the forecasters are
very split on this question,
what they expect.
About how saying the impact is
unlikely to be positive.
And the other half saying
um, especially in low income
economies, maybe.
Um,
Maybe it will
So hard to say, um.
Uh, what that effect is gonna
be?
Really sorry, too many moving
parts for this.
And frankly, I also think it
depends on your time horizon.
Um, are you looking at
You know, the next 3 or 4
decades into the future or you
look into the next 3 or 4 years.
Um, and the reason that's
important is because we've been
really bad about predicting
what's gonna happen with
artificial intelligence
generally. I say we, everybody.
Um, even the experts in the
field have been bad about
predicting what was gonna
happen.
Um, so it's gone in the in the
sort of direction that people
expected, but not uh in the in
the way always as quickly as
they expected.
Um, I put two examples in the
handouts. This is, these are
professors from the Wharton
School of Pennsylvania.
And they describe kind of what
they think based on everything
they've seen, the effects of AI
are likely to be um in one case,
one professor from the Wharton
School talks about um
The fact that
AI is likely to impact almost
every job. So, there's always
something that you can do or are
doing as an employee that could
be impacted by AI either your
own employer's AI or the AI of
your customers or the government
or something is going to impact
your job, uh, even if it's only
indirectly.
What that effect is likely to
be, not, not sure, but, but
basically, uh, lots and lots of
people are gonna be affected if
even if it's indirectly.
Um,
And you can say,
Uh, some of that can be measured
by to what extent, and this is
the methodology they use is
their overlap between what you
do and what AI can do. So if
you're doing a lot of research
or if you're processing a lot of
data or if you're trying to get
information out of data, that's
what AI is, is good at, so
there's a lot of overlap between
that kind of a job and what AI
can do. There are other jobs
where it's much more sort of at
the border of
What you do, yeah, it can help
you, uh, but it's not gonna be
something that you interact with
or deal with on a, on a regular
basis. So, uh, a lot of jobs
have a high degree of overlap,
and that may sound a little
ominous, uh, to people, uh, on
the other hand, um, other, uh,
professors at the same Wharton
School, uh, have come out and
said we don't think it's gonna
be that.
Significant an upheaval.
Even though AI is going to
affect lots and lots of jobs,
it's not just going to boom, get
rid of jobs in that way.
Um,
And once you, you know, you
start thinking about this, you
say, all right, so it's an
automated system, it's complex,
um, and when we try to take
things that we're doing well and
doing efficiently and move them,
transfer them to that automated
system. They may not work very
well. It may take a lot of time.
Oftentimes we overlook the
complexity of the things that
we've done, uh, a particular way
for a long time.
So, transitioning to AI may
actually take, uh, even if the
AI is working, may take longer.
Um, it could also turn out to be
that uh it's just an advanced
tool that allows a lot of
people, you know, like a search
engine.
Uh, to do work that uh would
normally take them a lot longer
to do otherwise.
Um, I've also included
information from the Urban
Institute, a think tank.
Um, and it's studied, um, what
You know, they think it's gonna
happen. They estimate that about
50% of all workers will see more
than half of their current job
tasks automated by AI. So this
is just the headline you have to
dig into this research.
But essentially, while it's half
the tasks, it's only about 30%
of their work hours, so.
So for some group of employees
again, uh, professionals and,
and information workers are a
big part of this. Uh, it's going
to automate a significant uh
part of the job, but, but
probably not all of it.
Um, even with those things, uh,
happening maybe more rapidly now
than we expect.
The effects are still gonna take
a while to work themselves out.
Um, every job's gonna be a
little different. Every employee
is gonna be different, um, all
of that, uh, probably is gonna
take time to sort things out.
What we may see right away is AI
freeing up some time amongst
these workers to do other
things. So fewer resources
because of the baby boomers
retiring.
Maybe more resources because of
AI. That's one way of looking at
it.
Um,
There also seems to be little
doubt, at least among most
experts and economists that AI
will increase the global gross
domestic product, so it will
vary by economy and and country.
But, uh, urban Institute, for
example, estimates that that
increase will be around 7%.
Um,
And one way to think about any
disruption and the negative
effects of any disruption from
all of this.
is what the Urban Institute
calls occupational transitions.
So, uh, this is what we've a lot
of people call the need for
upskilling or retraining workers
who've been around in the
workforce for some period of
time. They've gone through
public schools, maybe
university. They've been trained
in a job, they're doing that
job. Uh, but now they're gonna
need retraining, uh, with at
least new skills in the use of
this AI.
Um, employers are gonna pay, uh,
play a big part in this. This is
different than other sorts of up
training, upskilling, whatever
you wanna call it.
Because this is not about taking
someone who does a job that
maybe it's just not as useful or
uh for them anymore and trying
to train in a new field. This is
a field that doesn't exist even
yet. So, employers are going to
be learning how to use this
technology. They're going to be
trying to figure out where to
use it.
Um, not just training their
employees and using it, but, but
figuring it out themselves, and
that's gonna happen with an
industries and within sectors,
and so that's gonna take time.
It's not just a matter of taking
a bunch of employees and putting
them in a room and saying, OK,
we're going to retrain you now.
Um, there's also a role for
government in all of this,
obviously.
Um, the biggest area that you
might want to be focusing on is
how it affects the educational
system.
Um,
Not only again are we going to
see students needing to be kind
of going through a process of
training and education that are
coming out of K through 12 or
4-year college program, but
again, workers who've been
around for a while, but as with
the employers.
The academics, the teachers, the
professors, they're not gonna
know much more about this new
technology and the people
they're trying to train, cause
it's brand new. So they're gonna
have to learn uh this new
technology as well in order to
be able to help people learn it
and use it.
Um, so that's a real different
role in some respects for.
Um, the educational side of
things.
Um,
The other kinds of roles that uh
government may have in all of
this, um,
You have to think about the
impact that AI will have on the
government employees themselves.
So employees are gonna be
affected. Government employees
are going to be especially
affected, I think, ultimately,
uh, many government workers have
professional or white collar
jobs.
They process information, just
the kind of jobs that can be
greatly assisted or changed by
AI.
Um, many government jobs provide
information to the public.
Uh, and we've all seen how AI
can be used, AI programs can be
used to interact directly with
users and the public to answer
questions, provide information,
respond to that particular
person's.
Particular questions. um, I
think we're gonna see more of
that. So that role will change.
Um, humans that are involved in
that now are going to be
overseeing that essentially
making sure that it's done
right.
Um, that technology is not as
new, it's being used more and
more.
Um, also, government agencies
have long been plugged with
vacancies?
They're unable to fill these
vacancies due to lack of
qualified employees or just.
Competition with the private
sector.
This is especially true for
accountants and lawyers and
those kinds of folks,
economists, etc.
Um, and I really have to
emphasize this because in my
role, talking to folks from
other state agencies, tax
agencies, on a regular basis.
This is the number one problem
that they talk about all the
time. You ask them what's your
biggest challenge or what are
you dealing with, what's hard?
They'll say filling the
positions that we need to fill.
There's no lack of work.
Work never goes away. It's lack
of people and resources to do
that work.
Um,
So
Even when we prioritize and even
when we're trying to make things
work,
the technology is often the sort
of savior that comes in and
fixes it. Uh, that's happened
over the years, electronic
filing, being able to process
returns and data, all of that
kind of stuff as greatly
assisted uh in the tax
compliance and tax enforcement.
Um,
But
Government is often also slower
to adopt things like AI, so, uh,
I would encourage uh you all to
think about, uh, you don't want
to be the first to adopt it, um,
but you also don't want to be
the last think about uh watching
this, this area and seeing what
works and seeing the tools that
come out of it and how those
could be used.
And let me talk finally about
one very specific example of
this.
And it hits close to home, um,
and that's how AI can be used um
in enforcement of taxes.
Now, that may scare you a little
bit, but I can tell you right
now, if you're talking about the
balance between the tax agency.
And the taxpayer, especially
large.
Uh, high income, high wealth
taxpayers.
There's, uh, there's not much
doubt who's winning that battle
right now. In part, that's
because of the complexity of our
tax system. It's just really
complicated.
And it's applied in uh in the
circumstances that are also
growing in their complexity.
Um, so this last slide is from a
GAO study at the federal level
uh published earlier this year.
Um, as you probably know, the
IRS and uh Congress track what
is called the tax gap.
And the gap represents the
difference between the tax that
is owed, however you estimate
that, and the tax that's
actually been reported and paid,
and there are differences of
opinion about what that amount
is, but in any case, it's
hundreds of billions of dollars
each year.
And as the report notes, the tax
gap has just been growing. It's
continuing to be a problem.
So one area in audits and
enforcement that's been
especially challenging for the
tax administrators is the
taxation of partnerships.
Um, and as this GAO report
notes, more businesses are being
organized as partnerships, which
allows them a whole lot of
flexibility, and it also allows
them to pay tax at 11 level
instead of it as in the
corporate world, uh, paying tax
twice on that income. So more
businesses organizing in
partnerships, uh, and these
larger partnerships are growing.
They're much more complicated.
They have tiered structure, they
have circular.
Ownership structures.
And all that makes them
virtually impossible uh to audit
and the IRS best kept secret for
a few years, or at least well
kept secret was that they
weren't doing any audits of
these um of these large
partnerships.
Um, in 2015, Congress gave the
IRS the authority to audit the
partnership, make assumptions
about how that partnerships, uh,
income should be taxed.
And assess the partnership,
unless the partnership sort of
meets its burden to come forward
and say, no, no, we all the
partners reported their tax
correctly.
So now in these partnerships
where you have thousands of
partners, it's the partnership
that has the obligation.
Um,
But even with that and the
additional money that Congress
has given the IRS recently.
The IRS still is not showing
much progress in being able to
audit these partnerships and the
audits that are being done are
coming back with very low
amounts of, of um assessments.
So everybody's been looking at
that figuring, is it, do we miss
something? Are we wrong about
this? What's happening? Um, and
what the IRS proposed to do last
year was to use artificial
intelligence to try and identify
in these large complex,
impossible to understand
partnership structures.
Use AI to figure out
Are these the kind of structures
that might be used to hide
income or shift income, that
sort of thing. And then identify
which ones are the most likely
audit candidates.
Um,
So that's one of the things that
the IRS has proposed in this GAO
report basically says, and then
you're gonna need the technology
also to do the audit and to
figure out the issue and make
sure that you've identified it
properly.
So we've vested all of our
hopes, um, on fixing this really
complicated tax system in this
technology. It's not the first
time that we've done that.
My biggest hope, uh, I'll just
end with this.
Um,
Is that um
That
You know, we have
We don't just say sit on our
hands and say, well, technology
will come and they'll fix
everything and it'll, you know,
make everything simple again.
Uh, I think sometimes what
technology ends up doing is it
um
Is it actually
You know, facilitates.
Uh, emboldened, enables the
complexity. So rather than
simplifying the system or
putting limits on things or
saying, oh no, this has gotten
too crazy, we've got to push
back a little bit on this.
We just make things worse.
Uh, one last thing, um, before I
end, there, there are a lot of
states, I say this often to this
group.
There are a lot of states out
there who have much narrower
sales tax bases.
Uh, and that income from that
base continues to shrink because
if you only tax tangible
personal property, there are a
lot of consumer goods out there
now that are not tangibles.
Um, and so states are
continually looking how to
expand their sales tax base.
Um, and as these additional uh
products come online that AI may
uh enable, um, you're gonna see,
I think more pressure on states
to look at expanding their sales
tax base. That is not something
New Mexico has to worry about.
We have this great system that
um
Franklin Jones designed in the
1960s that um has continued to
be flexible as everything has
changed, um, and that's, uh, so
just, just.
One of the things that other
states are grappling with that
New Mexico has not had to worry
so much about and without Mister
Chair, members, uh, I'll take
any questions that you have.
Thank you for your presentation
this morning.
We have a list with no one on
it.
They want anybody have any
questions or comments?
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you for that presentation. I, I
can tell you that um
If my company asked me to work
in New Mexican work in.
Where Arizona half the time and
the laws were different, and so
I had to claim.
Citizenship and either or both
of those, I'd quit. I'd go find
somebody to let me work in
Mexico.
Um, that seems like a very
burdensome.
Challenge. So, but my, my
question, Mr. Chair, is on the
tax gap.
The billions of dollars that are
missing, we have an idea what is
missing in New Mexico?
Mr. Mr. Chair, representative,
um, I think that um you can do a
real back of the napkin kind of
calculation and say, well, 2%,
let's say of those billions.
His income that's, so federal
government relies primarily on
the income tax, and that's the
tax that's most complicated and
so it's most likely to be where
income is not being reported or
or correctly taxed. Uh, so
assuming it's all income tax,
New Mexico is both a corporate
income tax and a personal income
tax, and so you can do this kind
of back of the nap and
calculation and say, uh, yes, a
significant portion of that and
some states do this, that,
that's kind of how they
Gauge the effect of certain
changes in the, at the federal
level, they're, you know, more
precise ways of doing that, that
your economists can, can point
to, but that's the kind of, you
know, it's, it's not
insignificant for New Mexico,
um, but you also have to
consider the industries and
primary located here, um, the
kind of activity that's done
here, all that sort of thing as
well.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and,
and thank you for this very um
Intriguing presentation for a
Monday morning, Mr. Chair. I
needed more coffee.
Of Mr. T, I think what, and
we've had some conversations, of
course, in um a few other
interim committees over the
years and recently also talking
about AI.
And what New Mexico is doing
statutorily, right, to give
direction to what happens and
how do we oversee implement.
Um, what happens with, um,
artificial intelligence.
And I think what this brings
just for more conversation, I
think, and for us to um
Uh, how would I say, put this on
paper, although paper may be, of
course, it's disappearing, not
because of the trees, but
because of what our computers do
for us.
Um, I, I find it interesting,
especially as we look, I think
at the um economic makeup of New
Mexico, right?
And where you were presenting um
With regards to the economic
effects of remote work here in
New Mexico, you know, I mean, we
We have an agriculturally based
economy.
In many parts of our state.
And how does AI affect, right? I
don't see the AI is gonna have a
direct effect on planting.
Other or harvesting other than
maybe some of the GMOs or
whatever they do for the the
seats. I mean, you know, there's
some other things that have come
in on that.
Um, I, I think this is
something, Mr. Chair, uh, that
we
Really need to look at um when
we talk about.
Where our tax base is going, and
it's not just now, but
As the younger end results,
ending of all the baby boomers,
the baby boomers are moving
forward, of course, and aging as
we all are, um, but
I, I find that we talk about
healthcare issues.
And we're talking about
education, a smaller, you know,
population is downsizing on
that.
But when we talk about health
care, which is important for our
state.
As to um what we do.
For services provided.
Right, and those services that
are provided are employees who
also have to pay taxes. So I
think there's just a lot of
other.
And from my brain right now, Mr.
Chair, there's just a, a whole
expanse of what I think we need
to sit down and really look at.
Maybe not short term, but try
and look long term, especially
as we see the aging of
population and the baby boomers
are the biggest chunk of.
Of um
Consumables, consumers, right?
Uh, at this point in time.
And I think that's where we
really, I think.
Mr. Chair, in the next, you
know, year, up to 5 years, um,
new legislators will be coming
in, but
I, I just, I have some.
I think we just need to sit down
and have a plan to really look
at it and sit down and figure
out where we're going.
Um,
Cause even if you look here, Mr.
Chair, um, on page 16 and it
says artificial intelligent
intelligence impact on
economies, and you look at the
high income economies, there's
some higher impact than what we
looked at low income economies.
So I think with New Mexico, we
need to really look at and see
where, what the impact may be.
And how we're going to respond
on that.
New Mexico is rated as one of
the lower income states in this
country.
So what is it that we can do to
anticipate
Um,
move conversation along and look
as to what our tax policies are.
I think Mr. Chair, this is going
to be.
A very fascinating discussion
that I think this committee and
others need to have, including
the LFC.
But I think we need to really
work with all of our colleagues.
And see, um,
What we can learn.
And I think really have a a true
conversation discussion on what
this impact is going to have.
Just some conversation, and I
appreciate, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
If there's any point you want to
respond, please, please feel
free to do so, but if not, I, I
made, I made myself a note here
that AI is impact by state is
important, and I've not seen
anyone study that, but um I'm
gonna go home and look for that.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next on our list, we
have Senator Stefanis.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the presentation. I
wouldn't give you an example and
just have you.
I think I understood from
previous
Presentation
Um, a New Mexico resident who
contracts with the federal
government.
And I'm not talking about
myself. I'm retired. Um.
And this person would travel to
do evaluations in different
states, and sometimes they're
gone for 3 days, and sometimes
they're gone for 3 weeks.
I
So the tax would be here in New
Mexico since they're the
resident of New Mexico?
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
that's right.
OK, so I'm gonna give you
another example that I've um.
a situation and some of the
staff are familiar with it.
I have, um,
An individual in my district.
Who pays um
Gross receipts tax on
Having
A um
For training facility.
And the services that she
provides.
And then she pays a gross
receipts tax.
When a customer comes in for.
lessons.
You see that as double taxation?
Mr. Chair, Senator, so we
typically define double taxation
as competing jurisdictions
taxing the same thing.
And not giving her credit for
it. Um, but you could define
double taxation as
You know, I, I mentioned
corporations that pay tax on
corporate income and then their
shareholders also pay tax on
dividends.
You can also say that there are
multiple taxes on the same thing
that, and that's a kind of
double taxation where you've got
a grocery seats tax and an
income tax on the same thing, if
that's what you're. So, it is
common and
In the business arena.
Uh yes, Mr. Chair, Senator, so
we think of the grocery seats
tax here as a tax on business,
but it also functions as a sales
tax. So to the extent you're
passing that tax on to the
customer and recovering it from
the customer.
You know, you can debate whether
or not that's a tax on the
business or not. Oftentimes the
economic effect is it's a tax on
the business, but yes, it, it
depends. Great. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Let's move
on then to Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
coming in a little bit late, but
I've been
Just kind of trying to keep up
on all the AI things, but it's,
it's, it's a little difficult,
so.
I'm wondering what um
I know that there's a a task
force of people or or a group
that's a federal um.
Federally that's looking at AI
and the effects and you
mentioned the IRS, but it's more
extensive than that. Can you
maybe give us a little more
information about that, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I think that
what you're referring to is um
At the federal level,
Um,
Both the administration and
Congress to some extent have
said
We want controls on artificial
intelligence, especially with
respect to how information is
coming out of that and being
used.
Um, there are threats that that
some see from artificial
intelligence that
disinformation, uh, use of
information in ways that it was
not intended for just flat out,
you know, trying to mislead uh
uh folks about certain things,
um, and, and to what extent is
information in the media or
information the government puts
out gonna be considered reliable
going forward.
Um, and there was talk at one
time from some of the advocates.
Uh, proponents saying we really
should pull back um on
Uh, artificial intelligence and
its development until we have
these things in place.
Um, and really it's a national.
Government kind of problem
because it's even affecting, it
could affect defense, it could
affect other things.
Um,
But the counterargument to that
is, well, if we're not
developing it here and it's,
it's gonna be developed in the
private sector for the most
part. It's gonna get developed
somewhere and so it looks a
little bit like, you know, the
nuclear um development in the
You know, 50s, 60s.
With the idea that this is a
technology that's now pretty
well understood and out there
and um
And so the, so the real question
is to what extent can government
come in now and regulate that,
but that's a, that's been a big
concern. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. I just think that
um I my concern or what we need
to be um having a discussion
about it how we're using the AI
AI as a tool in its efficiency
and how it's been.
Given to us in this in
These different systems and
particularly as we're talking
about our taxes and the IRS, but
also in the realm of
Of when it's, it's more than
that, and I think, I don't know
how we do that, other than.
To just kind of to talk about
what Senator Lopez said we
needed to study this a bit more.
How do we
Where do, how do we come
together to really understand
what we're doing with this
technology and really using it
as a tool that we're being uh
Uh, that's being used as a
discussion and a tool for so
many things and
But the whole scale of it, I
think we need to confront as
well, Mr. Chair. I just
It's been reading some articles
and a lot of information on it
and it's, it's can be scary, but
it also we need to understand it
better and I think that.
I think we, I don't know if we
could do it if we have a task
force, but maybe we have a
discussion about that, Mr.
Chair, and what that means for
our state in a in a bigger
Um,
The bigger concept of what AI is
going to bring forward and what
it's doing, because some people
are even saying even on the
national level that it's not
even a tool, it's beyond a tool.
It's been, it's, it's its own
entity. And so I think we need
to really keep those that
conversation in mind as we're
developing.
Policy or or discussions around
AI. So, thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
move then now to Senator Campos.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and uh it's an excellent
presentation, a lot of uh food
for thought as we move forward.
So a few things. The first is we
start talking about uh the tax
gap.
And as we look at it, we're
trying to narrow, if you will,
um, what that would be, but
unfortunately, on the other side
there are people that are
working to see how they can
broaden.
That uh that particular gap
using AI.
But it essentially leads us to
the point where
Frankly, we don't have much time
in order to uh really delve deep
into what AI truly means to the
New Mexico tax code.
That being said, a couple of
things to bring to the
forefront.
The first is, as you talk about
maybe some of the best practices
or initial practices.
If you can help us a little bit
to better understand that
because as you say, we don't
want to be first, but we
definitely don't want to be
last.
But we need to be somewhere in
there preparing for this next
session. Maybe you can help us a
little bit with that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator,
that's a fabulous question, and
I think.
That we are in, in my sort of
corner of the government world
focused on tax policy and
administration enforcement.
We're seeing a lot more of this
AI coming into practice and,
and, and being out there and
being used.
Then maybe another areas of
government. I can't speak to all
those other areas, but it just
seems like
Um,
We see a lot more of that
happening. It's affecting um
For example, our audits.
Uh, I mentioned that the
multi-state tax commission.
Those audits of some of the
largest Fortune 500 companies.
Um, and we do it for multiple
states.
So we may have an audit that we
do of a large uh corporate
taxpayer for 25.
Or or more states.
And um what we're seeing is a
lot of the data, a lot of the
things that used to be.
Verifiable, I guess I would, I
would use that term, um.
Who knows, to what extent it's
verifiable now, unless you want
to take every transaction and
get on the phone, call up the
customer and say, did you
actually buy this from this
company? Or did you actually do
this or do we actually know if
this happened?
That's getting more and more
difficult.
And I, and I think I know that,
you know, tax audits like the
least interesting thing on the
planet, but that what we're
seeing there, we're also
beginning to see in the
financial sector, in the
services sector, where you've
got
Banks or investors or whoever is
saying how do we know that the
records or the information that
we're getting from this
potential um company that wants
us to invest, how do we know
that's correct information? How
do we know that that information
is reliable?
So here is a field of government
but also regulatory oversight,
uh, that's necessary to make the
whole system work. It's
necessary that I know as an
investor, when I pick up the
financial statements that
they're reliable are those
kinds, is that kind of
information going to continue to
be reliable going forward.
Um, and is, what are the
potential solutions? Well, I
always say states working
together is one solution, but
now I think you're going to see
national governments also having
to work together on these issues
and figure out again, you know,
in what way can we verify some
of the information that
Um, that's being put out there
that seems reliable, and it
seems to have a basis, um, but
with AI it's hard to know.
So and I, I really appreciate
that and it leads not only to
the validity but also the
diversification of other
currencies that we're beginning
to rely on.
And, and that that really brings
up uh uh a much broader
question.
When, as we do move forward and
we're looking at, let's say
bitcoins and other forms of
currency.
As we tie that in, how is that
gonna go ahead and be taxed and,
and those are things that have
been there and they're still
simmering, if you will.
But if we're not prepared to go
and deal with that, we could be
missing out if you will, on a
very large portion of, of not
only commerce but also how how
governments are going to be able
to, to afford to operate. uh
just switching very quickly uh
between
Albuquerque in here there's
constant uh commuting and uh I
know that there are quite a few
government employees that
Frankly have indicated they
can't afford to live in Santa Fe
vice versa as their they're uh
living in other places, as as we
deal with our upcoming
We'll just say AI.
What, what do you see for the
future in these type of trends
that are gonna affect New
Mexico, so that people can
continue to go ahead and work
out at home because those people
that are commuting.
Aren't your construction
workers, aren't those people
that are in manufacturing,
they're they're essentially in
government jobs or if you will,
uh those uh professional jobs
where uh they report to an
office. Do, do you see a major
trend there to go ahead and also
help us.
With transportation in the
future.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
the
I think the challenge for every
employer is gonna be a little
different for government, um,
and for different agencies
within the government. I think
those challenges are going to be
a little different. Um, there
was when I started in 1980, um,
there was a lot of public facing
jobs in the in the tax
department, we worked the
counter we, we've handled people
coming in asking questions in
some ways that was the only way
to get the information or deal
with the issue.
To go down to the office and go
in.
That's happening less and less,
um, can that some of that public
facing work now be done from any
location. That's, that's a good
question.
Um, because that would be a
major shift, not just I'm
sitting at my desk in my cubicle
in my office working. I could be
doing this at home, but instead
of interacting with someone face
to face, we're dealing with
someone that way and not even on
the phone, I could be dealing
with them through a chat or
overseeing the kind of chat that
happens, that sort of thing. I
think what employers typically
in government, I'm not sure, um.
What's concerning is how do we
manage that? How do we make sure
that those remote workers are
doing their doing their job and
they're being productive.
I think that the technology is
evolving with respect to that as
well, to be able to say, not
only can we now kind of
Gauge the productivity a little
bit better in different ways.
Um, but, you know, the, the kind
of work that the human has to do
has got to be done in order for
the AI to continue to do its
work and so I think that that
In and of itself may provide a
little bit more of a framework
for this kind of remote work if
that's what.
Uh, you know, like I said at the
beginning, what a lot of
employers have told me
personally is that
Um, when they've said to
employees, you can come into the
office and you'll get better
benefits and you'll get other
little things and you'll be
promoted quicker or you can work
remotely. A lot of these workers
say, I want to work remotely. So
it's, it's a way of offering
employees something that they
value.
Well, I, I still have quite a
few questions. I'm just gonna
close with this one though, so
as we, we see AI continuing and
it's an information-based system
within that, uh, we're finding
employees that are gonna be
globally based. So,
No longer in New Mexico and, and
that being said, uh, if we don't
prepare for this and we continue
to go ahead and see if you will
the transition, particularly in
the area of hospitality,
possibly even moving into the
area of outdoor recreation is
Mexico makes its shift.
Uh, what, what are your closing
thoughts in terms of
What we really need and how
quickly do we need to prepare
for this?
And, and I, I say that because
to me this is an area of
urgency.
And if we don't approach it, in
essence we go another 18 months.
By that time, trying to catch up
may may do us more harm than
And good as we move forward in
this industry and if you will,
the new, the new way.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
that's, I think we will likely
see one or two sort of
significant events, that's,
that's the trend in a lot of
these kinds of situations where
you've got brand new technology
coming in, and you could see it
coming, but then one thing
happens and it drives a lot of
other things, or a couple of
things. Um, it's hard to
predict, obviously, but um I
think monitoring it on a regular
basis and getting the the latest
Information, including from the
people who are helping to
develop that technology if
possible, be able to say, is it
going as as quickly as you
thought it would? Are you
rolling out products based on
this technology yet?
Um, you know, it was the
investment, you know, sometimes
investors are the ones that are
most closely related to
following um what's developing.
So sometimes you can say, all
right, this business is growing,
it's gotten new investment.
There must be something that
it's got that it's doing, uh,
that maybe represents the next
trend, um, but I do think that a
lot of this is going to happen,
um, sort of incrementally, uh,
for a while, um, and, and again,
Um, it's gonna impact not just
the businesses that are directly
impacted by employees, but, but
lots of different businesses. So
New Mexico will be impacted by
this, I think, and, and it
definitely warrants a careful
monitoring. I really appreciate
your thoughtfulness. Thank you
very much for your responses to
the questions. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chairman. Thank
you for your presentation this
morning and for answering our
questions. We appreciate you
being here.
next on our agenda we have
equitable disclosure, fair and
equitable treatment of property
owners with presenters.
Chief deputy assessor for Berlio
County, Mr. Lata.
As well as Santa Fe County
assistant Mr. Romero.
Gentlemen, whenever you're
ready, please do come forward.
The desk is there and the floor
is yours whenever you're ready
to start.
Thank you for being here.
There we go. OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chair members of the committee
for allowing us to present. My
name is Damian Lara. I am the uh
county assessor for Bernard Leo
County, and also here in my
capacity as the assessor's
affiliate chair, uh, affiliate,
um, of the New Mexico counties
uh as well, and then
accompanying me is Isaiah.
Isaiah Romero, Santa Fe County
assessor.
Um, as well as the, the vice
chair.
So I believe Rebecca's already
uh handed out a couple of
handouts, um, we just received
uh an additional handout um that
is going to be very helpful.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez was able
to get um some additional
information that many of us
had not been able to to acquire
the may some additional insights
on the constitutional amendments
that we'll be talking about, um,
and, and the other handout in
addition to the PowerPoint
presentation should be um the
League of Voter Women, the
women voters, um, analysis on
both constitutional Amendment 1
and 2.
So today we didn't want to speak
um on um
3 topics.
Uh, that are impacting, um,
property owners throughout the
state, uh, of course, first and
foremost, um, are the two
constitutional amendments that
are before uh the voters on the
ballot initiatives, um, both to
increase um the veterans
exemption from 4000 to 10,000,
as well as to provide some tax
savings uh for uh service
connected, uh, disabled veterans
in proportion to their
percentage of
connected disability.
Um,
Additionally, um, we wanted to
discuss uh a proposed
constitutional amendment to
increase uh the head of family
exemption, uh, and index that
for inflation similarly to the
way that the proposed
constitutional amendment indexes
that veteran exemption as well.
Uh, there is a shift in property
taxes, um, that are going to be
hitting all other property
owners and so we want to account
for that as well. And then
finally, um, as indicated, Mr.
Chair, um,
The
New Mexico counties uh priority
for the upcoming legislative
session, which is equitable
disclosure and ensure that we
are treating homeowners and
business owners uh fairly and
equitably and similarly in terms
of the sales transfer affidavit
that is currently in law
exclusively for property owners.
I'm sorry, for homeowners.
Um, so we, um, as indicated,
unlike uh AI that you've talked
about, this is a very concrete,
uh, right, uh, tangible, uh,
real property, a fixed to the
ground, um, so it's really easy
to source, um, but it's also
very uh easy for neighbors um to
review assessments to discuss
with themselves and um one of
the things that impacts them the
most is those property taxes,
both for our local.
and pop shops, um, that are
renting or paying business
personal property, uh, and for
homeowners. Um, we're all, uh,
well aware of um the various um
Tax savings programs for senior
citizens who are on a fixed
income, um, but sometimes we
forget that, that same value
freeze applies to persons with
disability, um, and that would
cover veterans as well. Um.
And really from an assessor's
perspective, um, our biggest
model, our biggest mantra is, is
fair and equitable, uh, and the
fair and equitable treatment of
all property owners. Um, that
is, um, by law, one of the
things that we have to abide by
is ensuring that we do, um,
industry standards and, and
really that is the industry
standard.
Uh, of course, um, fair market
value unless uh otherwise
required by law, and really
that's why we're here as well um
to kind of discuss a little bit
about um the various mill
levies, um, the tax rates, if we
can sort of flip over to page 4
as well now.
Um,
You know, um, legislative
Finance Committee, um, your
staff, um, we'll all, I'll tell
you, um, these are all very
basic tenets of, of all taxation
systems, right? Um, the broader
the base, um, the lower the
rate, um, you know, the.
We've heard a little bit of
discussions about GRT on this
and then GRT on that, and the
pyramidding and, and a lot of
those things, um.
In the inception of the grocery
seats tax, you know, when you
have a grocery receipts stacks
of 12, 3% pyramid isn't that big
of a deal, but you start
exemptionting, you know, and,
and I'm sure for good policy
reasons, but, um, food, medical,
medicines, um, certain, um,
other, uh, expendables for
manufacturing all of these
things, and pretty soon you, you
need a tax rate of 56, 7%. Um,
that means that you have to, as
you provide more
and more exemptions, that means
that the rate has to come up
higher and higher. Um, you
narrow the base and then that
Necessarily increases the rate,
um.
One of the reasons why um NM
County's, um, has made this a
priority for equitable
disclosures because many of the
counties is at least, and I know
you will be speaking with
Jennifer earlier or later today
uh from Legislative Finance
Committee staff.
Um,
The last we heard about 22
counties have already maxed out
their 11.85 mLs that they're
capped for operations. So for
those counties, um, the two
constitutional amendments will
be a um
Hard hit to their revenues.
Again, from the perspectives of
the county assessor's office.
Um, the other large concern is
for those persons with
disabilities as well as the
senior citizens who are on a
fixed income, uh, I believe it's
49, 100 or something.
Um, right now.
Right, they're on a value freeze
program.
Um,
You apply 3 years in a row and
then you, you get it unless uh
circumstances change.
Um, because they are on the
residential side, um,
They will see
Most of them will see an
increase in their mill rates.
Right, um, and so that means
even though as county assessors,
we keep that value frozen.
Um, if the milk rate goes up,
Their taxes are going to go up.
Um, we see that, um, I'll just
give you a very quick example,
um, those individuals in
Bernallio County that are in the
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
district last year, um,
MRGCD uh imposed an additional
mill, um,
Or some bonding issues, DFA
approved that mill imposition of
that mill rate, and my office
was flooded with calls from
senior citizens saying, hey, uh,
you messed up.
Um, my taxes went up.
And it was very difficult to
tell um these senior citizens
and um these people with a
disability who are on, you know,
our low income, it is a
needs-based.
And, and tell them, know your
values stayed the same. What,
what ended up increasing was
your meal rate.
Um, and then try to explain to
them about the various taxing
districts and everything else
and um
You know, even one meal, a
dollar for every $1000 worth of
value for these senior citizens.
It's, it's a big hit. A lot of
them have installment plans with
the treasurer so that they can
pay on a monthly basis. Um, and
so that makes a big impact for
them. Um.
And even if they received the
head of family exemption, which,
which many of them do on their
primary house.
Um, that hasn't changed since
Since uh the 90s, the early 90s,
um, and so
Um,
And the more we increase all of
the other exemptions, that means
that they're going to have to be
picking up more of that burden.
And because it, it isn't the
head of family exemption is not
indexed for inflation. That
means as time goes on and the
other exemptions do become
indexed for inflation. The real
value of that $2000 exemption
off the taxable value is going
to decrease more and more and
really uh at some point become
obsolescent, um.
Or obsolete rather.
Um, if you can go to 5, so
hopefully, um we can help um the
committee identify some
opportunities, um, that, uh, can
help, um, property owners and um
Municipalities, counties, and
all of the other uh taxing
authorities, um, meat revenues
as well, uh, first and foremost,
um, we, we do want to um
identify um some tax savings for
homeownership.
Um, many of you, I'm sure have
heard from your constituents,
how difficult it is to get into
housing, um, with, you know, we
did see 0.5% rate by the Fed
come down, um, but
Property taxes, uh, interest
rates.
Home prices, everything else, it
does make it very difficult for,
especially first-time homeowners
to become um homeowners, uh, and
we're trying to get into that,
um, the answer, the legislative
answer, some 40 years ago now,
or, or 30 something years ago
was the head of family, uh, and
I know that that's sort of a
misnomer. It does apply for um
single individuals who own their
own home for married couples who
own their home, regardless of
whether or not they have
Children and of course for for
entire families, um, including
people who own condos and and
all of those things. So that
really was meant um from our
perspective as county assessors.
Um, to help people, um,
Purchase a home and stay in
their home. Um, and so we would
recommend, um, you know,
indexing that for inflation.
There are
Different trains of, of school
of thoughts of what that
exemption should be. Um, I
recently, uh, co-presented with
Jennet from Legislative Finance
Committee, uh, before, um.
Legislative finance, uh, they
were indicating somewhere
upwards of like $30,000 for that
hit of family exemption. Um, I
don't necessarily disagree with
that amount. Um, but again, for
those 22 counties who are maxed
out, um, $30,000 on a head of
family exemption is a huge hit.
Um, especially if we're gonna
add that to um the already
existing veterans exemptions,
um, you know, that are coming.
Both of those, um,
You know, I, I just don't see.
not passing in November.
Um, right, and so we've um
settled on an amount of 10,000,
um, and then, um,
You know, through some, some
discussions with the assessor's
affiliate, um, Isaiah Romero
indicated in and applied that
that
If there's a possibility to
phase that exemption in at the
Local options, so allowing the
county commission to phase in
those $110,000 over a 3 or 4
year period um may assist with
allowing um the counties to
develop a plan and a budget um
to see how that is going to be.
Um, so,
We've, we've proposed that, um,
and again, as, as we indicated,
even if we were just to index it
for inflation, um, present day
value of the head of of family
exemption would be $5000 in
today's um
Um,
In real dollars, right, um,
instead of that $2000
The additional tax burden,
again, we received some, some
great information and uh Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, we really appreciate
this. This will really help us.
Come up with a better estimate,
um,
Because, you know, even though
I, I did spend over half a
decade at the Legislative
council service and, and reading
FIRs, um, you know, the FIRs
that came out in the
constitutional amendments, you
know, I think some of them was
in a per capita uh unit, some of
it wasn't, um, you know, most of
us at the county assessor's
level, we, we look at it at a
per $100,000 of value on mail
rates and, and so it was just
really difficult to find out
what the tax burden was gonna be
to um to various different
individuals.
Um, and, uh, our range was
between $25 but as much as $300
per household depending on if
one or both of the
constitutional amendments were
passed. Um, again, um, now that
we have some of this information
and we may be able to get a
better idea, but um,
Again,
Uh, at this point, I think it's
It's already, you know, the, the
Is that the cat is out of the
bag or whatever. I don't
anticipate that voters are gonna
not vote uh to approve both of
those constitutional amendments
for veterans. I mean, it's, it's
kind of hard to say no veterans
don't deserve this. So, um,
we'll see what that, uh, would
be going forward.
Um,
So, um, this is kind of our, um,
on page on, uh, yeah, slide 6,
We're working on some, some
draft language um for a joint
resolution that would come
effective in 2026, uh, or that
would
uh before the voters.
Uh, in 2026 to help alleviate
some of that shift in tax
dollars to the residential
property owners. Now, um, as you
may be aware, um, since
residential and non-residential
tax rates are calculated
differently, this veteran
exemption is only gonna be bored
by residential homeowners,
right? So our business owners,
uh they are Amazons, the
Walmarts, the, you know, PNC
banks and uh Blue Ha
and all of these other, uh, you
know, large corporate uh
property owners won't share in
that um tax burden to ensure
that our veterans deserve the or
they receive the, the tax
savings programs that they
deserve. Um, and you'll see some
of that information in the two
analysis done by the League of
Women Voters, um, and they are
updating that information and I
believe they will be submitting
that for um several counties as
well. Um, so we have some, you
know,
Some sample language, um, on
page 6, that would, you know,
maybe help.
Um, more homeowners stay stay in
their home or be able to access
and afford a home.
Um, and then the flip side of
that coin.
On page 7,
is equitable disclosure.
Um, this is, uh, not only uh an
assessor's affiliate.
Um, initiative, uh, this is, uh,
a New Mexico county's priority
initiative. Um, and we do have,
and I appreciate, um, joy, uh,
being here, um, to represent, um
NM counties as a whole.
Um,
So
Equitable disclosure, are we all
sort of working under the same
definition of equitable
disclosure. I know that that can
be a little tricky.
Um,
So New Mexico is, is one of 10
states.
That has a nondisclosure, uh
laws on the book that meaning.
Traditionally, nationwide that
uh an individual property owner
or just you know average
resident citizen doesn't have
readable access to sales price
information for property. Um,
one of the ways that many other
states, um,
Allow for this information is
that you put the sales price
right on the document of, of
conveyance. So for example, you
know, uh, Damian Lara were good
consideration and $350,000 sells
his house to Isaiah Romero,
that's filed with the county
clerk, and, and anybody who
wants to go through all of those
can do that. Um.
Most people, um, either
Go through uh the multilisting
service or through a realtor or
something of that nature to get
that information uh as well.
New Mexico while is technically
a nondisclosure state does have
disclosure for homeowners. If
you've bought or sold a house or
residential property in the last
1015 years, part of all of those
disclosures and information
along with that, you know, this
is the estimated tax levy that
you're gonna pay on the house
because you're gonna get it with
tax lightning, there is that,
you know, um,
Sales transfer affidavit saying,
you know, this is what you were
selling the house for, or
conversely what you're buying
the house for.
You know, if that purchase price
include a refrigerator, a stove,
a microwave, or dishwasher,
those kind of things. OK, yes,
what's the value of those? We
subtract that out of there. Um,
business owners don't have that
same requirement, right? Um.
And so
While county assessors use this
information strictly for
statistical and analytical
purposes were not able to really
identify or find out if we're
doing a good job with the
non-residential property,
residential property I'm talking
about vacant land, commercial
land, industrial land, those
kind of stuff, um, typically
income producing properties um
does not include Agland um that
has its own special method of
evaluation, ranch land, all of
that kind of stuff, farming land
is excluded uh from that
definition.
Um, and many of the other
states, again, just, just have
that available.
And, and when I say, you know,
New Mexico is, is one of these
10 states. It, it really isn't,
um, because, um, I don't know
how many of you own property uh
in Texas, um, but, you know, my
mom recently passed away and I
had to take over.
Her her house uh in Texas, uh,
not only do they have a much
higher tax rate.
Um, the central appraisal
districts in Texas, um, the, the
other side of, of county
assessors for New Mexico.
You can buy the data. They buy
the MLS data. They buy all of
this information, so while they
technically are nondisclosure
state, um,
They have the money, the
resources, and, and the ability
to simply purchase MLL's data.
And so when you
Protest your residential
property or your commercial
property.
You go to the central appraisal
district and they say, well,
here's what we have, right? We,
we bought
You know, from
The Southwest uh multi-listing
service or whatever regional uh
multi-service. So they might as
well be a disclosure state
because they have that
information. Uh, Utah similarly
has sales disclosures, Missouri
actually leaves it up to the
county to impose whether or not
um they're gonna require the
imposition of sales transfer
affidavits Mississippi actually
just recently changed its law,
and then again, as I mentioned,
uh, New Mexico does require
homeowners to submit those
sales.
Transfer affidavits to the
county assessors, but they do
not have similar requirements
for corporate and commercial
property owners.
Um, and I'm, I'm happy to take
some questions on that cause I
know it's a lot, or I can wait
till the end.
OK.
00, thank you.
Um,
So,
Um, one of the things that, um,
NM counties and Joy and her
staff have been so gracious to
do, uh, if we move over to page
8.
Um,
is for us to hold um several
stakeholder meetings um
throughout the state, we've held
3 so far. Um,
With um various, you know,
counties, um, uh, the assessors,
um, some homeowners, um, and,
uh, community housing
development organizations that
are sort of trying to ensure
homeowners are getting in there.
Um, we've also tried to get uh
additional stakeholders, um.
Possibly hopefully we hope that
they'll become partners um as we
begin to develop some actual um
legislation to propose either to
the committee or whatever the
will of the, of the chair and
the members are, or, or to file
in um.
In the 2025 um legislative
session. Um, some of those are
NOP, uh, the New Mexico
Association of Realtors and the
apartment Association of New
Mexico and of course uh Tidal
and escrow companies, um, and
we've received some, some good
feedback, um, and
We were hoping for some other
feedback, but we'll see as um as
the next couple of months, uh,
go forward, uh, uh, all of the
additional information that we
received.
One of the um biggest um
Uh, feedback that we received,
um, from various stakeholders
was to try and get um
Some tangible.
Document in front of them,
right? Well, you, you, you talk
about.
This and you talk about that and
and all of these things, but
You know, as, as they say, the
devil is in the details and, and
many of these stakeholders are
asking for
Uh, a discussion draft.
Right, can we have a discussion
draft that we can read through
it, analyze it, see if, if we
like it, if we don't like it, if
we can provide input on some of
that, um, and so hopefully we
can actually get something in
writing that um many of these uh
stakeholders can start to look
at um prior.
To the legislative session. Um,
you know, we've received some
feedback about
Basing in increases in property,
um, we've, uh, received concerns
about um the impact on our small
mom and pop shops, um, and, you
know, whether, uh, an exemption
or
For evaluation for business
personal property is adequate,
um, clean up, uh, on a lot of
the information from the
assessor's affiliate, um,
perspective, um, this is a bill
that's been presented, um,
numerous times on both sides of
the aisle, Republicans and
Democrats have both brought, you
know, the equitable disclosure
bill uh forward in, in several
other sessions in the past, um,
it was simply to, again, to
strike non-residential from the
exempt.
of the sales transfer route and
and allow that to be treated
equally, um, most notably
Senator Neville, um, who's
retired, presented that, um.
Senator uh Lee Harmlo, um,
co-sponsored that with him. So
again, this is really not a
Uh, a partisan issue in any way,
it, it's
It's to get us the information
that we need, um.
Doesn't require any additional
personnel, doesn't require any
additional technology, uh,
doesn't have any fiscal impact,
um or reduce any revenues for
any counties or local
governments, it would really
just be for statistical and
analytical purposes for the
county assessors to know whether
or not they're doing a good job
uh on valuing residential
property as well as
non-residential property. Um,
I received a strong
recommendation um from property
tax division of the Taxation and
Revenue Department uh in my last
evaluation.
Um, so for those of you who
don't know, how the assessors
have a variety of jobs. It's
kind of you guys remember seeing
that movie Office, where Bob is
talking to the Bobs.
And he's like, you know, my, my
only real incentive not to screw
up is that I have 5 different
bosses and whenever I mess up, I
hear it from all of them. They
come in and they all, all of
them tell me it's kind of
similar for the county
assessors, right? We've got to
be accountable and, and be
accessible to all of the
property owners. We also have to
report annually to the county
commissioners about how our
budget is and how we're spending
our money. We have to provide
information to DFA, but we also
have a quasi uh
Regulatory supervisory agency,
which is property tax division.
By law, they're required to come
in and evaluate us and ensure
they they do audits on us, make
sure we're following the law,
and there's some very heavy
penalties, uh, right, if we
don't, um, it's a $1000 fine and
six months in jail and were
removed automatically from
office and um
PTD comes in and they, they run
the assessor's office on behalf
of the county and then they send
a bill to the county
commissioners for all of the
extra work that they're having
to do if we're not following the
law. Um, and these evaluations
are taken very seriously by um
by county assessors. My
recommendation was that I needed
to do.
The sales ratio study for land.
And commercial properties.
It is almost impossible.
To do a sales ratio study, if I
don't have sales for land and
commercial property, you know,
and I've sort of mentioned that
back up to property tax
division, uh, and they say,
well, you know,
Figure it out.
Um,
Again, uh, sales transfer
affidavits that are for
residential and non-residential
would fix this issue, right? We
would be able to do a sales
ratio study, we would be able to
find out what the fair market
value is of, of
You know, commercial,
industrial, uh, lands and, and
properties and, and make sure
that they're being assessed
fairly and equitably. One of the
other big issues that I get in
Bernallio County, is that um
You know, this is more the the
property owners that own
multiple properties, right?
They, they come in and say, hey,
I mean, I got this property.
Over here
And I know what it's worth, and
you're assessing it at 50% of
fair market value, and I got
this other property over here
and you're assessing it at 75%
of their market value and then
they're basically the same,
what's going on I said well, I
wish I had a better idea of how
to do some of this stuff, but I
don't because I'm not, I'm not
having that fair market
valuations, right? And so if
that property owner is upset,
you can imagine.
Um, the property owner who's
having to compete.
Uh, in the same industry, in the
same business, with a similar
property against a competitor.
Who might be assessed at 25 or
50% of where market value is and
they're being assessed at a much
higher rate, right? So these,
this information is really so
that we can set a level playing
field for property owners across
the board. Um, they're not used
to
You know, change your values or
to do any of that stuff. It's
really to make sure that we're
treating all business owners
fairly and equitably. Um, and
again, a field control formula
kicks in.
Just because values go up
doesn't mean that taxes
automatically go up, right? And
DFA won't let that happen,
especially for all of this,
this, these properties that are
existing properties would be
But we, you know, in the yield
control formula, which is set by
statute are referred to as
valuation maintenance, right?
You counties, municipalities,
soil and water districts, school
districts, they don't get any
extra revenue or or income based
off of the valuation
maintenance. It's only off of
new construction or new values
that they they do that. So, you
know, for these reasons, I think
that that it is, it's fair,
it's, it's, it will help level
the playing field and and move
those things forward.
Um,
So we've got a
A 10-point plan.
Um,
Here, if we go to page 10.
Uh, on what we think.
Could be the uh the basis for um
some legislation uh that the
committee can uh consider.
Um, to help
Um, all of the local governments
ensure that uh they're doing a
fair and equitable job, that
they have the necessary
resources to provide those
critical um county and city
services like fire protection
and, and public safety, and you
know.
I, I appreciate that my garbage
gets picked up, my trash cans
get picked up every week without
fail. Um, I, you know,
wastewater and, and water, uh,
sewage all gets taken care of
and it's incredibly important.
Um, but also to provide a little
bit of relief.
To the homeowners who are
struggling, um, and, and really
this would be um one of the 10
of the things that we can do to
help um do this. So again, uh, a
joint resolution for a
constitutional amendment to
increase uh the head of family
exemption, um, with a, with a
county option on that one.
Again, amending
the statutes to ensure that
equitable disclosure applies the
same for residential and
non-residential properties.
Um, you know, we, we, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, we appreciate and, and
really like the disabled
veterans, um, but we do
anticipate that um
The percentage of disability uh
is gonna go up, you know.
Statewide, we're seeing over
40,000 veterans that would now
apply um for the disability and
not having a firm deadline.
Compounded by the uh amount of
exemptions that are going to be
received is really gonna impact
many of the taxing authorities
or local school districts or
soil and water conservation
districts and everything else.
Because
Right. Everybody else has a
deadline. And, and the reason
for that is because
The county assessor received
certification from centrally
assessed by the department.
By June 1st, by June 15th, we
have to certify.
All countywide values.
To the department.
Sends those over to DFA.
Who has the next month or two to
calculate the mill rate, right?
By law, by September 1st,
They have to set and impose the,
the meal rates.
And that's what the individual
taxing authorities used to do
that. In, in some counties.
You know, we're looking at
Uh, 14,000 in Bernallio County,
4000 in Donia Ana.
Uh, 3000 in Otero, uh.
Over 2000 in in Santa Fe, it, it
could have a, a disproportionate
impact, especially on the
smaller taxing districts if
we're thought we weren't gonna
apply a veteran's exemption, uh,
depending on disability, but
then on December 30th, we have
to apply it for the entire year.
That's gonna have a lot of
impact. It's also a lot of
administrative work, not that
we're not willing to do that,
but it, it.
You know, when it was the 100%
disabled veterans, um.
Less than 7000.
It was very manageable to, to do
that, um.
But going from less than 7000
statewide.
To over 40,000.
That that's, that's a big hit,
um, so we would like to work.
Mr. Chair, I'm Representative
Martinez, um, to ensure that we
can do that.
That's fair for our veterans.
And also provide that
information to.
All of the taxing authorities
and DFA so that they can set a
meal rate.
Mm
Excuse me.
Um,
Some of the other feedback that
we've received.
Um, many of you have
Heard from your constituents.
About um the devastating
wildfires that have happened
throughout the state.
Both in the north a couple of
years ago, as well as um
In many parts of Lincoln County
now.
One of the things that um
Because we do have that um new
construction um that doesn't
apply to the 3% residential cap.
We're looking at what um
exempting um
Similarly to the solar, um, uh,
physical improvements of
Homes
That if a homeowner um lost
their cabin.
And that was a residential cabin
or residential home, um, and
there was lost, uh, due to the
wildfires.
That it's, you know, it does
take a little bit of time,
right? So typically they will
raise that property. It'll be
vacant land for a year or two
before FEMA or they get the
resources back to rebuild.
Um, so we were hoping to exempt,
uh, the reproduction of of
physical improvements that are
destroyed by a declared state of
emergency or disaster, um, so
that they don't get hit with
that um tax lightning when they
Build brand new construction.
Um, also, um, heard a lot of,
um, information.
From um non uh residential
property owners about
Um, various increases that have
already happened, right? So the
by state law, county assessors,
and some of us, or some of them
do a better job than than some
of us, um.
With increasing those
properties. So, um, the fear is
that, and that if we get um
equitable disclosure.
Um,
That unfounded, I think, but
nonetheless, the concern is
there and we've heard it.
That we start getting sales
transfer affidavits for
commercial property that values
are gonna go up really high and
the property owner doesn't have
the stability or the
predictability to gauge what
that would be and so we've
considered um having a phased-in
approach to non-residential
increases over 3 years with an
automatic sunset and repeal of
that phase in.
Um, and then some, um, what I
like to call clean up, um, some
property, um, evaluation
classifications, the notice of
value, um, increasing the amount
of funding for the protest board
members, uh, and the
presumptions.
The other one we've
Have some
Mixed reviews. This is um uh I'm
talking about um 7.
Uh, as I mentioned before,
Housing is an issue in New
Mexico and really throughout the
state. And, and access to
housing.
Um, one of the ways that, um,
Some local governments, um, and,
and state governments.
I've tried to address that is,
is kind of by getting in the
business of, of buying property
and then turning it into
affordable housing, uh, offering
more section 8 housing through
the feds or or HUD the housing
and urban development, um,
And, and multi-family definitely
plays, plays a part uh in that,
and so,
Um,
Incentivizing and um.
Trying to increase the, the
amount of multiple of
multi-family housing is, is
something that we've heard, um,
on the entire spectrum, both
from developers, uh, as well as
renters, um, city councilors,
and, and, and how to get that
done, how we actually get that
done is still a little bit of a
debate, um, whether it's
strictly affordable housing,
whether it's a special method of
evaluation for multi-family.
Um, just so that you are aware,
Apartment complexes.
Are considered residential
property, right?
Um, so they're on the 3% cap.
So when um,
A multi-family developer
constructs 100 unit apartment
complex.
They're assessed as new
construction at their current
incorrect valuation.
They have to compete with all of
the other multi-family apartment
complexes that have been
On a cap for the last 10 or 15
years.
Right? And so it's, again,
Um, they're finding out that
it's difficult to compete or
build these things because
they're having to compete with
multi-family apartment complexes
that have been on a cap were
paying much less in, in, in
property taxes.
Similarly,
It is difficult to get
investors.
Or uh new people into the
industry.
Because guess what?
If, you know, that long term
property owner wants to sell
their property, wants to sell
their apartment complex and say,
hey, I, I don't want to have to
manage this anymore.
They're having a hard time
finding a buyer.
Because guess what?
That, you know,
10 unit apartment complex, a 100
unit apartment complex, 250 unit
apartment complex.
When it's sold,
Is gonna get hit with.
That's lightning, right? We, we
have to bring up.
Residential property to the
current incorrect valuation. So
this new investors, these new
guys have to compete with the
people that have been on the
market or have been homeowners,
I'm sorry, property owners for
residential property over the
1015 years and again.
They're getting hit with tax
lightning, but their competitors
are staying on that 3% cap.
So it, it's
It's been difficult to get new
uh investments into the
multi-family apartment complex
um industry in, in New Mexico
because they're having to
compete with um these income
producing properties um that are
on a 3% cap. Um, and then
Um, rather than getting, um, new
investors to
Put money into the properties.
Um, get them fixed up. Typically
what we're now seeing, you know,
1520 years down the line, is
that property owner doesn't want
the headache, doesn't want to
have to manage the business.
They hire.
A, um,
You know, uh, management
company.
Hm.
Not always, but
In a significant amount of time
has deferred maintenance.
are not really looking to fix up
or not really looking to put
more money or to attract.
New renters, right? They're just
increasing the rent as it goes
but not putting money into the
apartment complexes because they
want to make money, right?
They're, they, they're the
managers. They want to defer as
much maintenance as possible and
bring in as much profit as
possible. Um.
So there, there is some
discussions and we did receive
some information on these
multi-family housings and what
that would be, um,
Oh, I'm, I'm.
Pass it over to to Isaiah if you
have any questions about our,
our homeowners and how that's
how they're being affected.
Oh, actually
OK.
Mr. Chair, members of the board.
things I'd probably like to say
is um uh I speak more in
stories. I'm sorry. So the other
day I was walking through the
hallway, walking over to the
treasure's office, and uh
there's a little old lady and
her and and her her daughter and
uh she was crying, you know, and
I was like, hold on, my wife and
I were just about to leave for
for lunch.
So walking over to the lady, she
was stressed and worried cause
she didn't understand if she
paid her taxes yet.
And I said, well, let me see, it
looks like you, you may have,
but she wanted something
tangible. She wanted something
in paper. So walk over to the
treasure's office. I got a
balance sheet. Here you go.
Looks like you have paid your
tax. She was afraid because she
had, she, she.
Prior to that she incurred uh
interest and um.
And penalty
I guess seeing all that, there
are people out there in our
community that really need this.
They really need that, that,
that $150 that they can receive
on the head of family exemption
increase.
They really need that shift of
taxes that could come, right? If
we do receive uh commercial
sales information. I've been an
appraiser at the County
Assessor's office for 24 years.
We've been fighting this, this,
I wouldn't say fighting but
requesting to make, to receive
sales information for
non-residential property for
something like 18 years.
And, and, and it makes so much
sense to me, right?
And it should just be there,
right? We should receive
commercial sales just like we
receive residential sales. It
should be that simple.
I, I, I don't understand. I
mean, what we're finding in and
what we're hearing from the
communities is, you know, how
can you make Santa Fe, right,
come from more affordable. I
don't think it's one big thing.
I think it's multiple little
things. This is one of the
little things that can help.
You know,
again, it, it, it just doesn't
make sense to me.
That when we're called by the
state statute to be at uh a
current and correct.
We're able to do that for
residential homes.
And residential homes that
they've been in their home for
quite some time, they're,
they're, they're subject to 3%
limitation of value.
Now you look at nonres.
They're not limited, right? But
we don't receive sales
information for them.
So it somewhat limits us to to
be able to do our job because we
don't have all the information
to, to reflect the value that it
needs to be. I was in a protest,
um, about 4 years ago with a
hotel, the hotel CEOs in in the
protest.
We asked for the hotel, uh, sale
that had occurred that year
prior.
We asked for it in
interrogatories. We asked for it
during the protest, I asked for
it at the table then and we, we
didn't get it due to state
statute laws.
And the truth is, the people
that we have.
No cap and sales information for
are all new home buyers.
So they're carrying the burden
of the taxes in Sanan County.
OK.
No counties.
Gentleman, uh, that conclude
your presentation?
OK, thank you very much for, for
making that presentation. We do
have a number of, of questions
that are going to follow now.
Let's go first to Representer
Martinez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll,
I'll keep it as brief as
possible.
Uh, first of all, thank you for
the presentation. It was great,
great information.
Um,
Not used to seeing Mr. Later
from.
Opposite sides of the table.
Um,
But my first question is on the
commercial property rates in
Sanival County, I'm getting a
lot of calls.
From commercial property owners
who have seen their their taxes
go up 175%.
What, what is the process if you
don't know what
Sales value of the property is
how are you setting a value to
that property?
Mr. Chair Representative
Martinez, um, most
A county assessors, uh, and, and
I'll defer to Isaiah, he's
really more the subject expert
on this. Um, but for example,
in, in, in Bernelio County, uh,
we use, um, by law we are
required to use 3 valuation
methods or combination thereof.
Um, sales, market sales, or, or
what we kind of typically think
about, you know, what is the
market doing, how many, what are
the sales?
If we don't have sales
information, that's gonna be
really hard to do.
Second, uh, the income, income
approach. We're required to use
that, um, and if, uh, the
property owner comes in and
they're making less income than,
than the value shows, then
sometimes they'll give us that
information, but they're very
hesitant to provide that because
that's proprietary information,
uh, and, and they really don't
wanna, wanna provide that, um,
it is exempt from valuation
records, so we don't share that
unless
It's in the protest process and
then it becomes quasi judiciary
and, and it becomes a public
court.
And 3
The cost approach.
So think, um,
What would it cost me to rebuild
my property for insurance
purposes, right? Uh, it's
typically referred to as cost,
uh, replacement new, less
depreciation.
Uh, it is no secret, um, that
with chain supply chain issues,
inflation, and a whole lot of
stuff. It costs a whole lot more
now to build.
And it did 2 or 3 years ago.
Um, my predecessor spent a
significant amount of money
updating all of the cost tables,
um, Marshall and Swift, Core
Logic, these are
Nationwide companies.
Used by builders, insurance
companies, finance companies
like the banks to try and
determine what that cost to
replacement you would be.
And so because we don't have the
other two methods of evaluation.
Most counties assessors use.
A combination or uh cost
approach to value property.
Currently, state statute
requires all county assessors to
take up all non-residential
property.
To its current incorrect
valuation using whatever means
they may have.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Martinez.
And in our office, if we need to
value a certain sector, uh,
commercial sector will utilize
any and all information that is
out there, um, as he stated, uh,
as, as the assessor of Burnley
County stated, there are 3
approaches to values the income
approach, sales comparison, and
the cost, right? Cost is fairly
simple, utilizing um publication
by Marshall and Swift, the cost
to construct, um, minus
depreciation plus the land.
You can send out that value.
Now, those increases have, we,
we've felt those increases of,
of construction, right,
throughout our community. So
that can increase your values.
Um, you could also run an income
approach and with the cost
approach to verify if that's uh
a current, according to the
information you have.
But as I remember, I see it
being state statutes as the
preferred method is the market
approach.
Given the sales information.
So
What, what we would love to have
is the sales information to show
and, and, and validate if our
income approach models are
working. If our class approach
models are working.
And and that's why we would want
sales information, but that what
usually what happens when you
see large increases, um, it is
due to the fact that you haven't
had increases in years in that
sector, because you don't have
the information or the data.
You don't have the information,
the data, even if you're
receiving all the market
information regularly because
sometimes the market of the, the
commercial market runs like 3
year periods, right? Um, so we
may catch up um on sales
information on, on 3 consecutive
years of 30% increases.
So that's what sometimes we see
in in in the commercial market.
Thank you for that answer, Mr.
Chairman.
Um, just, the next question is,
is there a uniform communication
policy.
Cross the counties.
Because
Business owners are opening
their property tax evaluation
and getting shocked at that
point.
As there is there a way to
communicate with
Not only commercial owners, but
residential owners.
That
These are the this is what's
going on.
This is the possi, this is the
possible raise in property tax
that you're gonna get.
Because these businesses
Some of their cost margins are
very small.
So their budget in January.
For the following year,
And all of a sudden, they have
175% increase.
In their property taxes.
That means they have to cut
somewhere else. That means they
can't hire that that person.
They can't expand here. They
There needs to be a way to
communicate with these property
owners.
So that they can then plan.
This is what we're gonna have to
do. I'm gonna have to sell 2
more cars. I'm gonna have to
sell 5 more refrigerators.
But when there is no
communication.
It's not helping the local
economies because
One less job, it's, you know,
one less expansion, it's.
Whatever is
Is there
And it's not
How can we get that done?
Mr. Chair, uh, representative
Martinez.
Um, most counties, I'm not gonna
say most, there's a good amount
of counties that have commercial
property that send out buyers
that state, what is your what is
your current income?
We get like 30% of those back.
That would help us to prepare
and to get ready for evaluations
at next year.
The next thing we send out is
something called the notice of
value every April 1st or May
1st.
That's, this is not a bill.
This is just a valuation.
We disagree with valuation, you
have 30 days to file an appeal.
During that process, we'll look
at any and all information that
we're not privy to prior to
valuing this property, to come
to a market approach.
And a fair market value. Thank
you for that, um,
if I
And so, um,
A couple of things that some um
county assessors have brought up
in some, some business owners
for the same reasons is um is
that
Number 8 on page 10. Is that
update to that notice of value
to provide that flexibility, the
county assessors to send that
out, um, and, and also, uh,
number 10, um, there's a statute
out there that would, um, it,
it's outdated, um, but if we
could update it, it would be
helpful, um, to engage with
property owners on the
presumption for those
non-residential tracks classes,
uh, and to try and receive some
communications um by the last
day of February
Which is um when um most
property owners are, uh, have
that opportunity to to update
all of their information and,
and, um, you know, communicate
with the county assessors so
that
The county assessador is uh
Cesar Romero indicated if they
respond to those or were able to
send those out, and they provide
that information, then we, we
could use that information in
setting their value rather than
just sort of guessing, and then
them getting shocked.
In in April 1st when they get
that, if they, you know, and
those two statutes would help.
Um, engage around the last day
of February.
Uh, with, with property owners
in the county assessor's office
to coordinate a little bit
better on the value of the
notice of value, I'm sorry.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
One last quick comment.
Number 3
You know, I'm, I'm going to
oppose that.
Because
If a disabled veteran has a
property tax certificate on a
property, he decides to buy
another property, move to that
property, he loses the exemption
on the first house.
So until we can figure out how
to protect that benefit.
And immediately transfer it over
to the new property. I, I don't
see how.
Oh, anybody could really support
something like that.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, so yes, we definitely
agree with you on that point,
right? So if any disabled
veteran, whether 10% or, or
100%, if they already own an
existing home?
And they have already applied
for and received and been
granted.
The exemption.
Absolutely, they should be
allowed to decide if they want
to keep the property exemption
on the house that they sold.
Or on the property home that
they are purchasing. Do not
disagree with you on there. We
have um some language that is
being presented to allow to do
that.
What the county assessors and
frankly, many of the much
smaller taxing authorities have
concerns with?
is to allow for a veteran.
For the first time,
To apply for an exemption that
they had not previously been
granted.
And then to be granted that
exemption after the
certification of values to DFA
to set the, the values and the
mill rates because then the
taxing authorities may see a
deficiency or a deficit in the
amount of revenue that's gonna
be generated. Again,
You know,
We did, we didn't really have a
big problem or, or a huge issue
with that when it was strictly
for
Less than 7000 veterans
statewide, but when we're
talking about any percentage of
disability we're, we're talking
about over 40,000 veterans.
That's good. And so that could
be a, a significant impact. So
absolutely, if, if the veteran
Has a home, is receiving an
exemption that veteran should be
able to choose at any time
during the year.
To continue that exemption on
the existing home or on their
new home, and we have some
language on there that would
continue to allow uh county
assessors to, to apply that
because, you know,
Maybe not exactly, but that
exemption is already taken into
account for in the
certifications. We're simply
gonna swap it out with a
different house, right? So those
amount of taxes are roughly
gonna be the same. But if we're
talking about, I've never had an
exemption on my home, and I want
to show up on December 30th.
And get my $450,000 or my
$500,000 home exempt. That's
gonna be a big hit for that
district, that, that home sits
in.
And so, um,
You know, whether you, you, the,
the committee wants to keep that
um no, no exemption. That,
that's up to the legislature,
but it will have an impact on
all of the various taxing
authorities um that rely on
those, on those values, uh, if
there is no, no deadline, um,
because DFA can't calculate what
those taxes or last taxes are
gonna be for any of the taxing
authorities.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I
would appreciate when you do
have the draft language being
able to go over that.
Thank you for the time, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Chandler.
Thank you, Mr. Chal. Very
interesting, um, presentation
and
Appreciate you bringing these
items to our attention. Um, so
on the first issue, the vess
exemptions and our expansion of
that.
Um, I guess the moral of the
story is that we shouldn't be
surprised by is when you
Lighten the tax load for one
group.
A group over here is gonna pay.
And um it's disappointing that
we didn't have a more vibrant
discussion about that.
During the session.
And had more transparency on
that particular issue. I know it
was contained in the FIR there
was this um the tax and revenue
um analysis, I believe what
eventually made its way, Mr.
Chair, into our analysis.
But it's um very disappointing,
of course, to see, um.
Veterans, of course, are um
You know, an important group in
our society and we definitely
need to be looking out for them,
but we also need to be looking
out for low income people.
Disabled people.
And the outcome we're gonna have
is here is one group is gonna
take precedence over another.
And I find that, you know, very
frustrating. I think some of us
here when
The realization came to us, um,
pretty upset about that.
And you know, when people get
upset, resentment start to
build.
And that's not a good thing for
society.
It's really not.
So I hope we can come to some
way to support it, um.
I was a little amused, and I
don't mean that like in a funny
way. I mean it in an ironic way
that one of the solutions you
guys are proposing is let's
increase the head of household
exemption.
Yeah, more money off the table
to, to account for the fact
we've done this other thing over
here, we think if that those
constitutional amendments, um,
pass.
So, um, you know, I'm not gonna
be really excited about doing
that because I don't think
fixing one thing with this
another thing that creates a
problem, potential problem is a
good idea. Um, you know, I want
to give credit to our um great
staffer back here, Pam. She
pointed to 72-14.3 tax rebates
for low income people based on
um you know, property.
So
It's something to look at where
we could use the income tax
system maybe to provide some
relief for people who are being
hit.
A little hard because of all
this other um shifting around
that we think is so laudable on
a short term basis. Um, we might
want to think about that and the
advantage to that is.
Counties will not
Be taking the hit.
And I want to bring that to
people's attention too, where,
what, what authority do counties
have? They have, they got GRT.
Right, some GRT if they have
stuff that generates GRT, a lot
of small communities don't have
things that generate very much
GRT. So that's what they have
and they have property taxes.
Obviously they don't have an
income tax option. So every time
we do something that takes money
off the table, the state's not
getting hurt.
The state's not getting hurt by
that. The local governments are
getting hurt by that and we need
to be mindful that when we start
jiggering um the property tax
system.
I will say I didn't hear much
from this uh the New Mexico
counties on these points, nor
did I hear much from the
assessors association, which is
a little disappointing as well.
Um, yeah, yes, this is the
assessors Association about the
impact this would have on your
revenues, um, and so we've got
Bernalio County that could
potentially take a big hit and
another, a number of others that
are outlined in these um papers
and um Mr. Chair. So, um,
there's a lot of shared, I
guess, responsibility here, um,
when people who are the most
effective are not speaking up
when it would be most useful,
um, just want to point
out.
Uh, and on the, um, disclosure,
you know, I, I guess, Mr. Chair,
I have to say I agree.
Oh
Why would we, I mean, it's a
little disappointing really.
What we're saying is we don't
want to provide as much
information as possible so that
the assessors can do a real
evaluation of the property, Mr.
Chair, thoughtful, you know, one
word, they have all the
information.
Why? Because those property
owners, the commercial property
owners are afraid they're gonna
have to pay their fair share.
And so let's bring this back
again when one group's not
paying their share, who's paying
their share a different group.
So, um, in that group is your
per your family, your
residential property owners,
they will be having to they are
carrying the larger burden in
the property tax system. And so
the question I have, is that
fair? I don't know, Mr. Tear. I
personally don't think it's
fair.
Um, so we need to be thinking
about, uh, that as well, maybe,
um, you know, a phased in thing,
I get that. I think that's,
that's something to think about.
You don't want big hits, it's,
uh, but to say, OK, residential,
you're gonna carry the load on
this and the commercial, we're
gonna, we're gonna cut you some
slack because we're gonna deny
information to the people we
expect to have appropriate
values on your properties. Um,
that's very disappointing, uh.
And, you know, I think
residential owners should start
speaking up on this. One last
thing, I've read some of the
articles from the various groups
that oppose us, they keep
referring to it as a property
tax increase.
And I think that's shameful.
It's not a property tax
increase. They know it. I've
read it in some of the op-eds,
and I think they've got to stop
doing it. They're misleading
people. The property tax
increase is more likely to go
against the residentials because
we're not fully evaluating the
um commercial property. So thank
you very much, Mr. Chair. I
think those I just wanted to
make those points.
Thank you, Representative
Chandler. Let's go to Senator
Maestas.
Mhm
Mr. Chairman, thank you, thank
you, uh,
such a lot Romero and Chera
Chandler gave my speech, so
thank you for that. Thank you so
much for that. But just so that
I kind of know a little bit more
um
Obviously, in a, in a general
sense, if we give a tax break
over here.
Uh, the tax code compensates and
so somebody's gonna pay it,
somebody's gonna pay it. But
with property taxes, it's, it's
more specific than that, I
believe. Could you explain that
to me if we give a X break to
say veterans.
In, in the, in the, in the math
of the assessor's office,
somebody's tax rates go up.
Like for example, the, the, the
example you gave, Mr. Chair,
Cesarada with the uh conservancy
district.
Mail levy?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh,
that, that is correct. So, um,
On, on a, on a whole, right,
holistically.
Um,
When
The various taxing authorities
request a budget they typically
Rarely do they ask for less
money than they had last year.
And so the formula that's set in
statute in the yield control
formula, they submit those
budgets to um
DFA local governments divisions.
They say, OK, this is an
incremental increase. Yes,
we're, we're gonna certify that,
that we're gonna allow for this
budget.
The second component is the
county assessor's valuation.
For that county.
Then they use those assessments.
And they apply that formula.
To
Basically back themselves back
into
The meal rates for each of those
individual taxing authorities.
So if there's um less value.
For certain people, that means
that those people whose values
stayed the same or, or, or
doesn't.
They they'll need to increase
the meal rate to bank up for the
loss of value overall.
Um, for larger, um,
Districts like the county as a
whole, it may be a little bit
less, but for smaller districts
that that might be uh an
increase, um, and so, yes, and,
and because the meal rates for
residential and non-residential
properties are calculated
separately.
They, so it may, it doesn't
necessarily mean that they will.
Um, right, so if, for example,
if the county assessor's office
does a really good job of, of
Producing good values and does
valuation maintenance, that
means that the, you know, again,
you'll control formula as a
whole, values go up.
That means that the mill rate is
supposed to go down.
Um, and so,
If there is enough value within
a county.
To make up for those differences
that it will, um, but again,
it's not just the county, right?
It's, it's the county, it's the
various municipalities. It's the
hospital districts, it's the
soil and water conservation
districts. It's the school
districts, all of those of the
livestock board, you know, all
of those have a uh an ability to
impose a mill rate onto, onto
the property owner, um, and so,
um, typically we, we do see, um,
that if, if values
Aren't keeping up with the
market, um, that means that the
taxing authorities are going to
have to increase their mail
rates, um, as was Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Chandler noted,
um,
If if a county doesn't have a
lot of GRT.
Then their operations almost
exclusively comes from property
taxes. Uh, in Bernallio County,
which is probably the, the
largest uh GRT producing county.
40% of our operations are done
with um
Uh, with property taxes, right?
We 40% of our salaries, our
bills, lights, all that stuff
for Bernalio County. So you can
imagine uh for everything else.
Um, and then of course,
Smaller school districts, um,
APS is like the largest school
district uh in, in, or the top 5
in the country, right? Um, but
that's not the case for all
school districts throughout New
Mexico. Some counties have 2 or
3 school districts, right? Um,
And so, um, those schools may
see a hit.
Uh, and while, yes, um, you
know, I think the legislature,
um, in New Mexico is, is at the
forefront with the um
equalization formula uh to fund
operations for schools. Please
remember that schools still get
money uh for capital outlay for,
you know, brick and mortar,
right? So if you want to have
those schools be cool in the
summers and warm in the, in the
winters.
They depend on property taxes as
well, and they get a mill rate
um on those as well. And if, if
there's a shift and they've
maxed out their middle rate,
right? Remember the constitution
only allows for 10.
I'm sorry, for 2 meals.
Right. So once that's it, you
don't get any more money. It
doesn't matter if you don't have
the value.
Uh, and so that is, uh, a, a big
concern to many of these taxing
authorities, including schools
who are not gonna have the money
to fund uh the necessary
services and operations and, um,
you know, brick and mortar, um,
for, for their students and for
their uh residents.
Mr. Chairman, uh, a lotta, thank
you for that explanation that,
um.
That makes these uh
Couple of things. One is I think
uh all taxes should be in
statute. They, they should not
be in the constitution. So I'm
asking myself why did these
constitutional amendments
Move forward and it might be
because taxes, bills rather that
affect the statute are talked
about collectively or talked
about as they relate to each
other.
Whereas the constitutional
amendment, you know, joint
resolution is kind of stand
alone, you know, and it's very,
very difficult.
To vote no on these things, uh,
and so I could understand it
getting out of one committee,
two committee, maybe even a
chamber.
But you know, that's where
chairs and leadership in, in, in
that second chamber need to
You know, put on their good
government hat, you know, and
and talk frankly about.
The effects of these
These initiatives, the um what's
curious is that the, this a
second Constitutional amendment
as it relates to household.
Uh, heads of household may in
fact be a good idea.
Despite that, that philosophy
that that I just espoused. Can
we do that in, in, can we do
that in, in, in statute or does
it have to be in the
constitution?
The household adjustment had a
household adjustment.
Mr. Senator, um,
I, I, I believe, and, and of
course I'll defer to um Martin
and, and the Stokes, um, but
because the, the way that the
Constitution is, is framed, it
does require a constitutional
amendment. Um, now, maybe we
don't go to 10,000, right? Maybe
you go to
Or stay at 2000 and index that
for inflation, are, are
concerned as county assessors,
is that because
The $2000 value has not changed
in
40 years, 30 years, I don't know
if I, you know, some people can
do math better than I can.
And the veterans exemption, if
it gets passed, that is indexed
for inflation. So not only are
we moving that from 4000 to
10,000 shifting again, that
valuation to to homeowners.
Because that is indexed for
inflation.
Year over year that amount will
increase.
Which means that the $2000 in
really in real dollars is going
to decrease in 3 to 5 years,
it's gonna be a lot less. So
maybe if, if the legislature
sees it in the wisdom that um
you provide a, a property tax
rebate to, to people in their
income tax that file,
absolutely. I think that's a
great idea that's probably
better served there. I would,
would grant to say that for
veterans, that would be a better
place for it as well, but you
should at least index it for
inflation so that the current
Benefit the current tax savings
that is really
For homeowners, individual
homeowners that only own one
piece of property, that's their
only benefit. And if you don't
at least index it for inflation,
it, it's basically gonna be
worthless, you know, every other
single state in the United
States provides some type of uh
homestead exemption, some type
of, you know, primary homeowner
of property exemption, um, and
again, if we don't fix that in
the Constitution for New Mexico
in 5 years.
It's, it's gonna be worthless.
Now, um, that being said,
There is an old statute that
unfortunately no county does
anymore because it's really
difficult, right? At the, at the
county option, the, the county
could elect to provide a rebate
on property taxes for low income
properties. I do believe, uh,
Mr. Chair, uh represented China
that, that, that statute, it's
not in our 10 points, um, but
if, if this was something that
was to be done that we remove
that from the local option and
do it statewide on the uh
personal.
Income tax so that the rebate
does come from there.
Um,
Yeah. And, and, and just to
mention again, you know, we do
have the disability, the value
freeze for disabled individuals,
you know, that, that's a great.
Great benefit
For these two constitutional
amendments for veterans again.
It is, it only applies.
To veterans who are property
owners.
It it doesn't apply to to the
veterans who are renters uh who
may be in transitional housing
who, who may make very little
income, right? Who, who, who in
all reality are the veterans who
may need uh a hand up the most,
um, this, you know, especially
on a, on a percentage.
point
Um,
Some veterans do very well. Um,
I know veterans who, who deserve
it, who worked very hard and,
and are in a $750,000 home,
right? And I, and I know the
veterans who, who have had a
hard go of it and, and maybe are
just barely buying or getting
into a starter home and, and
that house is
Um, you know, worth 200,000.
Right?
That that percentage of
disability is going to apply
that same percentage of, of that
$750,000 home is not the same
total amount as the same
percentage off of that $200,000
house.
Um, which, again, from a fair
and equitable, we much rather
would have seen.
Uh, a flat specific amount like
$10,000 off the taxable value
versus a percentage off of the
value of the house, um, because
again, it disproportionately
helps, um, property owners who,
who, who own very high value
property. No, thank you, thank
you, Mr. Shen. Thank you, Cesar
Laras for some reason those
points were missed in the
two-minute debate we had on this
on this constitutional
amendment. They, um, but no, I,
but I agree with the point that,
that
One is
Like if you philosophize about
democracy, one of the criticisms
of democracy is that
theoretically an interest group
could convince the
The, the democratic forces to
To get money from the treasury
for itself, you know what I
mean? So it's one thing to take
money from the treasury, give it
to our friends. Another thing
that
Take money from
Other taxpayers and give it to
our friends, you know, I mean
that resentment is real and it's
uh and it's it's bad public
policy, so we gotta, we gotta
watch out for that. But also,
um,
But it, but it, but if and when
we do do.
Things for folks that we
believe, you know, there's a
public benefit, single moms, you
know, uh, uh.
Child income tax credit, all
that stuff that we do should be
in the forms of rebates, rebates
and credits.
Rebates and credits. We gotta
flick the switch for 100 years.
We did tax cuts, taxes, tax
cuts, they help folks. Now we
have the money to write a check
to to help folks. When we prove
that constitutional, we proved
that when we wrote $500 checks,
everybody, uh, uh, during COVID.
So we can do that with rebates
and credits. We should
definitely move in that
direction as a state.
Um, so anyway, I have a couple
more things I'll just leave it
at that. Thank you, Mr. Chan.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to,
uh, we have a couple more on the
list. Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. If things
aren't already confusing enough
getting into these conversations
um.
And then if we're gonna add, you
know, rebates and checks and all
these other things, I think.
I, I, what is it?
And I think you're trying to get
to the simplest solution here,
but.
Um, I think my concern, a lot of
my questions have been asked and
I really agree with what uh
Representative Chandler is
saying
on many all those points, I
guess, um, sitting next to her
and listening to that, but I
didn't think anyone's asked too
many questions about the.
That the commercial property, um
tax and information and that's
not having that disclosure of
information, um, so,
And I guess my my question is
how much more money are you
spending by using all these
tools and and uh information
pieces to get to uh equitable,
um,
Uh, tax information for
commercial properties or
non-residential properties,
whether uh as opposed to them
just not disclosing to you,
Mister Chair.
If you know that. So, and I
again, I'll, I'll defer to um to
Cesar Romero, but so
Um,
Would they
Unlike Texas,
The the local uh uh
multi-listing services will not
sell.
County assessors.
So, um,
Yeah, they, they, they, so I, I,
I don't know if
I mean, I guess I haven't tried
to offer them like millions of
dollars for the information, but
um,
Yeah, they, they won't sell that
information. So, uh, Berna Leo
County does spend money on
subscriptions like
Marshall and Swift, um, co-star,
uh, Core Logic, and, and, and,
you know, counties who can
afford to spend money on that,
you know, we do have some more
limited information, but um,
I, I, you know, I.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lujan.
So it's a bigger issue than just
the assessor's office, uh,
speaking to the realtors
association. They've had issues
with commercial sales
information if they've sold
through MLS to receive that
information, so you won't see a
whole lot of commercial property
being sold through MLS. You'll
see a lot of property being sold
through Carno.
Um, secondly, it, it's not just
about commercial sales, us
receiving commercial sales,
there's an issue with appraisers
receiving commercial sales. So
it's not that we don't have the
data or some other third party
can get the data. No one can get
the data. There's these, these,
these ideas of what's your guess
on what the Eldorado sold for in
2000, what was it like 10 or
something like that?
So no one has this information
and that's why you have some
commercial groups and maybe that
I can speak a little bit more
about this that are, that are
somewhat uh on the other side of
of open disclosure because they
can't get good appraisals cause
there's not good data out there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
this is a huge issue, um.
And I, I, I just wanna know, I
mean, I think we need to really
do something about that and have
some uh fair and open
transparency with with property
owner with a commercial property
owners, what is the argument of
them not wanting to disclose,
Mr. Chair. Um,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Lujan, um,
We haven't really gotten an
argument against it, um, we've
gotten concerns and I guess
expressions of heartburn, um,
with this. Um, the only real
tangible um concern that we
could sort of address um is that
Um, again,
I, I, I, I, I believe it's
unfounded, but uh seeing that
sticker shock, um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative Martinez
indicated, right, um, more than
anything,
You know, coming from, from an
economic development background.
Absolutely. Business owners want
consistency and predictability,
right? And so having that phased
in approach that you see on, on
number 5 of, of uh slide 10, uh,
to face that in, uh, so that
property owners, um, know that,
hey, I'm not gonna go up more
than 25% this year or 50% of
value and next year it's gonna
go up, you know, an incremental
increase over 3 years, um, would
address any concerns about the
lack of predictability.
Um, and of course, uh, property
owners, um, you know, we were
not changing the law, we're
still use a cost approach, the
income approach, uh, the sales
approach. And again, if you read
the statute, um, the statute
does not allow for a county
assessor to say, OK, the
Alvarado sold for $500. We're
going to value it at $1000. We
can't do that, right? Um, when
your house sells for whatever it
sells for, we don't just put the
purchase price on there, we say,
you know, what's the
Market doing, um, most of us,
uh, may have experienced, you
know, those 6 to 8 months um
after COVID or during COVID
where people were purchasing
property at 250 to $50,000 over
asking price sight unseen.
We're not punishing homeowners
who overpaid for a property in
those, in those years, right?
We're seeing what the market was
as, as of January 1st and, and
setting that right. Similarly,
we, we don't reward um
homeowners who got a really
great deal on the property or
got it on a foreclosure or, or
something like that with, with
their sales price. We, we do the
market. We would do the same for
uh commercial properties. Um,
this is a, a market approach. It
is only for statistic
and analytical purposes. So, so
we wouldn't see that same sort
of jump that people are are
afraid of. And again, if we do
this wholesale.
Um, yield control should
theoretically say, OK, you know,
values went up.
Just because values go up
doesn't mean that the county,
the city, the schools need much
more money. No, they'll still
get the same amount of money,
um, you know, and most property
owners.
Residential and non-residential,
see a little bit of an increase
in year after year regardless of
what their value does, right?
And so, um, yield control would
prevent that from happening.
Thank, thank you. And then just
That's that's a lot. I think I'm
gonna have more questions
afterwards and I know that
representative Chandler her or I
can hear her brain moving over
here and she's she's getting
things formulated and I'll look
to her leadership as well on
this, but
On the, the new, um, the
constitutional amendments.
I know you focused in on
Sandoval, Torrence, Valencia
Bernillio, um, and since I have
Santa Fe here, what do you have
any statistics for Santa Fe
County?
Mr. Chair.
If not, that's OK. You can get
that to me later. I just, I know
you're focused. Is that and that
obviously because this is where
the majority of the populations
of our veterans are.
Thank you. That's all I, that
was my question. I answered my
own question. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Let's move in
now to the last person on the
list, Senator Pope. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and I'll try to be
quick and I'm holding everybody
for lunch, um, a lot of my
questions and comments have
been.
reiterated here, um, you know,
I, I support what we're doing
here in this constitutional
amendment, that being said,
Um, always learning a lot and
understanding better ways of
what we could do to really help,
uh.
are disabled veterans.
Really figure out a way to
support them staying in homes,
possibly getting in homes, but I
think you brought up a point of
The reality is a lot of folks
are renting or leasing and are
not going to be able to benefit
from what we're trying to do.
Um,
Talking about um the current
exemptions right now, property
tax.
I know right now there's kind of
an arbitrary or date kind of
what the county assessors decide
to do, and I know going forward
on folks that do a new claim.
Or or try to claim this
exemption, you want to set that
date.
Um, and I know in the past on
the prior the way the current
system is.
Um, I still get calls about that
as well, about that issue, um,
and I know there was some
legislation we did to kind of
firm that up as well. Um, how
does that seem to be going?
Because I, I've gotten calls
from folks to where they say,
well, it needs to be done before
April or a certain point, um.
From folks that have maybe moved
into New Mexico.
What is the current process for
that exemption or is there a
timeline? Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator, so
currently for the 100% disabled
veteran because we, we, it's
only for the 100% disabled
veterans. Um,
You know,
All come to my knowledge, um,
all county assessors.
Apply a brand new exemption.
100% disabled veteran, uh,
regardless of when they come in
with, with that change, right?
So, um, and again, when we're
talking about less than 7000,
100% disabled veterans
throughout the state.
It's, it's pretty minimal.
Um, my reading of of the state
statute and, and maybe there's
implementing state statute that
is done that I haven't thought
about, um, when it becomes uh at
a percentage.
My reading is, is that it, it
simply says a disabled veteran,
um, and if that's not somehow
corrected, then it, it would be
all 40,000 veterans in the state
could come in.
At any point during any given
year.
To apply for a brand new
exemption or to change their
exemption, um, Mr. Chair,
Senator, um, those of you who
are veterans and may know better
than I, um, it, it is my
understanding that um uh a
disability, a service connected,
uh, disability can change
throughout the year or
throughout the life of the
veteran and so a bad surgery
could leave you at, you know,
60, 70% disabled instead of the
25 or 30% disabled that you
were.
Um, and again, um, maybe for
You know, less than 7000 that
that doesn't have a huge impact,
but if we're talking about over
40,000 veterans who are shifting
their percentage disability
without any specific deadline or
anything um that that could
impact um the schools in
particular, um, and, and the
amount of revenue that they rely
on for, for that. Um, I, uh, Mr.
Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, I think every county
assessor agrees that if the
Uh, exemption has already been
granted.
And the veteran simply wants to
shift or transfer that property
from their current property that
they're selling to a property
that they're purchasing,
absolutely. Um, we should be
able to do that at any time of
the year, but a brand new
exemption or changing the
exemption percentage, um, that,
that, that would cause
significant issues.
Mr. Chair,
Um,
Senator Pope, I'm sorry. I'm not
used to speaking in these terms.
I'm usually out there in the
levee and the roads, the Camino
deo so I apologize.
Um, the only issue that we're
running into.
we are changing the, the, um,
The 100% disabled veterans
exemption to another property.
When we get too far into the end
of the year?
The other one's 100% exempt for
the for the other owner as well.
You kind of have 2100% exempt
properties.
Understood. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you assessors, and
that makes sense cause you're
almost like, almost getting
double cause you've lost and
you're gonna losing both is that
time frame, um.
With this equitable disclosure,
we're talking about commercial
properties and we're talking
about.
That possible increase on from
the rest of the property
taxpayers, right, in your
slides.
$25 could be a few $100 right?
You go up.
Which could impact a lot of our
low income folks and seniors as
well.
Those unintended consequences.
Um,
Is there any way, I, and I know
in the smaller counties it's
probably not probably not
possible like GRT they don't
have that revenue source.
Um,
Is there any of this made up by
what you're doing here on the
commercial side?
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator Pope,
absolutely, um.
If we have current and correct
valuations, um, and correct
value maintenance.
Uh, it would allow, especially
the smaller counties to have
that ability and that cushion,
um, and then again, um, because
DFA sets these rates based on
the overall budget, right? Um,
county commissioners, city
councilors don't say, OK, well,
I need this much money from a
residential property owners and
I need this much money from uh
commercial property owners right
now, they just say, here's my
overall budget and DFA is the
one that calculates that
absolutely. Um, we do believe
that there would be
A, a balancing uh of the tax
burden, um, if we are able to
have equitable disclosure and to
share the burden, um, both
residentialally and and
commercial.
Uh, thank you, Mr. S. Thank
yousessors. That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator Pope.
Gentlemen, thank you for your
presentation this morning. We, I
know we had a
Extensive discussion about this,
but I would also like to invite
you again as we talk about
endorsements of legislation for
the 2025 legislative session.
Uh, we will be having that
discussion on October 17th and
18th. Uh, so,
With these items, I, I would
suggest that maybe, you know,
you, you get back with our staff
and uh be determined and have
something in writing in terms of
what the bill looks like uh for
our considerations that we can
consider something as we move
forward, if this is the intent
of, of your organization.
Um, Mr. Chair, would, would you
want us to um do that on a, on
behalf of the committee or?
It would be done on behalf, I,
I, I guess what I'm saying is.
If you can work with some build
drafters and obviously
legislators on those that may be
interested in carrying this type
of legislation helped to draft
something so that they can
present it in front of these
committees for the potential
endorsement in those in in that
October meeting.
Although um
members of the committee, we
will, we will reach out and, and
if anybody is interested in, in
sponsoring that, we'll
definitely get that um chair
Senator, thank you so much.
Thank you, appreciate you guys.
And we will return uh we'll keep
the same start time. Well, let's
see. Let's push back our start
