Christina and I've been
organizing quite a bit based on
the work plan. Uh, very excited,
but I do want to go through just
a little bit of housekeeping
first, um, especially when I
just looked at Representative
Lindstrom, we do have part of a
presentation that you've already
seen, so you might be able to
take a little longer lunch.
However, I think it's really
important for this, and I do
wanna, like, just put it out
there to LFC. We, we snag them
first.
We booked them first before LFC
did, so, so there, I know, I'm
looking forward to it. Um, so,
uh, just a couple of things for
folks if uh you're either tuning
in or you're here for the first
time, um, as chair, you'll find
that I'm weirdly aware of time.
Uh, I used to work in radio and
talk to a clock for a living for
20 years. So what um I bring to
chairing the committee is based
on making sure we use our time
and your time wisely. Um, I do
like to try and start committee
meetings and return from breaks
as close to
the start time as possible. I do
this out of respect for our
speakers, our hosts, those of us
who have to drive all the way
back down to southern New
Mexico, uh, and also to the
other corners of the state. Um,
so if you can make sure to
arrive on time for the beginning
of the meetings and when we come
back from break, that is much
appreciated. Um, Christina and I
have worked on making sure each
of our presentations allow for
plenty of time for questions and
discussion, and I really
appreciate, uh, Representative
Duncan used to serve on the
Economic and Rural Development
and Policy Committee with me,
um, and we, uh, like to ask
a lot of questions. I do ask
that we try to keep them to
topic, um, and if you just
happen to go off tangent a
little bit, I will respectfully
and gently bring you back uh to
the questions so that we can
stick to our schedule. Um,
you'll find that I like to
cluster topics based on
relevance and so in our
remaining meetings, try to make
sure those topics are related,
uh, that are discussed in this
meeting just so that our points
are fresh on our minds. Um, so
with that, um, we can operate as
a subcommittee.
correct? Um, we are going to
start off with, uh, New Mexico
Tax Policy 101, uh, as I've
mentioned in conversation with
the secretary, uh, and with
Izzy, um, and just for you all,
I grew up with a single mom who
borrowed from Peter to pay Paul.
uh, and so taxes, uh, remarkably
give me a lot of anxiety. So I'm
really grateful that the gentle
hands, uh, that the secretary
and, uh, Izzy in their offices
have have done in terms of
helping us understand about the
tax policy, and I keep thinking,
and I don't know if
Representative Lindstrom will
like this or not, but I feel
like she's on my shoulder, uh,
when I think about, do we need
to have a tax package. And I
think ultimately that is the
question that we are going to be
discussing this entire time is
do we need
a tax package? Is now the time
to have a tax package. And so
that is the approach, uh, that
we're taking throughout this,
uh, and really grateful for the
committee's support. So we will
start off with, um, Secretary of
Taxation and Revenue Department,
Stephanie Chardon-Clark. We also
have, um, our, our dear friend
Ismael Torres, who is the chief
economist of the Legislative
Finance Committee. We're going
to have, uh, Izzy here quite a
bit today, um, but I'm gonna go
ahead and turn it over to you so
you can help us and those who
are watching.
uh, be able to understand our
tax policy, uh, that we are
having, uh, in New Mexico. So
thank you very much for being
here. I'm gonna let you go ahead
and start.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the invitation to, from
you and the, and the members.
It's a pleasure to be here to go
through an updated version of
our tax policy 101 slides, um,
and it, I think the way that
you've designed your agenda to
then kind of transition into
talking about the permanent
funds as a revenue source, not a
tax, but as a revenue source
makes great sense and I'm
excited to hear that
presentation as well. So I'm
gonna start us off and Izzy and
I will share these slides. Happy
to take your questions. Um, so
we've basically structured this
to go through this, the general
fund's major revenue streams and
just talk a little bit on each
slide about what is the tax
base? What are the rates? Where,
where possible, where do we rank
rank in our rates compared to
other states where we
competitive, where are we less
competitive, those kind of
things.
Um, all right. So without
further ado, I'll start on slide
4 talking about the grocery
seats tax, which is the largest
uh source of general fund
revenue, uh, bringing in
3.1 bill 00 I'm sorry, I'm on,
I'm still on side 4, sorry. Uh,
we have one here just
overviewing the general fund
before I get into the GRT.
Sorry. So, um, you can see on
here that, as I was saying that
the sales tax or in New Mexico,
the grocery receipts tax is the
largest source of revenue, um,
sales taxes there includes not
just the GRT but the
complimentary compensating tax,
and then there's some excise
taxes on special products. Um,
next up, we've got direct taxes
coming from
the oil and gas sector at 3.1
billion, another huge source of
about 25% of general fund
revenue, and of course there's
indirect revenues that are also
coming from the oil and gas
industry in the other revenue
sources too, like GRT
incorporate income tax. And then
next up you'll hear a lot more
about this in the next
presentation. We, we've got 22%
of general fund revenue made up
of um uh sorry, 14% of
investment income, that's mainly
the distributions from the
permanent funds, but
also um in years like now,
that's also reflecting a lot of
revenue on the balances that the
state treasurer's office, and
then we've got our two income
taxes, pit and sit.
and then some other revenues
OK, onto slide 5. Now I really
will start talking about the
grocery seats tax. Um, New
Mexico, I'll just start by
saying, has a pretty unique
version of the sales tax. We
have a groce receipts tax rather
than a sales tax that most
states that have anything like
this have. And I'll start by
saying that the main reason
decades ago that we we
structured our attacks as a GRT
rather than a sales tax, really
has to do with our national
labs, and that the state
would not have been able to
capture the activity of the labs
in our tax base if we had
imposed a sales tax on the buyer
because New Mexico as a state
cannot directly tax the federal
government. However, a GRT is a
tax on the seller, and we can
tax their vendors. So that is
it, it basically, if you're ever
wondering to yourself, why are
we so weird? Should we change to
a sales tax, probably no, the
answer is that our two federal
labs in the immense activ
ity that goes along with them is
captured through a GRT. It would
not be through a sales tax.
All right. And what is the
biggest thing that makes a GRT
different than a sales tax. A
sales tax traditionally is going
to be taxed on goods, tangible
things, a GRT incorporates
services. So New Mexico's GRT is
much, it captures a much broader
uh part of the economy,
especially we, you know, looking
back to probably from the 90s
and on, we know that the
services economy is what has
grown very quickly. And so New
Mexico has our tax base has
benefited
by capturing base, the, the
growth in the services base,
whereas a lot of states in their
sales tax have not, and so we're
sort of blessed in that uh from
a tax policy standpoint in
general, all other things equal,
you want to have as broad a base
as possible so that you can have
as low of a rate as possible,
and we do that by, by including
services.
Um, the total rates in any area
is not just the state rate of
4.875%, which has been cut in
recent years by uh from 5, 5.18%
to 4. 78. Um, but there's also a
local option taxes that go on
top of that, so the, the rate
varies statewide depending on if
you're in um an unincorporated
county area. It's probably quite
low if you're in a municipality,
it might be as high as about
10%.
Um, it tends to be the highest
in municipalities that have a
lot of tourism. Uh, uh,
municipality like uh Angel Fire
or
uhowski Valley, uh, can
theoretically have a higher tax
rate and they're really
exporting the incidents of that
tax to out of state visitors or
out of municipality visitors. So
you see a trend there in in the
way the rates are structured.
Um, also want to note that the
state rate, while it is 4.875%
statewide. 1.125% of that goes
to municipalities when the sale
is sourced to a municipality. So
the true state rate is actually
um down in the 3% uh in every
municipality, which is pretty
significant. All right. Next,
I'll go to slide 6. Talk a
little bit more about the GRT,
um, sourcing is something that
you'll hear a lot about, um, as
members of tax committees and
and legislators, a huge uh shift
occurred in New Mexico and most
states in the last, say, 5
years, uh, we had a US Supreme
Court decision called Wayfair,
that changed the way states can
impose tax on internet sales out
of
state sellers, and as a result,
most states, including New
Mexico, moved from what used to
be called origin-based sourcing
to now we call it destination
sourcing. And what that really
means is that when, when a
transaction occurs that's
subject to the GRT, we need to
know
where, what is the location that
we're saying that sale is
sourced to. The origin in the
old days used to be the business
location generally. Um, but now
the destination reflects where
the goods or services are
received, goods where they,
where, you know, where the buyer
takes possession of them,
Services, it's a little more
complicated. It's where the
initial use of the product of
the services is delivered, and
that could be unclear and
subject to interpretation. That
doesn't make sense to you.
You're not alone. It doesn't,
it's complicated a lot for a lot
of folks. Um, so by moving to
destination sourcing, and we did
so legislatively. It was
implemented July 1st, 2021. We
were able to capture all the GRT
on all these online platforms
that are selling into New Mexico
from out of state, which kind of
was great in that it broadened
the tax base considerably. It
brought in a lot of revenue for
municipalities, for counties,
and for the state. But you'll
hear
there is also some trouble with
that. Um, the main things you
hear about are
uh related to oil and gas
services. You'll have the impact
on some municipalities and the
oil patch is that you'll have um
transactions that used to be
sourced to the business
location, which might be in the
municipality, say Artesia, and
now instead are being sourced to
the unincorporated county area
where the well is located. So
there was this big shift of
sourcing that has cost, uh,
especially oil patch
municipalities pretty
considerably.
But I'll say that that went into
place at the same time as they
benefited from internet sales.
So and, and also a new local
option compensating tax.
All right, um, so that's
hopefully demystifies sourcing a
little bit for folks. Another
thing um that you'll hear a lot
about, um, his pyramidding, and
I mentioned a little while ago
that our GRT is somewhat unique
compared to a sales tax because
we tax services. That's a good
thing in that it broadens the
base.
but it can be a difficult thing
because you can have
pyramidding, which means you tax
multiple transactions on the way
to the final sale.
And, and so you're pyramidding
attacks upon attacks upon
attacks sometimes, and so many
provisions of our tax code,
you'll see many deductions and
uh sections chapter 7, section
9, the GRT Act that are designed
to prevent pyramidding. And
we've done a lot of work to
prevent a lot of it, but there
still is some pyramidding in the
GRT, and that's something you'll
probably hear proposals about
every single session.
All right, I'll move on on slide
7 to the compensating tax. Um,
again, most states have a sales
and use tax, we instead have a
GRT and a compensating tax. And
um I mentioned a moment ago that
on the same day we moved to
destination sourcing. We also
implemented a local compensating
tax.
So, uh it used to be that local
options included just GRT, but
the compensating tax that is
sort of designed to capture all
the transactions that would be
subject to the GRT but are
evading it. Um, locals used to
not benefit from that other than
a distribution of about 20% of
the state. Now there is a
mirroring compensating tax rate
for every local government. And
I don't have the exact number in
front of me, but locals are
getting something like $50
million a year as a result of
that change.
So the compensating um rates are
equal for to the GRT rates for
local governments. It's a
companion to the GRT, as I
mentioned, um, different from
the GRT which is imposed on the
seller, the compensating tax is
imposed on the buyer.
and it's imposed on the value of
property. Um, this is for things
that are manufactured in the
state, um, acquired outside of
New Mexico, but that would have
been subject to the state GRT
had they been acquired in New
Mexico.
um, and
something that becomes taxable.
subsequent because of subsequent
use of the property. It's, I'll
just say that you won't hear a
lot about the compensating tax,
and it's not a major revenue
source, but it's intended to
capture some things that
otherwise just are evading
taxation by the GRT. And I don't
mean to say evading as in
criminal evasion, just there's a
loophole there and the the use
tax in all states, um, captures
that.
All right. I'll go on next to um
some of the excise taxes. These
are smaller, uh, kind of sales
taxes that are on specific
products, not general, like the
GRT and the Compacts are. So,
um, in the revenue estimates,
for example, if you look at the
table, you'll see the GRT, the
comp, and then about 10 or so
different excise taxes on
specific products. A lot of them
are what you would call
syntaxes, maybe tobacco, liquor,
cannabis, all those types of
things fall in here, but also
insurance premium tax and uh
areas where just for one reason
or another, uh, the legislature
has put in state law that we're
going to tax this type of thing
differently than under the GRT.
So, um, tobacco, there are,
there are two different things.
There's the cigarette tax on
cigarettes, and then there's the
tobacco products tax on other
forms of tobacco like snuff,
cigars, e-cigarettes is the most
recent thing that was added to
that. So the cigarette tax rate
has been set for the past
several years at $2 per pack.
Um, and we're right in the
middle. We're the 19th highest
in the nation, and the states
range from a cigarette tax of 17
cents per pack in Missouri, all
the way up to $5.35 per pack in
New York.
Um, and, um, of course, there's
all kinds of policy
considerations on these types of
taxes, whether it be tobacco or
liquor or or cannabis, um, there
are studies that indicate the
higher the tax that it might
bring down consumption, but as
an addictive product, we also
know that consumption might be
pretty elastic elastic and um
maybe
resistant to
quitting
So, um, we also have exemptions.
I won't go through those in, in
great detail, but we have um
some exemptions, uh, making sure
that we're not um taxing a US
agency, um, to deal with tribal
taxation, um, sales prohibited
by the Constitution.
Um, all right, and where does
this revenue go?
Almost 80% of it goes to the
general fund and as you'll see
it in the revenue estimate
table. And then there are
earmarks of it by percentage to
UNM and NMFA, and a lot of it
has to do with special projects
and special uses related to
health. uh UNM Hospital, I
think, has a lot of that.
Um, so that's the cigarette tax.
And then there's all the other
tobacco products, um, that fall
under the tobacco products tax,
um, we are taxing tobacco
products at 25% of the product
value, but there's a special cap
of 50 cents per cigar, which is
interesting because the value of
a cigar can obviously vary, uh,
very significantly, um, and so
the attacks, the effective tax
rate on cigars is higher on low
price cigars, 50 cents of a
dollar versus 50 cents of 1
0 $0.
It just, it's 50 cents.
Uh, for vaping products, we put
in place a vaping, uh, uh, we
added e-cigarettes to this tax,
I think in 2019 and House Bill
6. so we do tax them, but I will
say we tax them at a very low
rate. We're taxing vaping at
12.5% of wholesale for
e-liquids, 50 cents per closed
system cartridge. I think that's
what they call a jewel pod or
something like that. I, I don't
know my vaping products, but
again, there's a 50 cents cap
for closed system cartridges,
12.5% of wholesale. So we are
quite a bit lower than most
states, um, states, some tax
wholesale, some tax the retail
value and uh and ours is pretty
low, but we are including it in
the base.
Uh.
and that is distributed also to
the general fund.
Right. Next, on slide 9, we'll
talk about the liquor excise
tax, which I know has been a a
great topic of debate in recent
sessions here, quite familiar
with this, I think. Um, we are
imposing the liquor tax at the
wholesale distributor level, not
at the retail level.
um from an administration
standpoint, that means there are
a lot fewer taxpayers to collect
from, a lot fewer uh folks that
need to file a monthly return,
get audited, get collected upon,
and for us to administer,
whereas uh a state that did so
at the retail level is
potentially tacking onto like a
restaurant receipt or a grocery
receipt, the GRT and another
tax, and maybe a local option
tax, so it's, it's a little bit,
we've consolidated the
administration of this tax by
doing it at the
wholesale level
The rates are right in the
middle where the 24th highest of
the states, which is a little
bit of a subjective statistic
because we have different rates
and different products, but in
total, we think we're right
about in the middle based on
some data from the Tax
Foundation. Um, the rates are
all given there. I, I won't read
them all aloud, but I will say
that those rates haven't been
adjusted for inflation since
1994.
And because these rates are $1
per volume or, you know,
whatever cents per volume.
It it it the tax is not keeping
pace with inflation because it's
not based on the product value.
If it were 5 cents of value,
then that would uh naturally
keep pace with inflation, but
because these are, you know,
$1.60 per liter or 41 cents per
gallon. They have not kept pace
with inflation since 1994, and
over that time, just generally,
inflation has risen about 117%.
So the value of the tax, the
amount of revenue, um, the
effective rate has gone down by
more than 50%.
Um, there are some exemptions
and deductions that you'll
probably never hear about for
things like sales to the armed
forces and interstate sales.
The distributions are a little
bit complicated, about 50%
currently goes to the general
fund, which was 24 million in FY
24, and then we've got 45% to
the DW local DWI grant fund,
which is administered by DFA
and, and granted out to
counties, 5% to drug courts and
249,000 per year to Farmington.
I also will mention that there's
a local liquor excise, uh, and I
believe just Gallop.
Um, and there's a special, um,
legislative authorization for
them to impose that.
All right. Next on slide 10, uh,
is the insurance premium tax.
Uh, that is a, uh, just what it
sounds like. It's a tax on
insurance premiums, which are
subject to this tax in lieu of
the GRT.
Uh, so it's 3.003%. Um, the
distributions are different
depending on which type of line
of insurance it is. So the
general fund though received 370
million from insurance tax in,
in uh FY 24.
Um, that's after 10% was
earmarked to the law enforcement
Protection Fund on life
insurance, health, general
casualty, title insurance.
Um, we're also distributing 100%
from property and vehicle
insurance to the fire protection
fund.
and then uh starting uh last
July for uh sorry this July 1st,
2025. We're sending 5% of
premium from health insurance to
a new emergency medical services
fund.
OK, so then on top of the 3%
premium tax
there is a surtax that is only
on health insurance.
Um, in 2022, there was
legislation that increased the
surtax from 1% to 3.75%, and the
revenue that was generated from
that increase was distributed
between a new healthcare
affordability fund and the
general fund. And there have
been some changes in the
distribution over the years,
but, uh, right now it's just
steady at 55% to that Healthcare
Affordability Fund, 45% to the
general fund. Um, I looked at
this, uh, last week, just for,
for different reasons. The
general fund is getting, I
think, about $150 million per
year from the surtax.
whereas the rest of it is, uh,
is being used for healthcare
affordability. Uh, crossed my
mind that with all the uh work
that you need to do and that
with the governor's office and
his policymakers around
healthcare.
that might be an earmark to look
at.
All right. Next is the gaming
excise tax on slide 11. Um, this
is a tax just on the 5 Raino,
uh, and their gaming operations,
not on tribal gaming, there's a
separate, they're tribal gaming
compacts that are not attacks.
They do come to the general
fund, but they're not
administered by us, but there
are 5 racetrack casinos
statewide, um, they pay 10% of
their receipts from the sale or
lease or other transfer of
gaming devices. More
importantly, 10
% of the net take for nonprofit
operators. I think that would be
like Elks clubs and
I don't, you know, things like
that, but then the five big
operators pay 24.8% of their net
take, um, and that's the main
source of the, the gaming excise
tax. And again, this is paid in
lieu of the GRT or any other
tax. So, uh, whereas most things
are subject to a 5 to 10% GRT,
uh, these gaming net takes are
subject to almost 25%.
Um, gaming operators are
administered uh and regulated by
the Racing Commission, and
there's some uh requirements of
what they put into gaming
purses, and the gaming text
distributed almost 2 $68 million
to the general fund in FY 24.
OK. Next, um, on slide 12, we'll
talk about our newest excise
tax, that's the cannabis excise
tax, um, this was put in place
in what year did we have that
special session? 2021, I think,
where we, we passed this
legislation and then the uh the
program was implemented and
sales for recreational cannabis,
adult use went live on April
1st, 2022, for the first about 3
years that the tax was in place
and the program was in place,
the rate was 12
% We've now just entered the
phase where the tax rate is
phasing up by 1% per year. So
this fiscal year, it's 13% next
viscal year it'll be 14%. When
you're, uh 1% per year increase
until it reaches the top rate of
18% in FY 30.
Um, this is, uh, a different
than the liquor tax, which is
imposed at the wholesale level,
the cannabis tax is imposed at
retail. So retailers are
collecting this uh from
customers when on on each
receipt, um, it applies to adult
use, recreational cannabis, not
to medical cannabis, that is,
uh, is not paying the cannabis
tax, it's also deductible from
GRT, so there should be no tax
on the medical cannabis sales.
and 2/3 of this revenue is
distributed to the general fund
and 1/3 to the local government
where it's sourced.
Sourcing rules are the same as I
mentioned earlier about the GRT.
So it's if the cannabis sale is
happening at a shop, it's to
that locality, if it's being
delivered, which I doubt, but
if, if anyone is delivering
cannabis, it would be at the
site of the delivery.
Uh, the general fund is, is
earning about $33 million per
year off cannabis.
which is real money, but I think
sometimes you hear people
talking about, why can't we
solve all of the states
problems now that we're taxing
cannabis. It's, it's not that
kind of revenue source.
OK.
Next, we have the motor vehicle
excise tax. Again, this is a
alternative lower tax than the
GRT that applies to car sales.
It's a 4% tax, we increased that
several years ago from 3%, but
we're still um in right in the
middle of, of uh the states and
lower than some of our
neighbors. Um, the highest rate
amongst the states is 8.25% in
Nevada.
Um, this gets paid to tax and
revs through MVD when vehicles
are titled. So the enforcement
mechanism is you cannot title
your vehicle without paying this
tax when you come into MBD.
There's some exemptions for
manufactured homes, um, certain
vehicles that need modifications
for disability to try to ensure
that those modifications are
more affordable for disabled
folks, and there's some
exemptions for veterans, and
about 60% is distributed to the
general fund, that totaled 167
million FRA 24, and then the
rest goes to the state road Fund
and the Transportation Project
Fund, which is for local
transportation grants. OK. If
you're still with me.
I'll go into the two income
taxes before turning it over to
Izzy.
Personal income tax is another
uh huge major source of revenue
behind the GRT. We took in 2.2
billion of personal income tax
in FY 24.
We imposed the tax on both
residents as well as
non-residents who have income
that's apportioned to New
Mexico. Revenue that was derived
in New Mexico. So that might for
a non-resident, they might have
had wages here part of the year,
but they're not a resident or
they might have passive income
like royalties or something like
that.
Um, individuals pay the pit, but
also some businesses pay through
pit rather than sit. Um, that
could be sole proprietorships
and LLCs, for example.
and something that comes up a
lot right now because of all the
federal tax changes that we're
talking about is that New Mexico
conforms to federal tax. So
what, what that means that a
very big picture is that
each of us, each year, we
complete our federal return and
we get to our federal adjusted
gross income.
Your federal AGI is the starting
point for your state return. So
every, every calculation you did
above the line to get to your
federal AGI is included in New
Mexico's return, and we, we do
or do not tax that income based
on whether the feds do.
We make them below the line
adjustments to New Mexico income
um after a federal AGI, but
really big picture, that's what
we mean when we say we conform
to federal.
So we, we take our federal AGI
and then our New Mexico pit
returned, we might add some
things that the feds don't tax
that we do, but then we'll
subtract some things that we
allow to be deducted or
exemption or exempted, and maybe
most importantly, we then allow
the subtraction of tax through
credits that are upstate, um.
we have a graduated, I'm, I'm on
slide 15 now. We have a
graduated marginal personal
income tax rate. So what that
means is that your first dollar
of income is taxed at a 1.5% low
rate. And then as your income
rises and goes through these
brackets, uh, it the, the higher
income is taxed all the way up
through the brackets to to the
top rate of potentially 5.9%. So
it graduated rate, uh,
basically.
adds progressivity to the tax
code by taxing lower income, uh,
individuals at a lower rate and
higher income individuals.
at, at the higher marginal rate
There are 7 states that don't
have any income tax. Um, 13
states have a flat tax that is
just every dollar of income
that's taxable is, is the same
rate. And then there are 31
states like us that have a
graduated rate.
and our top rate of 5.9% is kind
of right in the middle. Um, the
rates would go from 0 for those
seven states that don't have an
income tax all the way up to
13.3% top rate in California.
And as I mentioned before, we
have a lot of credits, rebates
and deductions that reduce um
individuals' tax. Um, some of
the things that get debated
probably most hotly in
legislative committees would be
some of the aspects of credits
or deductions like should a
credit be refundable. That means
it can really take the amount of
tax that an individual pays into
the negative. Should it, or if
not refundable, should we allow
a taxpayer to carry forward
extra credit for a number of
years, or should we allow them
to transfer
the credit to someone who does
have liability if they don't, so
those are all design aspects of
credits that, that we can talk
about anytime.
Um, and just like the feds,
returns are typically due April
15th, but like the feds, we can
allow an extension to October
15th.
um, and, and basically the way
it works is, is most of us if
we're, if we're earning wages,
and our employer.
he's withholding every paycheck
they take out withholding as a
prepayment of what we expect to
be owned by us on.
April 15th, and really the
withholding is intended to make
sure that the amount you owe or
get back at April 15th is is
relatively small. So then, uh,
when you file your return April
15th, you do what's called your
final settlement. If you
overpaid withholding or
underpaid it a little bit, we
all know that, you know, we, we
owe our taxes or we, or we get a
refund. So big picture on Pitt.
Um,
next steps the corporate income
tax. I'll say, um, this is a
a less, uh, large revenue
sourced to the general fund.
It's also very dynamic and quite
volatile. Um, gross corporate
income tax revenue was $535
million in FY 24, and it can
really fluctuate a lot.
Um
in the revenue estimates, if you
look at that table, you'll see
gross sit is, is listed
separately and then we net out
of it credits that are paid
against it. That's primarily the
film tax credit to get to net
corporate income tax, uh, net of
credits. Um
uh, it's a 5.9% flat tax rate
now. It didn't used to be. We
used to have a, a marginal rate
structure which didn't really
make any sense for corporations.
So, uh, for this 2025 tax year,
now we have a flat 5.9% rate.
Again, we're right in the middle
of the pack. We're 28th highest
amongst the states, 44 states
have a corporate income tax, and
they range from 2.25% all the
way up to 11.5%.
Um, something else you'll see is
that passed through entity tax.
This is a relatively new thing
that states have been grappling
with past through entity taxes
reported in the sit line, and
that was 190 million in FOI 24.
This is not just only paid by
corporations, uh, but also
partnerships, LLCs, sometimes
nonprofits, trusts, it's called
the corporate Income and
franchise Tax Act, actually.
Um, and so the issue of nexus
determines who owes corporate
income tax in New Mexico and the
apportionment of income to New
Mexico versus all other
jurisdictions, not just states,
but nations, is a big area of
debate and sometimes litigation,
but to be subject to New Mexico
tax or to have nexus in New
Mexico, um.
there needs to be employed or
engaged in the transaction of
business in, into or from New
Mexico. You're doing business in
New Mexico. You have to derive
any income from property or
employment in New Mexico.
and you must have more than a
slightest physical pre presence
in New Mexico, and that can be
established by having agents
here.
On slide 17, um, New Mexico
Taxable Income again is as
defined with federal income tax
purposes. So again we conform in
our corporate income tax, but
then we have some additions and
subtractions from the federal.
Uh, we, for example, add
interest on non-New Mexico, uh,
state and local bonds. You, you,
you only get tax exempt bonds
from New Mexico, exempt from tax
in New Mexico. And then there's
um these net operating losses,
uh, with carry-backs and
carry-fors that can become very
complicated, and then we're
subtracting certain bond income,
uh, state net operating losses,
certain dividends in certain
state tax credits.
Um, it's one of our more
complicated to administer
programs, and it's one of our
more volatile revenue streams.
I think I can go, probably I can
leave the detail on some of the
next slides, um, but, you know,
we've, we've given a lot of
detail on different reporting
methods that corporations can
elect, um, on slide 18 between,
between worldwide and water's
edge. This has to do with
apportionment and, you know, if
you're operating internationally
and in another states.
Um, and on slide 19, we talked
more about the details on
allocation of income between
states and nations for
apportionment purposes, but I
will say we follow what's called
eudipta. That's the uniformed
division of Income for Tax
Purposes Act. It's there in
Chapter 7. It's, it's a, a
model, uh compact that uh that
we've entered in our statute as,
as with most other states. And
so,
uh, one area that we really look
to and get a lot of support on
this because it's so multi-state
is the multi-state tax
commission. They are a national
organization. We've joined their
compact many years ago and um
the MTC does a lot of work to
help ensure that states are
auditing these things, um.
consistently and kind of
combining our efforts to make
sure that
things are fair and equitable
across states.
I'll turn it over there to Izzy.
Good
My name is Ismael Torres. Uh,
you might know him, know me as
Izzy as the secretary just
mentioned. And uh I know, no,
no, no, no worries at all. And
um
I know we're a little bit
running behind on time, so I'm
gonna breeze through these
slides quite quickly. They're
there for you as a resource, but
of course, I'm happy to answer
questions after the presentation
or, or offline as well. So I'm
picking up on slide 20 oil and
natural gas taxes, and we'll go
more into this in the next
presentation, but these revenues
the excise taxes, which are
described here, but also related
revenues, uh, which are royalty
revenues
combined make up about 22% of
the general fund. So that's a
significant amount, um, if we,
if we combined all of the
collections between the major
these major oil and natural gas
taxes and the royalties. That's
about $4.7 billion right there
alone. Um, we, uh, one of our
economists, Jennifer, puts
together a really
uh um complicated but
comprehensive chart tracking oil
and gas revenues. Um, and where
they go and, and what she found
was an FY 24 that
it was about $14 billion come
from oil and gas through either
royalties or um taxes, and
about, so that's not um reco or,
you know, realized here in New
Mexico. Another billion goes to
local governments, more or less.
And so that leaves about 10
billion benefiting the state.
And it's really important to
distinguish between oil and
natural gas taxes, which apply
to all
oil and natural gas products
that are severed and sold from
New Mexico.
That that applies regardless of
land ownership, and then
royalties, which are our share,
New Mexicans.
as, um, you know, as some of
these resources are owned on
public lands, either state or
federal lands. They belong to
New Mexicans. And so when that
oil and natural gas is, is
produced, New Mexicans get a
share of that um profit in some
sense. And so that's the
distinction and and that's why
royalties aren't included in
this presentation, but they'll
come in handy in the next
presentation related to revenue.
So this is just taxes. You can
see here just taxes, 8.27% on
oil, 8.97% on natural gas. Um,
and then if you actually
turn the page, there's a a
greater breakdown of which tax
and how much the rate is. Um, I
want to point out the adboorum
and the equipment adorum taxes
down at the bottom of these two
tables, and those are really to
the benefit of local
governments, they're in lieu of
a property tax, um, for the
value of that product.
Um, really, the notable one
here, the two notable ones here
are the emergency school tax.
This provides a lot of money to
the general fund. It also goes
to the Early Childhood Trust
Fund, and I think now the
Behavioral Health Trust Fund,
um, the oil and gas severance
tax is what the state uses for
capital outlay. So that uh
um, you know, 3.75% goes to uh
uh is pledged against the debt
that we might take out or
capital outlay purposes, and,
and again, we'll get into that
in the next presentation as
well. I do want to point out
that there are price traders, as
you noticed on the table, if
prices drop below a certain
point, um, which they rarely do
below 18 anymore, but they did
during the pandemic for a brief
period. Um, we do have a
decreased
oil and natural gas severance
rates for those products when
when the price decreases. Um,
moving on to the next slide,
some non-general fund revenues
here, the State Road Fund, of
course, is primarily used for
roads, and that is that consists
of motor vehicle excise taxes,
gas taxes, weight and distance
taxes, which we're not going to
get into here. Um, severance tax
bonding fund, I just mentioned
that's used for capital outlay.
Um, it's also goes for public
schools capital outlay, that's
the same oil and gas severance
tax. The, the permanent funds
will definitely get into in the
next presentation. These are not
attacks, of course, but they are
a revenue to the state and
actually act as a tax, um,
savings in some ways for for
taxpayers and, and I'll get into
that more in the next
presentation. But local and
tribal, um, secretary did a good
job covering that. Unemployment
insurance trust fund, um, if
you'll turn to the next slide,
I'll, I'll speak a little bit to
that.
Um, we, we had a lot of exposure
to this tax and this fund during
the pandemic because the trust
fund was used heavily, of
course, as, as uh the
unemployment rate rose pretty
dramatically. And I would say in
my research at that time, New
Mexico has one of the best, uh,
structures for the unemployment
insurance tax. We have a
formula-based
tax rate. So it's really hard to
pin down exactly, you know,
what, what the rate is, but in
general, it's maybe 0.3% to 5%,
I would say, depending on the
industry, and it depends on your
number of employees, if you've
had recent layoffs, um, the, the
balance of the fund is extremely
important. So what, what will
happen is if the fund's balance
is exhausted, the rate goes up
on businesses and employees, but
it comes on in a lag. So
economists would give this type
of tax a gold star because it
' s what's called
countercyclical. In times where
where when times are bad
economically and a lot of people
are on unemployment, a lot of
money goes out to support those
folks, and the tax rate stays
low. But when, when, when times
are good, when we have an
economic recovery, the tax goes
back up to replenish the fund
for the next time that um
uh, you know, a recession occurs
and, and the federal government
gives us a credit against our,
our tax imposed because of this
good management. So this is
really a a gold star for me on
on earth.
tax structure in New Mexico.
Moving on to the next slide,
local and tribal taxes, I think
it's worth spending a little bit
more time on this just because
I, I find this is a frequently
confused, um, um tax. We have
the state portion.
4.875%.
and then
that's if you're not within the
state, sometimes we have sales
that are out of state and those
just get the state rate. If
you're in a county, then the
county rate applies stacks on
top of that.
And then if you're in immuni,
the muni rate stacks on top of
that.
One final complication in this
system is if you're in a moony,
muni will also give you a slice
of the state rate as well. We'll
give you a piece. We'll give the
municipality on that economic
activity, a slice of our state
tax rate, about 25%.
of the state's rate goes back to
muni's in those areas.
Um, uh, another, I think, really
important piece that uh is not
lost on me when I travel or or
meet other taxing folks in other
states. A lot of local
governments have to administer
their own local taxes. And in
New Mexico, the tax department
provides a great service to
locals by running that for them.
So, you know, like, you could
imagine that would be a a big
administrative burden for a
local government to try to run a
gross receipts tax. And so the
state does it on behalf of local
governments. And now, um,
actually, there used to be a 3%
administration fee. That's
phasing out as well. So that
service will be provided to
local governments for free. Um,
and that represents, I think,
$70 million here. We're
estimating and, and I'm sure
that's likely to um the cannabis
excise tax is split 2/3 to the
state, 1/3 to the applicable
local government. Um, as the
secretary mentioned, those rates
are climbing, so the share that
goes to the local government or
the effective rate that goes to
the local government will be
rising as well. Property taxes
um are not covered here but are
certainly at in an area of
growing interest for us.
There are a lot of restrictions
that the state imposes on
property tax, um, imposition,
and what that's done over
decades is really reduce the
amount of property tax that
local governments have collected
and shifted local government
revenues to the grocer seats
tax, which is a much more
volatile revenue stream than the
property tax, and so that's a an
area of interest, I think for
us. It's important to note that
maybe because of that,
New Mexico's property taxes are
frequently listed, if not the
lowest in the country, maybe 2nd
lowest in the country. So, we
can, we can see how um that's
really played out in terms of
competitiveness there.
Tribal taxes, I think uh this is
the only site I have on Tribal.
Um, tribal taxes
the GRT, you know, how I
discussed the state and then the
county and the community, that
doesn't apply in tribal areas.
They get to set their own rate.
and the, the tax department has,
as mentioned here, currently
operates that rate for them.
for 21
different tribal entities. Um,
and the state does get 25% of
that total amount collected. So,
rather than, you know, maybe in
like a muni, the state
collection might be a 45%.
in the in the in the tribal
areas, it's 25% stay share.
OK, moving on to
go ahead. Just to clarify, then
I
won't, I'll get out of your way
again, but on those tribal, uh,
revenue sharing agreements, the
state collects 25% or none,
depending on whether it's class
1 or class 2 receipts. So if it,
if it's a tribal business
selling to tribal members, then
the state remits 100% to the
tribe if it's selling to
non-tribal members, then yes,
clarification.
OK
Um, moving on to maybe the more
theoretical stuff now.
If you turn to slide 26.
you know, we just threw so much
information at you, all these
different types of taxes with
all these different types of
structures and
you know, how, how do you make
sense of it? How, how do we in
the tax world, um, think about
taxes, how do we think about tax
policy? And these principles
come from the New Mexico Tax
Research Institute, if you're
familiar familiar with Richard
Anklem. This is his
organization, but these are
pretty commonly agreed upon
nationwide and, um, LFC has a
set of tax policy principles as
well, adopted by the committee
that looked very similar to
this. And so these are generally
principles or concepts that um
are, are generally accepted. And
so when you're thinking about
how to design attacks or what
changes to make to attacks.
These are the things we think
you should consider adequacy, is
it, are you going to raise
enough money to fund the, the
services that you all deem
essential for government.
Efficiency, are we doing it?
in a very um um
maybe heavy-handed way versus a
more specific way that that can
get at the goals more
efficiently. Equity are the same
taxpayers who earn the same
amount of money and live next
door to each other, getting
taxed the same, or are they
getting taxed differently? You
know, it's a fairness question
there. Simplicity, there's a
significant administrative
burden on taxpayers to comply
with the complicated tax code.
So we always want it to be as
simple as possible, easy to
understand, comprehensive. When
you're thinking about and, and
secretary will get into it
shortly, progressivity
or regressivity, you probably
want to be thinking about it
holistically. You don't want to
necessarily think just at one
piece of the tax code.
code just for this one industry,
you want to think about it, um,
in, in the bigger picture.
and accountability, is it
transparent? Is the public able
to understand it? Um, are we
able to analyze it effectively.
And in the FIRs that you will
receive on your tax bills, these
principles will be there and
there will be some annotation on
whether or not, you know, maybe
it's counter to one or the
other. And I think what I really
want to point out is that these
are often at odds with each
other. So it, it really requires
you all to do a balancing act,
you know, are we going too far
on simplicity and, and maybe
we're sacrificing efficiency or,
you know, vice versa.
And so we'll get into that more
on the next presentation and um
the, you know, the trade-offs
between certain tax policy
decisions. So on the on the next
slide, uh, maybe a little bit of
a
nuanced distinction is the
difference between tax policy at
large, and then tax expenditures
specifically. So we have a tax
base, we, we choose how to tax
certain activity, and then we
make specific exemptions from
that. And that's what the LFC
calls these tax expenditures.
They're money foregone by the
state or sometimes in some
cases, money spent by the state
through the tax code.
And so maybe there's another set
of principles that kind of align
with the first set, but maybe on
more specific to tax
expenditures on this slide here.
Are they vetted? We like to, you
know, the more committee
discussion, especially during
the interim, that can happen,
the, the more likely the policy
is to be um thoughtfully
considered? Is it targeted that
kind of relates to the
efficiency question,
transparent, are we able to
analyze it? Same with
accountability uh applicable to
the accountability provisions,
effective and efficient.
So I'll, I'll move on to the
next slide here.
for um
if, if you weren't put to sleep
yet, this is a little bit of a
math exercise. And I'll, I'll
try to keep it simple, but um I,
I wanna walk us through
why we care about a broad tax
base.
And you might hear that a lot
A broad tax base and a low rate
is preferred to a narrow tax
base with a high rate. And in
this example charted here for
you.
these two different tax systems
generate the same amount of
revenue, $9 billion.
And maybe to make it more
applicable to New Mexico.
We're gonna say the $150 billion
sales tax base, say that's oil
and gas.
So,
we could have a tax system where
we have impose tax on nothing
else except for oil and gas, but
it has to be a pretty high rate
to get the $9 billion right? But
we could do that.
On the other side, we can apply
taxes to other things, to the
rest of the economic activity.
Maybe that's only $75 billion
worth of economic activity. But
all of a sudden, the rate only
needs to be 4% to get the same
amount of money.
Now, of course, imagine a
scenario where
I'm sure you don't, I'm sure you
don't have to, um, it's not that
hard to imagine a scenario where
oil and gas crashes, falls by
5%.
Now in the 6% scenario, you've
just lost
$4.5 billion.
in the broad-based scenario, you
only lost 4% of that half. So
you only lost uh
you know, maybe $3 billion.03
billion dollars. So you, you've
cushioned yourself $1.5 billion
in that scenario, because the
rest of the economic activity is
helping you sustain. So there's
a, a, a direct correlation
between volatility, revenue
stability, and broad-based tax
policy, and it also speaks to
the nature of tax expenditures
because tax expenditures can
have the same effect to narrow
and narrow um a tax base and,
and force the tax rates higher
in order to maintain the same
amount of revenue.
And uh if you flip to the next
slide, this isn't just
theoretical. This is analysis
from the Institute for Taxation
and Economic Policy of the
federal tax code. So this is the
tax imposition by different
industry.
because of
special exemptions that
industries have gotten over the
years to, to exempt them from
certain kinds of taxes. And so
it's kind of a game of whack
mole where somebody will go and
get a special exemption. The
rates may rise on other folks,
it becomes unbearable. They go
and get a special exemption and
so they, you quash the the rates
on that one and then the other
ones rise, and you end up with a
really uneven
tax code really across
industries, which maybe goes
against equity. So another
important consideration when
when thinking about tax
expenditures, especially for
specific niche businesses or
industries, you can create a
really uneven playing field, um,
economically.
OK.
And with that I'll, I'll hand it
back over to the secretary.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
members, um
you're gonna receive a
presentation from us later in
the fall on the tax expenditure
report. So I think I'll save
some of these slides to not
repeat them in a couple months,
just to say, uh, picking up 31
Texan Rev, uh, since 2012 has
been creating a tax expenditure
budget or tax expenditure
report, and we, uh, were doing
so under executive order for
many years. Now we're doing so
under statutory obligation that
we actually push to get in place
uh in one of our tax code
cleanup bills, and
that was something that was
first championed by Senator
Tollman.
Um, and so basically what it is,
is
this massive
encyclopedia of the tax code
that tries to quantify for you
and for for the public, how much
revenue we're foregoing as a
result of all the different
carveouts from the tax code.
Every credit deduction,
exemption, everything like that.
Uh, we've got some commentary on
why we think it exists, maybe
whether we think it's effective
and most importantly, how much
it's costing and foregone
revenue for the state and for
locals.
Um, so I'll skip slide 32. It's,
I'll, I'll do that uh in the
fall when we come back to
present that report, um, but on
slide 33, I want to show you
just sort of the data on how
those tax expenditures are
totaling, and they really, there
really has been a lot of change
in that over the years. Um, we
split the types of tax
expenditures into five
categories, those that are
targeted towards healthcare,
economic development, the
environment, highly specialized
industry and citizen benefits.
Think of
citizen benefits as sort of the
targeted lower income, uh,
refundable credits that we're
familiar with.
And you can see um how the
expenditures have grown in
recent years, but um some of
that growth in FO 22 and 23 and
a little bit in other years was
non-recurring. Those that
represents the rebate payments
that we made in response to the
uh pandemic and the state
surplus. Um, but really, even
without the rebates, there's
been pretty considerable growth.
Um, on slide.
34. Um, you can see a tally of
the top 10 tax expenditures, uh,
the largest now being the one
for prescription drugs, oxygen
and medical cannabis. As of
2024, we also marked this one as
red in terms of how sure we were
about the estimate. That one was
not required by taxpayers to be
separately reported, but we
fixed that in the last session's
tax code cleanup bill, so
starting July 1st of 2025. Now
when you claim that deduction,
you do have to
separately report it. So for FY
26 going forward we'll have much
better data.
on that very large tax
expenditure. And then beyond
that one, the food deduction,
food for home consumption is
very large at 466 million, um,
the uh
credit, or sorry, the deduction
for hospital receipts uh is
about 260 million, and I'm down.
I won't, I won't read them all,
but those are the largest.
And then just, um, we, we also
attempt to estimate how much of
the tax expenditure revenue is
foregone state revenue versus
local revenue, and you can see,
um, there was actually a shift
in that uh lately, historically
about 12% of foregone revenue
was local, about 88% of, of
these incentives were paid by
the state, um, the reason that
that increased the local share
increased to 19% is because the
state reduced its GRT.
So when we cut the GRT by 0.25%.
all of the GRT deductions are
foregoing a little bit less
revenue and that shifted.
the the balance there, and maybe
it's mine. OK. Uh, give a, a
real brief recap on
on the uh changes that we just
made to the tax code from 2025.
Um, as, as you know, we didn't
have a tax bill, but there was
still a lot of activity uh that
changed the tax code and changed
tax policy. Um, House Bill 47,
that was happy to work on Cha
Lite with codified the two
constitutional amendments that
changed our property tax
exemptions for veterans, and
then, of course, the department
had um House Bill 218, which was
our tax code cleanup bill. You
might remember it being over 400
pages, um.
it repealed 81 sections. It, it
did a lot of different things to
standardize our credits and
everything, but um.
I won't go through all those in
detail today, but some of the
other highlights, uh, we had
industry come forward um through
the legislature and amend the
some definitions in the high
wage jobs tax credit to be more
um easily for taxpayers to claim
and, and it, it really was, was
fine with the department as
well. Um, we allowed, uh,
municipalities impacted by
floods to impose GRT and, and
issue flood recovery bonds, and
Roswell is in the process of
doing that. Uh, we also created
the state
Fairgrounds District, which is
operational and having monthly
meetings now, uh, and receiving
75% of GRT and gaming excise tax
in the district, and then we
increased um a few state fees
and funds through Senate Bill
535. Those are implemented.
All right, picking up on 39,
these are just general um tax
policy principles that I'm sure
you all are familiar with. Um,
you know, it's important to
reiterate that these are not in
the political sense, but rather
in the technical mathematical
sense of a progressive tax
versus a regressive tax versus a
proportional tax.
progressive being rates rise as
income income.
the tax burden rises as incomes
rise, regressive is the tax
burden falls as incomes rise and
proportional as it stays the
same. And so there is a good
analysis on slide 40 that thinks
holistically property GRT income
combined, how do New Mexicans
tax.
structure look, how, what does
it look like? And you can see
that it's progressive through
maybe the first half, and then
it gets regressive in the second
half. That's um demonstrated in
the light blue bars here, but it
is a significant change from
only
maybe 7 years ago in the dark
blue lines where it was a
completely regressive system.
And so if you turn to the next
slide, you can zero in on where
the contributions of that
regressivity or progressivity
come into play. And GRT is a
very regressive tax, and so you
can see um that in the top left,
the property tax is also
somewhat regressive, but the
personal income tax
intentionally makes up for that
regressivity with payments to
lower income folks, and then um
is slightly
progressive.
uh from the middle on up
This one might be yours. Thank
you. All right. Finishing up. I
know you're short on time. Um,
slide 42 just highlights, um, a
lot of the changes that we've
made together in the last 6
years, uh, the, the things that,
that Izzy just mentioned uh
really added a lot of
progressivity to the tax code in
general, specifically mostly
through the personal income tax.
Uh, we were so happy to see in
the last ITEP report. They,
they, every 3 or so years they
do a who pays ranking of
progressivity amongst the
states, and we jumped 18 spots
from 27th to 8th most
progressive tax system amongst
the states. We're really proud
of that. And here are some of
the reasons why we reformed our
pit rates a couple times. We cut
the GRT, the most regressive
large tax we have. We twice
enhanced the working families
tax credit. We expanded Lichter,
we created a child tax credit, a
dependent deduction to prevent
that federal tax increase on our
families. We exempted most of
Social Security and $30,000 on
military pensions.
Real quick, those are a lot of
the things we've done to move
the needle. And then we can just
wrap up quickly here. Um
you know, these are ITEP if
you're, if you're considering if
you feel like the progressivity
still isn't far enough, or, or
you want to make further
changes. Here's a quick guide on
things that, um, you know, are
regressive in the New Mexico tax
code versus progressive in the
New Mexico tax code. And, and
that may be a helpful guide in,
in, uh, future policy distance
now.
or uh to move on either if that
if that's
Well, we do have at least 2
folks. Thank you so much. 3
folks so far for
Can I hear 5? Do I have a 6 over
here?
Um, so we're gonna go ahead and
do that, and I, and um in the
future we are gonna allot a
little bit more time for
questions um on our
presentations. Uh, so we do have
a little bit of cushion in the
lunch period. So I've got uh
Representative Lindstrom, then
Representative Murphy, then I've
got Senator Sheer.
um, and please have your hands
up again. I know we had Senator
Munoz.
OK. Um, Lindstrom, I'm gonna go
ahead and let you go first if
you don't mind. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and good morning
everyone. I did have a couple of
questions for the, the panel,
good presentation today. uh,
just a quick one, the, the first
was on your destination.
sourcing. Did we ever resolve
that issue with Carlsbad. I know
a former Senator Gay Kernan
brought that bill up.
every year that she was serving.
Did we ever get that
straightened out?
Madam Chair, I think the short
and and Representative
Lindstrom, we have not changed
the law since the way that
destinations sourcing originally
went into effect.
So the impact on Carlsbad and
Artisia is remains unchanged. I,
I would say we, you know, in
addressing that, um, it is real
money to those municipalities,
but I would encourage us to look
at it in the context of other
things too, like the new
compensating tax for locals, um,
the internet sales, a lot of
other moving pieces, um, but
it's true that destination
sourcing has reduced revenue to
those. OK, um, and Madam Chair
also had a question on page 15
when
we're looking at personal income
tax, particularly the credits.
We're looking at credits,
refundable, those that are
carried forward and
transferable. I noticed when you
do your, your report, uh.
on how much all these uh
the these tax programs costs the
state of New Mexico of the
three, which one is most
expensive to the general fund.
When we're looking at.
refund, carried forward or
transferable, because I'm not
sure what is an example of
carried forward.
Madam Chair and Representative
Lindstrom.
I don't know that I would say
that the, the credits each cost
more or less just depending on
how the like the size of the
credit. So for example, uh the
film credit is a large credit,
high wage jobs, tax credit, um,
but they
and then in the pit, working
families and uh
child tax credit. Those are all
large credits, um.
but they don't they're not
necessarily large because of
they're refundable or
transferable, but um
I think what's probably
important when you're analyzing
which one they should be.
A refundable credit, you know,
in my mind, really allows a
lower income taxpayer to take
advantage of the intended
relief, uh, by maybe having
little to no income tax
liability and yet being able to
enjoy the full benefit of a
credit. Carry forward might be
something more um appropriate in
like a business setting where
you know, you're um trying to
incentivize a certain business
activity to occur, but you don't
want the state coffers to go
negative. So that corporation
has to make a commitment to New
Mexico that eventually they have
to have New Mexico income tax
liability to enjoy the credit.
Um, transferability is
somewhere in the middle
I, if, if I, as a corporation,
maybe I earn a credit, but I'm
not gonna have the liability for
a while just because where I am
in my, my business structure. I
can transfer it to someone else
who does have tax.
The reason I'm asking, Madam
Chair is because on page 31,
when we're doing the tax
expenditure report, all the
credits are kind of lumped
together.
So when you provide the among
the three that you've, you've,
uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, not, not in an
aggregate kind of data away. We,
I think in each description of
each.
uh tax expenditure, we would
note whether it's refundable or
carried forward or not, but I
don't think we are.
tallying them up in that way
that you're looking at. We can
look at that and see if it's
possible.
I would, I would appreciate
that, Madam Chair, and then uh
last question that I had, I'm
trying to.
you know, on top of all of this
is, um, I really, really, I like
your chart on page 43. Improving
tax progressivity in New Mexico.
I like how you have progressive
and regressive listed here. It
gives people some sense of what
that means because we see a lot
of.
uh proposals that come forward
that
tend to hit just one thing
want to raise taxes on alcohol.
And I mean that, that has come
up for several years in a row.
And when we talked about which
one of these categories it fits
in
I think it's a, I think it's a
regressive tax.
Um, don't know what our experts
on the panel think, but that's
what I've always seen is when
you and a target something like
cigarettes as an example or
alcohol or whatever, um, it gets
back to.
uh singling out and um
I think it's regressive
And if, and if the macropoly
fair and equitable and follow
all those other standards that
you all have laid out.
That doesn't make sense to me
though
unless we're, you know, gonna
try to do something different,
which is, which is fine. I, I
appreciate it and Madam Chair,
you're right, the hearing that
you're gonna have later this
afternoon is great, and I think
a lot of it ties in to what
they're talking about when they
talk about cleanup language in
these pieces of legislation as
it ties to the federal programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and I had
also destination sourcing
because sitting in the Senate
tax, business, and
Transportation Committee with
former Senator Jay Kerman, and
that
was something that she brought
up uh on a regular basis. So I
appreciate your, your question.
I have Representative Murphy,
then followed by Senator Sher,
Senator Munoz, Representative
Duncan. There was somebody else
that I'm missing, I think. Um,
if not, uh, Representative
Murphy you're next.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much, uh, Izzy, Secretary, um.
first, uh, question, um, sort of
relates to your slide 4. And I
note that some $3.1 billion is
directly from the oil and gas,
um, industry.
Um,
one of the tools we've also
talked at times about the cyclic
nature of that.
And one of the tools that, that
the industry uses to get through
those low periods is of course
savings, and we have that.
um sort of similar in, in our
permanent funds or our protected
funds. One of the other tools
that is used is hedging.
and
that 3.1 billion actually um
represents some quantity if you
divide it by an average price of
oil and gas. So in, in, in
essence,
the state is receiving a
financial benefit, but if you
convert it back to, to the
commodity equates to some number
of barrels.
Now, the state doesn't have the
opportunity to hedge.
like private industry, and I'm
wondering why not, because it
would actually take a lot of
those ups and downs out and
eliminate
this committees and this part,
uh, heartburn at times.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Murphy, I, I'd
like to take a first stab at
that, but I also would love to
hear from Mr. Torres.
I would say that effectively the
state actually has hedged
through its own statutory
distributions. We have probably
something better than the
industry can offer us because
we've, uh, already set up
distributions where we're
putting windfall revenue into
endowment funds, uh, for future,
like we've built this massive
early childhood trust fund to
sustain that programming for the
future and and others.
The permanent funds I read in
the news just reached, I think
$64 billion. That's our hedge,
and 35% reserves are our hedge.
We get approached um by industry
about every year to see if we're
interested in doing hedging, and
we look into it. It's very
costly, um, and, and basically
what we would be agreeing to do
if we entered those head,
there's different ways to
structure them, but we would pay
something to have a floor
revenue, and we would give up
our windfalls.
And right now we've, we've done
that internally, effectively, I
would say.
But you'd also met a chair in
in, and panel, uh, but you'd
also, um, let's say we go from 3
billion
um next year to one day.
Now if you hedge a portion of
that
it might, that hedge might
protect you to the tune of, of
two, right? So therefore, um,
while you're taking a percentage
of it and putting it, and I
understand in the savings
accounts for lack of better,
better term. You're still
missing the opportunity to
protect either up or down that
amount of money projected
forward, correct?
Potentially, Mr. Chair, when
we've looked at those before,
you, you pay a considerable
amount to prevent
the loss that you're you're
talking about hedging against,
but you also give up your
windfall when things come in
better and if we had hedged in
2015
we would have potentially given
up tens of billions of dollars,
um, and it just, I think more
effectively, we've protected
ourselves statutorily.
within and uh maybe we can talk
about this more on offline
because I, I, I see it a little
bit differently. I'm gonna jump
to uh
slide, I believe it's slide 10.
um insurance premiums, and one
of the things that, that
it occurs to me and perhaps I'm
wrong on this, is, is that
health insurance
premium really applies to
privately
uh provided health insurance,
right? Uh, a company provides
its employees health insurance
or whatever. And I just wonder
and perhaps from a policy
standpoint, you can't answer
this, but I just sort of query
as to why are we, why are we
punishing businesses
that want to provide healthcare,
but through a tax.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
actually, the largest payer of
this is Medicaid. OK. So really,
the, the primary purpose of the
increase to begin with was to
export the tax, especially
because of the match from the
federal government. It's mostly
paid by the federal government.
OK, I'd made the assumption that
Medicaid and Medicare would
probably exit, but they're not.
Only Medicare is exempt. OK,
great. Thank you.
And then let's see here.
um, slide 12
um, roughly $33 million in
Canada's excise tax, and I go
back to a statement that I
believe, um, came, came from you
guys, and that is, is that
um
as a source of revenue
um, we cannot really expect that
to be a huge source of revenue
in the future. It's probably, I
don't wanna say it's capped, but
it's, it's, it's in some bound
range, correct? Is that a fair
assessment?
Uh, Madam Chair, I, I think
that's right, that, you know,
we, we've likely hit our
maximum demand or very close to
it, you know, we might have
inflation growth, but not likely
much more demand growth. OK. So
if someone's to say that look,
we can replace the $3.1 billion
of oil and gas revenue with
cannabis sales, which are 100
times less than oil and gas.
and that wouldn't be a, a, a
very realistic statement, would
it?
right? I, I see head shaking,
thank you. All right, um, let's
see here. Personal income tax,
um, on a slide, uh
15
And I just want to take issue a
little bit and, and, and, and
you may correct me on the 3rd
bullet point that says 5.9% tax
rate is moderate, ranges from 0
to 13.3.
But it's only moderate because,
because we have a couple of
examples of, of very high tax
rates being California and New
York, right? They're in the mid
percentages, right? The 1513,
14%.
What are the tax rates of our
competitor states?
What are the tax rates in Texas,
Arizona, Colorado, and Oklahoma.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Murphy, we can
provide you this data, um, when
I get back to the office sales,
I think it's from the Tax
Foundation. I can send you that
map of the states.
OK, would it, would it surprise
you, um, Madam Chair and, and
panel, um,
to note the tax rate in Texas is
0.
Arizona is 2.5.
4.4 in Colorado, and 4.75 in
Oklahoma. So that puts us at
least a solid point to as much
as 2 times are adjoining states,
which in, in my opinion, puts us
at a competitive disadvantage.
Did you comment on that?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Murphy, you're
correct that for example,
Colorado does not have an income
tax, neither does Alaska, many
others, uh, 7 states do not, but
uh Texas has amongst the highest
property tax rates, and ours is
the lowest. So you have to kind
of look at those two things as
well as our sales tax and and
other taxes in comparison.
So what you're saying, Madam
Charon, is um panel is that when
you look at, at taxes on any
individual or any any enterprise
or industry or whatever, you
should globally consider the,
the, the entire tax rate, right?
The effective tax rate. Is that
a fair statement?
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, where possible. It, it's
hard. It's not apples, apples
always, but yeah, sure, OK.
And then, um, the same question
would apply in the corporate tax
rate, and I don't have those
numbers, but perhaps we could at
some point talk about those as
well because I suspect that um
our substantially higher than
the adjoining states. And, and
my point of this is, is that,
you know, as a state, we have to
remain competitive, right? And,
and we want to attract
businesses and um perhaps we can
have a longer discussion on sort
of a blended effective rates,
uh, uh, to our competitors. Um
it won't come as any surprise. I
might want to talk about oil and
gas taxes a little bit.
So Matha chair, um, we have, uh,
I'm looking at slide 20
Um, we have, um, 3rd bullet
point.
Um, and let me see if I'm doing
the math right. Roughly 3.1
billion in oil and gas. 1.1
billion to the general fund, and
then to the tax stabilization
reserve, the rest of the funds
about $2 billion. Is that?
sound about right
So we got one coming in to, to
pay some bills and we got 2
going in the savings account.
Um, Madam Chair, I have those
numbers in front of me. It's
actually in uh
more likely on the magnitude of
uh 600 million for the emergency
school tax, and then, you know,
a lot of the other tax revenue.
So, so it's not as symbol of a
calculation. We have a really
that that a sinky chart that I'm
happy to provide to you. A lot
of it
might, a lot of the other funds
might not make it into savings
account because they're bonded
against or go for public. So,
um, I have, I'm showing off the
top of my head 650 million um
thereabouts from the school tax
specifically. Great. Um, couple
more questions. I know that I'm
taking, representative, yeah, if
I can give you, I'm gonna give
you two more questions if that's
all right, just because of this
that we have.
Let me see here. Let me
prioritize.
Um
OK, two more questions
Um, slide, uh 21.
Um, I note the emergency oil and
gas, uh, tax on oil is at 3.15%.
in the tax on gas is at 4%.
Can you explain that, why, why
that there's a difference.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative as, as you know
very well, um, it's from a
historical change made, I
believe in the 90s, um, when
there was federal changes to tax
liability on natural gas,
specifically, it was, I think at
the time, uh, you know, I wasn't
there, but intended to sort of
offset the decreased tax
liability that the, the feds
were providing, um, and since
the federal tax,
has uh um the benefit, I guess
you could say, has ended and our
rate has stayed the same. But,
and, and so maybe that's one
source of, of the difference
there, but also just
historically, much broader, much
bigger reliance on natural gas
in New Mexico than oil. And so,
you know, whenever the state
needed money, the natural gas
rate, I think it was still
higher, maybe 3.5 before that.
Um, that's where you would go
for money rather than oil. So
it'd be fair to say that it's um
um
gas taxes, is, is probably too
high in oil tax is probably too
low.
Yeah,
maybe Dasco's too high too.
Um, one last, one last question.
um, equity
um
page 26, and slide 26, in terms
of guiding principles.
um, you talk about equity and
comprehensiveness.
and um
there's only have one more
question. I'm, on
comprehensiveness
one of the things that, that I'm
trying to understand and, and
reviewing some of the materials
that you give us.
is
what's been described to me as
the difference between static
versus dynamic.
scoring
And, and I guess in, in my
simplistic way of thinking about
sort of the cost benefit
analysis.
So,
with static, you're considering
the cost, but you're not
considering the benefit. Is that
fair? And why do we do it that
way?
Madam Chan, Representative
Murphy, um, I, I think actually
there's one step further, which
is cost benefit. So, static
would just be the issue at hand
without knock-on effects,
without sort of the ripple
effects of that tax policy
change, and then if you consider
those ripple effects, that's
dynamic, but that's still really
isn't cost benefit analysis,
which is the gold standard, and,
and it's extremely labor
intensive to do dynamic and
especially cost benefit and um
uh we're we're proud to, to show
in a couple of
uh presentations here. We're
doing some dynamic analysis.
We're dipping our toe back in.
We've piloted, piloted it um
over the decades, a couple
times, never with any success.
We're trying again, um, but it
is very labor intensive and uh
and we're still short of
cost benefit analysis,
truthfully. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you so much, and I do
appreciate the enthusiasm, uh,
of this, and, uh, as we
continue, I know our speakers
are always um very gracious and
willing to have those
conversations and
representatives, you saw some of
those questions that that are
really worth a conversation, uh,
offsite. So I do appreciate that
if you can think about that when
you're asking your questions. I
do have Senator Schr, then
Senator Munoz, and then
Representative Duncan. Uh, so
Senator Sheriff, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair.
So, uh
first of all, I'm really excited
that, that uh Izzy is now a huge
proponent of the 2% tax. I just
heard him talk about all the
value of it.
Uh.
but
one of the things that we did
talk about through all of this
was
uh the complexity and, and we've
got bits and pieces and, and so
one of the things that we have,
and I'm not sure now where we
are because we did some things,
but we used to have 354
exemptions, credits or
deductions.
You got rid of it, a couple of
dozen of those last year, didn't
we?
Madam Chair and Senator, yes,
some of them were expired and we
were taking them out of the
code, but yes, we got rid of a
few that also were just not
being utilized. Yeah, so we're
down to like
just 320 now, 350, but that, I
think, uh, is part of what makes
our, our tax
code
problematic
I do not believe that New
Mexicans are overtaxed.
I believe that we are
confusingly taxed, but nobody
knows how to pay their taxes,
and I'm, I'm always interested
in, yeah.
troubled when I find out that we
have the same business, and yet
we're paying different taxes
because our CPAs looked at
something different. Neither one
of us are trying to cheat.
just
that the CPA looked at it in,
and so I've been a proponent for
simplifying the tax.
and doing away with, if not all,
300 of those credits deductions
and exemptions.
a bunch of them
But at the same time lowering
that and of course, uh we had
the the chart there that showed
that
that the broad bass and lower uh
rate was, was effective and so
I'm, I'm
here promoting that again,
because I do think we really
need to take a real deep dive
look into that.
I've had the 22% GRT tax out
there, OK?
That was only to be a starter in
the conversation.
And yet then we get hung up on
some little tiny piece of it
all, well, you can't take away
my exemption until the whole
thing melts because one person
uh is gets all weirded out over
their exemption.
OK, as opposed to the global
view which we ought to be
taking.
OK.
And, uh, you know, the reason
that natural gas was taxed more.
It's because natural gas was the
producer.
San Juan County, for a long
time,
and that was just
hey, they're they're the 1
percenters tax them more. Now
it's the oil people.
So we ought to tax you more
or tax us less. The emergency
school tax, that's an
interesting tax
We had a problem. We had a
problem with education in 1932.
So we created the emergency
school tax so we could fix
education.
in 1932
Maybe it's not a tax problem we
have with education.
but
I do think GRT is a good tax.
especially for New Mexico. Is it
weird? Yes.
but we are in the city
different, so having a weird tax
I don't think is a problem.
because it can capture more and
dramatically reduce the rates
that we're paying.
if we can figure out how to
unwind deductions. There you go,
you're done.
Thank you, Senator Sher. Senator
Bunosin and Representative
Duncan. Thank you. I thought
that was the left us some time.
busy in in whatever Billy want
to call it, the federal bill.
Isn't there a reduction in oil
and tax?
uh
that's coming to the state
Um, Madam Chair and Senator,
it's actually on federal
royalties. So if you think of
them similarly, um, yeah, yes,
it, it, um, reduces the royalty
rate on new lease 12.
OK, that's one thing I think we
need to keep in mind as we move
forward. Those are one things,
uh, uh, one interesting thing to
me when rep expenditure, didn't
we buy you guys software this
shovel.
Um, Madam Chair and Senator,
yes, the work that we're, that
Brendan, one of our economists,
will then, um, you know, present
shortly is because of that
software that we're able to
conduct the dynamic analysis,
but that doesn't quite get you
to the cost benefit analysis,
but it, it is certainly helping
us take a step in the right
direction and hopefully the tax
department can join us soon, um,
in that software as well. Well,
do you want to ask Grock for
what an answer, AI, right?
In, in the cost. Brennan's
laughing behind you, but I mean
that that they really do
provide, I mean, we use it quite
a bit. I mean, we're scheduling
throughout with and taking
workload off.
So I, it's gonna be interesting
if we need to target some of
that to get some answers that
you don't have 10.
um he's gonna agree with me the
whole day. Um, you, you know,
we've given what, $2.5 billion
worth of tax credits over the
last.
Mm.
Um, Madam Chair, yes, I think I
have a table in here in the post
session if you're interested in
looking, um, since 2019,
uh, if you take out, maybe,
maybe one point, I have 1.2
billion.
over the last 6 years.
Yeah, over the, I think it's a
little bit higher than that.
That that's right, Madam Cherry.
If you include the rebate, the
rebate years might have been
higher because the rebates were
a lot higher, but they didn't
recurring basis when they told
me a few years.
Um.
you know, the, the other thing
we're headed into is we don't
know what's gonna happen, right?
It looks like the feds took the
our tax policy and how to pack
the task bill and
did it federally
because it's a hodgepodge of
what's there and what's not
there, right? And, and that's
what happens in New Mexico.
depending on the revenue
numbers, I'm planning on putting
$150 million. We're not gonna go
through the scenario we went
through the last year or the
year before, and we're gonna put
a hard cap on it, but on page
27.
these are gonna be have to done
to the team with these.
So we can understand what
We're not down there at the last
minute.
in and saying this is there,
that's there.
Um, I talked to the drafter
today and she said, oh, thank
God I didn't make any mistakes,
right?
Cause if you make a mistake on a
tax policy, you have two
options.
right? Either fix it, or there's
some stuff in order to fix that.
But we, if we're gonna do tax
policy, let's do it.
and skew with page 27, so we can
get these.
these bedded
targeted
right, and people know what's
happening
And, and this is gonna go a
message to the lobbyists, don't
come in here at the last minute
and say, hey I want a Christmas
ornament, right?
or.
$5000 tax credit. I mean, they
have to be targeted, and they
have to be
vetted
And, and we need to know where
we're headed, because
we're in
oil and gas is giving us a lot
of money.
And, and it's gonna flatten out
in 2030.
And then we're gonna have to
start looking back at tax policy
pretty hard.
What did we give away? What can
we take back?
The GRT that we did
3 or 4 years ago was 220 million
that we reduced it, right?
Well, 60 days later, the cities
and counties picked up the GRT
and nobody even knew
right? It, it did nothing for
what we wanted to target a cost
to savings to a person.
cause the cities and the
counties came back and, and did
it immediately we and no none of
the public benefit from that.
That was, that's our greatest
tax that we can get at the
highest rate they're gonna
happen again.
So that one is our and so as we
move forward and we look at
what's happening federally. I, I
believe and I talked to my
advisor over here, Don.
you know, work
' re we're not headed for
recession
We're in stagflation. We're
almost
I, I, uh, high costs, right?
Labor costs are high,
everything's high.
Uh, interest rates are high, and
stagflation is worse because
it's harder to handle. There is
no fix for it.
You can't cut here. Inflation is
just driving everything.
crazy. If you go to McDonald's,
like I did this morning.
got a cup of coffee for $1.94
and then I ordered a
sausage and biscuit deal
right
It, it's really crazy to where
we are today with with what food
costs are and everything and
stagflation is gonna be the
hardest thing to do.
Tax rates, it depends on your
population. New Mexico is a
small state.
2 million in population. You
compare us to Texas, Arizona,
Colorado, right? Their
populations are over 10 million,
right?
And, and we're 2 million. So who
bears the brunt of the of the
tax policy. It's a middle class.
That's the base for tax policy.
It's not the hiring cause we
don't have that many rich people
living.
in New Mexico or uber wealthy
rich, right? People living in
New Mexico, it's the middle
class that that gets hit with
tax policy.
You could raise the high end on
the high-end earners of
from 5.9 to 6.9 to 1%, and it's
not gonna make that much
difference.
It will make the difference 2030
million, right?
And it makes a difference that's
that they're gonna pay it.
but it's not gonna make a big
difference in in.
even revenue for the state
And so, the other thing I wanted
to ask you about for you.
OK, Senator, I'm gonna ask you
to kind of wrap to have this is
your last question. Yeah, the
UI, where are we on UI? I know
we passed a bill this year. It
was in hot water, where are we
at with the, the UI funding and
Oh.
Madam Chair, I can follow up
with you, um, Senator, our, our
balance is still quite high, but
I'm happy to.
offline. Yeah, that, that's
gonna be important because if
anything happens in the economy,
I mean, we don't know what jobs
number we're ever gonna get
again if what it's gonna look
like. That number comes up and
we start seeing jobs fall off,
the UI fund needs to be the
first
source of defense or line of
defense for those employees to I
gotta apply in and so that's
we're in the right place and we
target as we move forward cause
anything happens, when
somebody's laid off, fired,
whatever, that's, that's their
source of income we need target
that. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, and uh, I appreciate
it. And anything that um is
shared that um our panelists
have talked about sharing. Uh,
if you will, please send that to
Cristina and then Cristina will
send it to the entire committee
so that we can have um all those
different points that are, are,
are talked about
Um, we're, uh, have, uh,
Representative Duncan is our
last question. Um, I do want to,
uh, thank the committee, and
I'll get you uh as well,
representative, uh, of
understanding kind of gauging
how, how, how, uh, uh, curious
this committee is, um, in terms
of questions and, uh, and, and
trying to have these dialogues.
Um, so in the future, we'll
extend a little bit more time
because we are at 11 o'clock and
we're supposed to be on our
third presentation right now. We
are going to go into lunch, so
just to keep you, uh, keep
you uh apprised of that. Uh,
we're gonna stick to our
schedule today. So
Representative Duncan and then
Representative Terasas, if you
can keep your questions to the
point, I appreciate that. Thank
you, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
some of these, I'm sure, um, if
you guys want to just email us
out, that'd be great.
I'm just curious on page 12, how
many cannabis retailers are
there now? That seems to
fluctuate with the price of oil.
Um,
and then, um,
and then the second question,
Madam Chair, is, um, on page 34,
can you tell us the breakdown of
the prescription drugs, the
oxygen and the medical cannabis.
Madam Chair, I probably cannot
because up until this point, it
hasn't been separately reported,
so our estimate is really only
based on national data.
and uh even once they separately
report it, I don't think they'll
have to tell us which thing they
deducted for.
Thank you Madam Chair. Izzy, is
that something that uh software
can take care of. Unfortunately,
no, Madam Chair, I wish. OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Page 37
SB 481. Can you tell me how much
money is going into the district
and, and the uses of that of
those funds, Madam Chair was at
the state fair district? I
believe the revenue estimate for
that was about 12, between, uh,
between GRT and gaming, it's.
I wanted to say about 10 million
per year, and that's mostly
gaming tax, a little bit of GRT.
Thank you Madam Chair, and the
use of that
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
the district uh legislation
basically creates a board that,
uh, I know they're, they're
working on redevelopment. It
it's not exactly my area of
expertise, but there's, it has
the board has powers and bonding
authority and uh they can
acquire land.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Sarasas, you're
going to finish this off today.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, it's
just interesting. Thank you for
the presentation. We were
listening to it, uh, on the way
up, uh.
and uh
just had a couple of questions.
If you had a magic wand, how
would you simplify the tax
policy in New Mexico?
I'm just gonna put feet to the
fire.
Hey
3 things that you, you would do,
that you think would help.
Madam Chair and our
representative, um, it's hard to
think of just with the goal of
simplification in mind, but
if I could do something to,
maybe not, not in terms of
simplifying, but maybe in terms
of improving
I think it's unfortunate that
our three-legged stool is kind
of one of those legs is a
volatile revenue source, oil and
gas.
And if there were a way to
diversify state reliance to the
property tax to buy down the
GRT. I think that would be
beneficial, but it's really hard
to do.
because
when you change the property tax
when the property tax for better
or worse is is not popular. I
think people have sticker shock
on their property tax bill where
they don't on their GRT that
they pay little by little, but
it also implicates local cha,
you know, local revenue changes
that makes it really
complicated, but if we could
diversify the general fund to
reliance on property tax and
less than GRT. I think. OK,
well, I just, uh, and thank you
for sharing that. I think, uh,
New Mexico has a diverse amount
of uh economic sectors as far as
personal, some people have uh or
maybe more fluent to uh.
people that are uh struggling
very much, and I see it in parts
of my district and stuff. And I
think, um,
I think all of it hurts. I
think uh we uh
you know, it's just and I'm just
gonna sum it up because I know
we're in a hurry.
I think what, what I'd like to
see New Mexico do is is posture
themselves in a way that we
attract businesses and sometimes
our policies, uh, in general,
New Mexico.
kind of give pause for other
companies to come in
And, and I think that is our
number one problem. I, I don't
see stag the stagnation that
we're talking about stagly least
in New Mexico, that would be the
unemployment rates are going up
and, and we've got people that
are unemployed. I don't see
that, but, but I do see is if we
continue to
give posture, and this is what
Texas is good at, OK?
They have a 0 personal income
tax, and then there, what are
they trying to do right now?
They're trying to see how they
abate their
their um uh property taxes.
So they give that posture of of
an invitation rather than, uh,
uh, you know, putting people
kind of setting back and, and
thinking, can I, can, how can I?
invest in New Mexico.
if it's volatile. And, you know,
we see that in several sectors.
We see it in the, in, in the uh
uh medical sector, and, uh, and
I
for one think that I don't
believe, cause I heard, heard a
statement from a couple of
people that, that uh oil and gas
is gonna get, start to go flat.
And why is that?
Do we really believe that the
world is going to move away from
oil that quick in the next.
4, 4.5 years.
I don't believe so. I believe
that the the market will be
there cause there's other
developing countries that will
need that.
I think we ourselves as a state,
if we decide that we want to
limit ourselves in how we
produce that because honestly,
if this, if New Mexico was my
business
I'd be putting the pedal to the
metal.
especially if I know that I can
improve, uh, my infrastructure
and, and whatever I could and,
and, in, in my state, if, if I
owned it, that's where I'd be
seeing how much I could do that,
uh, uh, get revenue out of there
knowing that uh New Mexico
produced that those are my
statements because I think we're
short on time. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I appreciate
that.
Um, we are, um, I'm not gonna
engage any more questions on
this particular one. we, uh, I'm
gonna let Izzy, you're gonna
stick around. Dawn, you're gonna
go ahead and come on up.
So the kind of the forecast for
the rest of the day.
uh, if we have to, we're gonna
work through lunch, um, which
lunch has been provided by, uh,
Lauren Abbey, who is there in
the back. So thank you very
much, Lauren.
Um, we'll kind of play it by ear
as we get to it, but we may wind
up taking just like a 10 minute
break and going through lunch
cause I do want to be respectful
of everybody's time, especially
our speakers. And for those of
us who have to drive back home,
which is out of uh Santa Fe, uh,
and it's quite a drive for some
of us. So I want to go ahead and
be respectful of that. So now
we're looking at revenue sources
and there's
you've talked about, and as
we're understanding is, is I use
this uh on a regular basis is a
wheel of a bicycle is that we're
looking at one issue and then
there are the folks off that,
that hub.
and understanding our revenue
resources, our revenue sources,
and where we give tax rebates,
we really have to look at all of
those folks because we can't
just look at one.
Um, we are understanding that
this is very complicated and
thank you for the brains that
you have to be able to, to
manage this. Um, but I
appreciate that what the attempt
of this committee is to look at
all of those different spokes so
that we have an understanding
because it isn't just a one
shot.
here. So, uh, Don and uh Izzy,
I'm gonna let you go ahead and
go about, uh, revenue sources.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
I'm kicking this off and we're
gonna go real fast. Hopefully we
can make up some time here. Um,
I really appreciated adding this
agenda item to the you're adding
this item to the agenda because
I think um it it can feel
sometimes that the focus on tax
policy is so great, and, and it
should be that we maybe forget
about the dual purpose of this
committee, you know, it's the
revenue stabilization actually
first and then tax policy
committee in the name. And so
there's a, a, a great connection
between tax policy and revenue
stability
and revenue stability is
incredibly important for the
management of, of a financially
sound state. And so if you turn
to slide 2, here's a little bit
of context as to what New
Mexico's facing or what we faced
when it comes to revenue
stability. And so I, I, I find
this chart really um interesting
because what you see is the 60s
to the early 80s.
I mean, just a golden period of
no revenue decline.
That's incredible. I mean, and,
and if you think back to what
the economics of the state were
at the time. We were one of the
fastest growing states in the
country, both economically and
demographically, and this was
really a a tailwind we had
behind us going into these next
couple of decades. There was a
large amount of tax reform in
the early 80s, which resulted in
that small revenue decline. I
think in some ways, um,
expected. And then still, again,
another 20 years of basically
positive revenue growth, really,
uh, um, a great time to be a, a,
a financial manager in the state
of Mexico because
you have the wind at your back.
And then, what we've had over
the last 20 years is in sharp
contrast, the most volatility in
state history of the, I think 6
times that um budgets have had
to be cut, the 5 of them have
happened in the last two decades
and really in the last 15 or so
years, um, the largest, most
dramatic, if you look peak to
valley, the most dramatic
declines to growth in revenues,
and that's extremely
challenging.
for state government and for you
all to plan ahead, to think into
the future, to invest in the
future, to make sure that, you
know, public services are
provided on a stable basis. If
you're providing public services
and your budget's cut one year
and then grown doubled in the
next and then cut again. That's
really hard to do and think
strategically about. And so this
is a major challenge that
tackling, um, um, this revenue
volatility can can bolster the
way we provide services and
hopefully help us achieve better
results. So if you turn to the
next slide, you can see that
you know, it's not just that
we're not, what we're not seeing
isn't just bad, you know, uh,
historically, it's also bad
nationally. We're one of the
most volatile states in the
country. That's probably
unsurprising to you all. Almost
2 times as volatile as the
median state. Um, you know, our
ranking improved slightly over
the last 5 years. We went from
being the 5th most volatile to
the 6th most volatile. I guess
that's somewhat of good news,
but yet our revenues actually
grew more volatile over that
period. It's just that the other
states were also getting more
volatile. And so what you all
have done over the last
several years and, and it goes a
little bit to the hedging
conversation is the chart on the
right. You've put into statute a
lot of these stabilizing
mechanisms that we'll get into
here shortly that have reduced
the volatility of the general
fund, and so that's a benefit,
but of course, there's certainly
more work to do on the revenue
stability front. So if you turn
to the next slide,
I think it's important to keep
in mind that there are different
kinds of revenues with different
kinds of purposes, and they go
into different kinds of funds.
And so, generally we're talking
about the general fund. This
usually comes to the forefront
because it's what you all use to
provide services. That's an
operating fund. Other agencies
throughout state government
might have their own operating
funds. So you might consider
revenue volatility for them as
well, or for those revenues and
those types of funds. And that's
mainly what we're going to focus
on in this or I'm going to focus
on in this presentation for my
portion, but we have the debt
fun
d s that we talked about
earlier, that's for capital
outlay. We use severance taxes.
Those are highly volatile, so
you might want to craft a
special type of, um, uh,
stabilizing mechanism for that
fund. And um Mr. Vice Chair did
that in the 2024 session, HB 253
was a new mechanism on how to
calculate the amount available
for bonding because it's
directly oil and gas money and
that is so volatile. There's a
new trust fund, um, mechanism
for, for that um process. We
won't get into it a lot, but um
that's one form of revenue
stabil
ization that this committee
could take on and investment
funds. This is basically the
focus of the second half of this
presentation, and it has been a
major tool for you all as the
legislature to use to stabilize
revenues in the short term and
gain revenue stability and
growth in the long run. And so
we'll, we'll talk about that
shortly. I should clarify, um,
there is a difference between
our investment funds for
pensions and our investment
funds for permanent funds. And
so we're primarily focusing on
the permanent fund aspect as
pensions don't
directly, totally, um, play into
the state budget as much as the
permanent funds do.
OK. Turning to the next slide,
slide 5.
Uh, the graph on the right here
is just to demonstrate the uses
of the general fund over time.
It's just to highlight what this
money goes towards. This is
healthcare and Medicaid, Health
and Human Services, public
safety, Higher Ed, you all know
the list, um, public education
at the top of the list.
And then I think it's helpful to
look at the table on the left.
because
I think what what can happen is
so much focus is paid to the
budget, to the chart on the
right, that we lose sight of the
table on the left.
And the table on the left
is a balance sheet, a very basic
balance sheet, where you have
revenues at the top, you have
your spending in the middle, and
then your baseline, you know,
what's, what's your bottom line
at the bottom. And of course,
the, the budgeting happens in
the middle there. Those middle
expenditure items, but the
bottom line depends on both. And
so what has to happen is that
top line, any considerations,
changes, you know, cuts in
revenue have to be done in
concert with what's happening in
the middle. Otherwise, you can
end up in the red. And that's
unconstitutional in the state of
New Mexico, you can't end up in
the red. So they
have to be done highly in
concert with each other.
If you turn to the next slide, a
little more about the general
fund. You can see the shares of
each piece of the pie here, or
if you want to look at it over
time on the left, and, you know,
just going through it here,
about 1/3 coming from the
grocer's seats tax, um, as the
secretary mentioned, a third of
that 3 is related to oil and
gas. So you could see a scenario
where a third of our GRT can dry
up really quickly in the event
of a of a downturn on that um
cycle.
22% on energy
um, back to the, um,
conversation on hedging, 22%
related to energy allowed in the
general fund, but we might be
collecting easily more than
double than double that, but we
only let half of it in to try to
stabilize. So if, if prices and
production fall, we could
sustain maybe half of a of a
fall or or more before you all
experience it and have to cut
budgets and pull back on
budgets. So that's a form of
hedging that the state's um
taken on. And then we'll get
into more on what you do with
the upside and how that's also a
benefit.
um shortly
Uh, you can see income taxes,
that's both personal income and
corporate income taxes in green,
21%. What's really notable is
that 16% coming from
investments, mostly from the
permanent funds. This is really
unique to New Mexico. You know,
this is a, a huge benefit to the
people of New Mexico, because
that's 16% of spending that does
not have to be taxed or does not
have to be borne. The burden
does not have to be borne by any
New Mexicans or any business
activity in New Mexico. So, you
know, put another way,
to sustain this level of
spending that you all are
currently appropriating without
these investments, they would
have to be, say, generally 20%
higher across the board. GRT 20%
higher, personal income tax is
20% higher. Oil and gas tax is
20% higher just to maintain this
level of spending. So this is,
this is, you know, you could
think of it either as a tax cut
in some ways, or, or just, you
know, um, a, a benefit or or
more spending in other ways.
OK, turning, turning to the next
slide. What are the sources of,
of consternation, you know, what
are we worrying about, um, and
that's really highlighted by the
two charts on the left here. I
want to draw your attention to
the line chart. It, I don't know
how easy it is to see, but you
can see at the bottom, the least
volatile revenues are the
personal income tax that's the
least in the general fund,
followed by the gross receipts
tax, and then followed by direct
energy and what we've seen in
recent years is corporate income
taxes and um state treasure
' s office earnings are the most
volatile sources of revenue in
the general fund. So if you all
are thinking about strategies to
mitigate revenue volatility,
those are maybe the lowest
hanging fruit, maybe the most
ripe for, for fixing, you could
say. And um they contribute
greatly to to that um revenue
volatility and, and you can see
the third chart here
demonstrates just how volatile
those monthly revenues can be,
and they are, they can go
negative. So we can go from
expecting 800 million in
corporate income taxes
to in a recession, having to pay
out $200 million and that's, you
know, a huge swing of $1 billion
in in the budget that can be um
a tough pill, a big pill to
swallow.
So, you know, these are some of
the issues that we're currently
seeing. There's still issues for
us now.
but we've fixed some of these
issues. You can see oil and gas
actually isn't the most volatile
anymore, and that's due to the
chart on the right here.
And what
you all have elected to do is
put that floor.
You say, we're only taking this
much oil and gas revenue,
anything above that goes into a
permanent fund. And so, rather
than ride the roller coaster up
and down, up and down, you stay
steady and any excess, if any,
goes to the permanent fund,
which can, you know, there,
there's no problem if the
permanent fund doesn't get money
in any given year. That's OK. No
one's hurt. Programs don't have
to be cut, budgets don't have to
be cut. But rather, we, we see
over time is that they steadily
increase distributions because
of investment return and maybe
windfall revenues, and they
actually increased the
distribution to the general fund
over time. And what we've seen
is this strategy is so effective
that the investment earnings,
the investment income to the
general fund is now the
strongest, the fastest growing
revenue in the general fund. So
it's the most stable and it's
now the fastest growing, and
it's what we expect will power
the general fund and budget
growth into the future. And so
it's very important to um stay
focused on, on how to ensure
that stability through either
investment strategies, which I
think Don may or may not talk
about
shortly, but also, um, in, in
distributions to those funds. So
before you go on, I know that
there are a lot of people who
are riveted by this kind of
conversation topic, including
all the people here in this
room, but there are people
online, uh, the, the charts that
Izzy and that those that have
been referred to are available
online. You just click on the
agenda for those who are
watching on the webcast. Thank
you, Izzy. Thank you. So, on the
next slide, I have something of
a playbook, you know, if, if
you're, if you're hopefully
thinking about, hopefully I've
made a good case that you
should care about revenue
stability. It's a, it's a big
concern, especially in New
Mexico. And so what do you do
about it? And it depends on the
type of volatility that you
might be experiencing. So, of
course, there's this structural,
what I've called structural
persistent volatility. This
might be based on the type of
tax. You can't get away from it,
you can't expand the base. Oil
and gas is going to be volatile
no matter how much you expand
the base, or for that matter,
capital gains is always going to
be volatile. Um, state
treasurer's office is always
going to be volatile. So what do
you do?
What we've done and what other
states do say
maybe anything above the trend
in growth.
goes to an investment fund, or
goes to a one-time use, goes to
infrastructure, um, anything
below that can stay budgeted in
your um operating budget. So
that's one option for structural
and persistent type of revenue,
um, instability. Short term
shocks, these are like
recessions. They're economic
cycles, or maybe even oil cycles
in some cases. And so what's the
solution there? Rainy day funds
and reserves. This is totally
separate from investment funds,
rainy day funds, and investment
funds are not the same. Rainy
day funds are intended to make
up these
short-term shocks, maybe a few
years of downturn economically
or in oil, um, that can cover to
prevent budget cuts in those
instability years. But they also
mean flexible appropriations,
not spending to capacity. If you
spend 100% of your expected
revenues, and then revenues
crash.
That makes it a real challenge.
You have to come back and cut.
You're, you're gonna have to
pull back on some of those
services, which of course is
sort of the root of the problem
that we're describing here. So,
keeping a cushion between
revenues expected and revenue
spent is an important, um,
solution to to these short term
types of shocks.
And then you have the long term
challenges, you know, does oil
and gas
decrease plateau over time? How
do you address that? And one
solution that, of course, the
legislature has chosen is that
the more we invest now through
the power of compound interest,
the more that money can be worth
in the future, and we actually
get the LFC do long-term revenue
estimates every year we'll be
presenting it um in September
this year. And what we found in
the last revenue estimate is
this strategy is currently
sufficient to offset expected
declines in oil and gas. And I
think Don will go into that
shortly. So, that's
one solution, but there are, of
course, um, um, other
strategies, making sure you're
planning for the long term.
That's also part of it, you
know, uh, the, the LFC analysis
indicates that maybe at a 6%
growth rate, budget growth rate,
you could sustain, um, with the
given revenue expectations over
the long term, um, for, for at
least the medium term, maybe not
the long term. So thinking
strategically, looking ahead,
and then making these
investments and planning for
what you see are important
strategies. So on the next
slide, just graphical
representation of what these
strategies look like in
practice. The chart on the left
is what we call the stress test
or what's commonly known as the
stress test. You know, how, how
much revenue could we lose in an
oil downturn scenario? How far
does that cut into our spending
represented by
the bars, and then the
difference, you know, how far
that line cuts into spending is
how much you might need in
reserves to make sure that the
appropriations can keep going
out rather than being cut.
That's one way to gauge, um, you
know, those short-term shocks,
and then the one on the right is
just a visual representation of
what we've been talking about.
You set a floor, how much money
of oil and gas can go into the
general fund and everything
above that um goes into an
investment fund. And what you'll
notice on those bars an
important thing.
in FY 23 was actually a peak
year for us for in terms of oil
and gas collections. We've
actually had decreasing oil and
gas collections every year
since. And if you all had
allowed 100% of that to enter
the general fund, we could have
been experiencing budget cuts
for maybe 2 or 3 years in a row
now, and we've avoided that
thanks to this.
hedging type of strategy
Um, and, and this just speaks to
the long-term strategic
challenge on oil and gas and and
long term production scenarios
there and and uh.
lastly on on slide 11 is the
analysis speaking to that point,
given those revenue expectations
in black, how much spending can,
can we accommodate um in the
near term through the long term,
to make sure that we don't find
ourselves in a structural
deficit over time.
And then lastly, um, connecting
it back to the tax discussion of
the last presentation.
You know, I, I hope I made it
clear about the broad tax base
and the inherent volatility that
you can create by narrowing the
tax base with tax expenditures.
But tax expenditures themselves
also bring volatility to
revenues because people claim
them and they can, they can come
as a surprise. If we attract
more films in a given year than
we were expecting. Those payouts
will increase. That's a direct
loss to the general fund. And
you actually see that playing
out in this chart here. This is
total tax expenditures, um, as
reported by the Tax and Revenue
Department. $3 billion
And as the secretary mentioned,
that shaded bar represents
rebates. We expected those to go
away in the next year, and we
would, we expected expenditures
to come back down, but they
actually jumped. And we're
actually seeing higher tax
expenditures than we did with,
with the rebates through things
like more claiming on uh
manufacturing services deduction
to GRT that came in, I think,
double, triple what the previous
years. So that's inherent
volatility. So that's worth
keeping in mind, not just the
narrowing the the tax base, but
literally the cleaning of those
tax expenditures brings
volatility to
the tax code. So making sure
that those are tight when you um
write them so that they can't,
you know, bring big shocks to us
is extremely important and um.
for revenue stability at least
And with that, I hope, I hope I
went.
fast enough but not too fast.
I'll pass it over to Don.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Dawn Iglesias, and I am the
investment operations officer at
the State Investment Council,
and I've been asked to come here
today to speak to you all about
the investment revenue portion
of the funds um that we invest.
and how that contributes back to
the state, and this starts on
page 14.
Uh, I think it was mentioned
earlier in this presentation. We
now manage 14 different
permanent endowment trust and
reserve funds. They all have
very different functions. They
all have very different um
purposes, distribution
mechanisms, ways that they
operate, so it can be hard to
keep track of them all. A lot of
times people only pay attention
to the two largest flagship
funds, the land grant and the
severance Tax Funds that go
directly into the general fund.
So in a lot of
ways they're the most visible,
but all 14 of the funds serve a
very specific purpose and have a
very specific beneficiary and
contribute to the long-term
revenue stability of a variety
of different state functions. So
I'm hoping to help you
understand each of these 14
different funds, what they do,
why they're there, and some
additional information just
about how these investment
revenues really help to support
your overall state budget,
including but not limited to
just the general fund.
So these next 3 pages are sort
of a really brief kind of quick
snapshot of all 14 of these
funds, in terms, when was it
established? What's its primary
purpose? How does it get money
into that fund and what is its
uh statutory distribution
policy? How can money flow out
of that fund. And so of course
the first two that we have here
are our flagship longest running
investment funds, the land grant
permanent Fund and the severance
Tax Permanent Fund. The land
grant permanent fund, as
you all know, was established
during statehood in 1912. And
while we often refer to it as a
singular permanent fund. It is
actually a collection of 21
different permanent funds that
have beneficiaries that were all
established upon statehood by
Congress when the state or when
Congress entrustedracts of land
to the state for the purpose of
these very specific
beneficiaries.
Um, this, uh
fund is primarily
um receives revenue through
royalty production on those
state lands, so all of those
state lands that we have, they
can receive non-renewable
sources of revenue and renewable
sources of revenue and all of
that non-renewable sources goes
into the land grant permanent
fund and oil and gas is the
primary producer of that
non-renewable revenue. It makes
up about 99% of all
contributions that come into
those permanent funds, and the
distribu
tion policy for those permanent
funds are actually established
in the New Mexico Constitution.
So, of the total permanent
funds, the singular one, the
permanent school fund, which
benefits public schools and
common schools in New Mexico,
primarily.
That one distributes 6.25% of a
rolling five year average. All
other funds distribute 5% of
their rolling 5-year average.
And if there was a desire to
change that distribution policy,
it would require a
constitutional amendment at was
as was done a few years ago to
actually increase the
distribution from the permanent
school fund to benefit both
schools and early childhood
education.
And if there was ever a desire
to change the beneficiaries of
that particular permanent fund
of those 21 beneficiaries, it
would not only require a change
in the state constitution to be
approved by voters but also um
an act of Congress, since though
it was Congress that established
who the beneficiaries of those
permanent funds would be.
Now the severance tax permanent
fund was established in the
1970s as a repository of keeping
any additional severance tax
dollars that was not used for
capital outlay projects. Now
recently, there's another
function, another source of
revenue that this permanent fund
will receive starting in FY 25
as a beneficiary of Senate Bill
26. So the mechanism that you
all enacted to say for um
federal royalties and for oil
and gas, emergency school taxes,
the general funds
only gonna receive a certain
amount and anything above that
amount is either going to get
distributed to the severance tax
permanent fund or the Early
Childhood Fund. So as of FY 25,
um, it that fund started
receiving its first
contributions from this new
enacted statute.
and its distribution policies is
also set in the New Mexico
Constitution at 4.7% of the
five-year average. So again, if
you wanted to uh change the
distribution policy for the
severance tax permanent funds,
specifically, that would also
require a constitutional
amendment and approval by
voters.
Now, the tax stabilization
reserve was a fund that was
entrusted to us to manage in
2019. It's a fund that's existed
for a long time in the state,
but in 2019, it really actually
became the state's rainy day
fund. A lot of rules around how
that fund operates and allowing
it to build up balances, changed
during the laws that were passed
that year and then it was
presented to us to manage. Now
this fund does not actually make
any regular distributions from
it. Instead, it is available for
appro
pri ation um through certain
mechanisms and rules allowed for
it, but it's really intended to
shore up general fund shortfalls
should they occur?
and that fund can be accessed in
that instance. And so while we
try to produce um some
additional investment return. We
keep this in more liquid assets
to make it available to the
legislature in the event of that
rainy day occurring.
Now, the early childhood
education and Care Fund was
created in 2020. It is now
become our 3rd largest fund and
it's actually rivaling the size
of the Severance tax permanent
fund at this point, because it
has endured such rapid growth,
largely over the last 3 years,
and almost entirely due to the
spike in oil and gas revenues
and large increases in oil and
gas production that has occurred
since 2022, and it has received
billions of dollars in that
short period of time,
functioning exactly the way that
it was designed to function,
which was to capture those
windfall revenues that happened
during an anomaly. It was price
spikes after the Ukraine,
Russian war, and those price
spikes generated enormous
amounts of additional
non-recurring uh oil and gas
dollars and pushed those dollars
up above their five-year
averages, and that's how the
early childhood bond receives
money from those oil and ga
s sources above that five-year
average.
Now, it also makes a
distribution on a regular basis
of 5% of its 3-year average that
goes directly to the early
childhood education and care
program Fund, which is
appropriated during in your
budget process every year and
supports a multitude of early
childhood programs across the
state.
Moving on to page 15, we have
Don, if I may, just because
there's so, I mean, and and I
won't go through each one of
them. Yeah, I appreciate that
just for, for time purposes
because there are very clear,
um, uh, bullet points on that.
So we really appreciate that.
Yes, absolutely. I wanted to go
over these 1st 4 just because
they're really important ones
and highly visible ones. But as
you can see, I'm gonna actually
skip through pretty quickly on
15 and 16. You can see how each
of these get money they were
created for a variety of
different purposes, whether it
be to receive set
tle ment revenues for, say, the
tobacco settlement or the opioid
settlement. Some are recreated
for the intention of providing
conservation funding or funding
to rural libraries, workforce
enhancement, etc.
Same thing on page 16. The only
thing that I will point out here
is the bullet points on your two
new permanent fund or trust
funds that were created in the
most recent legislative session.
Your Behavioral Health Trust
Fund and your Medicaid Trust
Fund. The Behavioral Health
Trust Fund just to, um, add a
little bit of additional context
to it. It did receive $100
million in its initial
appropriation, so it did get an
initial source of funding, and
it will receive 50% of that oil
and
ga s school tax windfall that
would otherwise go to the early
childhood fund. So for 3 years
only for FY 26 to FY 28, it's
gonna get half of that windfall.
Similarly, the Medicaid trust
fund will get half of that same
windfall for the federal royalty
payments for FY 26 to FY 28. The
difference with the Medicaid
Trust Fund, one of the things to
understand is that was not
endowed with an original
appropriation. So at the moment
that fund exists in our um
uh accounts, however, it does
not have any money in it yet. We
are expecting hopefully for it
to get some inflows through its
singular source of continual
recurring funding is through
agency budget reversions. So
anything over the current
revenue forecast, which is 110
million. that will flow into
this fund, so has the potential
to get funding, but the size at
this point is unknown, and it is
set to not begin making regular
distributions until FY 30, and
it has to
reach a threshold of 500 million
before it does so. Those are the
rules that were set in law for
that piece. However, it can be
accessed should it get funding
by the legislature through
appropriation
On page 17, really quickly, just
so that everyone is aware in
addition to the 14 funds that we
manage, we also manage 49 client
funds for 24 different clients.
These range from state and local
governments to university
endowments.
and it's really another way that
the State Investment council is
providing an additional benefit
to services across the state, so
not just in the funds that
you've created statutorily, but
in other funds for state and
local governments and
universities who are trying to
grow their endowments or even
grow some of their operating
funds until they are ready and
need to.
Moving on to page 18, this is
just a list of those 21
different land grant permanent
fund beneficiaries in case
you've forgotten who they are.
Um, along with this relative
sizes that they each hold of
that land grant permanent fund.
On page 19, we have our total
assets under management. So when
we look at everything that the
State Investment council is
managing. Um, it is, has just
reached over $64 billion as of
the end of this past, uh, fiscal
year FY 25. You can see that the
three largest funds for that are
the land severance and early
childhood Fund. And here's what
I'm saying that the early
childhood fund is starting to
rival the size of even the
severance tax fund, which is
pretty remarkable considering
how new one fund is versus the
severance tax bond, which has
been around since the 70s and so
that is very much indicative of
the way those funds receive
money and how they've been
allowed statutorily to receive
those funds. There's a very big
difference in how those work.
And then we list out the
relative sizes of all of the
other funds that we manage so
that you can get a sense of
what's currently sitting in each
of those.
Now turning on to page 20. Each
of these funds have very
different, um,
uh asset allocations. We try to
look at these holistically to
say which of the funds function
very similarly. A lot of them
are created with very similar
rules, similar distribution
policies, etc. So we try to look
at the goals and the purpose of
the funds along with what are
their spending policies to
determine what's the best way to
invest these funds, and they're
invested on a continuum of one
of a way to think about it is
that that is more growth
focused, which is a little more
risky trying to get more return
versus those that are more
preservation focused, so
invested in less risky assets,
still trying to earn a return,
but we're really focusing on
preserving the benefit of that
fund and you'll see that the
funds that fall under this
preservation focus are things
like the tax stabilization
reserve, which is intended to be
your rainy day fun. We don't
want to subject that to stock
market volatility. You'll notice
it has no stock market
investments, but it does have
some private market allocations
in order to try to boost the
amount of revenue that it could
get
versus what it would earn um
only sitting in cash.
How we make these investment
decisions is on 2021, just sort
of a little overview of our
total process for how do we
decide to invest these funds and
sort of what, how does it
function through our total
investment process, and you'll
see with these green boxes here.
This is really where it starts
is thinking about what did the
statutes have, what's the
statutory distribution policy,
what's the statutory mechanism
for it getting money? What are
the rules around potential
spending, um, can this
fund be directly appropriated
from the corpus versus is it a
constitutionally protected fund.
All of those things matter in
making decisions on how, what
kind of assets we um invest each
of these funds in, and that
really determines the strategic
asset allocation for the funds,
and that along with things like
our capital market assumptions.
So how do we expect each asset
class to perform that really
gets toward that long term
expected compound return. So if
you were looking back at the
previous page and
you see that expected return of
each fund along that continuum
that expected return is really
dictated by what asset classes
are invested in and what's our
current expectation for the
performance of those asset
classes over
moving on to
page 22. This is just a quick
snapshot. I'm not going to go
through it in detail, but if you
were wondering about the
performance of the funds, how
each of them are doing. This is
our most recent published
performance report as of May.
We'll have a new one coming out
very soon that will show fiscal
year-end performance. Any of the
funds that you see here that
have uh no data available.
That's because that fund hasn't
been in existence long enough to
have long term data, um, but
you'll see for those that do
have very long term performance,
like 10-year performance returns
that
ranges anywhere between 6% to
about 8.3%, and it really just
depends again on that asset
allocation.
On page 23
when we look at overall
distributions from all 14 of
these funds, and where do they
go? What do they do and what do
they support? He sort of grouped
them into categories, and you'll
see that the biggest beneficiary
of all of our public, uh, or all
of our investment funds is
education. So K through 12 and
higher education is the biggest
and largest beneficiary of all
of our our our investment funds
through one means or another,
but you'll see that early
childhood is also rapidly
growing.
as well as beneficiaries like
health and infrastructure that
are getting uh some of the
additional uh new funds that
have been added, and general
government is growing quite a
bit, and that has to do with the
expected growth of the severance
tax permanent Fund, because the
severance tax permanent fund
goes straight into the general
fund and is non-earmarked. It
can be used for whatever purpose
that you all deem is most
necessary at the time.
And for FYA or excuse me, for
2025, we'll distribute over $2.5
billion to the state that is on
a recurring basis, and our
current baseline is that by
2050, these distributions to the
state could reach almost $10
billion.
And just over the next 10 years
alone, if you took that
cumulative benefit, these funds
are giving back to the state in
their budgeting purposes, $38
billion over the next 10 years
alone. So this is the benefit
that you all that the state is
continually receiving from these
investment funds, like it's a
little lost in the discussion
around how do we benefit from
these investment dollars and you
really see it show up and not
just the general fund, but
across and if we're just looking
at education on page 24, this is
to show the relative and growing
importance of these funds in the
overall budget process from all
of the funding sources that some
of our most important uh
services come from. So for
public schools, if you look at
the total K through 12 public
school operating budget in every
funding source it gets from
every source of state revenue,
investment revenue, and federal
funding, the permanent funds and
the uh
excuse me, the permanent funds
make up for over 25% of all
K through 12 education in the
state.
And if we're looking at early
childhood, that growth in
relative importance is
especially apparent when you see
that an FY 23 when this fund,
the early childhood fund, was
first established. These funds
made up about 6% of early
childhood funding. Today, in
fiscal year 26, between the
early childhood fund and
distributions from the land
grant fund, it is over 78% of
all early childhood funding,
including federal sources,
including other state sources.
It is really these permanent
funds that
is powering early childhood
funding all across the state.
When we move on to page 25, we
were talking before about how
the permit going back to the
general fund and how the
permanent fund distributions
could help offset this
dependence on oil and gas
revenues, and while it doesn't
fix the three-legged stool
problem. It changes the nature
of the third leg of the stool.
It has the actual potential to
do that. And so this is taking
figures from the consensus
revenue estimating Group in
their most recent long-term uh
forecast which was last
September. They
will have a new one coming up in
uh uh next month and we'll be
updating these figures.
But in fiscal year 25, the
permanent fund distributions
made up about 13% of funding.
Um, as you mentioned before,
total investments was about 16%,
that includes sto, but just the
permanent funds is about 13%. So
a very important function, but
definitely not an overwhelming
piece of that.
But by FY 50, their long-term
estimate is that permanent fund
distributions alone could make
up 32%. And when you look at the
size of the slice of severance
taxes and writs and royalties.
Today, 23% by FY 507.
And we're really doing exactly
what this legislature intended
to do by taking those windfalls
and investing them and
redistributing them back to
yourself. It's to reduce that
reliance on that immediate very
volatile severance tax and
royalty revenue, and instead
rely on a very, a much more
consistent, um, revenue source
that is your permanent fund
distributions.
And another way to look at this
same concept I'll end with is on
page 26, and what this looks at
is a counterfactual between what
revenues would have looked like
pre-Senate Bill 26 versus what
their current baseline is, um,
post S built as post Senate Bill
26. So this is just looking at
for revenue sources. It's
looking at, or excuse me, um, 4
types of revenues. So direct oil
and gas revenues, that's all
your production taxes, that's
all of your rents and royalties
indirect, uh, oil and gas
revenues, things like GRT and
oil and gas withholding within
the personal income tax and
stacks those two together. These
are the, the light red and dark
red bars.
And then it looks at your
permanent fund distributions,
your severance tax and your land
grant permanent fund. And what
you'll see is preina bill 26,
massive growth was expected in
the very near term, but that
those oil and gas revenues would
start to decline over time, and
your permanent fund
distributions couldn't make up
for that climb, that decline. It
helped, it definitely helped
buffer the decline, but it
couldn't make up for those
losses alone.
If you look on the right-hand
side for current law, that's
post Senate Bill 26, what you've
now done is said we're gonna
allow for more gradual organic
general fund growth, invest
those oil and gas revenues
instead, and now these light
blue um area, which is your
severance tax permanent fund
distributions, that's getting
significantly bigger. And when
you stack that along with your
land grant permanent fund
distributions, you see that not
only our revenues continue to be
expected to grow.
but they actually end up at a
place that's even larger than
you were in your initial
scenario, and that's the power
of compounding. And um it's
really the first time in the
state since you all passed these
stabilization mechanisms that
we've ever been able to say that
the state truly has a path to
reduce its general fund
budgetary revenue dependence on
oil and gas, and we're really
excited to be a part of that and
happy to answer any questions
you have.
Great. Thank you so much, Don,
and I appreciate that. And I
think, um, there certainly is
and, and kind of referring to, I
think, uh, representative
Terasas is that the, the reality
is that we have to look at the
long game in terms of reducing
our dependence on oil and gas
and also making sure that we
have stable revenue resources.
And so it's not something that's
going to happen tomorrow. The
reality is that it shouldn't
happen tomorrow. And so we have
to look at that and looking at
this, this long-term plan is
really kind of comforting of
understanding
that that we are trying to
diversify those revenue streams.
So I do have Senator Maestas,
uh, wanting to ask a question.
Do I have others? OK.
Presentative Lindstrom.
Representative Murphy
Um, I do want to remind folks,
um, if you will stick to the
questions, um, and if there are
any things that can be asked
offline to go ahead and do that.
So, uh, Senator Maestas, uh,
you're first to go.
Thank you, Madam Chair, like 35
minutes or
uh
just ask you a question and make
it quick. OK, I'll let you make
that decision. Alright, cool.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Ms. Iglesias,
gentlemen at in our loss is the
SIC's gains so great, great to
see you, just a couple points
and then, well, one is how many
of these funds are
constitutional?
that that in other words, the
voters would have to change the
dy na m ic s Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Mae says 3 of the funds
are constitutionally protected.
That's the land grant severance
tax and Water Trust Fund. Thank
you. And so just a quick point
and then maybe a couple of
questions that the, the function
of the SIC
and it's not a criticism, but
the function, the sole function
is to grow the funds.
is to increase the value of the
funds.
Uh, and they will protect that
that charge.
uh, and so any hints of uh
increasing distribution
contradict that function in
life, you grow the funds. The,
the, the culture in my opinion,
madam I'm sure of, of LFC and
it's, it's, we have the best
economists in the country. LFC
is when we get a, an analysis, a
fiscal analysis.
it assumes zero economic growth
and zero tax policy changes.
And so, and that's what we want.
We want to know what this bill
does, you know, in light of
current reality, and then, and
then you throw in the state land
office that the Constitutional
charge of the state land Office
is to increase royalties.
increase royalties first and
foremost and only increase
royalties. So anyway, these are
the culture of those
institutions uh that are
involved in these funds, but,
but as policymakers, Madam
Chair, we cannot embrace that
culture.
And, and, and choice.
um, on how do we grow this state
economically cause um
you know, the, the, the when it
was said, Madam Chair, we expect
to power the general fund.
by
by these investment funds, I
suggest we power the general
fund by growing an economy. So
quick, quick math, we, um, we
passed a permanent fund for
rural libraries. We want to
maintain that wonderful culture
of rural libraries. So there's
$30 million in the rural library
Fund.
5%. So this past year we spent
approximately 1.5 million.
1.5 million on rural libraries.
200,000 here, maybe a new
bathroom here, maybe a new wing
here, maybe some awnings for
outside, I don't know.
If we were to spend 30 million
today, thou would certainly
benefit the small towns and the
small rural libraries, but that
begs the question, well, what do
we do in 20 years? You, you used
up all the money.
Well, in 20 years, given
inflation.
that 30 million would be
approximately 40
42 $45 million. If in 20 years
we can't find $42 million for
rural libraries.
then, then shame on us. I, I, I
inquired.
to uh NCSL, which is the
national, as you know, the
national organization that
monitors state
state governments, and I asked
them, hey, is there any other
states
create permanent funds, create
trust funds with, with general
fund dollars.
It took me like 3 or 4 emails
and, and 2 phone conversations.
They didn't know what I was
talking about.
They they were freaking out.
They were like, wait, what?
So we're the only state
in the history of our country to
take cash, to take general fund
money, tax dollar money, and put
it in a trust fund.
uh for 5% annual distribution.
It's just uh
it's something that we need to
think about
um
because I don't see the point.
Well, anyway, that's, that's my
soapbox, but um, but I think the
point is I I'm sure that these
constitutional protective funds.
and maybe 2 or 3 or 4 others are
totally awesome. I think what we
should consider is the state
uh, the state, uh, the land
management fund, which this,
this committee doesn't talk
about because it didn't really
affect us. It goes straight from
the land office to the 21
beneficiaries. Of course, we
give them permission to spend it
through the appropriations Act,
but we don't, we just rubber
stamp that money. I think in a,
in a perfect policy world
there should be maybe less than
5 beneficiaries, the
the special schools, education,
early childhood.
I think we should appropriate
those monies
hold those institutions
harmless.
and it would be a much better
way of managing that fund, that
money and, and creating
oversight, for example, can I
get you to ask your questions,
for example, uh, Department of
Corrections is a beneficiary
that makes no sense. Thank you,
Ma. Thank you very much,
Senator. I appreciate that. And
so was there any response from
you to Senator Myasis or?
at risk of, yeah, I, I would
just say, um, you know,
LFC's three main missions for
the last two years has hasn't
absolutely been economic growth.
I just want to clarify that
absolutely that's the
preference.
Um, the, the, the challenge and
hopefully it'll dovetail very
translating economic development
benefits into revenue. And, and
so there may be a distinction
between trying to generate
economic development.
outside of its revenue gain, and
then also these kinds of
investments, which are intended
to be a revenue, um, issue. And
so maybe we'll see that in the
next
Before we go to Representative
Lindstrom, uh, Senator O'Malley,
did you want to
you indicated that there was
something based on this. No, no,
I, I, um,
I have the same concerns
actually as, as the senator.
uh Maestas. And so there's an
opportunity to talk about it, as
you said in the next
presentation.
because, you know, the reality
is
um, you know, we have a lot of
infrastructure needs statewide.
And
these interest, you know, types
of things that we want to fund
generate.
uh, you know, uh, and help the
economy.
and can generate more taxes. And
so, I think the issue is, are we
going to be sabers or hoarders,
or are we going to get money out
to communities that need it, so
that they can, you know, we can
build the economy. I think
that's basically the, the thing
to say. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And if I could add one wrinkle
to that is that in many ways,
these funds could be a way to
provide more money for that,
because I think we found in our
dynamic analysis that a lot of
these economic development
investments may may not be, may
actually be revenue losers. And,
and that may be OK, that may be
a worthwhile goal. And so how do
we get money from the sources
that we can to make those
investments, not expecting a
return in revenue.
Maybe, maybe just trying to
differentiate sort of in the
thought process, economic
development and revenues could
be separate. They can also be
aligned.
OK and that that does require
some
some discussion as well. Thank
you so much. Thank you,
senators. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Lundstrom and then
Representative Murphy. Did I
miss anybody else?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, a
couple things on the on the uh
top.
top 3 funds that's been
discussed. It's easy for us to
measure success with a couple of
them. For me, Madam Chair, the
hardest one for measuring
success is the early childhood
fund.
Uh, there's lots of funds going
in that, lots of money going in
there, it's a lot different than
when you can say we've met our
growth goal.
as you do in the other two
funds. When you talk about gee,
we've made our 7%, so we've,
we've successfully invested and
we have this to show for it.
It's a lot different
but my question, Madam Chair
goes is, I, I think Izzy might
be able to answer this. Do you
know what our latest federal
royalty payment is to the state.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair, I pulled
up here.
just in case, and it, this would
be an FY 24 since we don't have
final FY 25 figures yet, but
federal royalties total were 5.7
billion, but about 3 billion of
that went to the feds, so it's
split about half and half. So,
uh, maybe, maybe about half of
5.7 billion came to New Mexico.
OK, when we get that, um, as a
second source based on oil and
gas activity.
Does that go just into the
general fund.
Um
Madam Chair, um, only the limit
the the allowed amount, the
allowed amount up into the floor
goes into the general fund. And
then if there happens to be in
any given year amounts above
that, it goes either into the
early childhood trust fund, the
severance tax permit fund, or as
of last year, also the
behavioral the
starting this year, Behavioral
Health Trust fun. So our federal
royalty payment is split that
way.
That's right.
Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Murphy, and then
Representative Laricadena. Thank
you, ma'am Chair. Thank you,
panel. Um, just a couple of
quick questions. First, when
relating to slide 9, low price
scenario. Can you tell me what
price you used and what, what
assumptions you use in that?
Um, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative for the question.
This is from December, so I'm
trying to jog my memory. It is
fluid, so it's not one steady
stagnant price. I want to say
it's in the low 40s. I don't
believe it drops into the high
30s, but it's around that area
in this scenario, and we'll be
updating the analysis with new
oil price figures, um, next
week. OK, thank you very much.
Um, next question, just out of
curiosity, I note on 17, there's
a number of third-party clients
and just for my education, I've
seen New Mexico Tech
Highlands, a number of
universities, but I don't see
UNM or Mexico State, so they
must manage their investments
some other way.
Madam Chair Representative
Murphy, uh, yes, uh.
these clients either approach
us, uh, with a desire to invest
with our funds, but they're not
required to in any way. Great.
Thank you for that. Uh, Madam
Chair and panel, one last
question. It relates somewhat to
slides 1920 and 20, well, 1920
and 1925. number I'm trying to
get to in my head is, is that we
have roughly 64 billion in these
funds. What would the, what
would the, the, the, if you
assumed no oil and gas income.
at some point in the future.
Let's say 2050, just for
example.
What would that fund have to be?
How much would we need in
reserve funds to fund the state?
And keeping up with inflation
and also, uh, you know,
relatively, um
you know, conservative
investment on budget increases
and that sort of thing.
180, 200 billion
Madam Chair, we haven't
attempted that analysis. I'm, I
would be very interested too.
Yeah, thank you very much. And
then the last one, I think it's
20 excuse me, 26 perhaps is the
very last of.
And let me make sure that I
understand this is that looking
at the right side under current
law.
Um, it looks like when you
combine
direct oil and gas and indirect
oil and gas in FY 24, for
example, were roughly somewhere
or Bayan.
4 4.4, 4.5.
And when you go out to FY 50
you're just below 4, and I'm
just guessing, guesstimating
that's maybe around 3.8.
So that's only a 20% decline in
revenue over the next
what is it 25 years. So that's a
pretty modest decline, right? So
you're even, even 25 years from
now.
a big part of our budget is
still gonna be relying on oil
and gas. Is that a fair
statement?
Yes, Madam Chair, that's a fair
statement. Thank you, ma'am,
Chair.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
the committee. One of the things
that, um, uh, and I'm, I'm
really grateful for you
recognizing which things can be
talked about and like asking for
handouts. What's, what's going
to happen is Christina and
staffer are taking notes on all
of those different questions so
that we don't get 20,000 emails,
what she's going to do is
compile it into one.
So just to, to, so at the end of
the day, the questions that are
asked in terms of follow-up from
our presenters, that will all be
sent via one email, um, or two,
all depending on the size of, of
the information, but I just want
to let, uh, have you all kind of
keep an eye out for that. Any
other questions before we wrap
up this panel?
All right, thank you. I
appreciate that. Um, Don, thank
you very much. And, and this is
a lot to digest.
Um, and in some cases, we might
need a little Pepto-Bismol
because it's so much
information, um, but uh uh I do
appreciate that we've got
Brendan and Drew who are gonna
be speaking next on the tax
expenditure assessment.
Uh, so I appreciate that. Um, we
are gonna try, um,
we're gonna do our best, our
next presentation will start at
one o'clock. Uh, we'll probably
have a little bit of a short
break for lunch, uh, and then
get back to it cause I do wanna
start back again at one o'clock,
but, uh, Brendan and, and Drew,
I'm gonna let you talk about um
tax expenditure, uh, uh, uh,
assessment and let's uh.
see how that goes
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, my name is
Brendan Gray. Um, I'm an
economist at LFC. I'm joined by
Drew Weaver. He's an evaluator
at LFC. I have my stopwatch
going. This is a snappy
presentation. We are happy to
pick up really fast.
Um, and, uh, yeah, there's a lot
of information in these slides.
I'll move through some things.
Happy to come back, um, really
the goal of this presentation is
threefold. Uh, first,
tell you this new product that
LFC is working on the tax
expenditure assessments.
Second, uh, give you an update
on the work that we've done so
far, uh, not only do we have a
new product, we have a couple
deliverables already produced.
Drew will talk about those. Um,
and then lastly, uh these uh
work products are going to be
developed over the interim and
will accumulate in a report.
at the end of the uh inter
interim period uh before the
legislative session, and we're
happy to take uh feedback as a
tax policy committee um on that
report. What's like I mentioned,
Drew is an evaluator. I'm an
economist. We typically don't
work together, uh, but we have
been on these this new work
product. It's tax expenditure
assessment. It looks like this
is a one-pager front and back um
on state tax expenditures, and
the goal is to get a better
sense of what we're
buying when we're investing in
uh tax policy.
If you turn with me to um slide
3.
Uh this has those tax
expenditures as of FY 24, the
categories um that we're
spending on. You have citizen
benefits around 1.2 billion, uh,
healthcare around a billion.
Economic development, close to
600 million specialized
industries and environment. And
we're focusing this interim on
the economic development, tax
expenditures.
Turn on slide 4
This breaks down those economic
development, tax expenditures.
And what I really love about
this slide is the pie chart on
the left.
because when we're talking about
economic development policy in
New Mexico, really our main
investment, our main way we
support economic development is
through the tax code. Almost 90%
of our spending is through tax
expenditures, and those are
broken out on the table on the
right, uh, that has what the
expenditure is, the amount, and
the share of.
And then the tan circles, those
are the um expenditures that
we've already done in assessment
on.
All right, I've been talking
about these what's in them.
Um.
I'm gonna skip slide 5. That's a
definition of tax expenditures
there uh happy to refer to it if
you need to. Uh but slide 6,
this summarizes what's in these
tas. So first off,
uh we start with the um great
work of the tax and rev
department.
their tax expenditure report. We
look at the history of the tax
expenditures. We consult with
the experts, um, we get a
history of the amount we spent
over time. Uh, we applied that
data, uh, and we put it into our
economic modeling software like
modeling Incorporated, uh, that
looks at the dynamic impacts of
this spending on the economy,
and with that, we estimate the
economic return and the return
in revenue.
And then lastly, we also look at
whether the credit or the
expenditure meets tax policy,
uh, best practices.
Uh doesn't have a purpose
statement? Is there an
expiration date? Are they
adhering to LFC tax expenditure
policies, those kinds of things.
All of that
again, the goal is to provide a
snapshot of what we're getting
when we're investing in that $3
billion.
What these assessments don't
include our recommendations.
Uh, they don't have a cost
benefit analysis.
We're not looking across states
quite yet, and then we're not
implying any causal causally.
Um, and all of that is
opportunities for future study,
but we're in the preliminary
stages of developing.
Slide 7, some definitions, got
to go through it, should be
pretty quick, just so we're all
talking about the same thing,
uh, return in revenue. This
one's fairly intuitive, looks at
over a twenty-year time horizon.
Um, how much are state revenues
increasing, uh, and then after
accounting for the cost of the
expenditure.
So a negative return in revenue
means that the increase in
revenue that's attributable to
that tax expenditure is not.
greater than the cost of that.
tax expenditure
A negative 25% return in revenue
means that every $1 we're
spending we're foregoing 25
cents.
and a recapturing 75 cents.
Similarly, economic return on
investment ROI. This is looking
at the economy as a whole.
turning revenues just state
revenues.
ROI is the entire economy and is
asking
uh how much is state GDP
increasing over that 20 year
time horizon after accounting
for, so 25% return on
investments, means that for
every $1
slide 8, this is the last slide
I'm going to have before I turn
it over to Drew to give that
update. Um, and I think this
might be the most important
slide that I have on here. So
I'll spend a few minutes on
this. Um, there was some
discussion earlier about static
scoring, dynamic scoring, and
then cost benefit analysis. The
Taxi reports represent.
the first uh stab at dynamic.
What they don't have at this
point is
um, as you all know, they're
useful in comparing across
policy domains, um, and really
what they allow is for an
analyst to say that a certain
policy is worth it or not, or is
good or not.
um across policy domains.
And unfortunately, the tax
expenditure assessments aren't
there yet, and so we can't make
those kinds of statements at
this point.
Um.
So if you're
reso if you're gonna, if you're
reading the tax expenditure
assessments
you might ask, is this good? Is
this bad? We can't answer those
kinds of questions, um, because
we're not looking holistically
um at, let's say the opportunity
cost, the value for the next
best investment, those kinds of
things we're developing that
ability, um, and it's something
the committee is interested in.
So we will have that eventually.
And instead,
what we'll see in our tax
expenditures. How does this tax
expenditure compare to
everything?
else is is having a bigger
impact on the economy to other
um types of all right. That was
quite a mouthful. Last slide is
just a reference slide. Uh this
is what's in the taxi reports.
Uh, you can refer back to this
if you at any point you get
lost. It shows what each element
is and where it comes from.
And with that, I will pass it
over to Drew to give an update
on our work so far.
Thank you, Brendan, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
Drew Weaver, I'm a program
evaluator with the LFC.
Uh, on slide 10, we've got a
brief overview of the 5 credits
we've assessed so far. These
include the rural job tax
credit, the high wage jobs tax
credit, the technology jobs and
research and development credit.
the Laboratory partnership with
Small Business Credit and the
Technology Readiness Credit
against GRT or trigger.
These presentations, we've
grouped them thematically, job
creation incentives, technology
and lab credits, and future
reports will continue with other
industries like manufacturing.
In terms of annual expenditures,
you can see that these here
range and reach up to 11 million
approximately for high wage in
tech R&D down to Trigger, which
is only a few years old and
therefore still growing.
On the next slide, we have an
overview of several of the
variables and metrics that
Brendan explained.
This includes economic return on
investment, which he mentioned
as a reflection of the growth in
GDP after accounting for the
cost of the expenditure.
As you can see, the economic ROI
is generally positive but
varies.
We also have return in revenue,
or how much the state revenue
increases or decreases because
of the expenditure.
We can see here that the
increase in tax revenue is not
greater than the cost,
reflecting a trade-off.
as we try to support growth in
particular sectors or regions or
have other goals. On the next
slide, you can see an overview
of the design elements, and I
apologize, we're running through
these quickly again. I know
lunch is probably ready.
Most of these credits, excuse
me, um,
me, or at least partially
fulfill their statutory purpose,
whether that is to incentivize
job creation or create a
tax-friendly business
environment.
Many are also relatively
well-structured. The strong
reporting requirements or the
specifically target export-based
industries, etc.
At the same time, there are
opportunities to further
strengthen them, for example,
through expenditure caps,
expiration dates, or and how
they target distressed areas.
Finally, if you turn to the next
page, we have a more in-depth
look at how each of these
credits, uh, kind of operate
individually.
I won't spend long on each one,
but instead this uh instead use
this kind of as an example to
show you.
what the assessments will look
like, what type of criteria are
included.
Uh, to that note, you will
notice that on the bottom of the
slide we have a link to the full
assessments online on our LFC
landing page.
There you can see that for each
of these status updates or
assessments.
uh, if you click on that link,
you'll see things like overview,
legislative history, claim
history, plus several other
metrics, jobs created, etc.
Uh, to that note, um, I'm not
going to spend too long on any
of these now. If you would like
to see those, you can, and we're
happy to stand in for questions.
So just kind of quickly move
through them just to, to kind of
remind you what we're looking
at.
Uh, so far we've looked at 5,
including the rural job tax
credit, which allows employers
to claim credit of 12.5% or 25%,
depending on the area's
population of a certain amount
of wages for a new qualifying
job.
We've looked at the high wage
job tax credit. Again, that's a
larger 1, 11 million a year, uh,
which likewise provides a credit
for a percentage of wages for
jobs created with wages over
60,000 in urban areas.
40,000 rural areas
We've got our three tech, uh,
credits, the technology jobs and
Research and Development Credit,
which supports technology-based
business doing research and
development by providing a
credit of up to 5% of qualifying
expenditures, 10% in rural
areas.
And then finally, we've got the
lab Partnership Credit and
Trigger, both of which connect
our two national laboratories,
Los Alamos and Sandia.
um, sort of, uh, their expertise
with small businesses, um,
through credits that offset the
value of the technical services
provided by those laboratories.
Again, that kind of is the quick
overview and that concludes um
roughly our summary of the 5
credits. Each of these programs
has a detailed report available
online, as I said, but we're
also happy to answer any
questions the committee may
have.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you so much, gentlemen. I
appreciate that. Um, you know,
I, I, I'm gonna go to
Representative Lindstrom and
then Representative Chandler,
but I have to tell you that I'm,
I'm already thinking of what
mindless podcast I'm gonna
listen to on the way home
because I need that in order for
this information to go to my
brain, uh, correctly cause it's
so much of a numbers dump. So
thank you. I appreciate that.
Representative Lindstrom and
then Representative Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
looking at page 10 of the uh
taxi report summary. What kind
of credits are these for each
one? Madam Chair Representative,
uh, what kind of credits, uh,
they are, um.
you mean in terms of
refundability, are transferable?
Are they passed through the
question I had from the first
pre presentation. Excellent
question, Madam Chair. In the
weeds, wonk, I like it. Uh, high
wage jobs is uh refundable, uh,
rural uh job tax.
carry forward and transfer I
believe that might not be right.
Therefore, we tech jobs, uh, is
partially refundable, but if you
meet a certain threshold, it's
more refundable than that
Uh laboratory partnership, uh,
is not refundable. That's just a
great credit for the labs, uh,
same with, Madam Chair, why I
asked the question earlier.
When we talked about that in the
first presentation. I think it's
important that when we get the
report back, we know what kind
of credits they are.
Uh, and, and
because when you look at
something like.
the one that I wrote ow to is on
page 11.
when I looked at technology
readiness credit, and the fact
that that it has been a negative
87% return on revenue
I think, but wait a minute, what
is this? and how is it actually
supposed to work?
So I, I would ask that when you
prepare your next update. I
think this is great. When I was
LFC chair, I had him buy this
program.
because I thought we needed it
as legislators to understand
what we're actually getting. So
if we could, we could talk about
what kind of credits they are,
and is this as alarming as the
chart would show.
Probably not if we dig into it,
same way with the lab
partnership with small business.
uh, economic return on
investment is 103%, but 80 80%
return on revenue.
But if you go back and you look
at it is a, is a uh straight
credit.
straight credit, but what's its
basis?
for the credit
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
the laboratory Partnership with
Small Business Credit is uh
provided
to the state's national
laboratories for proportional to
that the value that. So it's the
value for the service, and so
it's one of these things that
Madam Chair, a services provided
to small business that say
Sandia as an example does on on
uh reverse osmosis. I know that
cause we've used them for that
before.
for different companies that
need to save water, so there's a
value of time.
and service that those technical
people provide to a company in
McKinley County and because they
do that, they get.
that.
LLC within Sandia receives a
GRT. Is that how it works? Adam
Chair Representative, exactly.
OK. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom. I have Representative
Chandler, Representative Duncan,
did I misrepresentative Murphy?
What?
All right. Let's go check the
longer I, I'll get with him. OK,
I do appreciate that. Thank you
very much. Thank you. uh, and
then Senator Figueroa, I think.
Am I correct on that? Um, all
right, so Representative
Chandler, thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. I have a
question on page 4, sales to
manufacturers GRT.
um
it's the largest uh tax
expenditure in this economic.
category. Um
the labs are also going to be
able to take some advantage of
that GRT.
deduction. Is that not right?
And have they started? That's my
question.
Los Alamos especially, I'm not
sure about Sandia.
That's right, Madam Chan
representative. I think it's in
the coming fiscal year. I don't
believe the production of
plutonium pits. They this may
apply. That's right. And so it,
it, it's going to be worth
following up with, um, to dig
into the data to see if it's
possible, if we can disaggregate
the tax expenditure by county.
I'm not sure, um, but that, that
would give us a hint as to
whether or not the jump, because
there was a recent jump. It's
coming from Los Alamos. I can
assure you there's virtually no
manufacturing in Los Alamos
County at this point in time.
There's not enough land for that
kind of activity. So it will be
derived
primarily on Madam chair from
Los Alamos, if, if it starts to
kick in. And I think we have had
some assessments done because
there have been some bills
look looking at a way to maybe
not have that as a deduction for
pit production activities at the
lab, and we were looking at what
may be 80 million for the state
might that one that was an
estimate.
Am I right about that? Madam
Chair, is he, Madam Chair, that
number's ringing a bell, but it
might have been both state and
local, OK. Well, um, just wanted
to highlight that for people,
and it's something for us to
watch, um, it will impact the
locals and they're already
having meetings to talk about
increasing, guess what, the
local increment, um, so lessons
learned every time you
have one of these, it impacts
the locals and sometimes the
locals uh can't make it up any
other way but to increase the
GRT at the local level. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Chandler for
that. Representative Duncan and
then Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
starting on page 13, going
through 17, we're talking about
usage returns.
or usage trends and one
specifically return in revenue,
1 or a 3 year on that, and so
I'm wondering, uh, do we happen
to have
ballpark figure on when we think
that that will one go into the
black on both of those and how
many years that will take.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
your question is at what point
would be expositive?
uh for, for each
Madam Chair, it's a really good
question and I have to
think on that a bit. Um, I think
you are getting at a really good
question. What could we do? um
or is there a baseline scenario
where the return in in in this
scenario, we're looking at
20-year time horizon.
So,
the
uh estimated increase in
revenue.
and won't unless there's some uh
drastic shift
And so we wouldn't expect that
to become positive, unless
there's something worth
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you on that, uh, Brenda. So,
you're saying 20 years out and
we don't expect it to get into
the positive.
that what I'm here
Madam Chair Representative
Yes, the increase in revenue
isn't positive, and I'll just
point out for the committee that
this is not um the full cost
benefit. Uh, we're not saying
the full benefits aren't
positive. I just a specific tax
revenue. But yes, to your
question. OK, thank you, and
that's what I'm wondering. So we
have an economic ROI and then we
have a return in revenue, and
I'm trying to figure out if it's
20 years and we're not getting
any of those back, and they're
both in the negative, then why
are we doing it? That's my
question. Thank you.
I don't know if there's a
response to that or if you want
to marinate on that. Um.
Madam Chair, and there doesn't
have to be a response. I just,
that's my concern is we give
these things away and then
there's no, at the end of 20
years, are we're going to say,
OK, we're, we're yanking it, get
ready because it's not helping
us, the state a bit.
Thank you, thank you, thank you,
Representative Duncan. I
appreciate that. Senator
Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think,
uh, many of my concerns have
been addressed right there, uh,
but I would put in, I'm gonna
ask a question that Izzy might
need to come up to answer, to
connect this chart
with this information, and with
respect to volatility, because
that's something you mentioned,
and we have made
deliberate decisions to reduce
volatility in our revenue with
all of these funds
and it sounds like you're
telling me, Izzy, that we are
reintroducing volatility back
into our revenue stream with
these tax expenditures. Is that
accurate? Senator,
thank you.
I think
you know, this is, this is the
push and pull, the, the
balancing act.
challenge that you all face,
which is to accomplish
oftentimes very admirable policy
goals, but it comes at a cost
and the cost
um is likely
revenue volatility, if not from
the credit.
oh, sorry, go on
I, I was just gonna add one more
connection, I think is on the,
on the return in revenue
conversation is, is, this is,
this is a great conversation to
hear because this is, I think
um, in my mind, you know, is, is
the purpose to generate more
revenue. It may or may not be,
or is, and, and the economic
return may be positive and still
be in the red on revenue, which
means you might need another
revenue source other than the
economic development incentive.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, I, I appreciate that
that distinction, but that means
that that cost benefit analysis
that is out there in the future
because it's complex and labor
intensive.
really needs to be moved into
present time because that is the
basis by which we're gonna have
to make these decisions. My only
other comment is request on page
4, when you charted these out.
like as you go forward doing
your assessments and analysis,
could we do them in the order of
size. I'd really like to see the
assessment on sales to
manufacturer GRT deduction, and
then the said apportionment and
then the film tax credit, kind
of in that order so that we have
big money data first.
Thanks
Thank you, Senator Figaro. I
have Representative Lara Cadena
and then Senator Bergmans. You
had something though that you
wanted to pivot off of
representative if you don't mind
if Senator, go ahead, Senator.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I was just wondering,
could you share with the
committee that the Excel sheet
that
uh like picture came from.
It's in the slide. I'm sure,
absolutely.
And just to warn you that
Senator Bergmann's love's Excel
spreadsheets. She's really good
at it, so that's, I'm not
surprised by that question. So
thank you. Um, Representative
Larcadena, thank you, Madam
Chair and presenters,
understanding that this is on
the agenda, both as an
introduction and somewhat of an
overview. I do have a couple of
direct questions, as many of my
colleagues have on site for, um,
but the lead in for that, which
I appreciate, right at the inter
level, is slide 3 where we see
the the big buckets or stack
chart of where
these expenditures are, um, I
appreciate that today, health,
the healthcare bucket.
is not part of this presentation
or on today's agenda, but I was
curious what um
understanding all the
definitions you've laid out. I
didn't actually see a definition
of economic development, but I
was surprised to see the medical
supplies GRT deduction on slide
4. How does that come into play
as economic development, just as
an Madam Chair, Representative,
great question. Uh, that these,
um, classifications come from
the tax and revenue department,
uh, for the most part, so we
borrowed their classifications
and, and absolutely
representative.
I believe that is one of the
incentives to keep hospitals
open.
Um, if there's some on the
equipment piece, if there's some
credit availability there.
um.
it was my understanding it's to
keep them open, Madam Chair
Secretary, looks like she may
have something to offer. So.
Sorry, Madam Chariot, I would
just note too that this slide
before that, the
you know, that we can put them
in different buckets
legitimately. They, that could
be in both buckets, but I'm not
sure off the top of my head
which one we have it in.
That might be the differing, it
might be one of the things
Yes, madam Chair, anything it
gets me to my, um, more
overarching comment, possibly.
is that
we haven't defined economic
development and you are using
categories that we've set up
somewhere so that we can better
measure and see the implications
of these tax expenditures that
we have in place. But when I
think of that healthcare bucket
today, um, I see something like
a GRT deduction. I also see
something at the bottom rural
job tax credit, right? So I
imagine not under economic
development, but under
healthcare, if we were seeing a
healthcare slide, we would have
something like the real job
healthcare, the rural job
provider credit.
right? So some of these um
policies we've had are
interconnected in how they land
in the communities and what
we're trying to do. So I always
appreciate, Madam Chair, that
LFC, right? If we introduce a
bill, we see how you vet these
tax bills, but even as you've
named here, there isn't analysis
on the policy implications that
we're trying to meet. So, um,
Madam Chair, not on the agenda
today, but because there's some
healthcare things named here.
For example, the one I always
raised, the rural health tax
provider credit.
I say all day every day. I don't
think that is.
delivering
any
kind of step in our direction to
retain recruit, hold on to
providers. But I do wonder
if those questions should be
within the economic development
conversation, just like they're
also in the citizen benefit
conversation just like they're
in the healthcare conversation.
So I appreciate, Madam Chair,
that today we got a slide on
economic development, but would
love if you all have something
to offer, like what, what
creates the parameters of
something to be either in
economic development or not. I
tend to see in this legislature,
we pay a lot of attention to
something when it's economic
development. We put hundreds of
millions into economic
development, but I don't see the
same kind of care
and consideration around what it
means to have access to
healthcare, for example. So,
just more, um, some musings
today, but would, if there's
more parameters on how that's
how that's defined, whether it's
the codes that we've established
or otherwise, I'd be curious to
hear more. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
I think it's a great point, a
good flag to remember, uh, in
our presentations to include, I
expect in the report at the end
of the year, we will have some
of that discussion. I, I
imagine, especially as it
relates to that or, or others.
And the last thing I'll add is
uh one of the very exciting is
that the goal is eventually to
have
one and so that conversation
you're having with um
healthcare. One day we'll, we'll
get there and we'll have
similar report for, for
Thank you so much,
Representative. Any other
questions before we uh turn
these to Bella's loose, and we
give our brains a little bit of
a break.
from, uh, as what Senator Sheer
and I are calling to each other
a number dump, um, cause it's a
lot
Um, thank you both for, for this
and thank you for also keeping
your, your presentation tight.
Um, we've had a lot of
information this morning and uh
very, very grateful for it, uh,
as we continue, uh, and
especially with this committee
asking very thoughtful and
poignant and relative questions
um about these, about why we're
doing what we're doing and why
we're talking about money, uh,
the way we do. Um, before we
break for lunch, um, we do have
two bits of things. Make sure to
fill out your forms in the
the middle envelopes there and
get those into Cristina or any
of the staff. Um, we do need to
vote on minutes since we do have
a quorum. Uh, the minutes are
also in that folder. Uh, they
are from our work meeting.
Uh, so what I will need to, to
have, uh, is if there are any
questions or changes to the
minutes.
Otherwise, I need a motion to
approve the minutes, a motion
from uh Representative Duncan. I
have a second from Senator, uh,
Sher. Um, any opposition to
approving the minutes.
Seeing none the minutes are
approved.
All right, so we have, oh my
goodness, what a day and so
grateful. I, I really am if you
see me smiling, it's because
I'm, I'm grateful for the
questions that all of us are
asking, um, because they do come
back to our communities, uh,
either rural or, or urban
communities and how that's
really important for us to think
about, uh, as we continue doing
the work that we're doing, we
are gonna be breaking for lunch.
Uh, we're gonna be back promptly
at one o'clock. Um, I wanna
thank Lauren Abbey, who is the
government affairs director for
the Museum of New Mexic
o Foundation. She's taking good
care of us and providing this
lunch, and that's back in here,
right? Um, there are a couple of
vegetarian options because of my
vegetarian wife, I know to make
sure that those things are
always included, um, and we will
be back here at one o'clock. Uh,
so thank you very much. We, uh,
stand in recess.
