Very good, yes.
Will it be on, on online or
just?
You just have it physically,
which is fine.
I just want to make sure that
you've got the information the
way you want it. Um, if it's, we
have a, a physical copy for
ourselves if, if you prefer to
do that, that's fine. Can we
both put it, we have our
packages, but can we also put it
on the screens and then for
those of you that are online.
I assume that they'll be able to
see as well. Um,
yeah.
very good.
Here we go. Thank you. Thank
you.
And will we operate that from
this side or
your team do that.
Isaac's got it, all right.
This was work
Thinks they're doing. There we
go.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
members of the committee, it's a
pleasure to be here with you
this morning. My name is Rob
Black. I am the uh cabinet
secretary designee for the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department, um, with me is Isaac
Romero, uh, the deputy
secretary, uh, today, we'll be
discussing, um,
Pardon me, today we'll be
discussing a brief overview of
our relevant economic trends in
the state, relationship between
EDD's work and the work of this
committee to ensure we have
smart, we're, we're supporting
and, and promoting smart fiscal
policy and growing the state's
revenues and we'll be, we'll
give you an update on the status
of the EDD's state plan as we do
those updates and a summary of,
of our incentive programs
offered by the Economic
Development Department.
Um, first, I'd like to start
with EDD's mission.
Uh, the mission of the Mexico
economic development department
is to improve the lives of New
Mexico families by increasing
economic opportunity and
providing a place for businesses
to thrive. We take this mission
extremely seriously at the
department. Um, both in the
context of how it impacts
individuals in our state, but
also the pathways for those
individuals to to find
prosperity.
Um
Next, I would like to move to
slide 4, our economic trends.
In New Mexico, we've had a 1.5%
average growth rate.
Uh, in the last decade, in
Mexico's gross state product has
lagged behind the Southwest
Regional Average growth by 7%.
So that's in the last decade.
Unemployment rate is 4% with
significant regional variations
within the state.
Where we have seen in some very
positive news is around wage
growth, and New Mexico has the
highest wage growth in the
country in 2023, 2024, with
average salaries rising by 6.5%.
It also like to sit, you know,
as it relates to gross state
product that number of lagging
behind by 7% over the last
decade, while that is true, over
the last 3 years, that has
shrunk dramatically, and we have
actually turned the
turn the tide on that and, and
have been greet.
Meeting national averages, so
again, it is a positive that
we're moving in the right
direction, but we do have, we're
starting from a low point,
frankly. So, um,
wanted to highlight that as a as
a
As we, as an area of progress,
but ground that in where we've
been over the last decade.
Our labor force participation
rate continues to to lag many in
the country at 57.2%, ranking
44th nationally and our per
capita income is 54,428, again
ranked 46th nationally.
Again pairing that with the fact
that we have some of the fastest
wage growth. So we're heading,
we have, we're going on the
right trajectory, but we have a
long way to come from.
Move forward.
It's like 5.
Um, looking at economic
continuing looking at our
economic trends.
Um, stagnation in Mexico's
economy can partially be
attributed to a few things.
Over-reliance on industries with
limited employment growth.
Lack of economic
diversification, which is a key
indicator of broader economic
health and economies around the
world.
The state economy driven is
driven by 4 major sectors.
Um, according to our analysis.
Those areas and, and, and you
see these.
With the LFC and with your work,
our government, government
enterprises.
Finance, insurance, real estate,
rental, and leasing,
professional and business
services and mining quarrying
and oil and gas extraction.
Mexico's public sector workforce
accounts for almost 24% of our
total workforce.
Mexico is among the 10 least
economically diverse states in
the US.
So EDD is what his goals is to
bring new jobs to the state
outside of public sector
employment.
And grow revenues revenues as
well outside of our extractive
industries, so that we're
building a more resilient and
diverse economy. Doing so will
make again, will help diversify
our economy.
Um, you know, I'm, I'm a, a
product of Lee County, New
Mexico. I grew up in the Permian
Basin. Um, I watched many cycles
of my relatives with their oil
and gas servicing businesses
going bankrupt, starting up a
new business and, and do it
going through those cycles. It
can be very difficult on
communities. Um, the San Juan
San Juan Basin, uh, and our
Northwest as it relates to our
coal mine closures are examples
of those.
to economies that we want to
help mitigate as we build a more
diverse and resilient economy.
All right. And then on page
slide 6.
Um,
there are 3 main paths to
assuring that long-term revenue
that we're building those
long-term revenue opportunities
for New Mexico. Again, we
talked, I talked about the need
to diversify into new
industries, uh, increasing our
investments and continuing our
investments in the state's
permanent funds to create wealth
for future generations in
improving our fiscal policy
structures and encouraging
economic efficiency to increase
savings.
It's important to note that
this, that, that this happened,
that we do this at the state
level. However, local
governments face distinct
revenue challenges against, in
particular in regions around the
state that are less diverse, and
so, therefore more vulnerable to
those impacts.
As you're familiar with state
revenues have grown
significantly in in the in the
recent years primarily due to
shale, the shale boom and up tip
in activity in the Permian
Basin. And as you also know, as
revenues have increased, so has
government spending.
Mexico still faces significant
fiscal vulnerabilities.
Despite our increased revenues,
the state remains fiscally
vulnerable, um.
And revenue growth has been
unstable.
Mexico has the 6th highest level
of revenue volatility in the US.
Mexico's combination of revenue
volatility and lack of economic
diversification, make our
economy more vulnerable to
external shocks. So again, these
are things that
may sit outside of
Our control here in New Mexico,
even outside of the US control,
whether you're thinking about uh
the conflict in Ukraine, uh,
OPEC, other types of activities
that have direct impact on us
that we have very little ability
to impact.
Slide number 9.
Um, this is looking at our
regional and local disparities,
as I, as I mentioned earlier,
local governments have a, a very
different reality here in the
state at times. This is as a, as
mentioned, especially true for
regions and localities that rely
on the single industries to
drive their economies.
Eddie Lee County Drive derive
over half of local property
taxes, approximately 30% of GRT
from extractive industries.
It's important to note that
these figures only capture
direct dependence.
This, the actual degree of those
counties dependence on
extractive industries, both
direct and indirect, is
substantially higher because
As you know, and Eddie and Lee
County, almost all of our
businesses, whether they're, you
know, clothing outfitters, other
types of things are tied to the
industry that provides those
jobs.
As we have seen in Northwest, a
local economies can be
devastated by events such as the
cold closures and downturns.
They experience an acute degree
of physical vulnerability and
lack the tools like permanent
funds at a local level, save for
their futures.
Given both statewide and
regional and local challenges.
EDD is supporting economic
diversification efforts around
the state.
Diversification or growing new
industries makes economies more
resilient and creates new jobs
and revenues to to fund public
services.
And our, our hope is that our
work is central to that
diversification.
You state plan.
Uh, 2024, 25, 245 update.
Um
It's really a plan focused on
that that diversification of the
New Mexico economy.
And address this issues of
dependence on industries that
dominate employment, like the
public sector, and those that
dominate revenue like the
extractive industries.
This year EDD undertook the
first in-house authorship and up
for an update to our original
2021s.
Report.
It was led by Kayla Lucero
Matucci and supported by policy
fellows,
these policy fellows included
individuals from the the Harvard
Tubbin Center for State and
Local Governments.
The plan aims to promote growth
in diverse industries to create
jobs and revenue for the state.
New Mexico has many unique
unique advantages in the chosen
industries to make us both
regionally and globally
competitive.
It for, and this is what
industries are good for us to
really pursue as we think about
this. So, you know, do we have a
unique advantage?
Do we have a workforce that is
uh that that is already existing
that can be their skills can be
adopted to these new jobs.
Do we have a pathway for those
jobs, for those training for
those jobs.
There must be a strong driver
for revenue for the state for it
to be a good industry for us to
pursue.
Um
New Mexico must have the
appropriate supply chains for to
get goods and services to
market, including sometimes
physical infrastructure.
In many cases, geographic assets
like solar, irradiance or
geothermal energy which truly
are relevant factors for our
outdoor recreation in Mexico's
natural assets are also relevant
as we think about our
competitive advantages.
Industries must benefit New
Mexico's communities by creating
a pathway to economic
opportunity, security, and
prosperity for New Mexicans.
Finally, for a good industry for
New Mexico must be a stable
industry with dynamic potential
to expand with new
opportunities.
As as it relates to the features
of our state plan update.
37% of the original
recommendations from the 2021
report have been accomplished.
We're working now to develop new
data and analysis about the key
drivers to the Mexico economy as
part of our our update plan
update and substantial community
engagement, including displaced
working with displaced
coworkers, the cards, as well as
tribal engagement working
groups.
We determine that in addition to
enhancing growth in New Mexico's
target economies. There are
cross-cutting challenges
relevant to our entire economy.
These include a focus in the
plan and bolstering site
readiness to improve business
attraction and expansion
efforts.
We think this is really
important, especially in our
rural communities where we can
partner with state and local
governments, local economic
development organizations to
identify areas where we can
develop strategic economic
development sites.
Uh, help work with our
legislators, our executives to
invest capital outlay in those
sites in a way that make them
more competitive, so that we can
be faster to market for a
particular location for that
might be good for intelligent
manufacturing, uh, and good for
other bioscience lab, etc.
Um, that will allow us to
compete more effectively with
our neighboring states.
We want to increase our
regulatory efficiency. Um, the,
the
EDD will be supporting efforts
to improve our regulatory
transparency through the 60 day
session to look at how long, how
long does it take us to do
license and permits and the
construction industry, on
average, and how then can we
improve those, uh, not by
setting deadlines, but by
creating again transparency so
that we can better manage those
processes, um, on behalf and in
partnership with our business
community.
Modernizing our systems of data
management, so that all
stakeholders from local
governments to businesses and
investors can easily easily
understand and navigate the New
Mexico economy.
And continued analysis of areas
of comparative advantage and
opportunity.
An example of that is in 2021,
We, we looked at cybersecurity
as an important area of
opportunity for New Mexico as a,
as a strategic area.
And that continues to be, and
New Mexico Tech is a leader in
that for us.
But quantum computing has also
become an area within the last
few years where we are uniquely
competitive.
Um, Sandia National Labs has a
fab where uh companies are
coming to be able to test
quantum computing, New Mexico's
University of New Mexico has one
of the best graduate programs,
doctoral programs in antum
computing in the world, and we
are actually seeing our
workforce coming out of New
Mexico going into the largest
and and most successful quantum
computing companies around the
country, around the world and
the country. We are uniquely
positioned for that space, but
it's not something that we would
have.
identified in 2021. So we want
to be reflective to where we can
be most competitive for that
sort of opportunity and growth,
and that's an example of why
we're continuing to do these
plan updates.
Um, we want to make sure that
we're seizing federal funding
opportunities, especially those
in clean energy, technology, and
infrastructure.
And then supporting communities
facing economic uncertainty due
to dependence on extractive
industries, as we discussed
earlier.
We're also working towards a
more nuanced understanding of
New Mexico's unique assets, uh,
so that the state can focus its
limited time and resources in
areas that create regional and
global competitors. And again, I
think quantum is a good example
of, of where we're trying to
lean into those sorts of
opportunities.
Now I'd like to
Talk a little bit about the
existing incentive programs that
EDD has and that the legislature
has helped support and create.
One way to drive economic
diversification is by creating
new jobs and revenue, and, and
to utilize ED incentive
programs. I think examples of,
of companies even recently, both
that have been here, uh, that
have been here operating who
have used our incentives to grow
their operations or companies
like Intel and Rocket Labs, um,
others that we're using to
recruit here, companies like
Maxion, Ebon, solar cell
manufacturers. So these are,
again, investments that that
would help make us competitive
for these.
sort of large investments in
growth.
Um, another area.
Where the legislature has seen
fit to invest is around the film
office and the film industry,
uh, film office has a record of
job creation and increasing the
median wage in the in the in the
industry. Uh, it's designed to
grow and sustain the film
industry here in as a key pillar
of New Mexico's economy, with 25
up to 40% refundable tax
credits, including 10% for
production and rural uplift
zones. These eligible expenses
include wages for New Mexico
workers and goods and services
purchased.
In New Mexico.
Our unique film partner
agreements that's created
long-term partnerships with
industry leaders to produce and
invest in this state.
740 million in direct spend in
FY 24 created 1.1 billion in
economic impact in New Mexico
and FY 24.
Providing we and we and we're
working to provide better
training and education programs,
um, including with film crew,
uh, advancement program to
support training for advanced
positions, building out our
workforce so that it is an
easier place and more Mexicans
can be hired into those jobs. As
part of that, we're have been
working with and investing in
the media arts collective. It's
a partnership to provide
craft-specific training at
studio training facilities both
in Albuquerque and in Las
Cruces.
Film tax credit, the film office
has helped create thousands of
good paying jobs in New Mexico
at 39% higher than the state's
median wage. So again, one of
our focuses is we think about
where we deploy our economic
development tools and dollars
that have been given to us by
the legislature, uh, are those
areas where we're, we're
increasing those jobs or
increasing the wages, the
average wages of jobs being
created.
Um, next, I'll be talking about
the job training incentive
project program our JTIP
program.
JTip drives relocation and
expansive expansion of New
Mexico-based hiring.
Um, 45% of projects from 2019 to
2024 were in New Mexico's rural
communities.
have a strong record of
employing veterans and New
Mexico graduates into the
program. Uh, this is a program
that started in 1972. It is
consistently uh rated as one of
the most important job training
programs and most effective job
training programs in the United
States, and we've been doing it
here for over 50 years.
Um
As uh
And finally, uh
In the time frame that we're
talking about from 2019 to 2024,
um, JTI has supported over
12,000 positions, uh, new jobs
or upskills in New Mexico.
Um, next, our local economic
Development Act, LEDA.
Um, this is, this invests in
private companies to offset
land, building infrastructure
costs and economic-based
sectors. So those are sectors
where we're bringing revenue
into the state, uh, or into a
local community. It's a, we have
a 10 year track record over our
last 10 years, uh, record shows
that we created 9.6,000 um urban
jobs, 3.5,000 rural jobs, the
urban economic impact of
25.8 billion and rural impact of
8 billion.
Overall state fiscal benefit of
367 million, so that's to the
state.
Um, we're seeing a 343% ROI for
the state on awarded projects
with our leader program.
And then finally
Uh, in closing,
Uh
We have some pictures of our
lovely, some of our lovely team
members, um, Mark Roper, who's
our lead on economic
development, Steve Graham, who's
our new, uh, film office
director and Kayla Sara Matucci,
who is the one who helped us,
uh, who has helped us both on
the set and the seat, uh,
managing those programs, but
also helped recraft and update
our economic strategy for the
state.
Um, I want to thank my entire
team for their work, uh, in
really trying to create that
pathway for New Mexicans, a
pathway towards prosperity and
economic security, um, we
believe that what we do every
day is an honor to be able to do
on behalf of the state of New
Mexico and we could not do that
work without the support of the
legislature and, and your
investments, uh, and your vision
to help us make sure we're doing
that effectively for communities
all across New Mexico.
Um, so with that, I'll stand for
any questions.
Thank you, Secretary.
The needing to add to the
conversation.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and,
uh, representatives, uh,
the secretary covered all, I'm
here for support and to make
sure that we get your questions
uh answered and make sure you
have what you need, uh, to help
us.
Thank you.
All right. Sounds good. Thank
you, gentlemen, for the
presentation. Let's start first
with Representative Scott.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Secretary Black, I'm gonna
apologize in advance.
Cause you stepped into a
hornet's nest with me on these
film tax credits.
We saw yesterday.
Projections
That the film tax credits were
going to consume.
Almost a billion tax dollars
over the next 5 years.
The obvious question.
I went to these folks.
When will they be able to stand.
On their own.
Without
This massive volume of subs.
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Scott, I think one of the things
that, again, that I think is
important to remember as it
relates to the film industry in
particular is that um it is a
very competitive environment,
whether we're talking about uh
other states like Georgia, uh,
other countries like Canada,
competing for these high high
wage jobs. And as we think about
the importance of diversifying
our economy. Um, New Mexico has
invested significantly in this
space.
build, uh, to build out this
industry where we're seeing
individuals who don't
necessarily have to have a
college degree earning well
above the median average here in
the state. And so we think those
sort of investments are really
important for building those
pathways. That's why those
investments are important for as
we help diversify our economy.
So, Mister Chairman, Secretary
Black with the answer to that
question be forever?
Mr. Chairman,
Representative Scott, I think
the answer is, um, we are trying
to be competitive for those jobs
at this point in time, it
requires uh those sort of
subsidies to keep that
subsidized direct spend here in
New Mexico with New Mexico
employees and New Mexico spend
as a way to stimulate the
broader economy, and I
appreciate that when you just
looked at, at tax revenue in and
tax revenue out. Um,
There's some challenges with
that math, but when you look at
the overall economic impact that
it has within the community. Uh,
we think it, it is very
important to make those
investments in the state.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Secretary
Black, I, I'm looking at this
slide 16 that shows
$7.77 added.
The New Mexico economy for every
dollar.
Of subsidy
Well, I have seen a number of
studies.
That indicate 15 to 40 cents on
the dollar.
Rather than this $7.77 this, and
this just looks like voodoo math
to me, and I, I can appreciate.
That these film producers are
coming to this state.
Because what we're doing is
basically reducing their
operating expenses by 25%.
Which is the difference between
what we're taxing them and what
we're returning in refundable
tax credits.
Now, we're, we will continue to
have Mr. Chairman, Mr. Black,
those conversations. Let me move
on to the labor participation
rate.
And I believe
I've seen Puss in several
circumstances that New Mexico is
either the lowest or near the
lowest participation rate in the
country.
And I attribute at least some of
that.
To our
Um
Income support programs. If
y'all done any studies to
determine why
Very few folks in New Mexico
want to go to work.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, I don't, I, I apologize.
I did not quite understand what
you said. Did you say that you
attribute it to what, what did
you say you attributed to, uh,
Mr. Chairman, uh, Secretary
Black, our income support
programs in this state are among
the most generous in the nation.
And I wonder if that correlates
to
One of the reasons why our labor
participant.
Labor participation rate is
among the lowest in the nation.
If y'all
Do anything
uh with respect to investigating
that correlation and whether
there would be one or not.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Scott, uh, I don't know if EDD
has done any research specific
to that. My understanding is
that uh Secretary Naier has done
some analysis and her team has,
so I'd have to get back to you
on what that analysis has looked
like. Um, I
My recollection is there has
been some LFC analysis to that
as well, but I will need to get
back to you and follow up.
OK.
Finally,
Mr. Chairman
And Secretary Black on the
San Juan generation
generating station, the energy
transition Act.
Uh by most estimates that I've
seen cost.
Uh, somewhere between 1000 and
1500.
High paying jobs, mostly coming
out of tribal communities.
What if anything has happened in
San Juan to mitigate the damage
that we did with that piece of
legislation.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, um,
I think there's a couple of
things in play there. One is,
um, coal is becoming less
economically viable, regardless
of
What we think in regards to the
um the the policy that drives
that drives that. It's, it's
less competitive than even
things like natural gas in many
ways on a cost basis. So I think
the natural trends.
will be that there's a bit of
we, we may have jumpstarted that
natural trend, but the cost of
energy generation with coal is
becoming less and less
competitive, uh, either whether
that's against solar or against
natural gas. So I think, yes,
the energy transition Act
speeded that conversation up,
but I think that's part of just
a general uh financial trend,
um, as it relates to energy
generation. Um,
As it relates to those
communities that have been
impacted, you're right, those
are the numbers that I
understand as well.
Um
Do I think um that that
transition has been
Good.
I think, you know, I've, I've
talked directly and been in in
on panels with um former miners
in the San Juan area.
Who became miners in Colorado.
And then they became miners in
uh the Southeast doing potash.
Because they need to continue to
pay for and help support their
families. So it displaced folks
as well.
I think we need to be much more
intentional about how we do
those transitions, how we invest
in those. I know, um, there's
been an effort to get additional
those funds out to mitigate that
impact.
Uh, there's investments in job
training programs in the south
in the Northwest, Navajo
Technical and others Sanan
Community College have done
amazing work, but we need to be
much more intentional about how
we're driving investment and
growth into those communities.
I think that is why.
There's a very real interest in
thinking about how we
Invest now to diversify our
economies in the Southeast.
Um, if, if there is a time when
those, those revenues begin to
drop off and we start to lose
production, and that could be,
you know, I think you've seen
the efficiencies that take place
in the oil and gas sector today.
Uh, what it takes to pull a
barrel of oil out and the number
of bodies and jobs is much
different today than it was 15
to 20 years ago.
How do we continue to make sure
that those communities are
protected, those individuals
have opportunities to pathway
and, and how can we do that
intentionally, because we
shouldn't repeat what happened,
where those those good paying
jobs are lost, and there wasn't
the backfill to support those
individuals. Um, I think it is,
we're continuing to try to move
money into those resources we
have been slow to deploy it.
Um, is my understanding, but I
think it's an area where, um,
There has to be a level of
intentionality about again,
thinking about where those
regions in the in the in.
Um, and, and that goes along
with uh grants to Mexico as
well.
Um, and the impacts of closing
there.
So, you know, how do we really
think about impacting or or
supporting those communities
that have seen those sort of
economic trauma. Mr. Chairman,
Secretary Black, I completely
agree with you.
From the standpoint.
Of the current public policy.
Having a net zero emissions.
Uh, thereby sunsetting.
The extractive industries,
particularly the petroleum
industry.
And the negative impacts of that
policy would be orders of
magnitude.
Because now we're not talking
about 1000 high paying jobs.
We're talking about 1,035,000.
I pain
And I see no plans, nothing.
On the horizon.
That would substitute.
And
Mr. Chairman
Secretary Black, I believe it's
time for adults in the
legislature to stand up and say,
Well
Because if we are successful
doing this, we will impoverish
the state.
You know,
To the extent that we
We don't even want to think
about.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you, Secretary Black for
your answers.
Thank you, Representative Scott.
Let's go. Anybody else?
Questions, comments?
This presentation. Seeing none,
gentlemen, thank you for your
presentation this morning. We
appreciate what you do for the
state and we look forward to
working with you in the future.
Thank you.
Moving forward now, fairer and
simpler, new trends in tax
policy. We have TR Reid, who is
an author of a fine mess, a
global quest for fairer,
simpler, and more.
Efficient tax system. He's a
former foreign correspondent,
The Washington Post, National
Public Radio, and public
broadcasting Service.
Mr. Reid
Good morning. How are you? All
right.
Thanks for joining us.
Why would you be here? All
right, we appreciate you being
here and whenever you're ready,
the floor is yours.
Got it.
Good morning, everybody. Thank
you so much. I want to thank
everybody for being here to talk
about tax policy. This is
important and
Many state legislatures wouldn't
do this. I'm from Colorado. I'm
proud of my state, but, uh, I
have talked to our tax writing
committee and uh
They're, they're interested in
getting cut rates down and
they're not so interested in
policy issues of how to design a
good tax code, so I'm delighted
that you've asked me here to do
it. And
I want to thank you for bringing
me back to New Mexico. I was the
Rocky Mountain bureau chief for
the Washington Post newspaper
twice I had that job twice, and
I got some great stories in New
Mexico. I went from Shiprock to
Carlsbad. I had a wonderful time
in, uh, sometime in the late
1980s, Jeff Binghamman decided
that New Mexico was too fat, and
he set up this programs in New
Mexicans would lose 35,000
pounds between January 1st and
the first day
spring, 7000 people were
supposed to lose 5 pounds. He
says he did it. Let's, let's
assume in the Washington Post
reported that he did it, so it
must have happened. I'm sure it
was right, um.
On one first Tuesday in
November, I went to uh
Waterflow, New Mexico, and the
voters there, they went in one
room in the building and voted
for the President of the United
States. They went in this
another room on the same day and
voted for the president of the
Navajo Nation on the same day.
That, that, that kind of news is
interesting to readers of The
Washington Post. Those things
don't happen on the East Coast.
Um, I went down to near Carlsbad
to whip, you know, the 2000 ft
deep nuclear.
your waist disposal, right when
they were building it and uh the
big problem, one of the big
problems they had was this
nuclear waste was going to be
radioactive for about 25
centuries, and so they had to
come up with a way to write a
warning sign, danger that could
still be interpreted in the year
5000 AD. And I think they did
it. I think they did it. Um.
I went down with, uh, I got to
go to Shiprock with Tony
Hillerman, who himself when he
was working on one of his Navajo
police books. That was a great
achievement. And I also worked
with some excellent.
Smart
Serious, uh,
New Mexico politicians, I wrote
a whole book about Pete Dieni.
Here's my book about Pete
Dianicci, still in print. I know
you'll probably want to read
that. He, he wrote a book that I
was writing about in the
Washington. He, he authored a
bill.
When he was, he was the 1100th
ranking member of the US Senate.
He was the most junior
Republican in the US Senate. He
wrote a bill that couldn't pass,
and he got it passed, and I
wrote a whole book about it. Um,
I went to North Korea with Bill
Richardson.
Uh, Bill Richardson was very
friendly with me and um
Like most New Mexico
politicians. I thought Bill
Richardson had a sort of
charmingly libertarian view of
authority. Uh, 11 day I had to
uh do a story in Las Cruces, and
I drove down from Denver and
stopped and had coffee with Bill
Richardson here in Santa Fe, and
when I was leaving, I said,
geez, I, I got to get to Las
Cruces. How long will it take
me? And the governor of New
Mexico said, well, gee, it would
be 4.
hours if you went to speed
limit.
Which I kind of liked. Um,
anyway, another good thing about
being the Rocky Mountain bureau
chief of The Washington Post
was, I was really far from the
editors back in Washington. And
if they ever tried to call me, I
would say, oh gee, I, I'm down
in truth or consequences. I
really can't talk to you right
now. And that system works so
well that I became a foreign
correspondent. I moved even
further away, uh, so that I
never had to talk to the bosses.
That was pretty good. And the
way I did.
Foreign correspondent, there are
many ways some people write, you
know, how weird foreign cheese,
they eat seaweed for breakfast
kind of thing. Um, but I felt
what I should do is write about
what these other countries do
right and what they do wrong,
what we could learn from them.
And uh I ended up writing a
series of books about this. I
wrote a book about why East
Asian nations, East Asian
democracies have very low crime
rates, very low rates of divorce
and broken homes. What do they
do?
How do they do that? I wrote a
book about how all the other
rich countries managed to
provide health care for
everybody at about 50% our cost
while we leave 30 million people
with no health insurance. And
then I wrote about a book about
tax policy, uh, the publisher
Random House called it a fine
mess cause they thought if you
put the word tax in the title,
nobody would buy the book, uh,
as it turned out, nobody bought
the book anyway, but uh here I
am to talk about it, and
Uh, by the way, it's almost
Christmas. My publishers has
asked me to remind you that my
books make great Christmas
giving. I think your
mother-in-law would like to read
a book on tax policy, don't you
think? Um, and, um,
So, so, uh, I was invited here
to talk about some of the fairly
big policy ideas that in the
world of taxation today and how
they might impact New Mexico. So
what I'm gonna do is just talk
about a few broad principles.
Which are you just to remind you
of what people who think about
tax policy are talking about
these days.
Here's the first principle,
BBLR. This is very important,
BBLR that stands for broad base,
low rates.
And as you, I'm sure you know,
um, the broader the tax base
that is the more income that's
actually taxed.
The lower the rate you can have.
Um, economists believe that
taxes should be neutral.
That is, people should make
decisions in their business and
in their personal life, in their
home life.
Because of personal and business
reasons, not because of tax
reasons. And the way you get
there is by keeping tax rates
very low. If somebody's tax is 5
or 6%.
Then they're gonna make the
decision based on something else
that they have to pay a tax of
18% for doing something, then
that's gonna have an impact, and
the general feeling among
economists all over the world is
that taxes should be neutral and
low rates allow that to happen.
The way you can get the revenue
you need with low rates is by
broadening the base, that is tax
everything.
Uh, don't give exemptions, for
example, for mortgages or for
investment or um
charity donations if everything
is taxable, then you can raise
the same amount of revenue at a
low rate. Let me read to you
what the Tax Policy Center,
Professor Joel Slimrod of the
Tax Policy wrote,
Uh, base broadening, a term
applied to efforts to expand the
tax base, usually by eliminating
deductions, exclusions, and
other preferences from the tax
base.
A broader base allows more
revenue to be raised without
increasing tax rates, or for
rates to be cut without
sacrificing any revenue. So BBLR
is a really important principle
to keep in mind when you're
designing any tax.
The more of the income we tax,
the lower the rates can be, and
the less effect it has on
taxpayers, and we can get the
same revenue.
Another principle that uh the
National Conference on State
Legislatures promotes very
forcefully is revenue
diversification, and what that
means is you want to get roughly
equal revenue.
Uh, from each of the big types
of taxes, income taxes, sales
taxes, property taxes, and in
states like New Mexico or
Colorado, they're lucky enough
to have resources, severance
taxes. You want to try to even
out your tax revenue income, so
that each of those 4 sources is
is providing a steady source of
income in it's relatively equal,
and that means if you have a
downturn,
in the extraction industry or uh
or uh a series of layoffs and
therefore less income tax. The
other taxes can make up the
difference. So revenue
diversification.
Uh, the third principle.
This is quite important to me
personally, but uh, the third
principle is progressivity. Uh,
this is the basic notion that
Uh, the way to design a tax
code, the important point in
paying taxes is not how much the
taxpayer pays.
But rather, how much he has left
after she paid the tax.
Uh, and what that means is
basically, the more money people
have, the higher rate they
should contribute to the general
good through taxation. This is
set forth in probably one of the
first.
Written statements and tax
policy on our history in the New
Testament and the Gospel of
Luke. There's a Jesus tells a
parable about called the widow's
Might, and here's what happens.
Jesus tells his disciples one
day.
We're all gonna go to temple
this afternoon on a Saturday
afternoon. We're all gonna go to
Temple, and they go to the
temple, and at that in those
days, uh, the richer you were
the better seat you got really
rich people could buy a good
seat in the front pew of the
synagogue, and poor people were
stuck away in the back where
they couldn't hear the rabbi,
and so sure enough that Jesus
and the disciples are watching,
and the rabbi passes the plate
for donations and some guy in
the front row.
he's reserved a seat and he has
7 attendants with him, and he's
beautifully dressed, and he puts
2000 ducats in the plate, and
then two rows back, there's
another rich guy and a beautiful
robe, and he puts 3000 ducats in
the plate, and finally, the
plate gets to the last row, and
there's a poor widow with a
moth-eaten bag, and she reaches
into this moth-eaten bag and
pulls out one penny.
She dropped one penny, it's
called the widow's Might into
this bag, and Jesus says,
Verily I say unto you, that poor
widow gave more than anybody
else.
Yes, she didn't give us much,
but she had less left after
this, so that's the important
question. Um, the federal
government, our federal
government, almost all countries
have progressive tax rates. The
federal government has
progressive tax rates and about
30 states, including New Mexico,
have progressive tax rates where
they ask people with more money
to contribute at a higher rate.
This seems right to me. Um, as
you know, there had been a push
among some um
politicians in America for a
flat tax.
Ted Cruz was for this. Um,
Uh, flat rate tax where
everybody pays the same. What
could be fairer?
The richest guy in New Mexico
pays 15% and the poorest guy in
New Mexico pays 15%. No, that is
not fair. It doesn't work.
People with more money should be
asked to provide more. About
A dozen countries in Eastern
Europe after they got
independent of the Soviet Union
were were
Interested were sold this idea
by conservative American
economists to have flat rate
taxes.
Um
Hungary, Slovakia, Slovenia, um,
Poland, all try a flat rate tax
and almost all of them have
given it up, and the reason is
if you have a flat rate of tax.
You can't set the rate high
enough to bring in the revenue
you need, but still low enough
for low income people to be able
to afford it. The one country in
Eastern Europe that has kept the
flat rate tax is hungary.
And in order to make up the
revenues that they lose through
this low tax on income, Hungary
has the important distinction of
having the highest sales tax
rate in the world, 27% on
everything you buy in Hungary.
That's what happens if you have
a flat rate tax. So, I uh
commend New Mexico for having
graduated rates, if I were
running your tax code, I would
have even stronger graduation,
that is, I would have wealthier
people pay even higher rates.
Um
And then another way to see to
it that you get more revenue
from the people who can afford
to pay it most.
Uh, to get the most progressive
taxes is a gift tax or an
inheritance tax or an estate tax
in New Mexico used to have that.
And you know, when did you stop
at about 2,0005, I think it was.
Um, and inheritance tax is a
good idea. Maybe, may I just
say, uh, people who did, who got
$5 million and didn't work 1
minute for it.
Should be asked to help the rest
of us pay for state, uh, issues
pay for highways, pay for
schools. Um, it, it just, it
seems wrong to me that if some
lucky rich kid inherits $5
million and pays no tax on that,
but meanwhile, his gardener and
his chauffeur and his butler and
his maid are paying taxes to
help the state that seems wrong.
So I think uh a good way to
achieve progressivity and
This is used in almost all
countries is a tax on
inheritance, and you can set it
very high. I mean, you know, the
current, the federal estate tax
currently kicks in at $13
million.
You know, if you, if you have to
pay
a million of that.
To the federal to federal tax to
support the federal government,
you still have 12 million bucks
to buy gas for your Rolls-Royce,
you know, I mean, it's not that
these people are hurting after
they pay, uh,
Uh, estate tax. Uh, the fourth
principle that most economists
support is that it's a good
idea.
tax consumption.
Uh, economists will tell you
that if you tax anything, you
get less of it.
So if you have an income tax,
that's a tax on labor, you get
less labor. If you have a
capital gains tax, that's a tax
on investment, you get less.
Less investment. If you tax
interest, a tax on savings, you
get less savings. Uh, in
contrast, the tax on consumption
brings in revenue.
Um, without.
Impairing labor or investment or
saving. So economists really
like taxes on consumption, and
these come in various forms. New
Mexico is one of 8 states,
although some don't call it a
grocer seat tax. You have a gros
receipt tax.
And 8 states have that, although
some have a different name for
it.
Another
Uh, 37 states have a sales tax,
and there are 5 states, I think
currently that have no sales tax
and they brag about it. I don't
know if you've ever been to New
Hampshire? When you go to New
Hampshire, they, they called the
state south of them,
Taxachusetts, and they're always
trying to lure people from
taxachusetts by saying no sales
tax, no income tax, and guess
what?
The property tax there is
breathtaking. I'm a friend of
mine bought a house in um
About a million dollar house in
New Hampshire. It's on a
beautiful lake, it's a beautiful
house, and his taxes are 8 times
as high as the tax I pay for an
equipment house in Colorado. So
that's how they make up for it,
yeah. No sales tax, no income
tax, but they're still gonna get
the revenue.
Um
Personally, I like the idea of a
gross receipt tax like you have
here, for one thing, because it
taxes services as well as, uh,
as well as sales. Um, I just
want to point out to you that
the tax foundation, this is an
outfit in New York, in
Washington DC I mean, that's has
lots of very, very respected and
intelligent tax economists. It's
paid for by big business, so you
can kind of see there. Here's
what the tax foundation says
about your
Grosserte tax. The gross receipt
tax is often considered one of
the most economically damaging
taxes.
The gross receipt tax has been
dismissed for decades as
inefficient and unsound policy.
There you go. That's what they
think of your tax. I personally
kind of like it. I think it's a
good idea. Now, I just want to
point out to you, there is a
very important new idea in this
idea of consumption taxes, and
that's a tax which I'm sure
you've heard of called the VAT,
the value added tax. Are you
aware of this? This is a really
good tax. It's a sales tax, but
unlike the retail sales tax in
the United States. It applies at
every level of commerce.
And when you pay the tax, you
report that, uh, to the
government, to the, the tax
authority knows that a tax was
paid.
Um, people have an interest in
reporting the taxes, you get a
credit for the tax that you paid
already, and therefore it's a
self pleasing tax. It's very
hard tax to cheat on.
Uh, this idea came about. It was
invented in France in the late
1950s. Guess what? 150 countries
now have a value added tax. It's
the most important idea in
taxation. There's only one
advanced democracy that does not
have a VAT.
That's the United States of
America. We should have one, and
it could be done.
At the state level. Uh, I
mentioned Ted Cruz earlier, the
senator from Texas, he has
proposed a VAT for the state of
Texas. It's, it's a, it's a, it
works like a sales tax, but it's
a hard tax to evade.
Uh, one more principle I want to
discuss with you is simplicity.
Let's make taxes, easy to file
and easy to pay. Uh, the United
States, both at the federal and
the state level, Americans have
the most complicated tax system
in the world, we spend
Americans spent billions of
hours and billions of dollars
just providing the filling out
the forms and figuring out how
much tax they owe. This is not
necessary. This is not necessary
in many countries. I was in the
Netherlands 11 year on March
30th with a friend of mine,
April 1st is their tax day, and
I said to him, Michael, have you
paid your taxes? He said, oh
yeah, jeez, it's, it's 9
o'clock. I guess I better do it.
It's due tomorrow.
And he went online, and guess
what? The Dutch tax authority
has already filled out the whole
form for them. They know all the
numbers, they know his income,
they know his withholding, they
know his mortgage rate, they
know all the stuff that he could
write off. They filled out the
form for him, and he checks for
about 2 minutes to see if the
numbers look right, he's done,
and he's filed his income tax in
5 minutes.
And he said to me, I said, geez,
that, that was really easy, uh,
piece of cake, 5 minutes and
you're done with your taxes, he
says, yeah, you know, he says,
he says, sometimes I, I sort of
check the numbers to make sure
they're right. He says, you
know, you start doing that, it's
really a pain, and, you know,
and take you like 20 minutes
just to file your taxes, he
says. He was furious about it,
um, in Japan, the, the tax
agency knows how much you
earned, they know how much was
withheld, they know how much
interest you paid, etc. and they
send you
Guard.
And the postcard says, we think
that you earned this much. We
think you owe this much, we
think we withheld this much, and
therefore, um, we owe you a
surplus and we'll put it in your
bank account on April 1st. And
if this looks right to you, you
do nothing. It's, you're done.
Uh, when I was writing, working
on this book, went around the
world looking at taxes, I was
talking to my friend Togo and in
Tokyo, and I said, she get Togo,
uh, I was there on their, their
tax day is also April 1st. I was
there in late March. I said,
she, I want to watch you file
your tax return and see how hard
it is. And he says to me,
File my tax return, file my,
what, what does that mean for
all he does is get a postcard.
If it looks right, he's done.
He's done nothing. And I said,
gee, this is so easy. I said,
you know, in the United States,
people spend hours or days
looking up numbers and filling
out forms, and he says to me,
Well, why would anybody want to
do that?
Yeah, well, we wouldn't, and we
could make it vastly simpler.
One state.
has done this. California has
done the system where the tax
agency fills out your tax return
for you and sends it to you.
This is a system called CalFile,
and if you don't like it, you,
you have every right to fill out
your own return, but if you do
like what they've done, you're
done. And I, my argument is the
federal government and many
other, many states, almost all
states could do this too. Your
tax agency probably knows all
the numbers for about
60 to 70% of taxpayers in New
Mexico could fill out the forms
for them and let people decide
whether they want to accept
that. So, uh, this is the way to
get to more simplicity and
taxation. So, uh, I just want to
review again. These are my basic
principles, broaden the base to
lower the rates.
Diversify your revenue sources
so that you have a steady flow
of income regardless of what
happens in the economy. Make
taxes more progressive so that
the wealthiest people in New
Mexico.
do the best job of running of
providing first aid efforts.
put taxes on consumption, uh,
rather than on labor or
investment and make taxation as
simple as possible. Those are
the rules that I learned looking
around the world at tax policy,
and that's what I would
recommend to the people of New
Mexico, and once again, I want
to say thanks so much.
Or um for bringing me here and
just for having a hearing on tax
policy, I admire that. Thank
you. Mr. Reed, thank you very
much. Um,
The reason I'm speaking is, it's
kind of strange here that, uh, a
conservative Republican has now
been put in charge of the tax
committee, so, uh, we'll take
it, yeah,
right.
I feel the weights a lot of
pressure here, but we, we
appreciate the presentation and,
and I think uh some of the panel
may have some uh questions that
they would like to ask if you
have a few more minutes and uh
uh listronics, I believe, has a
question or two.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thank you very much. I think uh
You have put out some ideas that
we need to be uh a little more
creative about I am only
familiar with the bats in
foreign countries. versus any
place in the US is, is it
occurring here? No, nobody has a
bat, and it, it would.
It's, it's doable to do it on a
state level when there's not a
federal VAT, but it's easier if
the federal government has a
VAT, uh, this is what happened
in Canada, in Canada, all the
provinces had sales taxes, and
the Canadian federal government
put in a VAT and gradually it
took
Maybe 10 years, each of the
provinces put in their own form
of VAT which basically
He, uh, who was sat on top of
the uh federal uh VAT.
So
It, it would be interesting,
some, some economists, some tax
experts, Joel Slemrod at the
University of Michigan thinks
that an individual state could
introduce a VAT form of tax, and
one of the places where this
would be the easiest to do.
would be a state that already
has a gross receipt tax.
Which is heading on in the
direction of VAT, so maybe you
could do it.
But no, so far the United States
doesn't do it. It's the only
Uh, advanced country in the
world that doesn't have a VAT
and if you ask any tax economist
anywhere, they all say we should
have one.
Uh, the other issue, thank you
for that, um.
I'm sure that as you looked at
the taxes across the country,
and you were talking about high
property taxes in some places
and no grocery seats or sales
tax and others is that in some
states, property taxes fund.
The, uh, or the basis of funding
education. Yes, whereas other
states rely on state general
fund, etc. so
That, do you have an opinion
about
The weight of property taxes.
For education versus.
Other
so, so I, I agree that since
education almost everywhere is
considered to be a local
responsibility the county or a
city jurisdiction. It's a good
idea to fund that through
property taxes, because you
can't pick up your farm and move
it to the next county.
And therefore, it's
Reliable source of of taxation
for local responsibilities like
education or police or or
district courts or things like
that. So yeah, I think that
makes a lot of sense to have a
property tax to do that.
Thank you very much, sir, and
thank you, uh, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. And Mr. Temporary chair
last day
I, I was just getting rolling
here. The chairman shows back
up, but who's chairman
Republican chair that
that didn't mean that's still
your thunder, Senator. Let's go
on with uh Representative
Parajo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committee, um, thank you
so much for your presentation.
Um, I had a question also on VAT
and um because you said that tax
decreases the consumption and if
VAT is applied at every stage of
the manufacturing of the
product, I started thinking
about, um, you know, the
windmills that we're building
and the different aspects of
industry we're trying to build
out here, um, so in the other
countries.
where VAT has been administered.
I understand that depending on
how it's administered, it can
affect industry, so, um, what,
what would be your proposal for
the specific implementation of
the VAT in, in New Mexico
specifically.
Well, the way a VAT works is,
uh, I'll come, I wanna contrast
it to the retail sales tax or
GRT, uh, retail sales tax, uh,
A woman would call her Mrs.
Consumer, Mrs. Consumer goes to
the furniture store and buys a
dining room table for $4000 and
she owes 8% of that in, in, uh,
tax.
Uh, 480 $48. So,
That
The key point there is she pays
the tax and the furniture stores
then expected to remit that tax
to the state.
But Mrs. Consumer doesn't know
if they did, and she doesn't
even care if they, it makes no
difference to her if the tax was
paid.
In the case of a VAT.
The
Lumber company that sold the
lumber to the furniture maker
paid a tax.
And the furniture maker paid a
tax the wholesaler paid a tax.
The retailer paid a tax and the
consumer paid a tax, and each
time they pay VAT, they report
to the state.
Uh, I paid this tax, and the
reason is you get a credit
against the tax you owe for the
tax that you've paid. So people
are always telling the state
always knows every penny of tax
that was paid, and it becomes
very hard to duck.
So the reason other countries
have adopted a VAT is because it
brings in exactly the same
amount of money when you add up
the taxes paid and subtract the
credits. It brings in the same
amount of money, uh, but we now
have a record of every penny of
tax that was paid, so people
can't duck it. The other
Benefit of a VAT is it provides
a steadier form of revenue, for
example,
Um
If you wanna
have a product that takes 18
months to develop and build the
state doesn't get any money from
a real retail sales tax until
the final 18 months, uh, and the
final purchase, but if you have
a value added tax at every stage
of production, the state is
drawing in revenue from the VAT,
so it provides a steadier form
of revenue for states. So those
are the advantages. Um,
I, as I say, many economists
feel that an individual state
could do a VAT and frankly, if
one or two of them did it and
made it work, then every other
state would do it because it's
such a good idea.
Um, but it, it, I, I can, I will
agree with you that it, it could
be difficult to do it if the
federal government doesn't have
a federal VAT as well.
Sorry, did that answer right.
Moving on now to Representative
Scott.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Reid.
I agree with several of your
points, but let me use your
Your furniture analogy is.
As part of this question.
Uh, given the current tax rates
in New Mexico with 4 serial
processes in that.
In that tax chain, if you will,
the effective tax rate on the
On the product to the consumer
is over 20%.
And that seems like
It would put New Mexico
manufacturers, if you will,
furniture manufactures at a
fairly significant.
Disadvantage to folks that are
not utilizing that system. How
would you address that?
Uh, well, Mr. Chairman, I, I
didn't explain this very well.
The, the tax doesn't add up to
20% for the retail purchaser
because at each level,
Uh
Each buyer gets a credit for the
tax he paid at the lower level.
So the net net tax paid comes to
the same 8% overall.
Um, but it's a really good
point. If one state does it.
And taxes the manufacturer of
VAT for buying his supplies, and
the other state doesn't, you're
right. That would give, uh, that
would give New Mexico a
disadvantage. I agree with that.
So that's another reason why
We ought to do the VAT at the
federal level and then states
could follow. That's a good
point, and I'm, I'm sorry I
didn't explain that better, but
Mr. Chairman and Mr. Reed, that
is exactly the complaint that we
Here over and over again with
respect to our gross receipts
tax system in the Pyramidding
effect.
Of those
Serial taxes. Yeah, yeah, I hear
you. I hear that complaint, yes.
And how would you overcome those
objections.
Well, as I said, I personally
like the gross seed tax, partly
because of taxes, services as
well as
How would I deal with that?
Well, uh, you're, you're right,
Mr. Scott, that uh
The sales tax dozen of retail
sales tax doesn't have that
cascading impact.
Um, and if you went to a retail
sales tax, well, then you'd be
in line with what did I say,
it's about 37 other states have
it.
You know, 8 states, I believe it
is, have a gross receipt tax.
Um, how long have you had done
the grocer receipt tax wait
forever.
Yeah, yeah.
Um
Yeah, I, I see your point, and
uh I I.
I thank you for pointing that
out to me. I hadn't thought
about it.
And I guess the second question.
And this is
This is with uh respect.
To
Inheritance taxes, yeah.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Reid, one of
the complaints that we hear.
With respect to inheritance
taxes is.
You know, the folks that that
are able to move.
Generally would do so to avoid
those taxes.
And the folks that can't move
are generally farmers and
ranchers were a significant
portion of their asset base is
in the land which in many cases
has taken
More than one generation to
build. So,
An inheritance tax, the
complaint is
Those farms and riches have to
be sold in order.
In order to pay the taxes. Yeah,
Mr. Chairman, that's also a, a
totally legitimate point, and,
and we shouldn't make people
inheriting a farm, pay an
inheritance tax. The the land,
as you say, has accumulated huge
value over generations. It's
easy to exempt that kind of uh
gift, that kind of inheritance
from an inheritance tax.
Um
People who inherit money.
$5 million ought to have to pay
to help the state uh run its
services.
Um, but I agree with you,
exempting land and particularly
of the land that where the value
has spilled it over generations
of a family, that should be
exempted. We shouldn't shaft
farm families with an
inheritance tax. You're right
about that.
Mr. Chairman, that was it. Thank
you, Mr. Reid for. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Scott. Let's go
to Senator Burke.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh
just uh I guess a point of
clarification. Uh, first
principle is broad based low
rate. Uh, third principle is,
uh, tax basically according to
income. Yeah, so.
When you say low rate if someone
makes more, let's say,
For discussion purposes, rate is
3%, uh, some makes more money.
Are you talking about a 4% tax
on those folks or uh does that
jump to 10% or a 12%, 15%. How
do you calculate something like
that. I'm just trying to get a
little bit of clarity and in uh
understanding your principle.
Yeah, well, the people who, who
argue for low rates in order to
keep taxes neutral, that is, is
not a
impact
on your economic decisions.
They, they tend to think that
low rate means in the range of
10% or less.
If taxes get to 27% or 19%, then
that require forces people to
consider the tax implications of
what they want to do.
Uh, and the most economists
think that if the rate is 10%,
8%, 7.2%.
That has, it, it's much less of
an impact on people. So I think
when you're asking me.
How low is low, what level would
you call low rates? And I think
the economists who study tax
policy, think in the range of 10
or lower is a low rate. If you
really broaden the base.
Then your lowest rate taxpayers
can be paying tax at 2.5%.
And your high tax rate would
then be 5 or 6%. That's still a
low rate that doesn't impact,
but it, it gives you the
progressive rate and, and of
course, that rich person is then
paying tax on all of her income.
She doesn't get to write off her
huge mortgage or her charitable
deductions and stuff.
Um
And therefore even at a 5 or 6%
rate, you can bring in the
revenues you need. That's the
thesis of BBLR road basal range.
I appreciate the clarification
because I, I, I guess we're so
oriented today, see large jumps,
uh, you know, like even in New
Mexico, there's some significant
jumps depending on income. Uh,
so, and I think you're right,
that's kind of what I was going
for. If we pay a low rate, uh,
the jump should not be as, as
dramatic, I guess, as we have in
New Mexico with this particular.
time, but everybody is paying at
a uh a lower rate. You know,
it's, uh, if I might, I'm sorry,
if you, you look at other, uh,
for example, the uh
European, Western European
democracies, they're rich,
successful countries. Their tax
rates are astronomical for rich
people by American standards,
uh, in Norway or Denmark, if you
make $200,000 a year, they're
taxing you at about 45%. Uh, so
they, that, that's, that's
progressivity on, on steroids.
Uh, you don't have to do it that
way, but you do want to, I
believe, in
Most countries believe that you
wanna ask the wealthiest people
to contribute at a higher rate.
Um, and Mr. Chairman, uh, one
other quick question we have in
many discussions in the state
with our current tax code, uh,
about the process of pemating
you related to it the
manufacturer pays taxes on
goods. They produce something
and they sell it to wholesale or
there's tax paid there, so you,
you're paying tax at each level
all the way to the consumer. Uh,
we call it pyramidding here, um.
Is there is pyramidding
necessary?
Or are there ways around
pyramidding, yeah, the, the way
around it is when
So, um,
The, the Forester sold a hunk of
wood to the furniture maker, and
the furniture maker paid him 8%,
uh, tax. Now, the furniture
maker then makes the table and
sells it to the wholesaler, and
the wholesaler pays the fur the
furniture maker 8% tax, he owed
the furniture maker owes that
tax to the state, but he takes a
credit for the tax he's already
paid to the forester. Are you
with me? So this
series of credits that you get
do two things. First, they
eliminate the pyramidding, the
net tax paid comes out to be 8%.
Total by the time the consumer
buys it in the furniture store,
and B, because I took the credit
for the tax I paid to the
forester, the state now knows
the forester collected this tax
from me, and he better have
given it to the states, so
that's why it's called a
self-policing tax, hard to
evade. OK. Uh, thank you very
much.
I, and that's a lot of clarity.
Temporary chairman, thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Burke. Let's
move on now to Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I think
most of my questions have been
answered, so I'm just gonna ask
one personal question.
Are there any taxes that you
don't like?
Uh, let me see.
Um, I, I don't like income taxes
because they, they, um,
Penalize you for doing more
work.
Uh, I'd rather see consumption
tax and income taxes, um, I do
like, um, capital gains taxes to
a degree, but there are two.
They penalize me for investing
in industry and and building our
economy. So there too, I'd
rather see a consumption tax. I
don't dislike estate taxes.
Um
Um
You know, there's a, a type of
tax known as the sin tax. It,
it, as I said, most economists
think taxes should be neutral,
that is, we should be making
decisions because of the tax
implications, but there's some
taxes.
That we like just because they
impact activity, and those are
what we call syntaxes tax on
cigarettes, tax on liquor, tax
on cannabis, um, we don't want
people smoking and one of the
surest ways to cut, uh, tobacco
use is to tax cigarettes, um,
in, um,
In, uh, the Scandinavian
countries, the attacks on a pack
of cigarettes is about $16.
If you want, you want to smoke,
you pay for it. And guess what,
it works.
Their smoking rates are way low,
so this is an area where taxes
should have an impact, and I
like syntaxes myself. I think it
brings in revenue, and B, it
discourages uh activities that
we, you know, I don't wanna, I'm
kind of, I'm pretty libertarian.
I don't want to say to people,
you can't smoke, you can't, you
can't drink.
But we can say you should pay
for it, because they're gonna be
health uh implications and
therefore you should pay for
them.
So, uh, yeah, what are the taxes
do I not like?
Um
Uh, as I say, I, I'd like to
reduce taxes on work and
investment.
And make the tack somewhere
else.
Uh, because
We need, we need people to do
labor and we need people to
invest in our economy. So that's
what I'd say. Thank you. Thank
you for that. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
move to Senator Maestas. Oh
thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, sir, uh.
That answered, I was gonna ask
about syntaxes, but not in, not
in the question of curbing
behavior.
But in question of uh collecting
revenues to deal with a social
cost. What's your philosophy
with regards to that, I,
I'm all for that. I think that
makes a lot of sense. If we can
assess that if you smoke, you're
likely to develop diseases in
the future that we're gonna have
to pay to treat, then let's pay
for that.
So, and that is the beauty of
syntaxes is, is, uh, uh,
another.
form of that is the um
is the uh high mileage penalty
for cars that only get 10
gallon, 1010 miles to the
gallon.
No, I don't want to ban those
cars. I mean, if people wanna
buy some outrageous car.
Let him do it where it's a free
country, but doggone it, that's
gonna have a cost in terms of
energy consumption in terms of
pollution, air pollution. Let's
charge people uh to
Make up for those social costs.
So I, I like using taxes as
opposed to orders saying you
have to buy an electric car, or
you can't buy, uh, you know, a
Mercedes silver cloud that gets
12 miles to the gallon, you can
buy it, but we ask you to pay
for the social impact of that
decision.
Thank you. And with regards to,
thank you very much with regards
to excise taxes, you know,
taxing various commodities or
services at a different rate
than the normal sales tax or GRT
in your experience, studying
states and countries, did those
Those develop for policy reasons
or did they develop for
historical reasons, like, for
example, we didn't have a
personal income tax till about
100 years ago, and so
There's some excise taxes from
the 1800s that that exist today.
What, what have you learned with
regards to that? You know, I, I
personally, um,
Don't like variable tax rates
different tax for this product
or that product, and the reason
I don't like that is
The the reasons for them tend,
they could be historical, but
they tend to be political, which
industry had the most clout in
the legislature. They got the
lower tax rate, and I, I don't
like that. I think taxes should
be devised to be fair to
everyone and roughly equal to
everybody and every
manufacturer. So, um,
If you have these excise taxes,
unless there's some
Forceful policy reason to make
them different, I think, I, I
don't like variable tax rates.
Many countries have them, and
it's frequently because
Such and such an industry had
clout with the parliament.
You know, it's a political
decision, not a policy or an
economic decision.
No, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. We, we have to watch
out for that, we, uh, there's
several examples in my opinion
in our tax code.
Uh, we don't do a lot of excise
taxes, but we do a lot of
exemptions. So for example, uh,
Locomotive fuel does not play,
does not pay GRT and it's like
they can't go across the street
and get, get, get gas so it's
just a, it's just something to
watch out for. Thank you, Mr.
Jones.
Yeah, so I'd say without knowing
anything, I would say that might
reflect the political cloud of
the railroad industry, is that
the, that may be the reason for
that, and I don't like those
kind of variations. If you make
decisions because of social or
economic impacts. I can
understand that. But because
this industry gave more money to
the member of parliament and
that, that to me is not a good
reason to make these choices.
Yeah, just, I don't think, thank
you, Mr. Chairman. I don't think
it's a question of giving money
to the parliament, but we're
such a poor state, we're, we're
yearning for economic
development that many times
we're convinced as policymakers
that it will spur economic
growth, uh, but I, but I
appreciate, I hear what you're
saying, yes, I, I hear you. Yes,
I'm sorry to, even though it
may, it may not.
We'll take Senator, uh, anyone
else questions or comments for
uh Mr. Reid.
Seeing that, Mr. Reid.
Thank you for the comedy special
this morning. Thank you for
sharing with us your
perspectives on things we
appreciate you being here.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, again, I thank
you for bringing me back to New
Mexico, and I'm really, uh, I, I
Compliment all of you for taking
the time to think about big
issues of tax policy that's
important. And guess what? I'm
going skiing.
Well, enjoy your day. Enjoy
yourself. Thank you again.
OK, folks, uh, we have next on
our agenda, county legislative
priorities. I know that, uh, joy
is on her way. I know we're
running a little bit ahead of
schedule, which is fine. But in
the meantime, while we're
waiting for Joy to get here, uh,
if we can uh approve the minutes
from last meeting October 17th
and 18th, uh, if you've so moved
by a senator, uh, Stefaniks, the
2nd 2nd see no opposition. We
have uh minutes of proof.
Uh, at this point we're just,
we'll hold in place. I mean, if
you want to step up to the
podium and
If you have an ability to begin.
Thank you, Chairman and members,
um, I can start. I know
everybody's kind of.
Anxious to get out of here and
you're ahead of schedule, so
that would be um I can start and
pick up on Joy can pick up on
her, um.
Her piece when she gets here.
Um, so I'm, we're going to
present our legislative
priorities for the board has
selected these items as
priorities already. I know the
county commissions are working
on approving them as the
legislative prior priorities. I
think most of them have gotten,
um, gotten done with that
process. We've heard back from
most counties. I'm gonna start
with uh uh with a priority that
you've all, most of you have
heard about and certainly are
probably tired of of me bugging
you about it, but that's the
detention.
reimbursement fund, um, um,
thank you to the legislature for
increasing the reimbursement to
$5 million the past couple of
years were appreciative of that,
however, it's still isn't um
getting the full reimbursement
that's due the county's um per
statute, um, and so we are
asking this year for an
additional 3.2 million, which
would get us up to the average,
um,
Um, cost. And just so you know,
and it's not a joy when joy gets
her, she will have the handouts
for all of you, but the county
spends $389 million a year on
detention. And so the 10 million
actually this year it would be
8.2 million that we're asking
for. Um, it's just a drop in the
bucket and that only covers the
parole violators that the
county's house, houses, it
doesn't cover any um detainees
that a state policeman may pick
up and drop off at a county
jail.
So the cost is probably far
greater than 8.2 or 10 million,
um, so again, this year we're
asking for an additional 3.2 to
get us closer to that average.
The average is, um, is
information that's sent to us by
the sentencing commission and um
there is a slide um that's the
first slide, um, it's on page 7.
I don't know if you have, if
you're looking at an
electronically or not, that
shows the cost. Um, you, you'll
notice that it dropped a little
bit.
During COVID, but the costs are
back up, um, for a year 2023, we
were up to just over $10 million
and there is our fearless
leader, um,
The next couple of slides,
sorry, sorry, sorry to
interrupt, would she have the
handouts?
That you're reading from?
OK. Coming now. All right. Thank
you.
I just went to the detention.
Perfect. So I'll finish with
this one and then and then I'll
hand it back over to Joy. um.
The next couple of slides just
show.
Um, what the design be capacity
actually is in the counties with
detention facilities, um, keep
in mind that it's not actually
the total number of beds that
can be filled because obviously
we still have a severe staffing
shortage and shortage in the
jails as well. Um, and then you
can see the daily population,
um, and statewide detention
bookings, they're on the
increase again post COVID. Um,
and those slides go all the way
through page 9 in your handout.
We just included those just so
you can see the trend, um, what
it costs the counties and how
the the population is increasing
again now post COVID, um, and
again, the first probably most
important slide is on page 7
showing
Um, the county cost versus the
state reimbursement, um, since
2019. I did not do the gross
receipts, no.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Joyous
Parson, executive director for
New Mexico counties. Delighted
to be joining you all. Hello,
lots of friends, lots of people
were very sad or going to be
leaving us. Um, the
legislature's been very good to
us in recent years, and we
really, really genuinely
appreciate all the work that
you've done to support us, um.
I wanted to include in the
handout that you're looking at
on page 4, just sort of a
snapshot of county revenues,
especially for this committee.
Um, so the first one, of course,
is GRT distributions. This
current year in 2324. We only
had one that went down. So the
highlighted are showing where
there's a decrease from the
prior year. You'll notice last
year there were quite a few that
had gone down primarily because
of some of the equalization
formulas that had rolled off.
This year, with the inflation,
we saw an increase in gross
receipts pretty much across the
board, which was to be expected.
The next page is our county
property tax revenue. I, I'm
waiting on the final numbers
from DFA for the 4th quarter of
FY 24, but it's part of our
discussion when we talk about
our equitable disclosure in a
few minutes. So I wanted to
include some of that history. If
you look at these two pages, one
thing that we always say, if you
know, one county, you want no
one county, and the reality is
lots of things affect these
changes in both property tax
with businesses that may close,
contracts that may
not get renewed for GRT, um, and
these fluctuations, we can
clearly go into the 500 reports
of taxation and revenue and see
things where there's been a fire
and all of a sudden you see
these increased GRT as federal
contracting come in. So it's
interesting just to kind of see
these fluctuations, and I wanted
to point it out that sometimes
they're just downright unstable.
We do see trends overall they're
quite healthy, but keep that in
mind as we look at tax breaks,
tax exemptions moving forward.
The other one that I included
for you on page 6 is the GRT
increment changes. This is
something that came up last year
because there was kind of this
assumption going around that if
the state lowered their tax
rate, that local governments
were jumping to increase. And
that's not really true when we
look at counties. You can see
the ones in green are the ones
that have gone up and usually
there's a very specific.
purpose, for example, in Taos
County, the receipts went up
because we are all trying to
fund improvements to the Holy
Cross Hospital and the UNM
training programs up there. So
there's really clear reasons why
they're making those
investments.
So I know that Catherine's
already covered the detention
reimbursement fund. So I will
pick up on page 8 of our current
priorities.
Courthouse funding, this was
something that to put the burden
on counties to handle the
funding for state district
courts is something that we
considered an unfunded mandate,
we are delighted that we can now
call this kind of a revenue
share with the state. So the
last two years, the state has
provided funding to the
administrative office of the
courts to help supplement the
needs for those district courts
back when this law was formed
about 100 years ago, it was
probably one office for a
district judge. These judicial
complexes like the one in Lee
County,
was over $60 million. So any
type of revenue stream that we
can continue to have to support
this, any of the funding that
we're applying for goes through
the courts so that they're in
agreement with it. Counties then
go and apply for the difference.
The 1st 2 years, we had 8
million left over the first
year, they got 22 million in
requests. There were changes
this fall in the executive
director at AOC. So the request
didn't go out the same way, so
we didn't have that plethora of
requests like we've seen in the
last two.
years, but the need is still
there. So communication, we fix
that with AOC moving forward, if
you allocate funding, we look at
this as a long term revenue
need.
So certainly, if you have any
questions, also this year I
included the increases in
district court judges because
that's part of the question.
Every time AOC as a judge, it
costs the counties $2 to $3
million more. Often they have to
get a new courthouse added,
courtroom added, they need to do
new office renovations and so we
wanted to track how much those
have increased. It's not
significant, but we have
absolutely no control over when
that happens. So if you look at
in history, those are gonna
continue to happen as we move
forward.
The next two detention
recruitment firefighter and EMS.
I'm gonna handle collectively.
Last year, the legislature was
incredibly generous. They
provided 25 million in both of
these funding streams to help us
add positions for frontline
workers in detention and
corrections, and also to
increase fire and EMS support.
The way that that legislation
was designed, it was intended to
be a one-time appropriation with
3 years of assistance. So it was
100% offset the.
first year paid by the state.
The next year, I believe it
dropped to 50.
In the subsequent year 25, and
after that, the local government
entity was responsible for fully
funding that position. That is a
great transition for us. We're
very grateful for it. The
problem is, it was only one
time. If they didn't get on the
bandwagon that first year,
they're out. And if you look at
the numbers, the need was
significant. For example, in
detention, DFA received a
request for 850 positions. They
were only able to fund 1899.
and 40 of those went to
corrections, not to local
governments. As you know, we've
been at a crisis in vacancies
and detention centers. This was
a big help. We would love to see
an additional amount. We didn't
put it in here, that would be up
to the legislature to decide.
Maybe it's 5 million to pick up
some of those other needs we
didn't meet. Same thing on fire
and EMS. They received a request
for 330 positions. They were
able to fund 190, the number
ratio isn't quite as bad.
bad as it was in detention, but
I think it really goes to show
that those needs continue, and
we would love to continue to
have support of the state for
another year, for another 3-year
program that would capture some
of those needs.
The next one is 700 megahertz
radios. I'll turn that back to
Katherine.
Thank you, Joy. I just want to
include also on the courthouse
funding the AOC did include uh
$20 million in their capital
budget this year to request um
for courthouse renovations. Um,
700 megahertz radio is the
statewide radio system used for
emergency services, um, for
municipal county and tribal
public safety agencies, and
we're working on this with do
it, um, this year, the request
is for $6 million. That would uh
cover the subscription.
fees, not infrastructure, and I
just want to highlight, um, not
included in the packet and it
because it's not a counting
priority, but it is something
that our 911 affiliate is
working on as their priority,
and that's the 99 cents
surcharge increase for 911
services. Some of that funding
will go towards helping complete
the 700 megahertz radio system,
uh, network just for
infrastructure costs. So the 6
million is only for the
subscriber fees.
Um, the two additional
appropriations we're watching
are things that the legislature
approved last year, but as you
all know, we have lots of
changes coming in legislative
members, and this is something
we really want to make sure it
gets implemented the way it was
intended. One was that there was
a promise for redirect of 10% of
the health insurance premium tax
to go to the Department of
Health EMS Bureau. This is a
bureau that's been significantly
underfunded. It has
traditionally provided about
7000 to the different fire
districts, which barely covers
the.
for an AED in some of the
equipment with the funding that
was allocated last year, it's a
first start to see an infusion
of funds into those individual
districts and the promise of
this continued revenue stream is
very important to us. We want to
make sure that that gets
implemented. The other one, and
I know AJ touched about this
yesterday was how much we
appreciate the quick action that
the legislature took to remove
the 3% for the administrative
fees for the collection of GRT
at Tax and Rev. That was
something that grew beyond what
anybody had anticipated, and
when it was
brought to the legislature's
attention last year, you all
were very quick to act and we're
very grateful. Um, the next ones
are ones that stand outside of
HB 2 and I'd like to come back
to equitable disclosure. I know
our affiliate chair for the
assessors is trying to be here
for the 11 o'clock if he doesn't
make it, I'll go back to that
one. But inspection of public
records is something you all are
very familiar with the
challenges that we face at the
state and local levels. Um,
we've worked closely during the
interim with municipal League,
who's really spearheaded this.
They did.
A survey of the types of
requests that we're seeing, it
is no longer meeting what we had
intended for the law. It has
been severely abused, I hate to
say, but it's affecting every
different department at local
government. We are looking at
proposing some changes this
year. These would not be
additional exemptions, but these
would be more administrative
changes. Could we set up
something similar to the ethics
board that would help us
understand if we didn't meet the
intent to give us a call when
things are definitions are.
unclear. Are we not meeting it
and because of why we could use
some administrative oversight
and, and help from the state in
interpreting some of this. We
also would like to have the
opportunity to get noticed, um,
of how to cure something. So
often people can file and if we
don't miss the mark, there's no
way for us to recover and
sometimes it's a simple
miscommunication. So some of
those administrative fixes or
even looking at those entities
that are requesting for profit,
whether it's marketing or
LexisNexis, which are some of
our largest users.
Maybe they're handled
differently. So we're looking
forward to having that
conversation with the
legislature this year.
One of the things our counties
struggle with um is border
issues and we want to be part of
the governmental solution for
those types of solutions. Um, we
have a role in it. We certainly
respect that when it comes to
border issues, that is a state
and federal law enforcement
issue, but we certainly provide
support in talking with Luna and
Donana specifically they often
are called out for unattended
deaths. They are often called
out to respond with EMS by
Border Patrol agents.
individuals who are coming over
who are facing hypothermia this
time of year, who may be
malnourished, and we're going
out with ATVs and trailers
because that's the only way to
get there. These are unique
circumstances where counties and
municipalities may be providing
support with transportation or
connection to community services
and right now local governments
bear the cost for that. We would
like to see something similar to
what we've done in the past
where maybe there's a special
fund set up at DFA where local
governments could apply to
offset some of those needs to be
part of that intergovernment.
solutions specific to borders.
Um, I wanna start with our
equitable disclosure. We do have
Damian Marra who's joined us. He
is the not only the Bernalo
County assessor, but he is also
the chair of our assessor's
affiliate. So our assessor's
affiliate have championed
changes to disclosure for
commercial properties for quite
some time. It's usually run into
challenges of the legislature.
We understand there are lots of
mixed feelings about this. He
can certainly answer some of
those specifics, but what this
information would be is we'd
like to share it the same way
that they do.
with residential. Currently
we're in nondisclosure state. We
don't anticipate changing that.
That's not the intent, but when
a residential property exchanges
hands, assessors get the
information on the sale price
and the purchase price so that
they can adjust the properties's
tax value accordingly. It is one
of several tools that they use.
It's not the only tool. When it
comes to commercial property,
that extra tool does not exist.
We would like that information
to be shared so that they
consider that in their toolbox.
of things to make sure that
we're getting to current and
correct and fair market value.
This is something that
statutorily assessors are tasked
to do and what we're seeing is
when you get new assessors that
come in and they see that
statute and their roles and
responsibilities, sometimes they
go in and they make that
adjustment, and it is
overwhelming for the businesses
who did not anticipate the
increase, and we then need to
work through it. That's not
gonna change, but we would like
to have a better conversation
with more transparency that
maybe there's a solution like a
phased in.
approach. We don't necessarily
like the idea of a cap, but the
reason I want to talk about this
is the next thing that's gonna
tie into this, and this is
something that's slowly
unraveling as we look at it and
Damien don't handle the
specifics. There were 2 ballot
initiatives that passed for
veterans. We are 100% a veteran
friendly state. We care about
our veterans. It passed
unanimously through all
committees and through the
legislature, we certainly
weren't going to stand up and
oppose it. We get the intent of
it, but the ramifications are
significant.
So the first initiative was to
increase the exemption for
veterans from 4000 to 10,000.
Great idea hadn't been increased
in a long period of time.
That we can get an idea on what
those numbers are gonna be,
cause we knew what the 4000 was.
So we can estimate that yield
control should take care of a
fair amount of that.
The other amendments a little
bit more challenging, and the
reason why is it used to be that
if you were 100% disabled, in
line of duty, you could get a
100% exemption from your
property tax makes complete
sense.
The Legislature acted and the
voters agreed that that should
now be 10% or greater.
Here's where the problem comes
in for us to really quantify
that. You don't know if somebody
claiming 10%, 20%, or 30% as a
2000 or $30,000 mobile home or a
$2 million property.
We have no clue until they file
what that lost value is going to
be on our property tax values.
So we know the legislature is
considering enabling language
this year. We think equitable
disclosure should not be taken
off the table as part of the
considerations in how we recoup
some of that potential property
value loss. Yield control is not
going to make that up. Everybody
else is going to share part of
this cost that includes other
individuals who are disabled,
seniors over 65 on.
value freeze will see an
increase, and we have 22
counties that are at the cap on
their mill rates. We want to be
part of the solution, but I
think we need to look at all the
different options we have on the
table.
And it is going to hit us. How
do we fix that with you in this
coming session, and with that, I
would, Mr. Chair, if possible,
turn it over to Dam and Lara to
add some of the specifics of
this.
Thank you, Joy. Um,
She Lite, members of the
committee, thank you so much,
um, as Joe mentioned, as Joy
mentioned,
my name is before you do begin,
uh, would this be, uh,
The discussion that we're gonna
have in regards to the bill that
you and
So it's, it touches on one
component, um, but I don't
replicate the discussion, but if
I'm happy to just stand for
questions.
OK, so we can address it when
you present your bill. OK. Thank
you.
So Mr. Chair, that essentially
covers it. We have had great
relationships. We're really
sorry to see so many of our
champions for public safety and
others who are leaving us. We
know there will likely be
discussions on DWI, um,
appreciate all the bills
sponsors last year who were
willing to work with us and
understand how those affect our
local DWI programs. Several of
our affiliates have affiliate
specific initiatives such as if
we are going to do some of these
exemptions for veterans like the
one that Mr. Laura will be
talking about. We need a
deadline so that we make sure it
falls within the timeline each.
year so that we can make proper
assessments and if not, then
they'd have to hold off to the
subsequent years, and with that
we would stand for any questions
and appreciate the ongoing
dialogue with all of you.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you for uh showing up a
little bit early. We're ahead of
schedule, but I'm glad it all
worked out. We will go to the
committee for questions,
comments first on the list, we
have Senator Spanics.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you all for your
presentation. Um, I knew about
some of these, but I also want
to put a couple on the table for
you, uh, yesterday our committee
did endorse one of my bills,
which is a tax credit for
volunteer firefighters that many
of the counties do not have
enough volunteers, which is
quite a bit different than the
salary or the paid EMTs or uh
firefighters, so I hope you your
association will consider that.
Also, one of my counties, and
then I've heard a couple of
others that aren't in my
district, have some issues with
cannabis growing, so I have a
bill that um would allow
counties to petition the RLD for
a two-year moratorium on
cannabis growth permits, and I
know one of the county
commissioners from one of my
counties will bring it to your
association.
So I hope you will uh look at
that as well.
And um if you need help with
something, let us know. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We'll be
happy to take a look at those,
our board of directors will be
meeting in January. Um, we can
take action on items then and
then we'll, our executive
committee meets weekly
throughout the session. Thank
you, Senator. Thank you,
Senator. Let's move on now to
Representative Chandler.
Um, very briefly. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
So on the detention, not, not
getting fully reimbursed.
Have you guys all thought about
Mr. Chair just saying no.
Not except the prisoners.
Not accept the, I mean.
I mean, at a certain point, I
kind of I would understand if
you all are absorbing the costs
of the state.
So.
What's your thought, Mr. Chair
and Representative Chandler, um,
in the 20 years I've been with
the organization, occasionally
there have been comments by a
few elected officials that we'll
just turn them out on the side
of the road, but ultimately we
are tasked with public health
and safety, um, I think we take
that very seriously. I think
it's more likely that we would
push the issue through the
courts, which we would hate to
do, but it is just a small
amount that's still unfunded, I
think overall the system
probably.
could use additional data, which
may not be being collected
through the sentencing
commission, um, to really get
good numbers because we actually
think the cost is significantly
higher.
And if I could just add to that
too, this doesn't include
transportation costs, which we
haven't even mentioned this
year um because we sort of
weren't getting anywhere with
that, but there's also the
prisoner transport costs as
well.
Um, just one follow up, Mr.
Chair. So it's not either or, I
mean, they're not gonna go on
the street, they're gonna go
into the state system, did I
misunderstand something, Mr.
Chair. So, Mr. Chair, right now,
what happens is if they are in a
a state penitentiary, and they
violate certain conditions of
probation and parole, they go
back to the county detention
center and that's the ones that
were specifically wanting
reimbursement for, um, there's
still legal processes that have
to play out before they get
redirected back to the
penitentiary. I do think there's
been attempts to
drop them back off at the
penitentiary, and they were
refused without going through
these additional court
processes, but we can certainly
have more of that conversation.
Mr. Chair and uh Representative
state statute statute actually
requires counties to house
individuals arrested within
their counties.
And Mr. Chair does that statute
say that you'll be fully
reimbursed.
I, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, I don't know if
it's included in that statute,
but there is another statute
that says that states that
states the state shall reimburse
counties for costs.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go on to Senator Maestas. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, just a quick.
tiny bit off topic, but as you
know, um.
The counties are responsible for
building the state district
courthouses, which was a, you
know, an agreement or a decision
back in the day prior to, you
know, the state busting out at
the scene with extra monies. Is
there any conversations at all?
sell those courthouses to the
state and have the state take
over that responsibility or
Mr. Chair and Mr. Mata's great
point because we are finding
that the old historic
courthouses, which are
absolutely breathtaking, are not
conducive to future digital
complexes. So far it's my
understanding that the counties
have had uses for those, but
that could be a conversation I
hadn't thought of that, of
having those sold back to the
state. The reality is we still
are obligated to provide the
facilities for them, so if we're
not using the historic ones, we
have to look at other options.
Thank you, John.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for your presentation. Can you
um tell me the process uh when
uh state police officer makes an
arrest and it goes to the
county, and then they have to
transport them and how much that
cost in both time and money and
uh how the counties have to pick
that up. Can you explain that?
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herrera, that
therein lies the problem is, um,
traditionally our county
sheriffs are often going out of
state to pick up extradited
state prisoners. The problem is
we have 33 counties that often
have different software,
financial platforms, they don't
all break it out at that detail.
And so that's one of the things
that's been a challenge for us
in bringing that forward. The
statute already exists that says
the state will reimburse us for
those types of extraditions.
But until we get a solid figure
amount, it makes it a very
difficult conversation. Unlike
detention where the New Mexico
Sentencing Commission is tasked
with providing those numbers and
has done so. Um, so yes, it is
challenging when you look at
detention, it's the one place
where we have no control, who
all comes in and how long they
stay. Um, a couple of the
counties have agreements with
municipal counterparts to pay,
but it is minimal for the most
part counties are carrying the
entire burden of that cost, and
I think
uh Catherine probably shared
we're looking at about $389
million a year for detention
costs alone. Mr. Chair and Joy,
if you could tell me, um, how
much would it cost to do uh to
to buy a system that could track
that out of state mileage for
counties.
Um, Mr. Lindsey, I'm afraid I
don't know the answer to that,
and the reality is because of
the way the state the county
financial systems, that is very
low on their priorities when
you're looking at how many other
connections they have to make
with elections, treasures,
assessors, they're really
looking at systems that support
local government functions, so
it's almost kind of a one-off.
Um, so we did this past year
reach out directly to our
finance directors and ask them
to be part of the solution.
But part of the reason we didn't
come forward this year with a
proposal is that's probably
going to take another year or
two for them to actually parcel
out numbers that we could come
back to you and say, here's what
we really think it's costing. So
we are in the works on that, but
that's why there's not that
proposal in front of you this
year.
Well, thank you for that joy and
Mr. Chair. I, I know that's a
huge problem in Rio Riva. It's
a, it's a huge budget issue for
them, and it doesn't sound like
much, but we only have so many
sheriffs, and if you have to
send 2 out of state.
To transport a prisoner.
And then you have to pay for
that and pick up the tab
yourself when it's really not
even a risk by a county sheriff,
it's an arrest by state police.
It, it has created havoc with
county budgets. I, I just in my
district and that's all I know.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, do you mind if I add
representative and just keep in
mind the state does not
reimburse for uh reimburse the
counties to house individuals
who are picked up on new crimes
by state police. So that's a
whole separate, yeah, or
municipal, that's a whole
separate expense that they're
only reimbursed for parole
violation, violators.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Questions, comments?
If no, as far as uh and uh as
far as it excuse me and Miss
Carol, thank you for your
presentation and uh sister Lara,
we will get back to you here in
a minute with your, uh, piece of
legislation, OK? Thank you all.
I appreciate you all. So at this
point in time, folks, we have uh
consideration of pros
legislation for committee
endorsement. We have 3 total
today that we will look at uh
Senator Pope has 2 of them. The
first one that he will be
presenting, he is not looking.
for endorsement, but he's
looking just to provide a little
bit of a background on this
piece of legislation. And the
second one related to his work
with Clara is the one that he
will be looking for some
endorsement for, so.
Senator Pope, whenever you're
ready, you can present the, uh,
your first one that you are not
looking for endorsement on.
Flo is yours whenever you're
ready, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee.
Uh, this bill, the uh number for
this one is 0.22.
8887.2, just so.
We're all going off the same
draft.
Uh
This bill deals with equitable
disclosure.
And this is an initiative um
also from New Mexico counties
and the assessor's affiliate.
Um
And what equitable disclosure?
Does and why it's a priority.
Um, is basically providing equal
treatment between
non-residential commercial
property, and residential
homeowners, making this fair and
equitable.
And with that, I will pass it
over to the assessor, uh, to
just talk a little bit more
about some more key points of
why this is important.
And then we'll take some
questions after.
Um, Mr. Chair members of the
committee, um, thank you,
Senator Pope. Um, so there's uh
several initiatives in here, um,
thanks to uh NM County and um
several uh industry
organizations, we were able to
hold 4,
Working meetings with industry
and sort of trying to come up
with an agreement, we're not
quite there yet, um, but we've
indicated, um, for economic
development, for fairness and
equity, um, that equitable
disclosure is a good thing for
New Mexico, um, with that, we do
need to balance, um, as Joy
mentioned, uh, some
predictability, some disability,
and uh ability for continuity uh
for our business community. So
we're working on a temporary
cap, um,
last, uh, we had been speaking,
um, industry, uh, some industry
leaders, not all of them, but
some industry leaders indicated
a 15% cap over uh 10 years, uh,
assessors felt more comfortable
with the 20% cap. We're still in
negotiations. The can't be, uh,
before you today is at 18%, and
that probably will continue to
work on, uh, as we look uh
towards uh the session. The
other notable um pieces of
legislation deal with uh some of
the veterans.
Um, exemptions that we've talked
about earlier and that uh
changes were made to the
Constitution. Uh, we do need
firm deadlines um for the
disabled veterans. um, so that
we can apply that, um, uh, as
last time we were here at the
committee, we received news um
to, to many county assessors
that there were almost 50,000
veterans with a disability, um,
and so to try and implement that
is gonna be very difficult
without a firm deadline, of
course, um, I was reminded that
that doesn't mean
that they don't get it, right?
It's for the tax year, every
single tax year of disabled
veteran can apply for it and
receive it and reap those
benefits, but they just got to
meet the deadline so that all of
the taxing authorities can plan
for their budgets. We also have
updates to the notice of value.
We have our updates for payment
for the uh for the county
protest boards which are
underpaid, and that would put
that um similar pay to um
elected judges, I'm sorry, the
election official uh judges that
do that so that we can get some
Good quality um protest boards,
um, and some other cleanup and
administration of the property
tax code. Um, the
When we first presented, we
didn't know if the
constitutional amendments were
going to pass or not, so we
would need to put um in Senator
Pope has, um,
Mention that he does want to
include, uh, enactment
legislation for both the 10,000
as well as for the veterans
disability.
We would need to contact uh
veteran Services department
because, uh, as the statute
currently sits and is the way
that it is being implemented.
County assessors don't have the,
the staff, the resources or the
technical know-how on how to
verify uh federal disability
ratings. Um, that has always
been the uh jurisdiction of the
veteran Services Department.
They currently have no way of
providing a percentage of
disability certification.
So we will be reaching out to
them to ask, you know, when they
might be able to implement that,
um, county assessors, um, have
looked at this, we would need at
least uh implementation for
January 1st of 2026. Um, notice
of values have to go out in 3
months. Um, there is no way to
implement either the 10,000 or
the veteran Services Disability
in 3 months. Um, and so we, you
know, we would be, if, if
The legislature, so sought to
require that we would be putting
counties in a position of having
to roll back values to issue
refunds by the treasurer and a
whole lot of other
administrative, um, issues that
Many counties, especially our
rural counties, are just not in
a position to do at this time.
Um, so with that, I'm happy to
stand for, for questions.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
uh, Clara.
Questions, comments.
On this piece of legislation.
Anyone?
All right folks, as we develop
this more and more, I guess
there will be up, we do have a
question, Representative Chan,
um, Mr. Chair, it's more of a
comment and um, you know, I know
that.
There's a lot of controversy or
angst, um.
About the equitable disclosure,
you know, and we've heard, we
heard it when we spoke about
this bill. I don't know, couple
months ago or whenever that was,
and I just want to encourage
people to keep in mind that
If
There's a certain amount of
revenue needed by the local
governments, and if it's not
generated by the commercial
properties, it's gonna be
generated, and I think that
point is often lost when we
discuss it. Now, does that mean
we should move and do an
immediate increase and and so
on. I see that the assessors are
working towards a compromise
wherein, you know, there will be
a a phased in approach, which I
think is fair and perhaps other
discussions to help the
businesses who might be
impacted.
mitigate and plan, but the
alternative, I would point out,
Mr. Chair, is the assessors will
start attempting to assess the
properties at a rate that they
believe is accurate, and
frankly, I think they have a
constitutional and statutory
duty to do so, to do otherwise,
they would not be attempting to
fairly value those properties.
Now, there could be protests as
a result, because they will not
have the full breadth of
information that they have, Mr.
Chair, when they are working on
residential properties, and
those protests, frankly, will
generate the information that we
could short circuit and simply
go to by implementing equitable
disclosure in a way that it's
phased in and thoughtful with
input from the business
community, which I commend the
assessors for attempting.
To receive, so I just want to
encourage people to be open to
this, this concept, I think the
assessors are open to compromise
and uh and working with in with
with business and so on in a way
that it is least disruptive, but
one way or another, businesses
are gonna be impacted because
the assessors have a duty to
assess properties at fair value,
and it will happen and it will
happen, you know, a disruptive
way or it will happen.
not planned, thoughtful way
where businesses will have had
input and I'd encourage the
latter, Mr. Chair, but if the
latter doesn't happen, the
former may. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
And Mr. Chair, uh Representative
Chandler, if, if I mean, one of
the reasons why businesses have
come forth is because many
assessors have done that
already. Currently in statute,
there is no cap or phased in
approach for non-residential
property, uh, several counties
have increased non-residential
values, 20, 30% in the last
couple of years. Um, and so
you're right, if we don't get
equitable disclosure or some
type of cap.
That is what county assessors
are obligated to do by statute
and, and by the constitution is
to try and figure out what
current correct is and go to
correct the following year.
Thank you assessors. Anyone
else, questions or comments?
Seeing none, I'm reminded to her
in regards to the comments that
were made by Representative
Chandler that a compromise is
always, is always best, and I
think that reflects in regards
to the communication that we had
when I uh was uh invited to talk
with the assessors affiliate
back in October or whenever it
was that, uh, you know, if we
can strike a compromise best for
everybody. Everyone hates it a
little bit, that means we're
doing something right, right?
Thank you gentlemen for, for the
presentation this morning.
Senator Pope, the floor is still
yours. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
the next, uh, bill draft is
number 0.22.
8886.2.
And this is a joint resolution
and and what this does is.
It actually increases the head
of uh family household from uh
$2000 to $4000 and then it does
has a little cleanup language,
including um.
Surviving spouses of honorably
discharged members that are
actually um getting their
property tax exemption as long
as it's their primary residence.
So that this one is a lot
simpler.
Less controversial.
And I don't know if the assessor
had any additional comments.
Um, chair members of the
committee, um, yeah, so this is,
uh, as Senator Pope indicated a
little bit of cleanup language
as well. Um, when the
legislature did the uh veterans
exemption from 4000 to 10,000.
They also indexed it for
inflation. Um, the head of
family exemption, which sits at
2000, which was the original
amount that the veteran's
exemption was at 2000 has not
been changed, um, I think ever.
Um, and is the 10,000 exemption
goes forward.
Um, as
Property taxes are shifted to
homeowners, uh, especially
senior citizens and things of
that nature. Um, we believe
that, uh, adjusting the 2000
just for inflation to go to 4000
plus indexing it for 4000 will
make um those uh homeowner's
whole, uh, and won't feel the
burden as much.
Very good. Thank you gentlemen
for the presentation. Let's go
first then to Representative
Chandler and whoever wants to
get the list, please raise your
hand.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
when we
We briefed on the impacts of the
vet increasing the veterans
exemption.
We saw counties sustain
significant some counties.
Potentially sustained
significant revenue losses.
And that is concerning to me,
Mr. Chair, um, because local
governments, of course, have to
pay for the services they
provide and there were some
significant hits, I understand,
Bernal Leo um maybe um suffering
from a significant hit as a
result of the veteran's
exemption, so have we done our
fiscal analysis, Mr. Chair of
the impact of now the solution
being compounding the problem
that was created.
by the other exemption.
Um,
have we done a physical analysis
to see how much money counties
might lose if we increase the
head of household exemption,
Mister Chair, index it.
And I, I also have a question,
Mr. Chair. How does that play in
with the other, are they, are
they stacked, Mr. Chair?
They're stacked too, so you
could have a veteran's
exemption. I had a household
exemption, um, the most
beautiful property exemption,
um, so, um.
how are we thinking about this
for long term revenue streams,
Mr. Chair, for local
governments. Help me get how
this is a good thing.
So, Mr. Chair Representative
Chandler, um, as indicated by
Senator Pope, this will also do
some clean up, um, to ensure
that it's simply the primary
residence uh that receives the
head of family exemption, uh, as
well as the uh veterans
exemption, um, so currently, um,
you know, the 3% cap, they had a
family exemption while you only
get one per county, um, you can
apply it to any property you
wish, um,
with the 10,000 veterans
exemption, um, you can have a
veteran who's 100% disabled
veteran, claims it on their
primary residence has additional
land and stacks those exemptions
on the investment property on a
rental property, on a second
home, uh, of those things, so it
would, it would clean up those
issues where, um, county
assessors feel that the head of
family is very similar to the
homestead exemptions in, in many
other counties and states where
it's meant to
Keep the primary residents in
their home and provide them with
the exemption on that. So that
would shift some of that burden
back to um properties that are
not meant to be the primary
residents, um,
as was mentioned by you before,
um, right, because New Mexico
does have only 2 tax
classifications, residential or
non-residential, um, that would
be kept on the residential side.
So it it it's trying to even out
the
Tax burden that is being placed
on uh senior citizens in their
primary home. It's trying to uh
balance out the tax burden on uh
primary homeowners, um, and
you're right that the
The other burden will be put on
vacation rentals on a short term
rental properties, an investment
property that's all classified
as uh residential, including,
you know, um, a large apartment
complexes, but we feel that
because the burden is being paid
by primary homeowners that they
deserve to have some type of
equity, and this is really the
only other way that we can
provide equity for primary
homeowners.
Mr. Chair, um,
Have the local governments who
are gonna potentially lose the
revenue.
bought into the approach that
you are proposing, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Assessor, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Chandler, yes,
this is in uh New Mexico
counties endorsed uh
legislation um we did provide
this along with equitable
disclosures, um, to the NM
County's board. They reviewed
it, um, and they have endorsed
this piece of legislation. They
did not make it a priority like
they did for equitable
disclosure, but it is an an
County's endorsed legislation.
Um, one last point that was not
addressed, Mr. um
fiscal impact, what sort of
assessments have been done with
regard to fiscal impact, because
we may be hearing something
different like we did last, you
know, earlier this summer when
we found out about the
implications of the veterans,
um.
Mr. Representative Chandler,
you, you're right, we should do
and ask legislative finance
Committee to help, uh, do a
fiscal impact on this. Um,
It, it's just from the amount,
um, it's set to go into effect
in 2027. And so it, that the tax
burden that is being felt right
now, or that is being uh reduced
will double in each county,
right? We, we know that because
we're doubling the exemption
amount for the same number of
people. So the amount of tax
savings that are being provided
to veterans will double in that
revenue for the 22 counties that
are at their maximum may be a
hard hit.
There is no new construction or
yield control doesn't make up
for it in the coming years.
uh, Senator Maestas.
No, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Paul. Thank
you.
Uh, so lot, I appreciate you.
The um
Kind of along the same lines and
that, that we were just talking
about, um, there was there was
numerous concerns brought out
publicly since, since we, we
passed the resolution last year
and since the voters approved it
in November.
Uh, with regards to, uh, the
effect on counties and the
effect on other
Property owning taxpayers on the
effect on non-property owning
veterans, things of that nature.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, Senator Pope,
what are your thoughts about?
Uh, I'll start off, uh, Mr.
Chair, Senator, um, I, I think
those are
Real concerns, and those are
concerns that um
Even myself and my district in
going back and talking to folks
that the reality was that for us
to help, help veterans that we
needed to, what we needed to do,
uh, making up the revenue, um,
was gonna have to happen by
other homeowners.
I think with some of the things
that we're trying to do here.
I think can make, will make up
for that at the same time on
this bill that we're trying to
get the endorsement for or also
being more equitable and trying
to provide more relief.
For the residential folks as
well. And so, um, is it perfect?
I, I don't believe so, but I
think this is something to where
we didn't really try to shut
down or sabotage a bill um that
went to the voters, um, that I
think is gonna help.
Some folks
At the same time, we needed to
come back and really do the
right thing.
To really make sure that we're
looking out for the counties and
then we're also actually looking
at additional relief. Oh, thank
you for that, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator Pope, thank you because
this language on page 2 is.
is better than the language that
currently exists.
Uh, unfortunately, I don't know
why it wasn't.
Put in this
last year. Also, with regards to
a $2000
$2000 exemption, let's say it's,
if you know Mr. Chairman, uh, a
lot on a $2000 exemption, say
the house is $300,000.
And you exempt
$2000 of that, and obviously
with the other formula,
approximately how much money is,
is that homeowner save.
Um
uh uh
went to uh Senator,
so on a 300 depending on the
county and, and the mill rate
that's being levied on that
particular home. It's anywhere
between 60 and $75. Thank you.
No, thank you, mister, um.
Mr. Chairman, Silata, and that's
important, you know, I mean,
that's important for heads of
households, that's important for
veterans. But it's also very,
very minimal.
Uh, relatively speaking, we
wrote $500 checks the year
before last.
It was smooth, it was easy. It
was um.
And so it just seems much easier
to do, uh, either write checks
or, or tax deductions in
different formulas.
To get at the same result to
help heads of households.
households with children and
veterans who've served served
our country. So anyway, I just
wanted to point that out. Also,
Mr. Chairman, Senator, have you
considered doing this in stat?
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, uh,
Master,
we cannot, or the state
legislature cannot override the
Constitution by statute. So
that's why the Veterans
Constitutional amendments made
amendments to the Constitution,
for whatever reason,
When the
Founders decided to write up the
Constitution. They put that
particular exemption amount in
the Constitution. So it would
either have to be stricken and
that power delegated to the
legislature or the amount uh
overridden in the Constitution
itself. Um, we're also doing
some, some cleanup. So as, as
Joey mentioned, right, the, the
So homeowners that were most
concerned with that are going to
be impacted the most are other,
um,
Individuals with a disability
who make less than not, it was
41,009. It's now up to 42,000.
Their values are frozen because
they have a disability for the
statute and their income is low.
Senior citizens who are 65 and
or their income is low, how also
have their value frozen,
however, because the tax rate is
going to go up. The taxes are
going to go up.
They are allowed to get the head
of family exemption because
that's their primary residence.
This would help offset.
For, for those individuals who
county assessors see.
Almost on a daily basis. Um,
I've had the same experience as
Cesar Romero has had the same
experience when we have
Individuals
Literally shaking, coming into
the treasurer's office, trying
to set up a monthly payment
plan, because they can't afford
the $50 or $60 a month.
Um, and they come to us and
they're saying, why did you
raise my taxes? Why did you do
this? And it's because taxing
authority decided to impose a
new male. They don't understand
that they're on a value freeze.
And, and, and the senator Pope
indicated
That, that makes a difference to
them.
And this had a family exemption
would be limited to people who
have a primary residence. It,
it's not gonna be two other
residential property owners who
are have investment properties,
who have rental properties, who
have all of that stuff. It's
just for those people who need
it the most and who are going to
be impacted the most by the
Constitutional amendments that
were passed for veterans, right?
And, and it, it will still
provide that protection for
veterans.
Yes, I understand,
Representative Chandler's
concern that counties,
municipalities, soil and water
districts, hospital districts,
all that may be losing some
revenue.
There is nobody.
There is not an organization
that we've been able to find as
county assessors, that is
advocating
For the homeowner.
We've decided as an organization
and as affiliate that because we
too are elected officials that
we should be fighting for the
homeowner, for those senior
citizens on value freeze for
those people with a disability.
And this is the only other way
that we can provide some equity
relief on taxes that we know
they're gonna have to pay in the
coming years.
No, thank you, Mr. The um I
appreciate that. The, uh, also
those folks are walking into the
treasurer's office.
Uh, because we passed the
constitutional amendment that
helped the veterans, so they,
they could be affected
negatively, not just by a male
levy rate, but by what we do.
On this committee. So I would
just suggest that it's much
easier just to write a check.
It's much easier just to write a
check to these persons to help
them.
Uh cover unanticipated costs on
a fixed income. And also I
would, I would have a slightly
different take on it, um.
Mr. Chairman, that this is the,
the minimum. In other words, we
can't lower the
Exemption, we could add on to
it, in my opinion, in state
statute. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
We'll take and thank you,
Senator. Let's go to
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, just a couple of questions
I'm gonna follow up on uh Rep
Chandler's comment.
Um, I think cleanup is always
good, uh, simpler is better.
Um
I, I am concerned with the
stacking.
And what counties you're going
to see with that. And in regard
to that, then, can you tell me
how many veterans have uh
Um, res um residential income
property, commercial income
property that that will affect.
And can you tell us how much
that's gonna add or bring back
to what is being now given.
Um, Shermante, um,
Representative Duncan, I can
only speak um intelligently
about Bernalillo County, um,
each county assessor in each
county manager and county
commission will have to do their
own in Bernalillo County, we
have 26,000 veterans with the
10,000
that will
Soon have the $10,000 exemption.
That is a $1.2 million dollar
tax hit to the county. It's a
$789,000 hit to um the city and,
you know, as it goes forward,
there are
42, um, veterans that apply that
exemption to their uh commercial
property. It, it's sort of a
mixed use. They, they live out
of
That particular property and
business, so we apply that to
them. And there are
6800 and something uh current
veterans with a 100% disability,
um, because that is required to
be on their primary residence,
none of them live in a business.
It's all a, a residential zone,
primary residence for them, um,
so that wouldn't affect um that
on there. It, it would just, um,
and, and the, uh, to Senator
Maest's point, the stacking is a
statutory and a regulatory
issue. Um, that, that's done by
the taxation and.
Revenue Department, if, if the
legislature wants it not to be
stackable.
You, you can write that into the
statute. Um, but currently the
way that it is applied across
all 33 counties is if there is
a, a veteran, uh, and their
spouse is also a veteran, they
stack it, and they can stack the
head of family exemption on top
of that as well. If they have a
child who lives in the home and
that child is also a veteran,
then we added uh another one on
there, um, as well. Um, but the
Constitutional amendment would
say that all of these exemptions
should be applied.
the primary residences only, uh,
if, if, if the policy
determination or the policy uh
consideration that the
legislature is, is considering
for the veterans exemption is to
help veterans stay in their
home, then it should be their
home. It it it.
And, and that's the cleanup
language in the constitutional
amendment that would be
required, um, to, to ensure that
it, it follows that.
Standard.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Going back to no studies have
been done and to determine uh
how much is going to be realized
by the cleanup in this bill
saying you can only, you can
only stack it here, but you
can't stack it on any of your
other properties. Is that
correct? That uh Mr. uh I'm
sorry.
Chalite, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, and
Representative Duncan, that is
correct. We're still doing that
analysis.
And Mr. Chair, thank you. Uh,
when will that analysis be done?
I'm just curious.
We hope to have a conversation
in early January with um the
director of property tax
division, as well as
legislative, uh, finance
committee, uh, staff, um, so
that we can all agree on the
Uh, assumptions that we're going
to make because they, we, as
indicated by Joe, we're all
still working under a lot of
assumptions. Um, and just to
give you an idea, I did an
analysis and found that the
constitutional amendment for uh
percentage disability was going
to be a $5 million hit to the
county.
The county's economists said
that that was going to be a $10
million dollar taxes that they
were going to lose out $10
million in taxes. And so you can
see that from what I thought to
what the hired economists by the
county commission thought.
It is a $5 million difference.
And so we have to
Agree on what the assumptions
are gonna be before we can
provide any real guesstimate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, and
if it goes to the $10 million is
this still something that the
new Mac is gonna push forward
and say we're still going to do
this. I, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Duncan, I can't
speak for the board of county
commissioner, I'm sorry, for the
board of counties, uh, and of
counties, um, I have, have
conversations with um some city
councilors in Albuquerque, and
I've had conversations with the
county commission, uh, as well
as our deputy, uh, county
manager.
for finance.
If the legislature is sores to
put this off until 2026. We're
currently working on our FY 26
budgets for that coming year.
They're planning on keeping
their budgets flat.
And making sure that they don't
add any more increases, um, so
that they can absorb this
without having to either impose
new bills or having to be put in
a situation where they're going
to have to um cancel new
initiatives or anything like
that. So we're, we're actively
working at least in, in
Bernalillo County. Um, I, I
can't speak for joy, but I know
that um many counties is meeting
in January. We're having joint
meetings with the county
managers, the county
commissioners, and finance to
ensure that they're all
prepared.
Again, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Duncan of the
legislature so wishes to allow
counties the time to plan their
budgets so that they don't get
the, you know, they, they're not
not planning on an increase, um,
they could at least stay flat or
absorb any losses in revenue
that may come.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
that's all I had.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Senator Stefaniks.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So,
gentlemen, um, I represent a lot
of rural counties and the issue
there is that people are uh land
rich and cash poor.
People inherit properties.
And I would like to
Look, or have you all look at
The impact in some of those
rural.
Counties, because I know we have
a lot of veterans in those rural
counties.
Whether or not they are 100%.
That's a big question. Whether
or not they are, you know,
living.
Marginally, I don't want to say
that the poverty level, but
marginally, um, and how this
would affect them.
And then, in terms of some of
these other counties that don't
have a rich economic base.
The individuals that live in
those counties don't have a lot
of excess income.
So I just think that all of this
needs to be
put into this.
So just to be clear, Mr. Chair.
Are you looking for endorsement
of the bill or the joint
resolution.
Because I had to step out, I'm
sorry.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, we're
looking just for the joint
resolution, the, the first one
we went over on the disclosure
on the resolution that was just
so my comment on that, Mr.
Chair, gentlemen, is that
I think it's too soon. I think
it's gonna be confusing.
I think it's a similar situation
to the PRC.
And I think people, we made a
change on the PureC then we went
back and made another change,
and I think people now are
sorry.
So, while this all might be
valid, I think you need to look
at timing and even if 2 years,
you think is enough time.
I think voters will remember.
That we just voted on something
like this.
So I, I'm just throwing out
ideas and
comments for you all to think
about.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Representative Herera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, for the presentation, you
know, I have 4 brothers who are
veterans. God love them.
All are outspoken like me, but
uh so our family gatherings are
contentious, but that's OK. We
can take it, um, I guess if I
went to my district and said,
you know, we're gonna do this uh
tax break for veterans,
everybody would say, yeah, go
for it, yes. If I said we're
gonna do a tax break for
veterans, but all of you will
have to pay a little more
because we're gonna do that.
The answer might be different,
is what I'm saying. And, and
because, you know, I, I mean, I,
I really think first do no harm
up here if, if we really don't
know the facts.
Uh, the, the fiscal impact facts
behind the measure. I, I think
it's a disservice to people. I
think we really need to go
forward and and have the facts
before people so that they can
make a uh a difficult vote and
it would be difficult both ways.
I, I understand that, and that's
really all I have to say, Mr.
Chen.
Thank you, Representative.
Anybody else? Senator, yes, sir.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I just
wanted to uh respond to
Representative Herrera. Um, I, I
think you're right in your
points, and I think with what we
passed and rightfully so, I
defended that, and I think it's
about telling the honest truth.
Um, previous years I signed on
to the bill. I didn't sign on
it, the one that passed.
But I was clear to everyone that
there's gonna be a cost to this.
Folks are gonna have to make it
up. I believed in it.
But I think we had to be honest
and say that.
I think what we're doing here,
and even though we just saw
something go to the voters.
This is actually
Providing some relief.
to non-veteran homeowners.
So I think that's the argument
here.
But it's also the concern of
what is the loss to the counties
and what
Is that actual amount and that
information. And so I agree with
you. I think we need to find out
what that amount is.
So we can provide the
information.
Not only to us.
If we decide to pass this.
But to the voters so that they
can actually make that I wanted
to say that. Thank you.
Senator, uh, at this point, I
think we've all gone through
questions and comments. So is
your sentiment then that we
should delay taking endorsement
on this until we find out the
real numbers so that
I, you know, I think what what
people are saying here is that
we agree with the principle. We
understand that we love our
veterans, but until we know the
facts and the numbers, it's a
little bit of a tough vote. I
think people are looking at
taking this this morning, so
what's the pleasure?
I, I think we, uh,
want to move forward with the
vote and give it a try if that's
OK, Mr. Chair.
I know it might be tough for
some folks, and I understand
that.
No, it's at the pleasure of the,
of the sponsors. So is there a
motion then to uh endorse.
Uh
Senate joint resolution, uh,
number 0.228886.2.
Looking for motion.
I'd like to make a motion, Mr.
Chen.
sponsor makes a motion. Is there
a second to the motion?
On.
Going twice
Without a second, we cannot
proceed, Senator. So again, you
know, it's not a matter of, of,
of not wanting to support. It's
a matter about wanting to learn
the facts before we move
forward. So I think it's it's
well taken, so at this point in
time, we'll move forward without
any endorsement.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee members. Thanks for
giving me some practice for the
session.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
Lara for coming out to Santa
Peter's day.
Next folks, we have on our
agenda is our final piece of
requested endorsement for uh
endorsed legislation. It is uh
0.229030.1, it's the discussion,
let's see, it's related to
increasing uh liquor uh excise
tax and
This morning we have Senator
Pinto, uh, present in our room.
I do know that we have
Representative Ferrari that will
join us virtually.
And we have an expert and I
apologize, ma'am, you'll have to
reintroduce yourself, but when
we get to that, folks, uh, we
are here and uh the floor is
yours, ladies, whenever you're
ready to proceed and we can zoom
in or bring in.
Representative Ferrari,
whenever.
We can.
Floor is yours.
Thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, and we do have a
senator Cia Lopez and
Representativeative Ferrari.
On the Zoom panel. Can I confirm
that?
No.
It might just be
uh represented for Ferrari, we
do have confirmation that she
will join us virtually but not.
It's
There she is. OK, good. So
whatever order you want to
proceed, please do so. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee for the
legislation. 229030.1, the um
sponsors are seeking the
endorsement today in a boat, um,
components of this bill, part
one, is to adjust the alcohol
excise taxes for inflation. Part
2, introduced a 12% sales tax on
alcoholic beverages. This
proposal would decrease
population level, alcohol
consumption by 4 to 11% in
from 200 to 260 million in
annual funding.
And the reason I'm co-sponsoring
is that if I can add another
day, another month, another year
to any of my constituents lives
that is probably the most
important thing I can do with
this legislation, um.
Some people think that.
They're still going to buy it,
um, but if the
Cost is just a little bit
higher, maybe it'll take them a
little bit longer to reach that
point of no in some sense to
others, it is a point of no
return when we talk about the
mortality rate and also the
point of addiction, if that can
be prolonged longer than I, I
see a very large positive in
supporting this bill, and I will
defer to my expert witness here.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Thank you, Senator Pinto, Mr.
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Marlena
Lera. I'm a substance use
epidemiologist. Um, I'm also a
doctoral student focused on
alcohol policies and the
president-elect of the New
Mexico Society of Addiction
Medicine. I'm here today to
share a new
hybrid proposal regarding
alcohol taxes and to quote Mr.
Chair, just a few moments ago, I
believe you said that compromise
is the best for everybody, so
really we're here today in the
spirit of compromise to try to
bring together excellent ideas
from both groups of legislators
who have been working on this
proposal to try to move it
forward and to the finish line
in this upcoming session. I'm
gonna walk through 10 slides,
um, try to be brief but really
outline.
The various components of the
policy and um leave some time
for questions. So starting out
New Mexico, as you all know,
continues to lead the country in
deaths from alcohol and
excessive alcohol use is really
deeply interwoven with so many
other critical issues in New
Mexico ranging from homelessness
to crime and gun violence,
mental health issues, child
abuse and neglect and intimate
partner violence.
And although our overall
population experiences high
rates of death from alcohol.
Alcohol is also a major driver
of health disparities in the
state. So if you go to slide 2.
There's a nice figure that shows
that actually individuals who
are white in New Mexico, drink
the most out of all racial and
ethnic groups, yet they die at
the lowest rate and in contrast
indigenous individuals actually
drank the least on a population
level, yet experience the
highest rates of alcohol related
death. Same goes for individuals
who are black or or who, excuse
me, or who are Hispanic, um, and
I think this ties in nicely with
some of the, the real concerns
that Representative Kadena has
brought up previously about the
the great health disparities in
the state, and these harms are
really compounded from legacies
of colonialism, structural
violence.
Intergenerational trauma, the
list goes on.
Um
Increasing alcohol taxes has
been recommended by numerous
organizations, including our own
Department of Health centers of
disease control and prevention
and the World Health
Organization, and every year we
don't do anything about alcohol
taxes, alcohol actually becomes
cheaper because taxes continue
to erode from inflation.
So, thinking about what needs to
happen. The legislators um who
are sponsoring this bill feel
that there are 2 public health
goals that need to be achieved
with this legislation. The first
is to decrease alcohol
consumption on a population
level by 5 to 10%. So this is
not prohibition. It's not 100%.
This is not 50% reduction. This
is not a 20% reduction. We're
talking about a minor reduction,
5 to 10% to really dec
increase
The very, very high number of
deaths that are happening in
from alcohol in the state, and
furthermore, um, provide 200 to
250 million in stable revenue
for public health investments,
um, and to really help on the
other side with prevention,
treatment, communications
campaigns, harm reduction, kind
of the whole swath of public
health, um, interventions that
could be employed.
So digging into the hybrid
proposal going to this slide
components of the hybrid
proposal. I'm gonna go into a
little bit more detail about
what Senator Pinto just
outlined. So this, this really
is a hybrid proposal. It
includes both an adjustment to
the excise tax.
And the sales tax. So the sales
tax has been proposed by Mr.
Chair, by Representative Parajon
by Representative Cadena, um,
and this is a, a sales tax
similar to the gross receipts
tax, but it would apply to
alcohol. It would be on top of
the gross receipts tax, and it
would be applied at the register
and um 12% helps us to get to
that 200 to 250 million in
annual.
revenue. It's also the same
sales tax that's currently
applied to cannabis in our
state, and alcohol actually
causes far more deaths than
cannabis, and the cannabis sales
tax is actually increasing to
18% over the next 5 years. And
then the other component is with
the existing volume-based excise
tax, and this is what you've
heard hasn't been changed in 30
years. The last time the
legislature moved to um increase
It was in 1993, so the rates
are, were basically set in 1994.
So it's basically adjusting
those volume based excise taxes
for inflation since 1994. The
bill also kind of tries to
simplify things for future
legislatures by incorporating a
CPI inflation component, so that
every 3 years, this volume-based
excise tax will increase with
inflation, so hopefully.
No future legislatures would
ever have to come back to adjust
it for inflation. Hopefully not
in 30 years, there would be, you
know, these every 3 year
adjustments being made. So
that's kind of the overarching
tax structure also in terms of
simplification, it takes the
idea again from um
representative Kadena,
Representative Parajon and Mr.
Chair Lunte, Representative
Lente, to have a standard amount
for the sales tax across.
All beverage types.
So we're really pleased to have
this kind of hybrid bill that
incorporates both of these
excellent ideas. Um, we've also
made changes to the revenue
allocations based on all of the
feedback and all of the
excellent ideas again that we've
heard from the other
legislators, um,
First, existing programs would
be maintained and actually
increased, um, second, and this
is an idea directly from
representative Parajon and
Representative Cadena, 25% of
this new fund, um, would go
directly to tribes, nations, and
pueblos for mitigation of harms
from alcohol, including
culturally relevant practices,
so really trying to get the
money to the groups who have
been impacted.
the most from alcohol.
Second, another idea that
representative Parajon brought
forth, um, is allocating funding
for research on health
disparities and harms from
alcohol. Um, there's so much
room to grow in the research
that can be done within our
state Department of Health, um,
with regard to this and, and as
the unfortunate leader in
alcohol deaths, we should be a
leader in alcohol research and
to try to mitigate those harms.
And then lastly, there's the
creation of managed alcohol
programs across the state, and
this is an entirely new idea
that has been incorporated again
from feedback, um, or from some
of the concerns we heard from
Representative Kadena,
Representative Cataho about
individuals with really severe
alcohol use disorder who may
experience unanticipated impacts
from increasing prices.
And then there would still be
substantial remainder for a
variety of public health
programs, including health
councils, public health media
campaigns, school and
community-based prevention
efforts and very importantly,
um, funding for under or
uninsured individuals to make
sure everyone can access
treatment. So we're trying to
simplify things. We're trying to
streamline things. We're trying
to um make sure that, again,
these rates
will keep up with with time and
um the evolution of time, so
that this is a a lasting um
impactful intervention in the
state.
If you go to the next slide,
there, there's a comparison of
price changes and this outlines
how.
The price changes have evolved
over the course of this
legislation.
I'm gonna hold it up in case is
everybody have spies.
So for me, is there any extra
copies?
Yeah, I'm looking for work.
Thank you. We're looking for one
extra copy of their proposal.
No
Go.
OK. Great. Please proceed. OK,
thank you so much. So in the
previous proposal,
The changes were just going to
be made to the volume-based
excise tax, and that meant it
was the 25 cents a drink
increase that meant that
regardless of what type of
beverage you would be purchasing
whether it was an inexpensive
beverage, whether it was the
fanciest brandy or cognac, the
price change would be the same.
However, in this new hybrid
proposal.
The price changes are actually
very different. So in the
previous proposal, both an
inexpensive bottle of vodka and
uh a $110 bottle of Scotch
whiskey would have increased in
price by about $5.
In this new hybrid compromise
proposal.
The cheaper bottle of vodka from
Walmart would increase in price
by about $2.50 so the price
increase would be halved. In
contrast, the more expensive
Scotch whiskey would increase in
price by $15. So really the
price change grows as the price
of the beverage grows and and
this is really the idea from
Representative Parejon, Mr.
Chair Representative Lente and,
and Representative Kadena.
incorporated into this hybrid
proposal.
a significant departure.
And lastly, I'd like to touch on
this idea of managed alcohol
programs, that's this slide
right here.
Um
The group working on this
proposal really took to heart
some of the concerns that were
expressed by Representative
Kadena, um, I think previously
she said that sometimes people
just need to get through the
night and
That individuals with severe
alcohol use disorder may be at
risk of withdrawal, and
withdrawal is an extremely
serious condition. It can
actually be lethal for
individuals with alcohol use
disorder. It's different from
withdrawal from opioids or other
substances, but people can
experience seizures and they can
actually die from alcohol use
disorder. Um, we were also
inspired by Representative
Parajon's work in housing, um,
and just
The idea of harm reduction and
some of the work that's been
going on across the state in
terms of overdose prevention
sites.
And that led us to this idea of
managed alcohol programs. So
these are programs that have
been widely implemented in
Canada, in the European Union.
Um, and basically they use a
housing first model, and they
target individuals with severe
alcohol disorder. Um, and they
housed them and they give them
dosed alcohol.
So somebody who's homeless with
severe alcohol use disorder
would get a place to live and
they would get dosed alcohol
every hour, 8:30, 9:30,
whatever, whatever is needed for
them. There would be wraparound
services for medical and
addiction treatment if they, if
and when they want it, but it's
really a program that meets
people where they're at. Um,
it's a very novel program. There
are only 2 in the United States.
There's an opportunity for New
Mexico really to be a leader in
housing policies and also
substance use policies to try to
implement this, um, and
furthermore, we've gotten buy-in
from the Canadian Institute on
Substance Use Research, their
world leader in this, and
they're willing to help us
implement um programs across the
state. I have uh one pager on
these programs if you'd like to
do further reading and also a
New England Journal of Medicine
article on them, so I'd
encourage you to to take a look
at those.
And then lastly,
My, one might wonder, you know,
could such programs work in New
Mexico. And luckily, Professor
Kimberly Page and team at UNM,
um, actually just did a study
that they published a few months
ago where they surveyed
individuals who were unhoused in
Santa Fe and ask them what
would, what would you think
about such a program? 96% of the
individuals who are unhoused who
were surveyed, um, said yes or
maybe thinking that this would
be a good.
good idea for our unhoused
populations, um, and notably 41%
of that sample of unhoused folks
had alcohol use disorder, far
more prevalent than opioid use
disorder or stimulant use
disorder, um, so this is an
innovative idea that could
really mitigate some of those
unanticipated impacts, really
help people, um, with physical
dependences who might be at risk
of of withdrawal should these
price impacts hurt them.
So to kind of summarize this
bill incorporates really
excellent ideas from both groups
of legislators. I think this is
a bill that is a lot stronger,
um, because it is a combination
of all of the ideas that have
come before. It has the
inflation adjustment. It has the
sales tax, um, it maintains
existing programs. It has
allocations to tribes, nations
and pueblos, um, and it would
position us to be this leader in
harm reduction.
both for substance use policies
and housing policies. So, um,
with that, I'll, I'll turn it
back to, to Senator Pinto. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
member of members of the
committee.
The legislation 229030.1 has
received endorsements from the
Indian Affairs Committee and the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee, just to let
you know. And one of the things,
um, one of my early educations
was about DTs.
As a child.
And if you're not familiar with
that, um, but it shouldn't be.
That shouldn't be the beginning
education for our people, uh, at
that age.
So I hope we can make a change
and modify behavior over time,
um, with that, Mr. Chair. We
leave it to you. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you,
uh, Ms. Laura or Laura?
Lira. OK, thank you very much.
Uh, with that, folks, let's go
to the committee for questions
and comments. First on our list
is Representative Kadena.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good
morning. Thank you, Senator
Pinto.
And um Miss Lira.
I, I'm really grateful that
we're in this moment in
conversation this morning, as I
have done many times. I want to
appreciate you, Senator Pinto,
Senator Serio Lopez, and of
course my colleague
representative Ferrari, for
bringing this in front of us.
We weren't talking about alcohol
tax like this until you all
showed up and demanded,
insisted, compelled us all to be
in this conversation with you.
So thank you so much for your
leadership in those ways. Um, I
also really appreciate that as
we've built momentum from the 30
day session. We are having a
different conversation than we
were as we kicked off this year.
And I really appreciate um the
learning and humility you all
offered to to be in this debate
and dialogue with us about the
mechanics of the actual tax
policy, um, and seeing how much
movement we've come through from
the 30 day session to now it's
clear that you all took a step
back and were willing to act to
to look closer at the policy,
understand more intimately how
the taxing worked and bring a
hybrid forward that is heading
in the.
direction.
Um, I, I didn't have the
opportunity to be part of the
Indian Affairs meeting or the
Health and Human Services
meeting, um, so I'm curious,
maybe I can find the webcast in
here more of the conversations
that were happening there. Um, I
know all of us, uh, we're all
over the state, including, um,
representing Parajon and I were
in Las Vegas, New Mexico this
summer with the Association of
Counties and getting to meet
again with the DWI grant fund
affiliates who hold this work
every single day in the
communities we each call home.
in the communities we represent.
So from meetings to there to
every alcohol researcher
representative Farah could um
find virtually this summer and
tax experts across the country,
we're really proud that
collectively, um, New Mexico is
working to be innovative and to
name out loud that these archaic
systems that somebody else far
away came up with a long time
ago. We're never fit for New
Mexico, and we're trying to get
it right. Um, so in that vein, I
especially appreciate that we're
all saying now like.
We need better research. We need
New Mexico grown research that
understands the complexities of
our poverty and our trauma and
our truth and can help represent
the impact that tax may or may
not have.
On people's behavior, especially
when they're navigating, um, the
disease of addiction. All that
being said, I, I'm, I'm have a
smile on my face. I'm
celebrating that this is where
we are before we go into the 60
day session. With that, um, I
still have some questions that I
think we deserve to figure out
together as policymakers and
certainly beyond the those of us
sitting in this room today, um,
as you've noted in that
presentation, this proposal
still does um keep the.
excise tax or what we otherwise
know as a wholesale tax. Um,
I'm, I've looked through the
bill that got emailed to us
yesterday, um.
I understand that there's a need
to, if we kept something like a
wholesale tax in place that it's
outdated, it hasn't been updated
since the 90s, um, but the, the
new rates y'all have proposed
besides the CPI are are are
increases of 100%.
So for me, I'd have some more
questions about like why you
picked those numbers and and how
much money we need to raise off
of off of this tax. Um, so
that's still a distinction that
I'm, I'm.
Wondering about and certainly in
the conversations we've had in
this committee even as recently
as as our alcohol day sometime
this fall. Um, you all know that
the, the proposal representing
Barajon and I will be bringing
forward doesn't carry forward
that wholesale tax anymore
because it's become irrelevant
and we all can agree it's, it's
ineffective. Um, the other big
piece that I know all 112 of us
will debate as we get to the 60
day session and and I am with
you like we need to.
We need to send a bill to the
4th floor.
We'll see what happens when it
gets there, but we need to send
a bill to the 4th floor. For me,
the central piece of that debate
that remains is what the alcohol
retail tax rate should be?
How high that's gonna be, how
low it's gonna be, what, what
the magic number is?
And in turn, how much we think
is appropriate to raise from an
alcohol tax.
We've certainly shared this. I
appreciate the chair for raising
some of these concerns when we
had our alcohol tax day.
There's money in New Mexico's
budget.
I feel pretty uncomfortable in a
time like this to say we know
these programs need more
funding.
So we're gonna go to New
Mexicans and pull them out of
taxes.
If we, and, and I saw our, our
colleague Chair Munoz was here
early for a minute earlier
today. I, I wish she was here
now. If we have legislators
haven't figured out how to send
this money where it needed to
go, then that's a failure on us.
And I'm pretty uncomfortable in
raising taxes and in such in
raising and creating a new tax
at such high rates.
To pull the 200 or 300 million
that we can all agree
justifiably we need. Um, so I, I
know that there were suggestions
thrown out last time, like would
it be a one time appropriation
to kickstart the harms
alleviation fund, um, and we
then agreed to a rate that we
feel is reasonable for the
public good and and appropriate
for, um, what alcohol tax could
be, uh, but, but for me, yes,
lots of commendations for the
important work you've done. I
appreciate that.
Now we are talking in a
reasonable way about an alcohol
retail tax and what's in front
of us for the 60 days is
figuring out what that tax rate
should be. So thank you for your
work. I look forward to getting
into this. I'm not ready to vote
to endorse this yet because I
think we, we all need to have
some vigorous debate with New
Mexicans from across the state
providing their expertise and
insight, um, but I'm ready, I, I
know I'm ready to continue this
work with you all. I'm grateful
to see how far we've come.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
move on to Representative
Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for this, um, as an
individual who almost uh
was killed because of a head-on
collision with a person that was
impaired. I have no love for
alcohol at all.
I have less love for taxes.
Maybe they're on the same
wavelength.
We are awash with money in our
state, and if the goal is to
raise taxes.
I think we can do that. We
haven't done a very good job as
uh rep Cadena said if we aren't
putting the money where we need
to, where it needs to go to
substantially impact the lives
of those who are most impacted
by this.
Having said that,
How, um, Senator how will this
impact San Juan County's fund
that we have in place, and I
think we have a great program in
place. How will that impact
this?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
What
a lot of this allocation when
you talk about the AOC is after
the fact.
The punitive, some of the um
Legislation I've seen so far too
is more about raising penalties.
This is on the front end.
This is talking about those that
are.
Coming of age.
Before we got into December, uh,
actually had a student, uh, 25
years old.
Um, cirrhosis.
In the ground now.
You're talking about a little
bit too late or wait another
session, uh,
Who pays the taxes?
People do.
We don't have the people out
there to pay the taxes to
Earn wages.
go down.
Even more, especially when you
talk about after COVID.
So San Juan County and having a
program is great. I wish we
didn't have to have programs to
do that.
I hope it decreases, and I think
that's one of the things, um,
with Marlena here is that the um
There are predictions, you know,
uh, as we move forward, and when
you talk about evidence base
too.
And the Native American
population, um, especially with
San Juan County, I believe we're
kind of like geographically half
on the Navajo Nation and half
not on there is
We don't have the data.
I mean, you have the data when
it comes to DWI and when people
get arrested.
But on the front end,
Um, I don't really see, uh, how
we can really answer that
question on the impact of how
high will it.
B
Right away.
Over time.
We believe in over time we will
see an impact, um, we'd like to
weigh in on that.
Thank you. I, I just like to add
to Senator Pinto's comments, um.
I think it's very reasonable to
ask, could we just pay for
prevention and treatment from
the general fund, um, that is a,
a really rational question or
suggestion, um, but doing that
would only kind of.
Solve half the problem.
Increasing the price would help
to directly decrease
consumption. Again, this is not
prohibition. This is not major
decreases, but it's just 5 to
10% and this is really a
comprehensive policy that is
anchored in prevention. It's
about trying to prevent the next
generation from developing binge
drinking from developing alcohol
use disorder, um, it's really
about helping the future
generations of New Mexico.
be healthier, while also
circling back to help people who
already have alcohol use
disorder, um, get access to high
quality evidence-based
treatment. So it's really
grounded in prevention and
that's why.
Perhaps just
Putting money toward it alone.
May not get us the anticipated
health impacts that that we all
so desperately want for our
population.
Thank you.
Duncan question answer.
Thank you for that, uh, senator
and, and, uh.
Special witness, um, so then my
one last question then would be,
uh, Senator, the 25% that's
going to go to the tribes. How
will that be? Will that be
education? Will that be your
expert just said they'll circle
around and get treatment as
well, so can you explain that to
me how that will work?
And Mr. Chair members of the
committee and representative.
That is up to the individual
tribes, nations, and pueblos.
So I'm sure it's gonna include
all those because you can't
really get too much, um.
In prevention if you don't
educate.
But
In my area.
The facility, you know, we did
there's been discussion about
infrastructure.
One of my detox centers is in a
detention center.
Mm
So when you talk about trauma
and trying to get a person well.
And putting them into a building
that
Literally was a jail.
Um, to get them well.
You know, they need a new
building.
And
There's, there's a lot of
aspects to it. And even with our
tribes, nations and pueblos.
Having that infrastructure
available. I mean we're, we're
still trying to get teacher
housing on some of the
reservations. So we use uphill
battle.
to exactly say their sovereign
nations, so they get to decide
how that's going to be um
implemented, but they do need to
have some funding.
Um
Representative. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman and thank you, Senator
on that because I think that's
so important if we're going to
try to um get our young people
to not, I, I had a um an
individual I was working with at
one point in time, and he said,
You're not native.
You don't know what I'm going
through. And he was dealing with
19 different tribes, and he
said, so
What the best thing you can do
is, is help them get the tools
they need and then get out of
their way.
And I think that's a great idea.
Let's, let's get out of the way.
Let's have that treatment,
whatever it is, and I don't know
what that is, and I was curious,
that's why I asked the question.
Um, have you thought about what
that's gonna look like and how
that's gonna um unfold. Um,
obviously, there'll be some
other uh other expenses with
this, um,
secret tax talked a little bit
about that yesterday, um, and,
and it'll be millions, uh, just
for the
software loan and impacting
small businesses probably more
so than others, but, but there's
ways around that as well. But,
but I think that um I, I think
this is if, if this can unfold
and, and the treatments can be
secured before they needed it.
Now I'll make one statement, and
I'll, I'll finish, Mr. Chairman,
until we fix the families, I
don't know that we're gonna fix
this.
And, and so I hope some of that
is with our families as well.
And uh so, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Senator
Pinto. Thank you,
Representative. Let's go to
Representative Parajon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you so much, Senator Pinto and
um San Antoinette Cilia Lopez
represented Ferrari for bringing
this bill, um, the hybrid. I
really appreciate how you've,
um, identified on on the
components of the hybrid
proposal slide, which parts have
been merged together, um, you
know, I, I think that really
speaks to the um thought and the
care that we've also put into um
into the bills that we brought.
Forward and so yeah, I really
appreciated that slide, um, a
few in terms of infrastructure
center Pinto, I have, I have one
comment and then two sort of
technical questions, but, um, I
in Albuquerque a few weeks ago,
I got to see the sobering center
that's in Gateway in the old
Loveless hospital and it was one
of the projects that I worked on
when I was there at the city, in
addition to the shelter and the
medical respite center and
Um, it was, it was a really
emotional moment for me because
we had worked so hard to get
this sobering center stood up,
um, with funding from the county
and merging with the city, um,
and then even the dollars to run
it and to design it with
compassion and care and when I
walked in and I saw the lighting
and it was not overhead
lighting. It was soft lighting
and I saw the colors and um the
way that the furniture looks.
soft and that people had their
own rooms to detox in, um, it,
it was dignity and it's those
kind of infrastructure projects
that um we need in our state
that that is one sobering center
for our whole state and it's one
of 60 in the whole nation. And
so, you know, these kind of
innovative solutions are the
kind that our our people need
and especially the people
experiencing homelessness who I
used to work with.
Um, I really appreciate how you
drew, uh, um, attention to the
fact that more people are dying
from alcohol and opioids. I
think opioids gets a lot of
attention, um, but we built that
sobering center for alcohol
because that is what most people
experiencing homelessness, um,
are, are suffering with.
Um
Two of the questions that I have
for you. One, the first is, is
on that point of infrastructure.
I didn't see in the bill, um,
the amendments to the DWI
formula that was part of the
work that uh Repcaan and I went
to Las Vegas and worked, went to
the county assessors large
meeting have worked um with joy
asparson who was just here, but
that formula, you know, it's
based on two things, it's based
on your GRT and it's also.
based on the alcohol related
injury deaths, so it's not based
on alcohol related deaths, um,
and it doesn't, it just accounts
for how much money your county
produces, not whether or not you
have a need, um, there's some
adjustments with that because
it's, you can't use that kind of
money for, for instance,
infrastructure projects, so that
was my first question.
I'm just gonna lump them
together so you can answer them
together. The second question I
had was, um,
Is this proposal also going to
remove GRT.
Uh, or lump it together with the
12% because at the moment it
seems like you're getting the
12%, uh.
You know that the sales tax and
then you would also get the
additional 7% GRT, um, or if
you're in McKinley County with
the uh special uh tax on alcohol
that it would be um an
additional, I think it's 3%.
That the county has taxed
alcohol separately, um, so I
know in Maryland when they do
their sales tax, they have put
together GRT and the till
there's no GRT on the alcohol
piece. So if you could address
those.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Parahon uh with
respect to your first question
about DWI and infrastructure,
um, I think we recognize that
that formula.
could be updated and improved
and and actually I think
One of your particularly
brilliant ideas that you
incorporated into your proposal
is this allocation based on
deaths, um, that's not currently
part of it, but I think there's
definitely room to incorporate
that and I would welcome you and
Representative Kadena to
collaborate with us on that
because you have, you've done a
lot of the leg work to really
understand it, um, and I think
could, could help to inform
those changes. Um, that said,
this bill does.
Maintain and actually increase
funding for the existing
program. So the DWI program
would actually increase to $30
million annually. It's currently
at 23 million, um, and I've
received a long list from the uh
state level coordinator on all
of the different improvements
and expansions that could be
made within the existing
programs. I think there's a lot
of room to help expand and grow
them, um, and maybe update that
formula so it it meets the need.
I think that's an excellent.
Excellent point.
Um, with respect to
infrastructure as well, um, I,
again, a, a brilliant solution
and addition that could be
incorporated with respect to
your second question about the
GRT this sales tax as it's
currently proposed is in
addition to the GRT. So
depending on where you live in
the state that determines um or
where the purchase is being made
that determines what the GRT is,
is 12% would be standard across
all the state in addition to
whatever. Thank you and I'll
pass it to Senator Pinto.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
representative, one of the
things too with this tax is to
stabilize funding.
And when you talk about the
formula in the WI crashes, but
in my area, there are very few
roads, and we do have an issue
with not having law enforcement.
So our counties are very
different in which we live in,
um, so just keep that in mind.
Um, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, for bringing this bill
forward. um.
You know, we had um in Ribe
County and Mota County, we had
two, alcohol treatment centers
years ago, and they were very
successful. It was closed down
during the Martinez
administration.
So my question is, I'm curious,
how much did it cost to build a
map, uh, infrastructure, uh, and
then how much does it cost to
run them on an annual basis.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herrera. So I'm
actively looking into the the
details of that and I'm meeting
with the expert from the
Canadian Institute for Substance
Use Research after the holidays.
Um, meanwhile, representative
Ferrari is actually visiting a
map program in San Francisco
this Friday of this week right
before the holidays, so we are
doing our due diligence to
figure out those numbers so that
we can figure out how many maps
programs we could stand up. My
understanding is that there was
actually the start.
one in Gallup many years ago,
but it sort of fizzled out, um,
but this is kind of taking it,
it's taking like the idea of the
sobering center, which I'm so
glad that we finally have in our
state and then taking it a step
further and saying let's just
give everybody the housing.
Let's give everybody the meals.
Let's give everybody what they
need, meet them where they're
at, um, so I don't want to give
you wrong information, so I, I
will need to follow up with you
after I, I look into it further.
Thank you. Thank you, um, Mr.
Chair, and uh I just want to let
you know that we, we build a um
drug program, a rehab, uh,
facility in, uh
In Espanolla about 4 years ago,
and then we did a detox center
in um Tas about 2 years ago.
They both you take abandoned
hotels and fix them up and they
were both about about a million
just to build the
infrastructure, getting the
staff.
is much more difficult. Training
the staff, getting the staff,
getting in on board is is if I'm
just telling you while I totally
support this. That is, that it
will take a longer period, you
know, it, uh, uh, rules and
regulations for, for these
programs are tough, and they
have to be to protect everybody
in there, and I think that's
gonna be an uphill climb, uh,
And I, I have to say I didn't
vote for this legislation last
time around because I thought
there were too many problems
with it, but I, I really think
this is going in the right
direction, and I appreciate you
bringing this bill forward and
uh I hope to support this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Let's
go to Senator Stefaniks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mine are
more comments and they any
questions. Um, and I intend to
support it, and I'll tell the
committee why, you know, when
the tax bill, mine or anybody
else's gets to the tax
committee, they hold it and then
they decide at the very end how
to massage it.
Pass it on, not pass it on,
change the rates, etc.
So I think that we.
Should be sending a message that
this is needed.
Um
And we have a couple of examples
to go by. We passed a couple of
bills in the past few years
around hospitals and providing a
lot of money to support rural
hospitals and hospital staff,
etc. but we also left it to the
departments who are gonna get
the money to prescribe exactly
how the money was going to be
used.
And I think one thing you might
keep in mind is that there might
be.
A prescribed list of choices.
For the tribes to pick from.
Versus saying you have
Total freedom, or you have to
only do this one thing, because
when the healthcare authority or
the Department of Health.
Um, sets up, uh, a program,
there are accepted standards and
that perhaps a variety of
standards could be utilized in
uh working this out. So I just
wanted to make the comment that
I think
Our legislative process.
At the very end, decides if it's
gonna go forward or at what
rate. So thank you very much,
Mr. Chair and thank you,
sponsors.
Thank you, Senator. Let's go to
Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Senator, gentle lady,
just to maybe a couple, maybe a
question, but mostly comments,
um.
Right off the bat, the um on the
fund, I, I like the way this
fund is set up because the fund,
the money goes into the fund and
then the
Legislature appropriates it, um.
What I would ask is maybe take a
look at the DWI grant fund, look
at the duties and
responsibilities and mandates of
that fund.
And maybe consolidate.
into one fund instead of two. If
not,
Please consider changing the
word DWI.
To, uh
To alcohol or whatever, the
reason being, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, the I got a client who
was in jail. I tried to get that
client into the detox program,
the client was there on a
whatever a domestic violence or
whatever, and they were like,
oh, that client's ineligible
because you have to be booked on
a DWI to get into this program.
So anyway, just keep that in
mind, it may give the the
counties and cities more
flexibility on using that.
Money more wisely because
alcoholism's alcoholism and.
And you know, people are people,
the um
And then, uh
But, but one stickler I have,
Mr. Chairman, is, is dollars and
cents in the tax code, I just do
not like dollars and cents in
the tax code.
Unless you
Increase it every 10 years,
which governments don't do.
You know, our gas tax is still
stuck at 17 cents from 30 years
ago.
This is stuck
So I would suggest um that you
consider, and if you wanna kind
of lock in that 1994 tax code,
which is basically what you're
doing, you're kind of saying the
94 tax code was perfect and
we're gonna keep it in
perpetuity. You want to do that,
figure out.
How much money would be
collected if you went by
percentage.
Because per percentage, everyone
knows it and it and it, it
adjusts for inflation and you
don't have to have on page 3,
Mr. Chairman, that big paragraph
B where everybody's trying to
figure it out.
Um, and then obviously you could
have a different percentage for
beer, wine and spirits.
Um
And then, uh
And then lastly, Mr. Chairman,
um,
The the surtax I think is
frankly the.
The way to go, just to refresh
our memory on the cannabis tax.
It was a 12% surtax initially,
and it goes up a penny, I'm
sorry, it goes up a percentage
uh for 8 years. So it starts at
12%, goes up to 20% on cannabis,
and as we all know, cannabis has
a significantly lower social
cost than alcohol.
Significantly, one of the
reasons I advocated for the end
of prohibitions cause I never in
my 15 years doing criminal law,
read a police report.
Or someone said, you know, after
putting down his cannabis
cigarette comma, the defendant
did this. I never in my life
have I seen a police report that
that mentioned cannabis use, but
I guarantee you.
80, 90% of the violence there is
allegations of alcohol use.
Um, so anyway, the, the, the
surtec.
Uh, you know, if push comes to
shove, maybe you could phase it
in, uh, you know, from whatever
to whatever, what I would also
ask you to consider, Mr.
Chairman, is in doing House Bill
255 and researching all the
Alcohol policies from throughout
the world. There's a bunch of
stuff we can do to curve.
Uh, consumption.
Uh, a lot of stuff we can do
that other states are doing that
seems weird, but it, but it's.
You know, it's the law. For
example, in Indiana, you can't
buy cold beer.
You know, it's just it's just
the way it is. So when you're
driving to that Notre Dame game
and you're trying to get beer
for the tailgate, you will be in
shock, um, and you cannot buy
cold beer. And obviously the
times, you know, we can buy
spirits till 12 midnight.
What if we want to 11, you know
what I mean? So there's a bunch
of stuff we could do and I'm,
I'm grateful that the
legislature is now talking about
alcohol policy because it really
didn't for decades uh prior to.
House Bill 255. And then lastly,
I would, I would consider, uh, I
would suggest that liquor by the
package has a higher social
cost, and that's contrary to
what we've been led to believe
because of the horrific, you
know,
DWI crimes and stuff, the
fatalities on our roads. It's
really the, the, the liquor
that's consumed at home.
Um
Then then someone having a drink
after work, uh, we were
We fought for years about not
having point of sales, Mr.
Chairman, that we're gonna fight
DWI by not having point of
sales.
The more places that sell
alcohol by the drink, the less
people are on the roads, it's
kind of a weird policy choice,
but I would suggest that if we
were to distinguish between
alcohol sold by the package and
alcohol sold by the drink that
we tax alcohol sold by the
package at a higher rate as a
higher social cost and doesn't
affect.
Uh, you know, economic growth,
restaurants and things of that
nature. But anyway, thanks for
Bringing this forward has a lot
of moving parts, um.
I look forward to the dialogue
in the coming months. Thank you,
Senator, very much for your
leadership. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Senator.
Anyone else questions, comments
on this piece of Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Um, thank you, expert,
um, thank you for bringing this
forward again. I'm gonna be
supporting this, um, but I also
appreciate you bringing it
forward and working with so many
others with the issues and
really compromising and trying
to find a way forward and really
pushing this just on behalf of
our people.
And I know your community, and I
know that's where your passion
is, so, uh, just wanna say uh
thank you for doing that.
I just thought I needed to say
something because, you know.
I have a little, little issue
with alcohol sometimes, so just
wanted to say that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you Senator Pope. Anybody
else's questions, comments?
a couple of comments from me and
uh
To the points of Senator
Stephonics in regards to how tax
bills get held up in in tax
committees, right? I know it's
an issue. I know it's an issue
and I was, I was taught a couple
years ago when I took the helm
of the tax committees that
anything that has a financial
impact will be held back for the
for the omnibus tax bill.
But I, I, I, I will say that uh
wherever this a bill starts, uh,
whether in the house or or in
the Senate, but as it relates to
the house, taxation and revenue
Committee that this will be a
standalone bill. It won't be a
part of a of a larger tax bill
this will be one that will run
through the process and if it
starts in that committee and it
goes through the process, then
the more power to it, right,
with whichever bill that that
comes from that. And so I, I
think that's the commitment
that, that we are making to
ensure that this
issue that plagues New Mexico is
one that we are taking
seriously, that we are one that
we will send a message to the
alcohol industry that
We will be taking action in one
way or another.
My ultimate hope is that.
Because there are still yet um.
22 different proposals that are
on the table, um, I, I, I want
to make sure that
The one that
Both representative Kadena and
Representative Paajon worked
tirelessly on, and I say
tirelessly, maybe loosely, but
you worked on extremely hard
because you put your best tax
policy hat on.
He did the groundwork and labor,
which you which you all did too,
and, and when we talk about a
hybrid compromise bill, and I'm
looking at this and I'm
thinking,
And I, and I, I secretly I text
the two young ladies here, the,
the representatives, and I asked
them did, did you guys meet, uh,
with, with, with this team to
compromise to a bill that's a
hybrid, and, and, and they
didn't confirm, which makes me
think, well,
You know, I
I hope that this is not just you
putting their tax policy into
your bill and saying it's our
idea and let's run with it.
I think that there's a lot more
yet out there to develop in
terms of a of a bill that's
gonna make this a reality as we
move forward, uh, specifically
when I look at, at your proposal
um components of the hybrid
proposal.
It's, it's noted up many times
with ideas from Cadena and
Parajon and
And you click the next page and
it it continues with that. And
so I want to give credit where
credit is due, and I want to see
that if there's a tax proposal
that still needs to be
developed, that is one that I
don't wanna be, uh, held hostage
to one by endorsement here today
that I will likely be voting no
because I think that there's
more to develop in future days
in the weeks and the months yet
to come. And so that is my
simple comment that I wanna, I
want to give credit where credit
is due, and, and it's to these
individuals here that developed
the tax.
policy in a way where you all
were able to appreciate it in a
way where maybe you weren't.
You weren't there.
And, and, and especially when it
comes to how uh we're looking at
the DWI formula and how many
money will be spent, and so on
and so forth. So, um, again, uh,
Something will happen this
legislative session, at least
from the House side. It just, it
just, it's gonna depend on what
that looks like as it comes out
of the house and it goes into
the Senate, but to that being
said, folks, we are here for
endorsement of legislation, um,
build.
229030.1 and I won't take up a
motion yet, but I want to go to
Senator Bran. Mr. Chaman, I
challenge the presence of.
OK.
Yeah, we don't have corn.
OK, so.
Without a quorum
Folks, we can't thank you for
bringing that to my attention
center. We cannot endorse any
piece of legislation unless
Senator Maestas wants to
determine, appreciate you, can
you just for the folks?
Watching at home, some of us are
not members of this committee,
so just, you know, so, uh.
So, um, and we cannot vote or
folks, some folks, anyway, thank
you. Yep, absolutely. Thank you
for clarifying that. So it looks
like here there's only a small
fraction of the members that are
um members of this very
committee that are allowed to
vote and so those that are here
are maybe designee or or maybe
just a guests for the day. So
that being said, folks, um,
without a quorum, you're not
able to endorse, but again, it
doesn't mean
In this committee, in the
interim committee in my mind
first, as one member of the
entire legislature. This is
where ideas begin. It's in the
legislative process when we're
in that session that we, we
begin to flush out real ideas
and how they move forward, but
you have my commitment here that
we will work out something in
the house, uh, as a stand-alone
bill.
And that we should be able to
put on notice, folks that
something will come out, uh, in
one way or another.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Thank you. Representative
Ferrari, we didn't go to you
much, but thank you for being
present, uh, virtually and, uh,
Miss Lira.
Appreciate you being here as
well. Thank you all.
Thank you Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, and happy
holidays. Happy holidays to you
and members of our committee,
thank you, thank you, thank you
to our committee members, to our
staff, especially for, for, for
doing what you do to allow our
community to operate the way
that you do. Uh, we appreciate
