Uh, I would like to go through
and have our members. We're
gonna go through our voting
members first in attendance and
then we'll go to the designee
members and then the advisory
we've got a couple of advisory
here.
Um, to go ahead and introduce
yourselves if you would I'd like
you to say, uh, what district
you represent, who you are, and
what you hope to get out of this
committee, um, and then I will,
uh, finish it off with, um, our
kind of our goals and objectives
for this. Uh, we do have a
presentation from, uh, Ismael
Torres, um, which I'm very
excited about and we've had a
lot of work together and really
kind of laying the foundation
for what this committee is going
to be exploring throughout this
interim. So, um, I do appreciate
it. So, um, if we will, I'm
gonna go ahead and
start with Representative
Lindstrom. We're gonna go ahead
and just move around the table
to the other side. Um, if you
will say where you're from and
what you hope to get out of this
committee. Thank you,
representative for being here.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. I'm Representative Patty
Lundstrom. I represent House
District 9, which is the west
side of Gallup in 9 Navajo
chapters, and what I hope to get
out of this committee, this
interim is I'd like to have a
better understanding of our tax
abatements and tax credits
currently offered in the state
of New Mexico and whether or
not.
work, because if they don't.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you members of the
committee. My name is Mark
Murphy. I represent Roswell and
Chavis County District 59. Um,
what I hope to get out of the,
this is my first interim process
and um one of the things that uh
um I struggled a little bit with
during the session was really
digging into the budget and the
revenue sources and I look
forward to that education and
also um as in support in, in
concert with, with my friend
that left, um, really looking
at, at the incentives that we
have and and and what they're
doing and.
They're effective. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Rob Montoya from
San Juan County. Um, I will this
next year will be my
10th year on tax and revenue in
in the house. Um, so just uh
took a couple of years off in uh
different committees, so I'm
just wanting to get
re-established, uh, and
reacquainted with all of our tax
policy again, it's, it's amazing
how quickly you can forget, uh,
taking a, a little bit of a
break. I find out, I find that
out every year around April
15th. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'm
Representative Joshua Hernandez.
I have, uh, District 60, which
is in Rio Rancho. Um, I sit on
the tax committee normally, um,
and it advisory remember for
you, uh, and I think it's just
Um, what I would like to get out
is to hone my inner harper a
little bit more, um, and be able
to understand, um, some things
that I after sitting on the tax
committee for 5 years, I still
don't understand fully, um, our
tax code is very complex and I
think every moment we can spend
with it gives us, you know,
we'll make a better session as
we go along. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. um,
Doreen Gallegos from District
52. I have actually been on the
tax committee, I think.
8 years now.
Um, and to get what I want to
get out, out of this committee
is I would like to be prepared
to what's coming down the road
for the next session. Uh, just
to be prepared to see what we've
implemented, how it's working,
and uh what we need to be
looking at for the future. So
thank you, ma'am. Um, hello
madam chair, hello members, um
Representative Christine
Chandler, House District 43, Los
Alamos, Santa Fe and Sandoval
counties. I'd like to, of
course, you know, refresh my, my
memory on many provisions of the
code.
but particularly I want to
understand how we text. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, to the members of the
committee, those that are here
with us, members of the LFC,
LESC to our staff, and of course
to uh LCS to everyone that's
here, just uh, it's great to be
with you. I go back to the days
of the ways and and means
committee, so that's been quite
a while, but, uh, with it, I'm
state Senator Pete Compos
representing all the parts of 7
counties in northeastern New
Mexico. What do I expect to get
out of this? Continue to go and
work out the kinks and more
importantly, as we go forward,
take a look at what we passed
this last.
to see what's working and what
else we need to continue to
modify. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. State
Senator Bill Scherr.
And I think it's time we talked
about real tax reform, not
fiddling around the edges and uh
So on that side, uh, they talked
about what, what exemptions,
credits and deductions work and
what don't.
I think real tax reform says do
it with all the credits
exemptions and deductions, and
then you have
Real tax reform.
And Izzy has already worked on
it, and he's now going to put
Jennifer to work because it made
him too confused.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Antoinette Sadil Lopez. I'm
from District 16. I'm the
designee on this committee and I
was really happy to be here, um,
as most of you know, um, Senator
Ferrari and others uh Senator
Baragon and I, um, have been
working on an alcohol tax and
reform of the alcohol tax code,
um, which hasn't been the, the,
the tax has not been raised and
now it'll be 33 years, um, and
so one of the things about it
that I think is
really important to understand
is, is taxes affect on social
policy. Every time you pass a
tax, it provides incentives and
disincentives. And, and that's
true for whatever tax it is. And
so what I think is really
important is how we can provide
disincentives to over
consumption of alcohol. And I
think if we're able to do that,
we could make a huge dent in a
lot of the really disappointing
outcomes.
in our state because uh we are
the, the state with the highest
incidence of uh alcohol deaths
in the nation.
We are the state with um
horrendous impacts um in both uh
DWI and also cancer, you know,
all of the things, all of the
diseases that are related to
overconsumption of alcohol, and
I want to emphasize over
consumption. I'm not
anti-alcohol. People would, I am
anti overconsumption of alcohol.
And I think that um it would be
really great for this tax
committee to really study it and
pass a
Legislation that would be
effective in curbing
overconsumption of alcohol in
this state. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
um, yes, ditto, um, I'm
interested in how tax policy can
influence health outcomes and
how it's so important, um, but
also, uh,
You know, for some of our solar,
um.
Innovation of different
financing and things like that,
how that can be part of this tax
committee and also to find that
balance of taxes and um uh
Health.
Outcomes. Thank you.
I didn't say who I was, did I?
I'm Representative Joanne
Ferrari in House District 37 in
Las Cruces.
Senator Natalie Figueroa,
District 18 in Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County, and I am
interested, Madam Ta in what's
previously been stated at
looking at tax expenditures and
whether they are effective or
not, and then looking ahead at
building the bones of a
framework, or at least vetting
pieces of the tax package in
preparation for the next
session.
Thank you, Chair Roman. Um, my
name is Representative Christina
Parajon. I represent House
District 25 to the which is in
the northeast of Albuquerque,
and I've been on this tax
committee one year, but I've
learned a lot, um, I started,
uh, especially with the, um,
raising alcohol tax and excise
and certainly think that's part
of our public health approach.
One of the things that I'm
really looking forward to this
session is really examining the
progressivity of our tax system
last session of.
in the tax package that was
vetoed, um, there were really
progressive changes that we made
to um personal income tax and so
looking forward to continuing
raising our uh status is one of
the most progressive states in
terms of taxing, and then the
second thing I'm really
interested in is our housing
market, um, because of the
nature of GRT it's really
difficult to build and I came
from the um housing and
homelessness world and um.
Leader Armstrong and I last uh
year or this year, I guess, part
in this session partnered on um
some tax incentives for building
more housing. That is the way
that we will address uh housing
and, and really homelessness,
and then the last, the third
thing that I'm really interested
in looking at here is uh the tax
credits that we give to building
a more sustainable future, the
green tax credits, some of the,
uh, tax credits that we did, um,
with Rita and, and looking.
at those property tax
exemptions. I think that section
of the law, there are, um,
there's more to examine there
because of because of some of
the confusions that we ran into
last session. So, um, those are
some of the things I'm
interested in and, and really
grateful to be on this committee
learning from so many veterans,
uh, and getting to provide my,
um, my thoughts and bring my
experiences.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Bergmans is the, the,
you're gonna finish this off.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Hello
everyone. My name is Heather
Bergman, and I'm the senator
from District 15, which is in
Midtown Albuquerque. This will
be my first interim committee at
all. I was out of town earlier
this week so I haven't been to
any of the previous week ones,
um, but I'm really looking
looking forward to learning what
everyone else is interested in,
what everyone think is thinking
for the session, and something I
really want to start looking at
myself is property taxes.
So, however, we can
Meeting looks. However, we can
use property taxes.
Better than maybe we have in the
past. Let's explore the ideas.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Bergmans. Um,
and then, um, uh, our chair, our
vice chair would normally be
here, uh, again, he does send
his regrets. Um, I'm Carrie
Hamblin and I represent District
38 in Donana County. Um, I
should be wearing a shirt. My
wife went to Virginia and all I
got back was exposure to COVID.
Um, I haven't tested positive
for COVID, but I just want to be
cautious as she has. Um, and so,
uh, hence the mask today. Um, we
do have a forum. I, I, I do want
to, as I explained to Izzy, uh
In the beginning, um, just to
give you a little bit of a
story, my, I grew up with a
single mother who borrowed from
Peter to pay Paul. She was busy
trying to raise two kids. Um,
and so understanding taxes,
understanding, really financial
security was not something that
my single mother, uh, was able
to do as she was trying to keep
her household intact.
And in my day job, I run the
Green Chamber of Las Cruces, and
we talk about local businesses.
And so there are so many things
that all the different
categories that all of you have
talked about today are, are just
such a big complex wheel of what
we are talking about in terms of
how we support our government,
how we support our programs. And
so I, I share the same sentiment
as you as wanting to learn more
about this, but also wanting to
make sure that it actually has
impact.
Um, you know, last year, uh,
this last session, uh, we had
conversations, um, about things
that we could bring back to our
community, and we had um a
bipartisan support tax package
um that unfortunately was vetoed
by the governor. And so what I
hope our overall goal in
addition to all of the things
that you all have talked about
today, that our overall goal is
to come forth, to come out of
this interim session with a tax
package that we all support that
does not have a high risk of
getting vetoed because we know
that our communities could
benefit from that.
We want to make sure that we're
thoughtful and practical about
that. And I think understanding
a lot of the revenue sources,
we're going to have a
presentation from Adrian Avila,
um, about this, and so we're
going to get this foundation
that many of us have talked
about understanding, but we do
have um an ambitious work plan
which we will get to.
Um, but before we do that, um,
for those watching on the
webcast, thank you so much. I do
want us to all get to know the
staff that are here today, um,
who will be making this
committee run, so I'm gonna
have, uh, Christina go ahead and
start off and then we're gonna
go ahead and go through, uh,
everybody to introduce yourself,
say who you are and what you do
with the committee if you don't
mind.
Ok, I'm a staff attorney for LCS
and I'm the lead staff for this
committee. So if you guys have
any questions, you need
anything, feel free to email me.
That's
Um, Clinton Turner, um, I am
assisting today and I'm here for
any of your economic questions
also, if you have them um
throughout the interim or
through the session.
OK, all right, thank you so much
and thank you staff for uh
herding cats to make sure that
we had a quorum cause I know
that that's always uh a
challenge. Um, so I do
appreciate. Thank you all of you
who responded to the request of
topics, um, to do that, that
saves a lot of time in our in
our meeting today, um, but we
will have an opportunity to add
to the work plan, uh, once we
get on that, um, but I do want
to go through a little bit of
housekeeping, um, before we
actually get into uh having uh
Izzy speak to us today. Um, for
Those of you who don't know, I
have a, um, I'm weirdly aware of
time.
And so one of the things I used
to work in radio and I talked to
a clock.
I know about time and um so what
I bring to chairing the
committee is trying to be
respectful of your time, of our
guests' time, and of the staff's
time. And so, um, I wanna make
sure that we use our time
wisely, uh, and your time
wisely. So you will notice that
I do that a lot, that I will try
and keep pointing out the time.
Uh, I also like to try and start
committee meetings as close to
start time as possible. Again, I
do this out of respect for your
time as well as our speakers.
Um, we are all very busy and
thank you all for setting aside.
your time, uh, to be here today,
and I'd like to honor your
equipment, your commitment, and
be respectful of the time that
you've set aside. Um, so given
this.
In the future, and I'll, I'll
make this, uh, this statement
again at our next meeting, but
if you can make sure to arrive
on time for the beginning of
meetings and when we come back
from break, um, that would be
great because I do try to gavel
on time, uh, as my vice chair
during the regular session, uh,
no.
Uh, Christina and I have worked
on making sure each of the
presentations allow for plenty
of time for questions and
discussion, and I truly
appreciate, um, those
discussions that I've seen in
other interim committees come
from many of the members who are
here today. Um, so I do ask
though that we stick to topic.
Um, I know it may be easy for us
to veer off on tangents just to
let you know, I have a script. I
am the most guilty of that. So I
do have a script, um, but it may
be to where if one of us has a
tendency of going off on a
tangent, I may respectfully
bring you back. I'm just
So that we can go ahead and stay
on topic and achieve what we're
supposed to do for the day.
Um, what you will find is that I
like to cluster topics based on
relevance, and I was having a
conversation with Senator Celia
Lopez right beforehand and also
some uh some suggestions from
Representative Chandler, um,
some, uh, in terms of GRT taxes
and healthcare, um, so you'll
notice that I try to cluster
those topics. One, just because
it's out of a, it just makes
sense for a theme of the day,
but it's also so those points
that are presented are fresh on
our minds, um, so that, you
know, we don't have to refer
back to 3 meetings ago about GRT
for.
medical providers when we're
talking about it on that day.
Um, lastly, I'd like to make,
uh, the end goal of this
committee, as I mentioned
before, to have a bipartisan tax
package that we can introduce in
the 2026 legislative session. I
want us to look back on this
last session, the tax bills that
were introduced and develop a
comprehensive bipartisan tax
package that both chambers will
be satisfied with. So
ultimately, that's a big lofty
goal, but I do think that the
conversations that happened in
this committee, uh, that we can
that we can do that. We're gonna
do it by discussing revenue
sources, tax bills that were
presented.
compile a final tax package, uh,
and I think that we will be
happy with that. Um, I do feel
that with this committee, with
you as members are all committed
to spending our time together,
not just to understand the
various taxes and revenue
streams, but to also look back
on our time and feel like we've
actually accomplished something.
Um, you know, I, there, there
are certain, uh, purposes of
each individual committee, given
that this is my first year of
chairing this particular
committee and what, what my
experience was as the chair of
the tax business and
Transportation Committee this
last session. Um, I'd really
like our time to have a great
deal of impact, and I think you
do too, that we're not just
sitting here having
conversations and learning about
things, but we're actually doing
something that will bring back
uh to our communities. So,
What we're gonna do is we're
going to get a start on with our
day, uh, with the foundation for
our work on this interim while
Izzy is getting set up. Are
there any questions or comments
from the committee before we
start and hear from Izzy today.
And many of us know him as Izzy,
even though his name is actually
Ismael, but we all lovingly get
to affectionately call him Izzy.
No comments or conversations?
All right. Izzy, it's all yours.
Thank you very much for being
here today. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and good afternoon,
everyone. Um, my name again is
Ismael Torres, the chief
economist for the Legislative
Finance Committee, um, and I'll
be speaking to this
presentation. It looks like you
already have it in front of you,
uh, titled The Post-Session
Economic and Revenue Update.
I think just to lay out where
I'm headed with this with this
presentation and we got it up,
awesome. Um, I'm gonna start
off.
Sort of contextualizing where we
were going into the session. I
always find that it's helpful to
refresh the memory on maybe what
the mood was, um, heading into
the decision making, and then
we'll slowly move into looking
forward, what are sort of the
challenges on the horizon, um,
and, and then we'll wrap it up,
hopefully with about 30 minutes
for questions. And so, just
starting out, um, obviously,
maybe this is the, the first
step in what will hopefully be
a, a bigger discussion on tax
policy, tax policy 101, maybe in
a future meeting.
But the basics of the revenue
structure here in New Mexico are
broken out here, or at least in
this, in this chart categorized
as sales taxes, which is
primarily the gross receipts
tax, energy, these are direct
energy related revenues only. So
for clarification, some a large
portion of our sales taxes also
also dependent on energy related
activity. So this is only direct
energy revenues, that's
royalties and um severance
taxes. Then we have income
taxes, which are personal and
corporate income tax.
And then New Mexico is very
unique compared to other states
around the country, and that we
have a large portion of our
total revenue makeup coming from
investment earnings. So what
you'll hear, what you're likely
to hear throughout the interim
and, and in other tax policy
conversations, as many states
depend on what's frequently
called the three-legged stool,
sales tax, income tax, and
property tax. New Mexico is also
unique in that our property tax
is not a significant player.
It's actually not a player at
all in our state general fund
revenues, it does contribute to
to general obligation bonds.
in a small amount, but mostly it
provides support for local
governments and school
districts. So instead, we've
swapped out property taxes for
energy-related revenues, um,
historically. And uh that has
meant a lot of volatility, which
I'll get into here shortly. On
the converse, our investments
have created a significant
amount of stability in the
general fund because those
investments have unique
mechanisms that sort of smooth
out the total revenue, um, and
in future conversations or in
questions.
we can dig deeper into that, but
that's a very unique part of our
revenue makeup.
And, and then taking a step
back, you know, what is the
growth look like? If you stack
up all these bars, how do they
grow year to year? And you can
see that going into the session,
we had slowed down considerably
our growth trajectory. We're
looking at 3% revenue growth
coming into this session,
compared with the 20% or the 14%
you had had in previous years.
So the general um fiscal
Status of the state has been one
of of slowing revenue growth,
slowing budget growth as well.
And we can see that in the next
slide, where um you can see all
of the, of the different budget
increases that you all
implemented, um, in education,
$330 million for public schools,
or salary increases for teachers
and public employees. You had a,
a large infusion in health care,
the healthcare authority budget
is now $15 billion up 3.
billion dollars from only a year
ago. Behavioral health, um,
package, a large behavioral
health package was passed, uh,
again, compensation for the
state workforce, 4% across the
board. Significant investments,
but at 6%, slightly lower than
the previous year. And then even
before significantly lower than
the years before that.
Um, in addition to recurring
increases, which you see here on
this slide, significant activity
in non-recurring appropriations,
but over $3 billion in
appropriations made there.
That's become a significant, a
growing, uh, a part of the total
budget. It used to be maybe $300
million for non-recurring
appropriations, maybe 1/5 5% of
the total spending. Now we're
talking about 30% of the total
spending in any given year
happening in the non-recurring
side.
Um, we also had other
non-recurring appropriations not
from the general fund, like the,
the government results in
opportunity fund or the growth
fund, which appropriated about
500 or $458 million there for um
pilot projects.
So significant investments in
state programming, but I think
of particular interest to this
committee, or maybe some of the
actions that took place on the
revenue side. So that's on the
spending side. And then at the
top of of the balance sheet, we
have the spending side. And here
you can see.
Mm
More or less, let's see, maybe 8
items, 10 items that affected
the state's revenues, and of
course the largest of which was
House Bill 14, uh, the tax
package which was vetoed, and
that would have made an impact
of almost $120 million in total.
Uh, revenue reduction when all
was implemented, when all of
these changes took effect, but
because of that veto, we
actually see a slight revenue
increase from various um tax
changes that were made, uh,
primarily the media waiver
program provided gross receipts,
which um will actually allow for
collections on gross receipts on
some of those activities. Um,
maybe some other notable changes
here are the state fairgrounds
District Act, uh, which we're
estimating to result in a $9
million reduction annually for
the state's grocery.
Receipts tax collections.
But if we, if we drill down a
little further into the tax
package that was vetoed on the
next slide. Um,
You all may remember, but a
refresher is always good. Uh,
this package was again over $120
million in total reductions to
state revenues, so a tax cut of
over $125 million the largest of
which was the Earned Income Tax
Credit expansion, which I'll
dive a little deeper, um, on in
a moment. But it also included a
foster parent and guardian tax
credit, and that tax credit was
at $250 per month for each
family or for each taxpayer, I
should say that was.
The foster parent or guardian
for more than 50% of that month.
So the total amount of the
credit was $3000 if you were a
foster parent for all 12 months,
and it was refundable.
Then we had uh the liquor tax,
liquor excise taxes, which were
increased by 20% across the
board, excluding um small craft
brewers and distillers, and the
in the total collections above
current collection, so only the
20% that it was increased by,
all of that was to be diverted
to the newly created tribal
alcohol harms alleviation fund.
The gross receipts tax deduction
for health care, uh,
practitioners was on
co-insurance, paid directly by
patients currently that
co-insurance um providers pay a
GRT on, but they do not pass the
GRT on to patients. And so that
was uh in the tax package
eliminated at a cost of about
$41 million.
And if we
Turn to the next slide. You can
see the changes to the earned
income tax credit, and this
provision would have increased
income tax credits enough to
offset state income taxes paid
depending on the family, perhaps
up to 705, maybe $65,000 per
year per family. Um, that's
about $31 per hour working full
time for a family of 4, with,
that's with 2 children, 2
dependents, and uh uh you can
see how the
tax credit works in in this kind
of complicated chart on the
right here. It, it actually
increases as your earnings grow,
so it's an incentive to earn
more, to work more hours, or to,
to seek raises. And then it sort
of has a plateau to prevent the
cliff effect through, um, in
this example, $45,000 per year,
and then it has a slow decline
again, preventing that cliff
effect as you continue to earn
more until you're fully off.
And, and so maybe another way of
describing this as you can see
in the, in the chart on the
right, for every in the first
sort of section there, the
increasing part of that chart
for
Every $1 more that you earn,
you'll, the state will match you
13.6 cents on the dollar. So
adding value to your increased
earnings.
And I, I think it's helpful to
remember on the next slide here,
that even though this tax
package was vetoed, a
significant amount of tax cuts
have been passed over the last 5
years, specifically as shown on,
on this graph. And you can see
over $1.1 billion going back to
to New Mexico taxpayers, um,
from activity, from actions that
you all have taken over the last
5 years. Um, I really want to
highlight that the most
significant changes to the
personal income tax as
representative Barrajon
mentioned earlier, we're in the
20.
22 session, um, oh, no, excuse
me, that's the 2024 session that
was just last year, where pit
brackets were restructured,
that's about a $200 million tax
cut for New Mexicans there. Um,
also the child income tax credit
and the personal income tax,
over $200 million in, in that
newly created credit at the
state level and then expanded in
subsequent years.
Also significant is the gross
receipts tax cut that happened
in 2022/200 million dollars the
last time we estimated that, I
think we're north of $250
million in in tax relief for New
Mexicans through the gross
receipts tax. And of course,
your, your charge as a committee
is the tax policy committee, but
maybe the first part of your
name, the revenue stabilization
committee, and so this chart is
hopefully uh interesting to you
all. This chart, uh, is a
favorite chart at the LFC. This
is what we call the roller
coaster chart or the roller
coaster graft.
And that's because the, the
black line which represents our,
our total revenue collections in
any given year. And you can see
that it very much looks like a
roller coaster, up and down, up
and down. And what this means
strategically for you all is a
very challenging environment to
make long-term investments to
think again strategically when
you're having to maybe every
other year, come back, make
adjustments, cut budgets, um,
and, and so forth just to keep
you the fiscal house in order.
So it's very important for a
state to have
Stable revenues in New Mexico,
we actually just conducted a new
revenue volatility analysis this
last year. New Mexico is the
top, the 4th most volatile state
in the country when it comes to
revenues. Largely because of our
um
Uh, activity as a mining state.
It's a, it's a very volatile
sector in general, and, and
Thankfully, you all, over the
last several years, have
implemented a lot of
stabilization measures to help
reduce that volatility and even
with those stabilizing measures,
we were the 4th most volatile.
We would likely have been number
one without those. And, and I
think what's really interesting
about this chart is that you can
see periods of significant
stability. I mean, you, we have
here charted 1967 to 1982, a
period of significant revenue
growth where there was no
revenue declines over that over
20 year period or almost 20 year
period.
And then we had another period
of significant revenue
stability, following the the
early 80s to the dot-com bust,
another 20 years of revenue
stability. And in the last 20
years that
Uh, the state has experienced
the most volatility on record
and of the 6 times that revenues
have, have collapsed. The 5 of
them have happened in the last
20 years. So a very challenging
environment for you all as
policymakers to navigate that
environment, and uh what we're
hoping to see is that more of
these revenue stabilization
measures come into place and,
and continue to provide
increasing stability and you can
see on the right side of the
chart, we have good stability
now over the last 4 years. We
hope that continues, but we also
hope that it
continues at a at a stronger
growth rate. This growth rate is
below 5%, which is difficult to
keep up with inflation and maybe
make the larger investments that
you all are hoping to see.
So that's some of the history,
that's where we were coming into
the session and now looking
forward, you know, your
economists are, are looking at a
lot of indicators as I'm sure
you all are. Um, we have many of
them listed here. The jobs
report this week, 139,000 new
jobs in the country. That's not
spectacular. It's not bad. So,
kind of an ant report there, but
we do see a lot more volatility
or maybe uncertainty in a lot of
these indicators. I have a
couple here plotted for you, S&P
500. This was as of yesterday.
And I think the markets were up
last I checked, and maybe above
their previous peak. So that's
good, but you can see that only
a couple months ago we had a, a
bear market, uh, a really tough
market in uh the financial
markets globally and, and uh
state side, but maybe more
importantly,
To direct state revenues are the
path of oil prices. And I have
this charted from yesterday, and
we have good news today. We're,
we're pushing closer to $65 per
barrel, um, earlier today, but
this price is a strong indicator
of the revenues that we're going
to collect, both because of the
impact it has on production, but
also because our taxes on this
product are based on the value.
So of course, if the price
declines, the value declines and
our revenues decline.
So, these are the things we're
keeping in mind.
And as I was just maybe
belaboring the point.
Oil prices and production and
gas prices and production have a
significant impact on our
state's revenues, on our
financial picture. A $1 change
in the annual price, average
price of oil. We estimated has a
$50 million impact on revenues.
That was as of December. So
we'll update this prediction and
it will probably go up in
August, but it just speaks to
how significant that change can
can be for the state's coppers.
I mean, if you look back at this
chart on the previous slide,
You can see that prices have
collapsed in, in collapsed in
the last year, easily $10.
Significantly more. So you can
see how that $500 million will
add up quite quickly, especially
if prices stay low.
The good news is, going into
this interim, we have a healthy
collections. So this is, this
chart reflects our current
revenue collections in the FY 25
year, which is not quite wrapped
up yet. And you can see gross
receipts, taxes, corporate
income taxes are collecting
high, so we have a cushion maybe
of about $236 million coming out
of FY 25. So these would be
non-recurring dollars to, to
face down maybe economic
headwinds, whether it's in labor
markets, federal.
Policy changes, um, or oil
prices.
And, and of course,
At the LFC we are uh um not
unfamiliar. We are familiar with
the practice of what we call
stress testing. And this was
implemented, I believe maybe
around 2017. And, and what we do
is we take scenarios um for
economic declines, or, or even
booms above what we're currently
expecting in the baseline
scenario. So we might say, what
happens if the economy grows
even faster than we expect, how
much more money could we
potentially collect? What
happens if oil prices collapse
to the 30s and 40s. And in
this scenario here, what happens
if we have a moderate recession?
What happens if inflation stays
high? What happens if oil prices
are weak about where they are
right now, and what happens if
um
Consumer sentiment declines,
consumer spending declines, and
we have a recession. And you can
see the impacts of this scenario
on our revenues in the table on
the right. And, and what you see
is that total general fund. We
could lose anywhere between 200
to maybe 500 $600 million in any
given year. But many times these
recessions last several years.
They don't just last one year,
come and go. So you might expect
that over a 3-year horizon, you
have 1.5 billion, say, in
revenue losses. And so how does
that compare to our spending?
How does that affect
Our total, um, overall state's
fiscal health. And the chart
does a good job of of reflecting
how much spending would need to
be reduced, pulled back, or
prevented in the following year
in order to plug that gap. And
you can see that the good news
is our recurring spending has
remained low enough that
recurring cuts would not have to
be necessary in these kinds of
scenarios. But that
non-recurring pool, which has
become a significant part of the
overall spend would have to be
reduced or maybe clawed back or
cut.
In addition to, you know, all of
the, the worry that I, I just
mentioned, of course, uh, it,
it's hard to have this
conversation without mentioning
federal changes or policy
changes at the federal level.
And I, I couldn't find a good
table that reflected the latest
as past version, um, in the
federal House passed version of
the, the most recent budget
bill. But here's the
reconciliation instructions in
the table in the bottom left,
and you can see how much federal
spending cuts was uh a laid out
by committee, by a House
committee.
I found this uh analysis from
the Tax Policy Center, uh,
maybe a good representation of
how this could impact New
Mexico. So this analysis from
the tax Policy Center is only
how much GDP New Mexico could
lose from exclusively Medicaid
and snap cuts. So this doesn't
include Pell grants, this
doesn't include any other um
reductions in federal spending,
just Medicaid and SNAP, and New
Mexico is, has the number one
most GDP at risk in the country,
as you can see in the map at the
bottom right, um,
The Tax Policy Center is
estimating not quite a 1% GDP
loss there. They're estimating
$123 million in Medicaid for New
Mexico lost and uh 200 and over
$250 million in SNAP.
And this sort of line at the
top.
Represents for you all as the
tax committee maybe a helpful
way to think about what that
magnitude is or what that
represents in terms of, of
taxes. And you can see that the
Medicaid and Snap cuts as a
share of total tax collections
would be 6.7%. And that'll be an
important number to keep in mind
as, as I'll get to a chart here
shortly that we call the
Goldilocks charts, which shows
how important it is for New
Mexico to stay at about a 6%
target. So you can see that with
Medicaid and SNAP, we might
already be exceeding if 100% of
that.
was wanting to be backfilled, we
might already be exceeding our
Goldilocks range, which could
put the state in a longer term
uh difficult uh financial
picture, and I'll get to that
shortly. But on the right of
this line here, you can see how
much taxes would have to
increase to offset that loss in
the income tax, almost 2% across
the board for all New Mexicans
increased to cover that, or a
1.2% increase in the state sales
tax, uh specifically to cover if
you wanted to cover 100% of what
was lost there.
And this is another chart that
illustrates the exposure within
the state budget to federal uh
uh budget cuts.
Oh, I might have lost it online.
There it goes.
And you can see, um, as you all
are are likely already familiar
with. Health and Human Services
has the biggest exposure to
federal funds both in terms of
its total share of dollars, but
also in in actual nominal
dollars, that's the biggest risk
there, but as I mentioned
earlier, higher education, Pell
grants maybe doesn't flow
through the state government, so
it won't show up on this chart
because this is exclusively um
as, as uh appropriated in House
Bill 2, Pell grants are not
appropriate in House Bill 2, so
it doesn't show up here, but
that's a significant risk of
revenues to New Mexican.
And then, of course, it's not
just spending that we're talking
about when it comes to federal
policy changes. There's also
significant tax changes that
could roll down to the New
Mexico level and have a
significant effect on our
revenue collections. Um, again,
I, I hope we have a, a, a maybe
more in-depth tax policy
discussion where we can discuss
the personal income tax, but
many of you will remember that
New Mexico's personal income
tax, like many other states, is
tied or piggybacks to the
federal income tax. And so
changes to the federal income
tax could
End up affecting our bottom
line. So if you have a, you
know, when you do your taxes,
there's the pluses and the
minuses. You start with your,
your wages, you do your pluses
and your minuses, and you end up
with the bottom line. If they
make changes to the pluses and
minuses, the bottom line
changes. In New Mexico, you take
the bottom line and start there
to file your income taxes. And
so, as these changes which I
have listed here, I know this is
dense text could affect that
bottom line, which then is the
top line of your New Mexico,
Texas. I, I would really draw
your attention to a few of
these, the increased
salt deduction cap. This is a
complicated issue to tackle in
a, in a brief presentation, but
there has been a significant
uptick in New Mexico's pass
through entity income.
Because of the salt cap that was
previously passed in the 2017
tax cut and Jobs Act. The
expansion of that cap could
result in fewer collections for
New Mexico's pass-through
entity. And that has become a
significant part of our total
collections. I think we're north
of $600 million now in that
collection, maybe even more. So,
that's a significant amount of
revenue at risk there. The
enhanced standard deduction also
applies to New Mexico. We thai,
we are one of the few states
actually that tie our deduction
to
The federal deduction. So
increases in the federal
deduction will also increase our
standard deduction, and those
are temporary, I think 26
through 28. So that could be a
temporary reduction in our
revenues, personal income tax
revenues there.
Um, a couple of these, let me
see, let me get into this a
little more. The car loan
interest deduction is a very
interesting one, that would also
reduce New Mexicans' adjusted
gross income, so that could have
a significant loss to New
Mexico's revenues. Um, the, the
tax foundation actually did an
analysis on how much they think
states stood to lose from
including car loan interest as a
deduction on your taxes, and
they estimated $2.2 billion
across the country, and New
Mexico would be one of those
states that that could take.
hit there.
Let's see what else here.
Point
I guess I do want to point out
on this slide on the left, then
New Mexico stands to be one of
the, the largest revenue losers.
So the, the way we piggyback
leaves us with more exposure to
um federal changes than maybe
other states, especially because
of our lower income status, an
increase in the standard
deduction has an outsized
reduction on our our personal
income tax collections.
Um, let's see, anything else on
this one?
I, I, 01 last thing I'll mention
is, is on this tax foundation
analysis, um, they estimated
that if states were to comply,
uh, uh, conform with all of the
federal tax changes. It could be
a loss of about $20.5 billion
nationally to state revenues,
and so we would um share in that
in that cause. And outside of
You know, federal tax policy
changes, other economic uh
indicators that are in flux,
inflation, consumer sentiment.
We also have the big outstanding
question, maybe elephant in the
room for our revenues, which is,
um, oil, long-term trajectory
for oil production and
oil-related revenues. And what I
have here is a, a really busy
chart that shows the different
production pathway scenarios for
New Mexico under different price
scenarios. And this is courtesy
of Ryad, um, through the state
investsment.
counsel who did this analysis
for us. And what you can see is
our current trajectory in the
black line as of April, and it
looks like we are reaching our
plateau, as we've been saying
for the last couple of years, we
expected that
Production could peak around the
2030 range, give or take a
couple years, and we're still on
that trajectory even with prices
at, at the current um rate. But
you can see in the $50 oil
scenario, we may already be at
our peak, and we may begin to
see declines if prices were as
low as $50 per barrel and they
stayed that way. And then you
can see the upside as well,
right? If we have $90 per barrel
oil, we could still have a lot,
a lot of room to grow. And, and
this just really begs the
question as, as your state
economists, how much of this
peak
Or how much of this revenue is
non-recurring. And you all have
already made the decision to
capture a lot of this peak
revenue and distribute it to the
investment accounts, which then
spin off more stable long-term
perpetual revenues to the
general fund, but this is going
to become a headwind for the
gross receipts tax and the
personal income tax after
production declines as those
revenues are also highly
dependent. So Izzy, before you
go on, um, just so our copy
doesn't have like all the little
numbers at the bottom. It's got
just very it for some reason the
copy is weird.
So, um, when you talk about uh
if you could, as you're going
through maybe um specifically
mention the color, what, because
you were talking about the black
line and then you were talking
about $50 a barrel. Which color
is that? Yeah, $50 a barrel oil
is the maybe 2 lines down. So
right below the black line is
$60 barrel oil, and, and this uh
forecast is assuming that the
current trajectory is about 65.
OK. So it's slightly less and
then the one below that is the
50. It has some purple circles.
And we would already be
beginning our our descent now
if, if that were the case, yeah.
And, and by the way, um, as Izzy
continues, if you, if you want
to ask a question, just kind of
signal to me and I'll go ahead
and I'll start compiling that
list.
OK, got you. Go ahead, thank you
very much. You got it.
And so, where does this leave us
in the bigger picture? And, and
I mentioned this earlier. These
are our Goldilocks charts.
And
what your state economists do as
a part of the consensus revenue
estimating group every year is
over the last 3 years, we've
begun doing long-term revenue
estimates, which are a national,
nationally recommended best
practice. We've begun to tie
those with different spending
scenarios. So what we're, what
were to happen, I, I, I should
take a step back. The black line
here represents revenues, our
long-term revenue projections.
And what would happen if we grew
budgets at 3%.
Over the next 5 years.
And you can see the gap between
the black and the green
represents what is available for
non-recurring spending. So you
can see that there's a large gap
there, especially in the most
recent years. That's where that
$3 billion comes in.
But, you know, maybe we don't
want that gap to grow. You can
see in the out years that gap
begins to grow. So what happens
if we spend 10% on the, on the
extreme end. And you can see
that we quickly reach a
structural insolvency, a
structural deficit that would
either require or necessitate
budget cuts or revenue
enhancements. So 10% is clearly
too much. And what we've
explored over the last several
years, we found that 6% seems to
be a sustainable budget target.
Budgets could grow at about 6%
and maintain maybe a small
cushion for non-recurring
appropriations and also events
of, of revenue declines, um,
that
Would, you know, leave us with
comfortable room without having
to worry about significant cuts
to state programming that New
Mexicans depend on. But what we
weren't counting on is perhaps
$1.5 billion in federal budget
reductions. And so what, what
happens in this scenario in this
Goldilocks scenario, especially
the 6% scenario that I have
graphed out for you here, when
you might choose to backfill
$1.5 billion and you can see
that gap disappears immediately.
And it becomes clear that maybe
6% is already too much in this
scenario. And I think what's
important to remember is that
tax cuts, permanent tax cuts,
are the equivalent of a
recurring budget increase, a
recurring budget spend. So when
we say 6%, we don't just mean
6% spending growth remain 6%
spending growth and tax cuts. So
if you want to do 2% tax cuts,
you have to only do 4% spending
growth to get to the 6%. And you
can see that under this
scenario, even 6% is, um, is
unsustainable by those latter
out years. And, and I would like
to just call back to that 6.7%
scenario earlier from just
Medicaid and SNAP, that's
already over our target.
And that target is already maybe
over the sustainable rate in the
long run. So,
It's really important to keep in
mind the long-run outlook when
making spending and, and uh tax
changes considerations. And so,
I, I don't mean to be doom and
gloom, uh,
You all and, and us at the LFC
are, are no stranger to
navigating financial state a
state in financial hardship. And
so, what best practices suggest
is that you shouldn't wait for
the crisis to come before making
a plan, you should have a plan
ready so that way when the
crisis comes, you can make
deliberate and, and maybe more
um informed decision making. And
so, here's a list of do's and
don'ts from the Volker Alliance
on how to make sure you're ready
for these kinds of scenarios.
And you can see some things we
do and maybe some
things we don't. Um, high budget
growth with long-term forecasts.
We're doing that now. We're,
we're making sure that our
commitments today are
sustainable in the long run. Um,
reserves restricted for
shortfalls. We have some of
this, but we also like to use
some of our reserves for other
things. And so this is some
somewhere where New Mexico
could, could improve um on our
financial management. Um,
evaluating program performance,
I think I heard representative
Lustrom and others mentioned
evaluating tax expenditures,
making sure that you know which
ones are most effective to least
effect.
active. So if the time were to
come where you might have to
make some of those difficult
decisions to eliminate them. You
can make sure you're eliminating
the least effective and not the
most effective. That's an
important one and, and um I'd
like to actually shout out our
team, which, um, this year is,
is hopefully undertaking um uh
an evaluation of economic
development tax incentives,
which will be presenting to the
LFC and if you all are
interested, we'd be happy to
present them to you as well, and
hopefully analyzing the economic
impact of all of them, so that
way we can create a sort of
ranked list for you all in this,
in this event.
Um, also study and regularly
report on deferred costs, you
know, this is an issue that is,
is particularly important with
infrastructure. If we don't know
how much deferred maintenance is
out there. It's hard to plan and
prepare uh for a long term
strategy if we don't know what
bills might come due in the
future. So knowing what bills
might come to, um, is, is an
important part of that strategy
and something that we're working
on at the LFC.
Some don't. The obligating
future revenues. This applies in
many different ways. Um,
earmarking revenues is difficult
because in the event of a
revenue decline, those are
revenues you might not be able
to count on, or at least you'll
have to make the decision to
pull them back into the general
fund to to plug a budget hole,
say, for example, but delayed
tax cut implementation can be
dangerous. And the reason for
that is if you go back to this
slide.
What were to happen if we added
a couple of bars in the out
years, and we didn't pay for
them today. So we are saying in
2 years, on top of the 6%, we're
going to spend another 2% is
effectively what you're saying.
And, and if something unexpected
happens, like $1.5 billion in
backfill needed, you can find
yourself in a, in a crisis
situation. So avoiding delaying
implementation of spending,
making sure you're paying for it
with today's dollars rather than
future dollars is an important
part of fiscal management.
Um
Maybe I'll skip ahead here.
funding recurring expenses with
debt or one-time money, that's
an important one. I know you
hear that a lot from LFC,
especially, um, when it comes to
specials, making sure that your
special appropriations or grow
monies are, are um not
obligating future revenues. And
in fact, that's what grow is
helpful for making sure that
these longer term recurring
expenses have a dedicated pot of
money so that you're not
obligating future general fund
revenues has a similar sort of
impact as a um delaying
implementation of tax cuts.
And so, here's an example of
another state that does a good
job of of preparing their
playbook. This is Utah's, and of
course, New Mexico's will look
different. You have different
set of values, but you can see
how they plan to tackle a budget
shortfall.
At first you might take some
temporary budgetary measures,
then you might, you know, do
some cash flow maneuvering,
maybe selling bonds that you
have, that kind of thing. Then
they have spending reductions
next on their list for
priorities. And then hitting
their operating reserves, and
then revenue enhancements, which
I think is another word for tax
increases. Then they go for tax
increases. And then last for for
Utah is budgetary reserves.
That's sort of last on the list.
Of course, we also have one
maybe not as uh a linearly drawn
out because it's sort of a mix
of these that all happen at the.
At the same time. But of course,
New Mexico has historically
looked to the federal government
for help. I, I, I don't, I think
we can all agree that that's
probably not going to be a place
we can look this time. Um,
swapping agency revenues and
cash balances, canceling stalled
out your appropriations. These
are all common tactics for for
handling a budget crunch. Agency
specific savings. But for us in
New Mexico, reserves are pretty
high on the list. If we have a
large budget shortfall, I think
the, the reserves have been set
aside to address that, and, and
our reserves are.
Healthy in the event, just, just
in that case, specifically for
that case, if we have a large um
budget reduction. So reserves
are higher on our list, maybe
even before tax increases and,
and budget cuts, which I, I have
listed here at the end, of
course, um, it's ultimately up
to you all in in what order you
take this playbook.
And with that, Madam Chair, I
know that was a lot to cover,
but, uh, happy, happy to take
questions.
I appreciate that. Thank you so
much, um, you know, and I think,
uh, I, I think we'll be seeing
you at, at many of our interim
meetings. Hopefully, you and
your staff.
Um, and so I, I do hope we can
extend that if there are
questions and you're sitting in
the audience that we can uh ask.
So we do have um Senator Sio
Lopez, then Representative
Lindstrom and then
Representative Pajon. Um, so,
uh, go ahead and uh send her
toia Lopez. You can go ahead and
go first. If anybody else have
any questions, just let me know.
Thank you, Ismael. This is an
excellent, uh, understandable
overview. I really appreciate
it. I just had a little, well, a
couple of points, but a little
point, but it can be
significant, is on page 5. When
you say 20% increase in the
alcohol tax.
When you're talking about a
percentage of a cent.
Um, it's, it's misleading is not
the right word, but it's, it's
not.
Yes,
I mean, this, this increase was
less than a penny per drink. And
so it, it looks like, oh my God,
the alcohol tax increased 20%.
So it looks significant and
that's how the way the media
treated it, and it was not
significant. It would, it would
have no impact on drinking. And
so, um, maybe when we're talking
about such tiny amounts in the
future, you could have 20%.
And then say the equivalent
like.
I, I think one of them was 0.4%
per I mean.
Force 4% of a penny.
For drink increase. That's what,
what I think it was beer or
something. It was tiny, um, and
so I just, I just would hope
that you would consider that for
transparency state that it, it's
not misleading because this is
accurate. It would be more
transparent to have
The actual number, and I know, I
know why we generally use
percentage, but in this case,
when you're talking about such
small numbers, it's not his
transparent.
Um, so thank you for considering
that. And then the other um
Question I had.
And I think you, you mentioned
it, but I, it would be helpful
to me and probably for other
people to understand this
better. Um, as you know, we
increased the royalties um to
the oil and gas industry by 5%,
but royalties don't come to the
general budget.
Royalties go to the education,
um, budget. And so what is the
relationship between um the
moneys raised there and the
general fund and how that all
works because I think a lot of
people don't understand that.
And I actually had people say to
me, that's great about the
increase that will really help
us with the general budget, and
I had to say, well, no, it
won't. Um, and it would be
helpful, I think if we all were
clear on that.
Absolutely, Madam Chair and
senator. Yeah, thank you for the
question. So the, the royalty
rate increases, um, as you know,
of course, only on new leases.
So, um, not on all folks. And
then, as you mentioned,
Royalties collected from state
lands. This is only also to
clarify only specific to state
lands, goes to is collected by
the state land Office and goes
to the land grant permanent fund
and is actually um
Distributed based on its source
to a variety of beneficiaries,
the largest of which is the, the
public school permanent fund,
the, the beneficiaries, the
public schools.
Maybe about 85% of the total
there. And, and so what actually
occurs, how it does end up in
the general fund eventually is
uh in investments. So when you
see that $2.1 billion that
includes the royalties that are
then invested by the State
Investment council in that
permanent fund. And hopefully
grown by even more than what the
royalties were collected and
then distributed 5% on a rolling
average of that. So I think the
estimates on, on the royalty
rate increase where um maybe
around $50 million to $75
million.
So, you know, 5% of that, we
might be talking about 2.5
million in the near term, but of
course, over time that grows
exponentially. And so, over the
long term, it's certainly a
larger benefit, but in the short
term, very, very much smaller
impact to the general fund.
Thank you. I, I really
appreciate that explanation. It,
it was clear and that's what I
love about your presentations.
Um, and then finally, um,
And, and by the way, I just
wanted to compliment you on the
playbooks, you know, the best
practices and that, that's
really helpful for all
legislators, I think, um, and
but then on page 19, and this is
my last question, um,
How did, how were the federal
budget cuts.
Um
Estimated. I asked that only
because this big whatever bill
is super confusing and and seems
to be um
At risk of changing or not at
risk, it's just to me it feels
like it's a moving target and
daily I hear, you know, you hear
news reports about this is not
going to be on the chopping
block, this is, and that changes
here and there. So I'm just
curious how, how this um
Back filled that we're
estimating is
Was
that was um
You know,
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair
and senator, and thank you for
the opportunity to clarify. I, I
absolutely should have mentioned
in in the presentation. 1.5
billion is certainly not a hard
number. This, uh, as you
mentioned, um, it may be closely
reflects exclusively Medicaid
and snap.
That's about 1.2 billion there
and maybe a little bit extra for
other additional backfilling,
but um,
They're, they're, as you all
know, there's an interim
committee studying this and, and
they will continue to change
and, and, um, from what I read
and I'm sure what you all read,
it sounds like it will continue
to change significantly coming
back from the Senate. And so 1.5
is not a hard number. This was
purely for illustrative purposes
and um it could be significantly
more or less when when the final
package is is passed. Thank you.
I appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you so much. Make sure
you, uh, you hit your mic, um,
cause we, we'll have that echo
and we all are still learning
how to do these mics. I've got
Representative Lindstrom next
and then Representative Parajon
and then Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I had
two things, uh, Izzy. The first
is I'm just generally curious,
what are the variables that
you're using to measure impact.
Um, Madam, um, Representative,
could I ask impact on, on
economic development incentives
and because in our work program,
we've also included other
economic development incentives,
item D on page 2. So when you're
looking at your variables for a
different committee or for your
LFC work. What are the variables
that you're looking at?
Um
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for the question.
Yeah, we are looking at job
creation, uh, investment impact
that, that would include private
investment as well. And then
what we're actually using is a
new tool that you all um
provided for us called Remi. So
we use this um input output,
dynamic scoring, so it includes
dynamic, uh, sort of knock on
indirect spending effects as
well. And uh um we're, we're
still working on our first
presentation of that, which will
hopefully be this coming month.
Um, but off the top of my mind,
Those are, those are our primary
indicators that we use. Good,
because I'm glad you're using
the Remy model. That's very good
to hear. The second question
that I had is um a comment you
made regarding we've got great
reserves. Are you doing some out
your projections, uh, regarding
the budget, my concern is we're
using reserves, particularly for
long-term reoccurring spending,
I think we've got problems in
River City.
I'd like to see what that looks
like. I'd like to see you to
provide a chart that
demonstrates long-term
reoccurring spending in
relationship to the reserves in
relationship to the
Happy to do that if I could just
quickly point you point out
maybe one way to look at it
before we we produce something
for you. Um, this chart is, is
very helpful to me. The
Long term or the recurring
spending is the blue. And so,
you know, in, in the short term
and a recession scenario, you
might have a, uh, the, the
difference sort of between the
yellow, how far is the yellow
line drops below the gray bars
is how much I, I see reserves
might need to be.
And what we've seen in our, the
last estimate, which of course
we'll get updated, is 30% is a
good target that about $3
billion would be how much we
would need in a really crisis
scenario, if it's only not
recurring to your point.
You know, back to the dos and
don'ts playbook here, uh, one of
the most important don'ts that I
hit is don't refund recurring
expenses with non-recurring
money and reserves ultimately
are not, it's a savings account
for an emergency.
So because it's non-recurring,
we need to be able to see what
those long term recurring
expenses are.
Based on your budget planning
and we need to understand, um,
when we start kicking in some of
these other kinds of uh
recommendations that you have in
there.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative uh Parajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much, Izzy for this
presentation. I had a few
questions just as I'm learning a
little bit more, but um here on
page.
Thank you. It's a little bit too
close, I think.
Um
Page 4 where we're talking about
all the different bills that
passed and didn't pass. I just
wanted to clarify and refresh
our memories, HB 218, where it
says tax changes, that's the oil
and gas equalization.
Maurian representative, um, no,
that that is the tax and revenue
Department's cleanup bill, tax
cleanup bill, which had very
minor, uh, um.
Revenue, um, collection growth
there. I think it was like a 200
page or 400 page. It was just,
it was, it was coming from the
department 400 pages. It was
that cleaning up of a lot. And
so that was that, and I have
that note as well, um, that,
that, that cleanup really kind
of helped.
close some of those loopholes is
like representative Lindstrom's
talking about like, what's
working, what isn't, and that
was a record.
Madam Chair and absolutely, I
think a lot of the ones that
were eliminated were ones that
were not claimed at all. So
really the revenue growth here I
think is maybe there was some
fee revenue that they were
increasing just, just by a hair,
very small stuff like that. OK,
um, I, I just noticed that the
I, I didn't know on where that
was since that was one of the
big parts of, I think we put it
into HB 14.
Or it got taken out.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, yes, has passed the house,
the equalization tax was in
House Bill 14. This reflects
final passage, which did not
include or or yeah, final
passage did not include the oil
and gas equalization. Thank you.
And then, um, the other, so my
my question then was on page.
Um
Page 17, where we're looking at
the differences based on the
prices and that is that um this
indicates how, sorry, can you go
to that site cause mine is um.
But I don't know, it's like
alien language or something on
it.
Uh, yeah, so for this, um.
Sorry, what does WTI is that?
OK.
This is our best price
comparison for oil prices. Yeah,
no, absolutely, you're the
expert representative.
Honestly, maybe he has answered
this question too, Mike, so one
of my questions was, I noticed
there's a big change between $60
a barrel into $70 a barrel
versus the other one seemed to
not affect it as much is, is
that a price sensitivity to to
um.
How many um barrels are drilled.
Or racked. Yes, absolutely, and,
and Representative Murphy knows
this well, and I, I
Hoping that he chimes in here as
well. We, uh, seen a lot of
analysis.
Over in the last several months,
um, or, or trying to dig into
what is the, there, there are
several terms called the break
even. There's several ways to
measure the break even. There's,
uh, you know, at the wellhead,
which, what is the price that
you must shut in production.
Um, because it's more expensive
to maintain production than to
continue production. That's one
that we focus on a lot, um, in
our stress tests. And then
there's what might be more of an
economic break even. What price
do you need to profitably drill
a new well. And um we actually
uh have seen maybe, you know, of
course, it varies. It varies by
basin, it varies by producer,
but in our
Part of the Permian, might be 62
on average, $62 per barrel. So
you can see how that
60 is is too low. So you have
falling maybe no incentive to
drill new wells, but 70 is, is
enough incentive to drill new
wells, and so you, you can get a
big variation just between.
Maybe a smaller increment.
That's really interesting, um,
Madam Chair, and, and, um.
Is he did do these calculations
take into account the taxes that
we have on oil and gas in the
final pricing or is this applied
before. And Murphy, if you um
feel like this would be
something that you could help
participate in we'd appreciate
it.
Mhm.
Representative, so thank you for
the question, Madam Chair. Um,
these are, are sort of like
wholesale prices. These are the
prices you can fetch at market.
So if, if we have listed here
$60 WTI. That's how much a
producer can sell each barrel of
oil for. And so when we talk
about maybe an economic break
even $62 a barrel is what you
need to uh profitably drill a
new well, that would be
inclusive of taxes and and
regulatory burden incorporated
into those operating expenses.
Um, I think maybe what's
important to note too, I don't
have it in this slide deck is
our oil wells are um highly
productive in the first maybe 6
months and then declined very
rapidly. And so what you need is
more and you need to continue
drilling to maintain production
or actually drill at an
accelerating rate to increase
production. And so if you don't
have new wells, if you're below
the incentive to drill a new
well, your production can
decline quite rapidly, which I
think is maybe further to your
point of why the 60 and the 70
are so different.
Uh, yeah, just, uh, I think, I
think the, the short answer,
it's pre-tax. So I believe
that's probably based upon
futures prices or spot prices
or, or whatever. So if we had
just for example, um, $60 a
barrel, uh, we had a 25%
royalty, that would be $15 so it
would be at $45. We would then
have another roughly 10% in
severance out of the lower GRT,
so forth and so on that take us
down to about 40. And so,
Yeah.
That's, that's, so it's pre-tax
pre burdens
and pre-cost.
And
I just say it, I enjoyed working
with Izzy a lot over the session
and talking about these terms
and looking at it, and we, I
think generally concluded that
somewhere around the mid-60s, I,
I, I typically cause I have some
some um direct experience of the
basin and I use typically about
65, so his 62 or 63 is not far
off. Ricestead's not far off.
Those are pretty good numbers.
And it's kind of interesting, we
are about today where you and I
talked about where we would be.
So anyway, thank you. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you Madam Chair, just to
thank you, that really clarifies
a lot actually about this this
um chart and really quickly had
two other questions just as I'm
learning more here, um, for page
21 delayed tax cut
implementation, how, how delayed
are are are you talking when
you're making that
recommendation, is it 2 years,
is it just one year?
or just just never delaying any
tax implementation.
Madam Chair Representative
Parajan, um.
You know, I don't want to say
never say never.
there may be a time where it's
appropriate, um, in general, I
would say that it is not best
practice to put it outside of
the budget year. So that would
be one year ahead. So typically
when we do tax changes, it might
be in current year and budget
year, um, beyond budget year is
the is where you get into the
risk of maybe an unexpected
event, revenue decline that
you've maybe obligated expenses
that may not be affordable at
that time.
Got it. OK.
Great. Thank you so much, ma'am.
Thank you. Thank you. I've got
representative Murphy and then
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
very much. Um.
If he, if you could help me with
a couple of terms. One is the
term of the reserves.
And where those are and how much
those are, and then I think of
also and this is, this may not
be the right term, but you can
correct me if I'm wrong. What I
think of as protected funds,
like the severance tax permanent
fund, those that can't be really
gotten to. If you could help me
with that terminology, then I
have one more question after
that.
Uh, absolutely, Madam Chan
representative, excellent
question. Uh, and I actually
Reminds me to make a pitch. I
think Clinton has a box of post
sessions that represented
onestrom already has. It's a, a
black publication that LFC
produces every year, and in this
publication, there's a lot of
really good narrative if you're
interested in, uh, some
narrative, but there's also
charts and tables in the back.
And uh one of the tables in the
back is on page 51. I don't know
if you have that in front of you
or I actually would encourage
you to go to 52.
And this is what we call the
general Fund Financial Reserve.
This is the state's balance
sheet or a high-level version of
the state's balance sheet.
And really you all direct what
to count in reserves. And here's
what's currently being counted
in reserves on this page.
We also like to think of these
funds, maybe, you know, the very
simplistic way to think of it.
You have your general fund,
which is the checking account.
You have your reserves, which
are your savings account. This,
this is in the event of an
emergency. And then you have
your permanent funds, which are
more akin to a retirement
account. And the permanent
funds, as you know,
constitutionally protected. The
reserve funds are not likely to
be. Most of these are not. The
tax stabilization reserve, the
one at the bottom which has the
most in it, is the most
protected reserve fund. You
need, if at the top of my head,
I think it might be a
3 quarter majority plus maybe a
declaration from the governor to
access these funds in the event
of spending maybe not for making
up a a revenue fall. So you can
use this for a revenue fall, but
if you want to spend it, you
need much higher standards. Um,
some of these historically, you
can see the tobacco settlement
permanent fund was never a very
liquid fund represented ones
from will remember that. It it
was intended to be an investment
account, but it had been counted
on the balance sheet for a
really long time. Um, and, and
was not very accessible in the
event of a revenue decline.
Um, you might have similar
situations with the grow and the
behavioral Health Trust fund.
These are really intended to, to
be invested. Maybe harder to
access in the event of a revenue
decline, but they're currently
in our state's balance sheet.
Um, and then you have the state
support fund, which is a really
small player. It's really a
school sort of reserve reserved
for schools. Um, the
appropriation contingency fund
is for emergencies, wildfires,
that kind of thing. And then the
operating reserve is our um our,
our, our most flexible savings
account that we call on most
frequently to balance our check.
account now and then spill spill
over from the checking account
ends up in here and if we're
writing a bigger check and we
need something, we get it from
here. And that's, you know,
capped, but that one's fully
accessible, but it's, it is
capped in how much it can hold
as well. And and that was maybe
more than you bargained for, but
happy to talk through this if
you're ever interested.
Thank you very much. And then so
somewhere probably in here is
also what I think of as a
protected funds, the 7 sex
permanent fund and um oil and
gas.
The other friends, yeah, the
land grant permanent grant you
those are not reserves. They are
investment accounts and so, um,
yeah, they're, they're not
included on, on these sheets,
um, and, and are not accessible
because they're protected
constitutionally. Got you. Um,
Madam Chair, um, Izzy, um, I'm
kind of envisioning a chart, and
if I get too far in the weeds
here, I'll, I'll get with you
offline so I won't drag
everybody with me. Um, one of
the things that I'm, you know,
that we talked a lot about
during the session is, um,
The loss of um whether immediate
or gradual loss of oil and gas
uh revenue, which you've
projected here on 17. And so, so
the, the chart that I'm
envisioning is basically a chart
very much like this with a
projection.
Of the um uh of the expenditures
going out.
And if I envision this right as
the oil and gas revenues are
decreasing.
We're going to have some amount
of revenues there that maybe are
stable or increasing, but
there's going to be a gap,
that's going to be equal to
Around the oil and gas revenue
decrease.
And the question is how do we
make up that gap?
And so I would guess that as a
body, they have, and we will
continue to build reserve funds
that can then be invested in the
future to offset that gap, uh,
just like we would go to our
real or excuse me, our, our
financial advisor and say shift
some money from uh growth to
income.
Right? Is that, am I, am I
tracking this correctly?
Remember, I'm a geoscientist
trying to be an economist right
now. And so, um,
The question I'm trying to get
to is how are, how are we doing
of being on track to get enough
money protected to make up that
shortfall. And so here is a,
here's just a, a real simple
example.
If we have an $11 billion a year
budget, and we've got $4 billion
a year, and I think these
numbers are rough, but roughly
correct, and oil and gas impact
on the revenue side.
And all of a sudden we've lost.
To that over a period of time.
We're gonna need something on
the order of $50 billion of
investment money to make up that
2 billion, right?
Because we're not only, we're
gonna have to earn probably 7%
on that money, really make 3.5
billion, so we stay up with our
3% inflation rate, and then we
can then have the two band to
make our budget. It I, am I
thinking all of this correctly.
So could you put something like
that together? I think it might,
it might benefit, Madam Chair,
with your permission, if, if, if
you could, I, I think it might
benefit the committee greatly.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Montoya and then
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Izzy, my, my question is uh
slightly different, but it was
going down the, I think the the
first road that Representative
Murphy uh started down. Um, we
also have created in the last
several years.
A bunch of trust funds, and
there's a lot of money sitting
there.
Um, and, uh, in part, it was
sold to me offline.
That those dollars would be
there in case.
Uh, the sky starts falling, and
if they're so um
Is there any way, Madam Chair,
uh, with your indulgence that
Izzy, you could provide for us a
uh
A list of all those funds that
exist and, and the dollar
amounts that's in there, what
they, what the specifics of each
of those accounts are, what is
the, what is the ceiling if
there is one, if there's no
ceiling and that type of thing
because uh
If, if, uh,
On one hand, things happen in DC
that are going to put a crunch
on us and at the same time, um,
we, we believe that maybe we've
hit the floor on the crude oil
price, but we don't know that.
So it'd be nice to have that in
place, like I said, uh, offline,
it was sold to be that way. We
need to do this, and it's good
for these particular funds to be
created for the specific purpose
that they were created, but
secondarily,
It's kind of a savings account,
uh, and easier to get into than
some of these permanent funds
and, and frankly, um maybe
preferable, uh, to, to get into
those instead of some of our uh
other funds. So, thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you
representative, and I do believe
that we, we've been in
conversation with Izzy and
Adrian to have that was one of
the things of like where are our
surpluses and where we having
these funds and wanting to kind
of get an idea of that as we go
forward and trying to to work on
this tax package. So that might
be something
Cause Adrian's gonna be
presenting at our August
meeting.
And I think that's, he knows
that, right? Just in case you
make sure, um, and so that might
be an opportunity if you don't
mind getting with him that we
can have that if that's not too
much to ask.
Madam Chair, we, we can
definitely discuss the request,
uh.
I don't, I, I actually think
you, it may be possible that you
don't want the full list of
funds. I think we have uh just
like too many to count, um, but
we can certainly maybe get you
what you're looking for.
Yeah, exactly, um, with that,
uh, it, it might be good to know
some of the funds I think were
set up.
Just as a potential future.
A repository, but there is no
dollars in them yet.
Um, we might think about that
because there might be some, I
think there's some.
Uh, future deadlines coming to
start putting money into those,
so that that's, that also would
be important for us to know
because it might be going into a
budget crunch time, we might not
wanna start to putting Thank you
Representative Montoya, um, and
Senator Werth, before you ask
your question, you did miss the
introductions. So if you don't
mind saying, you know, who you
are cause we don't know. Um, and
then what you hope to get out of
this committee and then if you
don't mind asking your question,
that's great. I'm happy to
Peteror Sate District 25 in
Santa Fe, uh, very quick.
Question, which I think is a
good transition to your work
plan and discussion about tax
package on page 19, you talked
about the 6%. Each percent
equates to what amount of money?
Is it 100 million? Is it 110
million?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. It
was 100 million this last year.
Every time the budget grows, it
grows with it, so I think we
might be at 100.
8, 110 maybe.
So, Madam Chair, I just, I point
that out because if this
committee is looking at $150
million tax package.
And it's $100 million each
percent, that means that when
LFC is building their budget,
It's gonna be 4.5% if the room
is and again, I'm using 100. I
don't want to get to the 1008.
But I'm just, I just think it's
important to understand and
reiterate your point because we
did not always do it this way.
We would do a percentage and
then we would do a tax package.
And I just think it's a very
good thing from a financial
responsibility to look at those
together, but it also means if
we're going to be proactive
about building a tax package
that would cost money.
I think knowing what that number
is and you getting a feel for
that number and the committee
understanding that and working
with LFC to make sure the
capacity is there is going to be
critical. That's all I have.
Thanks. Thank you, Senator
Worth. Any other questions or
comments before we let Izzy go
for the day.
And I just say for the day
because I have a feeling we're
gonna have you back, um, because
you are the all knowing.
The all-knowing is or at least
if you don't know, you can find
somebody who does.
Yes. All right. Thank you so
much. Thank you to you and your
team. It's always a pleasure to
see you all since we, we got
real close during the session.
Not real close, but, you know,
close, we work together.
Um, so I do appreciate that and
we'll have him back and also um
Adrian Avila um from LFC as
well, we'll be speaking to us.
And so, um, as we finish up
today, um, you all have been
absolutely fantastic in
submitting ideas for this
committee and before you, you
have a two-column handout that
is being handed out to you just
so that I don't have to go
through and list all of them one
by one.
Um, but you will see, um, that
there are uh a variety of things
that several of you have talked
about, uh, already. And so what
we're going to do because of
your suggestions, we are going
to compile this into a master
list.
But what I want to do at this
point, um, is see if there are
any other additions to this work
plan. This is an ambitious work
plan. I think we have 8 more
meeting days.
123456788 more meeting days, and
so it is ambitious. So what
we're gonna try and do and
Christina and I are gonna work
together, um, on pairing these,
but if you will, take a moment
to look over, uh, for those of
you who might not have been able
to submit any suggestions or
requests.
This is the opportunity now.
And we will vote today.
To approve this work plan as
amended.
OK. And so, um, so Christine,
you're gonna go ahead and take
notes.
Um, I've got Representative
Lindstrom.
Representative Murphy, but I do
want you to look over it first.
I wanna give you a minute to
look over it first just to make
sure that it's not on there. I
see you, Senator share.
And while you're looking, so
we'll be spending quite a bit of
time with trying to cluster
these according to topic, um,
and seeing how we can go ahead
and make the most use of our
time.
Uh, it's quite a bit, so thank
you all of you who did submit
those uh those suggestions, uh,
for Christine and mine's uh
request.
And thank you for.
So at this moment I've got
Representative Lindstrom. You
have any other suggestions to
the work plan?
I do thank you, Madam Chair. I
mean, it's good, good, good.
It's got to look a lot of good
subjects in here and things for
us to look at, but what I would
like to ask is some better
clarification when we get to
that point I justification for
the need for a tax package. If a
tax package doesn't fit inside
the yellowC framework.
I have concerns.
And that should be what is
brought forth. I know as a
former LFC chair for many years.
That is the way we built the
budget. We made sure that there
was good communication between
the tax people and us, and we,
we knew that, right, Peter? I
mean, we all knew it. What that
was gonna look like.
But I don't think that it's
necessary that there's always a
tax package each year. I'm just
saying, uh, we need to have
clear justification.
Uh, I also feel that um.
It has to be more than these are
a few ideas we're gonna throw
them out the wall and what
sticks is what goes in a tax
pack. So if we get the
justification, we get the, the
purpose, the reasons, um, I
think, I think that's gonna be
super important. Thank you. I
appreciate that representative
Lindstrum. I think that's really
where we can have such a great
impact is much more conversation
than we were kind of.
Forced into this really tiny
little bubble of time, uh, to
make those conversations. And I
think in both sides, it was just
like, oh, wow, we got a text
package now.
Um, so, uh, we do want to work
on that and I appreciate those
comments as well. Representative
Murphy, if I may, bump,
Representative Pajaron she has
to leave for class. So if you
want to go ahead and go next,
and then we'll go back to your
representative Mary.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy. I appreciate your yeah,
yeah, yeah, I'll blame you. Um,
I, I just wanted to reiterate
that um some I, I, I didn't have
a chance to contribute to this
list, but one of them that I
would love to bump is um.
One that Senator Worth has put
here, which is the incentives to
stimulate construction of new
residential housing and um.
I think uh Senator Worthy had
another bill that I really like
too that I, I think I was trying
to do on the house side, which
is looking at um.
Folks who are gardeners, folks
who are nail techs who are
paying, um, who don't realize
they have to pay GRT and end up
in a lot of legal trouble, um,
and legal aid, we see a lot of
those folks coming in who end up
owing, you know, $10,000 in
taxes and didn't realize they
had to pay taxes because um they
didn't realize they were
independently supposed to pay
their GRT in addition to the GRT
that that business is paying and
um just some examination around
that area of uh for especially
for.
small business folks and our our
working folks like sole
proprietors and consultants. And
um, and, and then finally the,
the one that I, I really would
also love to see is in that vein
of the housing is the property
just brought it up here, but.
Different taxes on second homes
and really trying to stimulate
our um our
Our state building more homes
because I think that is one of
the things that wasn't talked
about enough in last session
was, uh, there's all these
efforts to try to reduce
homelessness and solve
homelessness in our communities,
um, but if folks don't have
homes, um, or anywhere to rent,
there is not the ability
actually to place those folks
into housing and so that for me
is a, a really important to see
how our policy could stimulate
those um construction projects.
Thank you, Ma.
you represented Pajaro.
Um
Good luck doing speed, going
back to school, uh,
Representative Murphy.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Um, I'd like to add HB
403, the reclamation Fund bill.
I think it would benefit the
committee to hear the history on
that bill, um, the, uh, these
are taxes that are collected
from the oil and gas industry
for uh for plugging in
abandonment and reclamation of,
of sites. Can you say the bill
number again it's 403, um, Madam
Chair, uh, reclamation fund, it,
uh, unless you were in the
energy committee, uh, you
wouldn't have the benefit of a
lot of that discussion, um, it
passed out of energy with the
help of uh the chair and the
vice chair unanimously, there
were a number of changes made
and I think the, the panel or
the group would benefit. Thank
you. Thank you very much.
Um, Senator Sher and then rep
represented Montoya.
So, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
So I did bring
Props with me here, but uh.
I don't think New Mexico is
overtaxed, but we are
confusingly taxed, and so
whatever we do for tax policy to
try to solve a lot of issues.
And so the 2% tax that I've uh
promoted before, that's
eliminating 356 credits
exemptions and deductions.
Many of those, well, I think
about 40 or 50 of them in that
last tax bill, because nobody
was using them anyway, but that
still leaves 300 that people are
using.
Um, and
So if you eliminate those and,
and uh
are wise staff over here uh
tried to do an FIR on that, and
they came up, well, it could be
500 million less or 500 million
more, we're not sure because so
much of this isn't tracked at
all, the exemptions aren't
tracked at all.
So they're making guesses.
Um
But if we have a tax policy that
makes sense.
People will build houses.
If we have a tax policy that
makes sense, people will drill
wells.
If we have a tax policy that
makes sense, other non-oil and
gas industries can come here,
thus stabilizing, which is part
of our name, our revenue.
And so, whether it's 2% or not,
I would like to have.
Real
Discussion about
Fixing the tax policy, not
piddling around with it.
I appreciate that, Senator
share.
He used much more um tame
language than I would have used
that many of you know that I
don't, my, my language
vocabulary skills are a little
bit more crass, so I appreciate.
Oh was she?
She knows you from the
legislative session, yeah. Yeah.
Thank you so much, Senator, uh,
Representative Montoya.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I know, uh, in the past we've
talked about how tax policy can
use to incentivize business to
come here.
Uh, right now we have a national
push for data centers.
And uh so I I didn't see
anything in the plan at all
dealing with potentially looking
at uh a track data centers, but
that might be something that
that we want to have at least a
discussion about that would also
include
Probably discussions about our
lack of um
Of fiber optic.
Uh, and broadband, but, um, I, I
One of the data center uh groups
that I've been talking to, it is
currently profitable enough, and
this might actually benefit our
broadband problem, but it's
currently profitable enough.
That, uh,
The data center itself.
Uh, could potentially help with
some of the cost of bringing
broadband into a community, thus
offsetting some of the cost.
Of the uh the broadband
provider. And so it's at least
worth the conversation. I, I
know water will be part of this
discussion as well, but um,
If we're looking to
Diversify
Right now, everything is going
towards data centers. I think we
need to take a serious look at
whether or not we want to have
that, those businesses. Thank
you so much. And I, you know,
and I'm, I'm so appreciative of
the conversations because I
think what we see, and I've used
this, this, uh, metaphor before
looking at something as like the
wheel of a bicycle and when we
talk about one thing that there
are so many different spokes off
of that, um, and that we can't
just look at one spoke in order
for that wheel to roll well, and
so I do appreciate cause you're,
as you're talking about data
centers, and we are talking
about microgrids, we're talking
about
Infrastructure and whether or
not that can actually support
that. And do we have that? And
uh if we don't, what are we
doing to try and provide that if
we want to go for that. So I do
appreciate that, that point
there. Um, Representative
Ferrari to see, uh, something
from you.
Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
when, um, on page 23 when Izzy
was talking about eliminating
earmarks um using performance in
evidence-based information. I
think also we can look at um how
we add earmarks, um, because as
we're seeing all these big cuts
from the feds on Medicaid and
behavioral health.
I'm afraid it's going to be one
of the big um uh cuts that um if
we have alcohol excise tax that
that will help replace an
earmark for Medicaid and
behavioral health that we need
so desperately.
So I just um feel strong and
also the nicotine acts to to be
increased. I think that's on
here. I think we've got that on
here for you. Yeah.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari.
Um, and the reason why I asked
representative, we're gonna vote
on this work plan, so I
appreciate you sticking around.
Anybody else before we
Move ahead on this.
Can designees vote?
Um,
No, I don't I do not think so.
No, we do, we, we have
established a forum of voting
members. OK, so, um, as long as,
let me see, I've got my little
list here.
We have the majority of folks
here are voting members. Um, so,
Senator Sidia Lopez,
Representative Ferrari,
Representative Montoya, and
Representative Hernandez, you
are non-voting members, but we
do have a quorum roughly, right?
OK.
Um, so at this point, if there
are no other comments or
suggestions to the work plan,
Natalie, uh, Senator Figueroa
and my detecting anything. I've
learned from the regular session
to watch uh Senator Figueroa and
Senator Bergman's just in case I
missed something. I know Senator
Sher will speak up, but I just
nonverbally look to those two,
before.
OK, so actually, um, designated
members can go ahead and vote.
Yeah.
So on that note, if there are no
other additions to the work plan
that you have before you, except
what we discussed today. Can I
have, no, Pam says no designees.
Thank you, Pam.
Wherever you are, um, OK, so no,
my apologies on that, but we
still do have a forum on this.
So if I can have a motion to
vote on the work plan as amended
for today,
um, Madam Chair, I move that the
uh work plan has amended um be
uh approved, approved. Thank
you. Do I have a second? I have
a second from Senator Figueroa.
Is there anybody in objection to
the vote, the work plan as
amended today being approved and
being our work plan for the rest
of the interim.
See no objections. Our work plan
is adopted. Thank you.
All right, so um
Just real quickly, uh, Pam was
listening cause she's afraid of
the 2%, cause she's been working
on it for a decade. Oh, I don't
know. That's the only reason
she's paying attention. She
might be. I know she's also
recovering from a trip to
Scotland, so she might have some
jet lag, uh, cause I think she
just came back from a vacation,
but I'm sure she's chuckling at
that, uh.
All right, thank you all so much
for this. I'm just gonna go
ahead and finish this off before
we adjourn. Um, I think we're
off to a great start. This isn't
ambitious work plan, and
Christina and I will do our best
to try and cluster those
according to the dates that we
have left, um, what we will be
doing, um, I will be giving you
kind of uh my radio days of
forward promotion, uh, giving
you a heads up on the remainder
of the schedule just to let you
know on the 16th of December,
that is the day that we will
vote to endorse any legislation,
um, the, uh,
of October will be the deadline
to submit any legislation that
you want this committee to uh
endorse, but I will be reminding
you of that as we go along. I
don't expect you to remember
that today. Um, we, uh, uh,
thank you to the staff for
setting up the facilities and
getting the handouts, uh, the
PowerPoint that was presented by
Izzy is online for those of you
who are watching, if you hadn't
checked it out already, it is uh
located, it's hyperlinked in the
agenda.
Um, our next meeting will be
back here in Santa Fe on August
14th, and, uh, amongst those
presentations we'll have Adrian
Avila, uh, help us understand
past tax items that have been
brought forth as we start to
work on that and members you'll
be receiving that agenda soon.
um, so on that note, uh, I
appreciate all of you and, uh,
safe travels for those of you
who are going back home. Hope
