Yes an director director city
from the nomination epa was able
to attend to and he's going to
join.
Yes I first I want to think
mister chair and the committee
for having us today we trilly
appreciate this and we do know
that this is a very important
subject and
I can drive this home a little
bit more.
Is that
the estimate from the federal
government is 40 percent of all
remaining giranium in the united
states and the state of new
mexico so this will probably
be very important coming forward
and the world next few decades.
We don't have handouts we do
have it on the screen
we have sent it
it can be printed off home three
and get it from you yeah emailed
yes.
And I also want to say
coincidentally that forty
percent number it was asked
earlier
whose biggest produce serving
and in the world and it's
actually cassette stand which
used to be part of the soviet
union and it's an independent
country although it's very
closely line with the pood and
so
that's here to to their question
I just happened to know it so I
thought it person on.
So we hear the day to talk about
the agreement between the naval
nation and engine fuels
resources incperiod
this is a company that has of
subsidiary in the united states
but that the canadian company
and virtually all the iranian
companies that you see operating
in the united states today
actually canadian companies with
subsidiaries.
The.
This.
Having a little bit.
Or deliver your
this is actually one of her
inspection points of what do
things ever really proud of
added at with our agreement is
we are inspecting every truck
that comes through the devil
nation
united states department
transportation if they pole very
truck every every few months it
would be remarkable
as of right now we have about
ten trucks in going through the
nomination per day
everyone is started we take
readings we look at their
paperwork and so this is unique
and you added states there's
nobody to the actually is doing
this level of a scrutiny of of
these tarps are inspected the
tarp over the truck
but as you can see what the this
particular truck and this is the
so standard in the industry
these trucks do not look very
different and intructs you see
on the road all the time we have
kind of that problem that people
wander about uh particularly
truck come within an avalation
because.
It's it's not very different
from what truck carrying
decorative rock what what how
you tell the differences there's
placing on the truck to
identifies it as carrying low
levels of radioactive material
and you're any more is
considered very low levels in
terms of radioactive material by
the united states to permit a
transportation who actually
overseizes
they were given this through a
memorandum with the nuclear
regulatory commission
to deal with with transport of
our when you're dealing with
things like your rods for
nuclear reactors that's
interesting jurisdiction.
This is the opinion plain mine
it's in it's actually located
within the grand ten in monument
actually not for have a super in
while a pie tribes
this this mine have basically
was started in the in the
nineteen eighties at least the
planning for for this mind in
some of the work was though in
the nineteen eighties when the
price of uranium crashed as.
Mister terra and
the senator senator charlie said
earlier about boomboard cycles
that is very true in the iranian
industry their numerous project
steadily start in one cycle and
when the proceed radium
collapses then
i'll work on that that i'll work
on it ends and and then
basically it would obviously for
this one it was many decades of
three over three decades before
the the mine actually opened for
the first time to actually
produce material
this is another view of the mind
you can see this is actually a
within united states for service
area uh basically but the the
land itself under the mining
activation seventy two
was basically now private
property the mind itself but
it's within four service land in
the grand kenya national
monument
previously for service
and next slide.
The primary drivers of the
iranian price explosion and we
have witness at one time to we
were over a hundred dollars a
pound in this previous the
previous cycle below when we're
all few reading mining basically
stopped he got down about seven
dollars pound right now it's in
the low eighties in terms of the
spot price this is what actually
is pushing it but it really is
political at this point
there were two conferences
basically dear dealing with
global warming
copy is conference of the
parties the cop twenty eight cop
twenty nine they basically said
for to fight climate train there
were a trip of the us of nuclear
power now obviously the trouble
the use of nuclear power you're
gonna triple the amount of urim
and have to mind or and we'll
have to have to talk about this
debt here but the nomination
would like to do is take the
mine waste out of.
Uh take the reading out a mind
waste your own mind waste it's
been previously mind and there's
a technology called a blach and
technology instead of creating
new thinks that i'll hont us for
you know the half life of
iranian is
random two thirty eight point
have going here so it's not
something that goes away and so
we don't want to create new
waste without we like to to use
a use that are
then new technology but that's a
kind of a separate
discussion but that's what we're
trying to do
also the senate passed the bill
of
banning the import of enriched
iranium they'll also need the
price spike up and when they did
like march thirteenth twenty
twenty four and that's that's
when it was briefly
in just the when they knew about
that occurring that's when the
price really shout up to well
like over a hundred dollars a
pound because of this because of
that sub clinically
there's a lot of push behind the
increase there you're eating
mining in the united states.
Now that the opinion plain mine
is
and if you also directly running
the premium planning mind they
operate the only operating
conventional mill in the united
states for
free radio more
you heard about insurance you're
reaching that process itself
basically is a milling and
processing
technique therefore a nuclear
regulatory commission regulates
all mills at that that that
there's a increased serve of
processing later on but that
doesn't go the conventional
melts so the only conventional
mill presently operating in
united states is located at the
weight master mill and in utah
and everything will have to be
shipped to that and that that's
important in terms of transport
through through all these minds
it has to be transported all the
way up to youtube but said to me
close to bluff u.
Okay.
Next next one
now these are the federal
regulations of radioactive
materials
and
as as I stay there they're a
lawyer the nrc leaves it to the
united states to purpose
transportation and the course
the the various department state
department of transportations to
regulate the or shipments and
we're doing that also we're
doing that
but like I said were the only
where they only political
initiate that stops every truck
inspects every every tarb and
has various other provisions in
terms of when the trucks can
come through and so that that's
what we're very proud of about
the agreement is it's
we did determine do the federal
preemption that we couldn't
start all trucks coming through
the navigation we couldn't
prohibited over state in and
federal roads but we we do stop
every truck we do inspect every
truck that comes through.
Next like please.
We sign these terms of agreement
on january twenty ninth and
twenty twenty five this was
after a essentially six month
halt the company actually did
try to
send or through the naval
nation.
And
we learned about it after it
started its shipment and we
immediately started to take
action we weren't namination
wasn't able to interest up the
trucks on the way through a
basically do the governor
resolve that help to sell that
and basically also have reached
out to the company they arranged
a uh together with a six month
moratoria money on shipment
while we tried to work out the
agreement which we did like a
week or two before that six
months of rand.
And they started to shipments of
on february twelve twenty twenty
five.
Initially ever doing two to
three trucks a day now they're
doing like ten or twelve
trucks a day I think going to
thirteen
next slide.
Altogether in direct red city
actually will take over now he's
actually be really been there
personally inspecting a lot of
the trucks in actually and
setting up the team at the
household inspecting the trucks
when he's not there so i'm real
and i'm address because it's
definitely the expert on the
thank you to good afternoon
steve members of the new mexico
state legislature this combined
community joint committee about
the house in the senate
radio account and hazardous
materials committee
so far
this at the end of this week
will be about four hundred and
thirty total inspections
that you saw the picture earlier
but where we located the
inspection site it's just on the
interior
of the south western boundary of
the albonation
closer to grand canyon area
it's a united states highway
eighty nine
basically the link between
flagstaff arizona and page
arizona like powell
heavily travel route
what we do as we
capture data from the bills of
laden and everything that we do
we keep records of it so we're
maintaining and building that
database daily
each truck
as a limitation a weight
limitation so each truck has an
average of twenty five tons.
Of natural uranium or.
Issues today we have one
incident which ultimately was
not considered to be an
emergency but it did involve.
Cooking you know county
sheriff's officers it's an
incident that happened along the
hall out before the struck
entered the alba honation what
are the drivers fell ill
decided to park his vehicle in a
restaurant parking lot
eastern side of flagstaffers
owner it was parked for enough
time for people to notice the
placarding and to wonder why is
a radio active truck parked in
the restaurant parking and so
called me
to appropriate agencies
including our nomination the
partner emergency management and
my office so combination of
notifications but the primary
responses cooking in a county
shares office and the
flagstafire department
everything checked out fine
the driver was checked out by an
ambulance service declined to go
to the hospital
by the time that all these
things cleared it was getting
close to noon and part of our
agreement has a a curfew we
allow the trucks to come on at
eight thirty in the morning onto
the reservation and they have to
clear by three pm each time so
by time this incident cleared up
the company made a decision that
they were not going to be able
to clear the three pm curfew so
they turn the truck back a silly
time truck has been turned back
so far in for hundred and thirty
eight
inspections
but the communications
demonstrated that the existing
transportation emergency
response plan and all the phone
numbers that are in there for
the all of these agencies to
communicate
it worked at and we also had the
public calling in as well my
office received at least one
call directly from someone in
the.
The restaurant that knew how to
contact our office so
this want to make make sure that
everybody understands that there
is this emergency response plan
at all different levels of
government along the hall rounds
for counties then all nation for
police districts along the
nation eleven tribal communities
and everybody has a copy of the
emergency response plan.
So far as then mentioned in this
agreement we're primarily
concerned with the potential for
radioactive materials to escape
from the trucks
when we learn that the covering
was a a tarp covering
we were afforded and actual
demonstration on a short trip
near the mine and I personally
took video from right behind
looking at the performance of
the tarp at that road speed set
speed limits sixty five miles an
hour
and that's why we do the
inspections because the the the
flap are the tarp at the
tailgate is where it's looses
and and can flap so we do these
checks at the inspection station
using the same radiological or
radio activity detection devices
that the company uses levels and
we use chinese the same model so
we get the same basic data we
share all of the meditator
behind
the use of those equipment so we
have copies of their calibration
they have copies of our
calibration store comparing
oranges to oranges
so everything up to now has been
well with below the limit set
forth by the us dot and these
limits are clearly on all of our
inspection forms
and as dan mentioned we're now
getting close to twelve trucks
per day
I mentioned that the turkey that
the emergency response plan has
been distributed to
a lot of folks along the
transport route and other
officers in each of the
countries and and our nation
department of public safety and
emergency management we've had
one information session
primarily directed towards local
officials
we've interested have more and
these will be re occurring
but one of the aspects of the
agreement was that the company.
Energy fuels agreed to pay us a
an amount of money that has been
received already and we're going
to be putting that to use
helping the local communities
with their training needs and
coordination so we look to this
upcoming fiscal year to put some
of these dollars to use
we're also going to hire more
staff within my office
to do these inspections and to
all this education and outrage
one of the other interesting
aspects of the agreement we
agreed no hauling on federal
holidays but in addition we
asked for a ten more additional
no holidays which called
blackout days we've used five of
them today first one was on the
major commencement day blot of
traffic on eight eighty nine go
to flag staff for the northern
ireland university comments but
with a lot of of our people that
ten northern arizona university
a lot of families on route at
the beginning of the day the end
of the day also was the same day
as our commencement actually is
that college and saley
a lot of people will be
traveling on us one sixty to get
to that institution so
other days there was a
commemoration of it we're a lot
of local motorcycle writers are
using eighty nine in the morning
so we we asked the company
tonight hall on that day and
they agree um just recently
during fourth of july
in the community of kind to
arizona us one sixty cuts right
through that community so we
asked for no halling so the
second and third no holidays
combined with the federal
holiday the four so three days
in a row hauling we have five
more days coming up this
calendar year
and what are the interesting
things as then mentioned
about some other aspects that
were involved in with.
General uranium mind clean up
the company
put on the table for our
consideration that they would be
willing to take ten thousand
tons of abandoned uranium mind
waste
from the nab honation to the
white message
that is something that we
continue to we're trying to
prioritize
the sites our sites that we can
select and
we've already had a couple of
discussions with energy fuels
and we need to have a few more
to just nail down where we're
going to be doing this
particular activity
and it has implications for some
of the activities that may be
her new mexico because the
agreement did refer to the
possibility of rocahonda project
also
happening and that there may be
additional waste material that
the company will be willing to
take from that albonation if
that project were to
get permitted and and and
approved so i'll give it back to
dan at this point
yes and I will say that the
company agreed to basically take
take away come pick it up take
the waste and desposit with it
as facility for free that's
worth them we're basic
necessarily us epa and other
data we've given their
approximately a
two point four million dollars
and significant amount of money
but disposal of those are ways
to
reserve with like the red rock
regional landfill I I can also
just give that up topia because
it's it it is interesting.
Using pay is going to be paying
five million dollars further
waste to go to cavaria some
that's and we have the problems
there because we'd rather use it
for mediation and then just
moving it and reburying that
that's not where we want to go
with things we want to get the
ways permanently off the naval
nation we've direct the red city
has a lot of experience even
worked for us c p a for quite a
while in in terms of.
Failure of cells that are
created in you know down the
line forty fifty years they fail
and your right back were you
where you started from a
supposed to to take knowledge
that there were pushing takes
ninety eight right now and we
think you can do to even better
take ninety eight percent of the
iranian out of the the material
so it's gone it's permanent it
put back into the fuel cycle but
it is.
Next slide please
so this is the opinion plain and
it shows the shows the map you
can conceive the whole route in
see while a pine have a super
reservation and how it's going
to first going up at it I mean
down the williams and then over
the fly staff and then it goes
unup to the weight basis that
that's the actual halling route
that's being used and that's the
only only mel we'd like to keep
that bill busy processing waste
not
encouraging it to a create new
minds and I will say the rocker
hand of mine that the numbers
i've looked at you know that is
a very it just makes it worse
that's a very low grade mind
that that's like point five
eight percent uranium you have
our places where you're getting
your twenty percent actually
ironically the opinion plain was
about a one percent they thought
but we picked up and then a
confirmed it that they cause a
slight increase in radioactivity
levels still willing save that
they went up to one point six
and actually two point they're
actually two three percent now
and they say they might have ten
percent iranian there but the
roger hand in mind that's it's a
barely profit or mine even
today's
prices now if there's a drop in
your radium and discuss to the
boom bust situation you know
that's going to be the one that
the first ones to shut down but
and they may reopen but in the
meantime then damage is going to
be done up next slide place
self they have they've been
playing a mine near mount tailor
and like I said it's not a very
rich mine but there once that's
going to make it up with volume
is going to be fifty truck loads
of
per day coming out of that mind.
And up first I I forty and and
then go up very routine will
show the next route but it's
going to be a wider traffic
truck traffic in our five times
what we're seeing with opinion
plane might
next tick slight place so this
is the route there's a couple of
proposed one up one ninety one
one four ninety one but if you
see it the kind of the bottom of
of that the rock ahead of mine
that's first going to go on I
forty so everybody on I forty
into a gets either either one
ninety one four ninety one will
be impacted and have to deal
with for that next slide please
okay so if there are questions
and and all the time is limited
but i'm sure they render team in
any questions.
Presentation for a small for the
committee and anyone listening
that presentation lives online
and am I just docate radioactive
and hazardous material committee
page
cause I think there is some
really valuable information
there.
More valuable over time
reference but I just have two
questions I think number one
you're talking about the nab
honation and the protocols in
the agreements for you
inspecting trucks and material
moving through the allow nation.
What is the state of new mexico
do are there compatible rags
with the state
when it before it crosses in the
nab nation when it leaves an
uphold nation.
Sure members of the committee
i'm not aware of any I mean I
would presume that new mexico
department transportation rate
is regulating relaxed materials
coming through the devolution
but that's
that's not really a area that
that I I know about personally
but a.
Everywhere everywhere else it is
done by the use of the state and
US department transportation in
terms of if there are new
inspections although as I said
her aware I don't believe it's
you know it's a very rare thing
for them ever to inspect and
look at placards like like we do
to make sure that they have
proper package and everything
else we're really unique in
united states in terms
that's what we pushed in our
agreement to you thank you to
you guys you were talking about
how they packages material
do you have equipment that tests
the any radiation immense coming
out of the trucks yes director
of city is personally doing this
thank you for the question
senator stoneborn members of the
committee
for this low level material it
has a usd or t designation as
low specific activity number one
doesn't require it's not
required to be put into a
container the container is the
trailer and the trailer as you
saw in one of the first lights.
Is an open back trailer with a
tarp covering there's a front
axel and a rear axal there's
twelve point five tonnes placed
near the front of the trailer in
a small mound of material than a
second mountain towards the rear
axel and that was you know we
learned that by
going to the mindsight and
watching the demonstration of
how they load the trucks using a
front and loader if you go back
to the picture of the mindset
you'll see where they store the
or when it's brought out of the
mind and that's the pads where
they actually load
the transport trucks so there's
no containers other than the
trailer itself which is why you
see argo
doing the same procedure that
the mine does on releasing the
trucks from the mindsight using
the radio active detection
device
we do that at the inspection
site and we compare the
radioactive readings that the
mind captured earlier that
morning with what after about a
hundred and sixty miles of
transport and that material sort
of jostling around and settling
inside the trailer we're looking
for any escape being and hire
detections along the sides of
the the trucks of what we're
finding a lot of art information
and data comports with the same
numbers that are captured at the
at the point where the trucks
have just been loaded and then
released onto the onto the roads
thank you very much I guess i'm
just wanted from a safety same
point you know people workers
who are testing this when it's
being unloaded like what's being
contemplated for this new
landfill to
new mexico to store all this
ways that you were talking about
bad facility like are there
federal standards that basically
in both cases have to be met in
terms of transport worker
handling off loading.
Where is the neighborhood.
And this mind company have one
set of rules but the epa is
going to go by a different
standard for this federal
refunded facility can you speak
to that
yes intense sort of like I said
that the tarp not was that the
detarping actually is is a
federal requirement you know to
agree that we're doing the
additional inspections that that
that's that's all something
different
like I and at the mining the
state of arizona obviously that
we have no part of regulating
the mining that's not a never
nation that that's off the
nomination but
you know we we did all that
we're little alarmed when we see
some of the things that are done
and we're glad that weren't
we're regulating because
at the mindset they leave mine
they leave mounts of this
material out of query to be when
blown in the arizona permanent
of environmental quality does
check it there
minimum maximum amount of
material they can put on there
but it's quite a lot of
materials so there's a lot of
you know
does blowing after we we we make
sure that when they're coming
across an avalation that none of
that is occurring and you know
so that that's our inspection
standard
and we we talked briefly about
the financial when we we we
actually created a a contract
with energy fuels that they have
to to abide by and.
There are we can't discuss
because you contract.
We can just say that we are
rated so in your fuels is more
than covering the cost of the
regulation but that that's all
we were attempting to do is make
sure that all our regulation we
could do all that run our
programs also
educate people a chapter houses
along the route everything else
that there be some financial
we want to have a financial
burden
as I keep saying
there's nobody in the country
that regulates the transport of
material.
Senator just to add on terms of
work or play safety over now epa
super fun staff are covered by
medical monitoring programs so
everybody gets an annual check
up
there are folks that go out into
the field and including our new
inspectors have really a
dose meters though similar
and those are
submitted to an analysis every
quarter so we track that as far
as
the implications
and looking at
transport happening within the
reservation and maybe over two a
facility like red rock landfill
we also visited the white mason
mill and looked at the unloading
process and what each truck goes
through before they're allowed
to get back on the public high
rates with an empty trailer and
so we looked at the
decontamination processes and
you'll the mill has primary
responsibility for their
workplace safety but in
releasing these decontaminated
trucks and and the proper
placarding for that we play
pretty much attention to that so
we know what to look for because
the trucks when they're empty
come back down the same row to
get ready to stage for the next
days transport.
And I don't know if it's a good
idea or not but john it makes me
wonder because if this is that
if this is a good solution for
new mexico to get rid of some of
its
waste as we clean up sights here
just if they're.
Better get rid of it then then
to bury it create a new problem
but you know create other issues
and save the issues with that's
where transport become super
important you know and I know a
lot of people have concerned
about the safety exposure of
during transport itself so
very good all right represent
block
thank you so much mr chairman
thank you both and so I just had
one question actually I was
wondering so when you stop the
trucks do you guys levy taxes to
collect taxes and is that in any
way where that you regularly
what goes in and outs you can
keep track of it financially.
Thank you mister chairman
representative block thank you
for your question
the the financial aspects of our
agreement with energy fuels
doesn't
provide an avenue for a plain
taxes we have
a one time payment that we've
already received
we have another financial aspect
which is tied to the actual
pounds of uranium that will be
processed from pinya complain
and and we've we have an
agreement for a monetary amount
for each pound that would
eventually come to that
albonation we have a an account
set up that is directly within
the novel epa's budget area so
all the funds will be coming
into that account and we'll be
able to request those funds to
help pay for the operations of
this new regulatory program so
we'll be able to pay for
staffing
training equipment medical
monitoring safety as well as
getting funds out to the
communities that are impacted
along the transport route and to
help them with their training
needs and their emergency
preparedness and emergency
response
capacity building.
Okay thank you mr chair thank
you for that that's that's
helpful I don't know if you had
anything yeah I would just just
say that
because of this arrangement
essentially the more attractive
that come through the more
payments and naval nation will
receive based on this and
ironically because they all has
been better richer dead act
actually increases at two so we
we do think we designed it to
just basically make sure
the minimum it would cover all
the cost of doing regulation we
do believe there'll be extra
money which we are going to
apply for to remediation on on
the never nation so
okay thank you mister chair and
so I think we said fifty fifty
truck loads we expect with this
new project so that would I
would assume financially benefit
the nabo nation with increased
with everyone to make any money
off that I mean we don't want we
don't want that mind you know
but if if if it comes through
yes now that nation it also will
get thirty thousand tons of
uh disposal for free so the
regulator to in place but we've
already made it clear and
comments and and
mr chair and members of the
committee uh.
We actually did help represent a
beta when when she was drafting
hers we opposite your difficult
people
to say that you know we're
working with them we're not
working with them but
we make the best of a bad
situation when we have to if
they're sunday tough through
we're going to collect money off
it so that that that's better
view but we would rather not
have that no totally understand
I I wasn't important
all that yeah I just think it's
interesting you know there needs
to be checks and balances and it
seems like you've put some in
there so that's just helpful
than now thank you mister
chairman.
And thank you sees me thank you
mr chair and thank you so much
for the information this as i'm
learning quite a bit of with
regards to the you meter comment
mr chair about the rocar honda
mine I had there is
the transport would go for a
portion of time on I forty
so mr chair just to curiosity as
to
how would I say that the
mentioned before was there is a
time loan between eight thirty
and three o'clock for transport
that you had mentioned mr chair
is there a similar time frames
when you know that maybe a
proposed as the material leaves
at this particular rocar honda
mine going it being transported
just curiosity that the
restrictions on tiber related to
when they're on the naval nation
and not along I mean
you know I I can say what will
be we wanted to a certain
maximum terrorist action but
they were only willing to we had
to compromise when they actually
international nation proper that
that's from reregulator and and
tell them when they can be on
and when they have to be off we
will not be regulating the eye
forty stretch.
And mr charity are just in
curiosity because there's so
much traffic that does go on
interest at forty and my family
I recently did a road trip
driving forty with all of the
semis and all of the other
issues that exist on the major
meter roadway and there is in a
road quality of road is another
issue I remember mr tear when
the road was
improved in widened you know
from clients corners down to
rose wool and going on down
without was a very small narrow
road previously and it was
widened when to accommodate the
transportation of waste going
down to i'm carl's bad area so
and I know this is interstate I
get it is federal but we still
cover the cost of a repaving and
such as the state of new mexico
so mr chair it just be
interesting to see what um you
the department of transportation
in the state and what perview
and overstate that we have to
make ensure that that's safe
transportation as a
moving oh product so I guess you
would say i'm waste through I
think a very.
Critical line of transportation
in a state so just curious mr
chair of maybe something could
be asked her to see what our own
department is doing on out with
regards to transportation thank
you.
Thank you very much so I just
mention our arm or we might want
to invite and and deal taker
talk about their.
Suggestions okay
thank you mister chair I think
you experience to make a phone
call unfortunately out there in
the baking heat is hot outside
so I have a question and if you
really just are so holidays so
removing the uranium itself
we're going up to utah correct
cause I I
mean with where they take that
to
I would imagine it's the same
precautions tell me what's a
difference between moving your
rain because I really don't know
this I know exactly how spent
fuel is moved and I know how
transionic fuel is moved is this
similar same guidelines tell me
a little bit what similar what's
different
thank you
mister chair center standing
born and a representative lord
this was brought out a little
bit earlier when you were on the
phone the material coming out of
the pinyand plain mine near the
grand kenyan
is
deemed natural or
have never been processed so
it's straight out of the mind
and it has a designation under
the united states to probably
transportation transportation of
hazardous materials and rate
active materials as low specific
activity number one and in the
whole spectrum which you kind of
highlighted
from the lowest to the highest
level of radio activity lsa is
at the very lowest end so the
requirements as I stated earlier
there's no containers the the
the the or is stored open on the
ground on the storage pad
the trucks have a steel bottom
and
they're they're all steal it has
tough on
sheeting at the bottom to help
for the material the slide out
when it's been unloaded.
And then it has a tarp cover
that's the containment for lsa
one material that US DO e
requires and so those are the
types of trucks that are
transporting the waste the there
is a weight limit
believe the total weight limit
for an entire shipment is eighty
thousand pounds so the truck
ways a large amount of that
and that leaves an amount of
twenty five tons of material
that can be loaded in the
trailer and that's loaded in two
mounds of material one on the
front axel of the trailer and
one towards the rear axal of the
trailer so the trailer
has a large volume a parents
from the outside but the actual
material does not come anywhere
close to filling up all that
space
and so there is a lot of room
still left in the truck once
it's been loaded and the is been
covered over the top
and that is how
the material is moved in
transport for this we would
expect the same regulations to
apply to any other natural or
that would come off of other
mind sites in our southwest
region
thank you mr chair and expert
thank you for explaining again I
I thought that was pretty much
moved I have some my own
interesting.
If the suffers in my backyard I
would want to have my c cell
about what done for me from what
I know I would have rather had
it sealed stuffed in case and
that moved it because that's a
lot of dirt flying that's a lot
of movement that's a lot of
movement taking it there to be I
would have if it was my desert
to save because I understand
that the encasement I would have
rather had in case because that
leads to a lot of things and
transportation being one of them
now how is that going to a fact
with anything right when you
have a lot of transportation for
many reason I mean just my
district they want to put four
thousand houses that's can
affect my road how does that
affect the part that whoever's
moving this are is there going
to be a repayment or helping
with funding of the roads here
in new mexico although well say
i've given millions of dollars
roads and I don't see anything
so I just want to add that my
roads are still horrible.
Mister chair center statement
representative lord thank you
for that question it kind of
relates to the earlier
discussion about transportation
impacts one of the things that
we are trying to keep on the
table are transportation impacts
number one the reason we do
these roadside inspections in
the reason we ask for these
trucks to pull over so we could
do it radiate radiation
detection
on each of the trucks so after a
hundred and sixty miles of
transport and all the jostling
and and the dust creation
underneath the type covering we
want to see if there's any
change or difference in
increasing radiation levels on
the sides of the trucks but on
all four sides
and and that's what we look for
that's always been are concerned
because we understood that
if we were to try and impose
higher restrictions we would be
coming up against this pre
emption
issue and if we were to push it
too far we we we might end up on
the losing side of that so what
we settled with was this
inspection regime and and as I
said really we use the same
equipment we share calibration
data so we're comparing oranges
to oranges
and that is really what we focus
in on now leaving the
transportation impacts on the
table when we spoke with
governor hubs.
Uh towards the end of our
negotiation period
some of our local chapters who
have experienced with large
truck traffic imposing on their
community roads and a lot of
these roads getting torn up in
the process have said you know
we got to watch out for that and
so
the governor has a brought her
special assistant for a
transportation to some of these
meetings that we've had in the
past and we have an ability to
come back and continue to raise
these issues and have these
discussions I think it's very
important to look at those
impacts we were doing it
on the back end of things
we didn't have a lot of time in
six months to lay everything out
but that is certainly something
that um we're going to
experience along us eighty nine
which is a federal highway us
when sixty which is a federal
highway and in US one ninety one
which is a federal highway
and we we're gonna have to work
with the arizona department of
transportation and when it comes
over to new mexico we have the
same types of issues they'll be
offered off reservation
transport at the initial start
of it and then when it goes
north of gallop on potentially
on US highway four ninety one
and then gets onto the novel
reservation well we'll be in the
same situation that that were in
with the opinion plane
from
the grand canyon region so
the other transportation impact
that we're hoping to put all
this experience together is the
movement of waste material
within the nation too so that we
have five hundred minutes to
clean up and some of those are
going to have their own
transportation plans albeit not
as extensive but a lot of a lot
of movement on the less and a
lot of use of
a growing network.
Of roads
are now honation law the
radioactive materials
transportation act
puts a lot of restrictions on
the transport of radioactive
materials and associated
transport but it has an
exemption for a clean up.
One more question I don't think
i'll say okay so there's example
clean up okay the reason i'm
asking all this is because
we're saying it's a low level
rate but you guys are still
going to have to so I don't know
if I said mister chair sorry if
I did I was just cause I forgot
to go through the chair
so what is it god for bid that
the truck should get into an
accent cause I don't
worry as much about with the
spent fuel and transferative
because it was caster and but
that mean they drop missiles and
bombs monkey stuff so this is in
a truck so god for bed it should
tip over
who has the training and and I
mean it's it's low level I get
that it's not super high level
but how does that what would
that look like for a clean up
and who gets trained to do that.
Excited just one that we got two
more people when asked questions
I may throw or something
solicitors be roll was tightened
up only and through sisters we
got running like early thanks
sorry mr chairman it's all good
I just want to give a time check
there for everything.
Thank you chair steinborn
representative lord for your
question here
of course that's what the at the
forefront of everybody's mine
when
this occurred last
june
july twenty twenty four
we we had a lead up to this too
we didn't know that my had
submitted their mind operating
plans we knew that
transportation was imminent
and even today that still on the
forefront of everybody's mind
we've had some information and
outreach
we do have
our nab nation department of
emergency management
with some capabilities of
responding we have are nava who
nation police department on the
front line as the first
responder entity and as well as
fire
capability in the communities of
tubercity and in the community
of key enter so we do have
limited response and we do have
challenges there but the primary
response responsible entity is
the company itself so they have
an emergency response team at
the pinyon playing mind and they
also have a emergency response
team at the white mason mill
which we become very familiar
with and then we have a network
of communications links with
cocanino county dem
naval county deal a patchy
county dm and san one county
demand you in south
so
all along the route
we have a right of way which the
state has responsibility for
managing so the other the second
level of response will be for
the state to to to apply their
resources if there is a need to
address an accident and.
And if there's a release
involved but the company will be
that the first one to be on the
hook so
we provide oversight we we
provide traffic control we
provide sight
of safety but until the
the company
and their emergency contracted
environmental
clean up people come up now
there is that issue of time and
how much it takes
normally we have a five hour
response time anywhere on the
reservation but since the
company has teams on either end
of their route either from the
mine or from the mill they
commit to us that they can get
to any spill along the route
within a two hour time frame so
mister terra members of the
committee one everything is and
we put it right in the agreement
a truck drivers have equipment
that they have to bring with
them so if there was
god for the like a rollover they
would have tarped to put over it
they have stakes to stick it
down to prevent windblock as as
the primary threat is that that
when you dump the material so
they're able to address it
immediately at the site and and
there's also information that
the company gets about where
these trucks are really given
time so because one of our
primary concerns well what if
the truck drivers in capacity
and so there will be radio life
transmission
to to basically i'll learn
people and what everything about
good better agreement.
Is
the higher level waste that you
were talking like fuel rods
actually nuclear weapons now uh
basically there.
People are alerted beforehand
that the shipments are actually
going through that's not
normally done with with your
anymore but in our case we put
it and we are alerted to every
truck where were told when the
trucks are going to be coming in
the number of trucks that's also
put in our agreement so we we
know when they should be on the
road and if we don't see them we
we will not that something may
be up and and message it and
miss chairman and experts I want
to correct you on that because
when you move that because it's
high security you can't let
people know not yours but you
can not let people know when
they respect field rights being
moved that's why they have the
security team yes or no do you
guys have any security going
with these trucks or now because
it's low level okay no not no
security so the only thing I
want to say is i'm unlittle
concerned because it's not in
the casks I just want to make
sure cause it and I don't want
to sit for her for another
thirty minutes asking questions
that we make sure that as this
moves there are people trained
the entire way that can handle
this I mean it is low level I
get that but I still want to
make sure it gets cleaned up
because wind is the biggest
issue so thank you
i'll just crates the ad
especially for going to me and
be moving a lot more material in
new mexico with what we know
what's going to happen and then
what we hope will happen with
clean up this may be a good
committee bill a good bread had
carcus bill by partisan right
to to look at some tougher
requirements in the state in
mexico about how this.
The word preemption and I don't
know if it's really prempted or
not
if that's an area that's pre
empty chair if I can add on that
I I you know when we move the
bigger stuff like we move the
spectrum to nonsense there is a
heck of a lot of rules and
regulations and others if
someone makes sure that when
we're moving this cause this is
a new adventure I would like to
make sure that we make sure that
it's sim so again maybe
something we can agree with the
other dump truck just put in the
back where dump track and move
it back to the pick up a direct
track move now we're we're not
insulting anybody we're just
we're just we're just talking
sorry months yourself about your
and we've been funny
so we still have a few more in
gas **** ask you just keep your
answers over the shorter okay
just because we're running like
but you're given super important
information
sorry representative better than
center tray
think you have senator thinking
mysteriously excuse me director
at city of mister morgan gets to
you here yes I have two very
simple questions I was just
reviewing the legislation that
the twenty second albert council
passed and I don't see a
definition in there what
constitutes a vehicle could a
train constitute a vehicle under
this
pla.
Mister chair
stoneborn in representative of
beater currently the only rail
on the now ownation is the old
rail between black message and
page for the former now
generating station and I think
the old rail between gallopin
when the rock for the pittsburgh
it way mine
if there were rails within our
jurisdiction this would apply as
well
but there are there are no
current rails and we don't have
a lot of miles of rail of the
berlin to northern santa fe real
on the southern sweep of a
reservation
but that is that has always been
a concern both the rail and I
forty cordor for training
emergency progress emergency
response thank you
and a director of city mister
moke and my last question is I
understand from your report you
said you do not have oversight
or regulate I forty but who does
and how do you collaborate with
them and is their state presence
there thank you.
Time born representative of
better
in in in arizona there are
either cross commission
agreements or other agreements
at the nomination will make with
our state neighbors for various
aspects of traffic control um
these sharing agreements I I
believe are updated periodically
and I think the one in arizona
is is making its way through
finalization so we do have some
capability for traffic control
on the parts of I forty that
come on to the navonation and
like you said there's not a
whole amount like whole lot of
mileage of those areas but you
will see sometimes now honation
police department must like you
would see leguna
police on on their sections of
five forty nine the reservation
is helping a monitor overall
safety for traffic.
Think mr chair I is any of the
agreements public review that
you're saying born and senator
charlie
no it's still covered by the
confidentiality cause it's in
the agreement itself and we have
highlighted aspects of the
agreement in or call a fact
sheet and that's when made
public since february
and
that does you know contain a lot
of
information about the high
points of the agreement
thank you mister and experts I
wonder with recommend is there a
compensated compensation
associated with transport
are able to share that.
So could you the question on
what is their compensation
associated with transporting
rate that map there and pulling
up
broker mine is there a
compensation associated with
transporting more
cheers than born senator charlie
my understanding is that the
broker hand of mine still has to
get an approval
it's it's going through the
application process now and.
I think that question can be
answered until it we actually
see what they're approved mining
planners because in that plan
will also be contained to
transportation aspects of which
route will be the actual route
that will be used in which
george sticks they go through
thank you mister charles so
there is potential for
compensation well in in our
current agreement
i'm sorry mister
charley in our current agreement
we make a a statement that says
if the rocker hander mine gets
approved and transport will
impact the nation
there are certain provisions in
there that energy feels as
agreeing to write at the outset
and that is to take more
abandoned iranian mind was offer
the nation that's the only thing
that that's in there but there's
nothing that bins the nation
from supporting that
approval of that mind we have
are full
rights to exercise whatever we
want to say about that project
as it goes to the review process
and we we basically will look
forward to being very involved
in and all the decision making
that will lead to an approved
operating plan or disapproval of
an operating plan to mister
chair
is now the whole nation
concerned about the volatility
of energy fuels quarter one
earnings have them at a net loss
of twenty six point third three
two million in quarter one which
is if online information is
accurate about a quarter of
their liquid assets are you
monitoring and tracking that
you can yeah yes I I monitor
other filings and going back to
slow of the rocker handed the
provisions are pretty similar if
if they ever do start shipping
but we don't want to that.
As far as the economics of the
fuels
well well the
the profit last doesn't look
great right now part of that is
they don't want to sell in the
iranian for less than a hundred
dollars of pound they're holding
off
their chairman has said that in
so their stock piling iranian as
opposed to selling so therefore
that that's processing why
even out there detectively
operating at a loss their
basically stock has been moving
up rapidly because people see
their greatest asset is the fact
that they're the only operating
conventional uranium or
operating miles there on when
they can process and it's
probably going to be several
years before you get a
mile operating and
a conventional mill operating in
in the united states so they
have monopoly so we're not
concerned
about their finances right now
to make it short
and i'll just close by thing the
minutes also within the tcp
boundaries of the
the
i've not healer thank you mister
guys great job today thank you
super informative and now as a
result we're going to bring the
mexico dot and here and you know
truthfully though to the idea of
do we need tougher regulations
as a state tougher last
regarding transport uniform
policies love to hear your ideas
on that I mean we would circle
back with you because you're
clearly experts and leading in
this field so i'll just leave
you with that invitation to give
us some feedback and you could
you know if you have any feel
free to reach out to paul myself
represent lord but I mean you
could you could come back to me
and the we could circulate it by
I think it's really interesting
idea.
Because we're gonna be doing a
lot more other than the future
itself thank you john appreciate
your time today ceptric poem all
right mr rodrigue thanks for
your patience
mr chair
mr chairman
just a concern and I didn't ask
this question but when the truck
served out on the road are they
worked
there there was can't they be
easily identified because the
trucks that are going and taking
wastes down to with
you know they're in a container
of they have all of this other
such so I don't I didn't ask
that but that may be another
consideration
probably wouldn't work big
radioactive or would we
just at least a public one
driver
so
i'm sorry
the previous experts said they
had a placard on them okay so I
didn't hear that thank you have
a read state of new mexico
license place.
Okay good thanks i'm sorry okay
john for issues
thank you
and we are we're talking about
the sand one generating station
remediation study correct
great thanks.
Okay.
Good afternoon interesting born
in in committee thanks for
having us here and yes we'll be
talking about the enemy
deportion of the
required valuation of the sand
one generating station under
especially one forty two we've
provided you with a hard copy of
the actual report itself and
then you have a copy of the
presentation we're going to do
uh will let you read through the
report at your leisure it's
about that thirty pages will
cover just highlights with this
presentation and then happened
answering the questions go ahead
to the next
so this first slide that you're
looking at
just shows the prior condition
of of the treatment plan of the
generating station when it was
an operation and
as of july first the current
condition they are in the
process of doing demolition of
the structures
and and I will say that that is
regulated under a couple of
pieces one is the uh
construction industry's
division.
As well as our
house this waste in and air
quality bureaus with regard to
any as best as contamination it
may be there they have to spend
a plan they have to then clean
it up appropriately
the primary concern that we have
of course is groundwater
contamination in a media
regulate water quality
i'll start off by saying that
we're very blessed as a state to
be one of the few in the nation
that have ground water
protection regulations most
states do not.
That allows us to
to better control and better
oversee what goes on with in the
state and this is a prime
example of it that we wouldn't
otherwise have so
we while we regulate the water
quality and we do that through
discharge permits and we'll talk
a little more about those than
we in conjunction with energy
and minerals who spoke earlier
they handle the mining and
essentially the surface
reclamation portion within the
mind
and then they oversee that the
minor operations as a ongoing.
So under HB one forty two it
required remediation plans for
both the generating station and
the mine
you heard from entered on on
their portion of that this
morning and what this has been a
faded as with is it in his
prevented clean up delays and it
is
cut down a lot of the potential
push fact it might have
otherwise been there with regard
to jurisdiction.
And so I want to first say thank
you to our legislators that get
that through it was very much
needed
an additional funding to help
with that doesn't hurt either so
thank you
so groundwater has three
discharge permits at this
facility that are active right
now they've had others over the
years but currently there are
three one is dp three or six for
their solid waste pair nether is
dp thirteen twenty seven which
is the generating station in
total and the third is the dp
eighteen forty three shamway
recovery system which you heard
talked about earlier on and I
think it's important to know
here that they're that part of
the activity that goes on with
the mine in the mail is
associated to a
a consent order that was entered
into by the operator and
I don't know if it wrecked in
front of me but with an ngo
years ago and it was one of the
requirements was the shamway
recovery system there's some
specifics with regard to when it
can be taken out of service one
is that there is no further flow
into that system alright so it
should right there's no longer
any need for it to recapture and
recycle water the second would
be if it shows that the water
that's coming into it is not
negative and it's not going to
have any kind of a negative
impact I will just tell you we
are in long way from reaching
either one of those conditions
so
you cannot talk a little bit
about timeframe discharge
permits are in place for as long
as they're needed and in tale
baitment and clean up is
complete and most of those take
years.
Those discharge permits have to
be renewed every five years
right and we are and we monitor
annually in some cases quarterly
to ensure they're in compliance
with that some of that is is
monitoring by the entity with us
checking their stuff some of
these actually going out of
monitoring.
But we can at any time if
conditions change require a
modification of that permit
outside that five year range and
we can bring their man
again because of our regulations
we have a lot more control over
over what goes on with those uhm
this picture of the one right
that you just saw shows the
location of the sand on coal min
area and then the discharge
permits themselves where they're
located now one of the things
under sp one forty two go the
next one required us to
determine what clean up plans
needed to happen and get things
in place this charge permit
require that the operator when
they get their permit a portion
of that is they have to have a
closure plan and they have to
have financial assurance based
on the operation at that time
and any time we review a permet
comes up for renewal we look at
that and we make sure that that
the financial assurance remains
appropriate for what it we
appear that the clean up is
going to take and it can be
pushed up we can require to
provide additional moneys
because we don't want to clean
this up on the stage down right
this needs to be the operator
that desert
under under the bill we began
evaluating options for further
characterization because as you
heard earlier there's some gaps
and the information until the
very first thing we did is came
up with a work plan hired a
contractor jacob's engineering
not to do the entire thing for
us but to go out and begin I
valuating the site looking at
gaps figured out how we need to
fill in those gaps and the
beginning to do some modeling
because it's not enough to know
what's there you gotta figure
out where it's going to go based
on groundwater flow conditions
and things are that nature so
that's a part of it
they began looking at the
existing discharge permit.
They began looking at
everything associated with him
and we're talking actually out
on the ground on the site.
It looking at all the historical
information everything else they
reviewed past ground water data
inspected the site for potential
contamination sources if your in
family or with real estate this
is basically a phase one
environmental assessment right
you are looking for potential
issues and then from there we
made a determination that we
needed wells upstream and down
and senator charlie talked about
the background peace that is
critical for a couple of reasons
number one
you know you want to be fair
with people and you don't want
somebody being forced to clean
up contamination that's not
coming from their site also we
want to know if we've got
contamination coming from
somewhere else we want to know
that right because I want to go
we're going to go figure out
where that's coming from and
deal with it but we are working
to establish it but that
baseline by putting in some of
those above the site to see
what's the ground water looking
like this is coming to right and
then that gives us a solid way
to determine how much impact are
they actually having on the
ground water rank to hold them
accountable for cleaner we asked
to recognize that they were
several sources potential
sources on the site that didn't
have any way to monitor them so
we've actually look at him
there's a picture later on we've
actually already moved forward
and installed
six additional ground water
monitoring wells and we do em
as I I call them nest it okay so
we have two wales that are in
close practice reach each other
you seem in a picture one is a
deep a well with the deeper
screen on a shallow we do it
that way so that there's no
potential for contamination
between those two layers because
of those wales but it gives us a
good capture of what those
conditions are and what's in
that brown water that's
essential to know to determine
what to clean up request what's
the abatement.
What sufficient what's not so we
move forward with doing that
measuring pollution levels to to
track the contamination and
identifying what she actually
occurring background versus
what's associated with the
operations
again the next step was
evaluating clean up assessing
existing efforts and identifying
needed actions developing the
contamination clean up strategy
there are some other portions in
in so to speak to the longer
term thing when it's the site
going to be put back into a
useful condition where could be
something else done with it.
There will be portions of the
same one generating sight that
aren't because for example that
shomway
peace they have to recycle and
pump that water up to a holding
pond at the generating station
so we can't close the holding
pond so long as family has to be
active which means that test be
maintained it has they have that
this charge permit it has to be
inspected they had the entire
thing stays in place and what I
will just tell you in all
honesty is that I can guarantee
that their cost for closures
will continue to go up because
i'm not finding anything that's
getting cheaper these days so we
will be real evaluating to make
sure that funding is there
and then of course part of it is
not only to clean it up but to
prevent spread right maintain it
where it is don't let the
contamination spread while they
bait there
so they completed the gap now
just analysis force in june
jacob's engineering this picture
shows a couple of the monitoring
walls.
And so you'll see larger pipes
in the center of those concrete
slaps that's the actual
monitoring well the four pipes
around each one or to prevent
what quite often happens with
monitoring well so my drives
over it and you lose the world
so we've constructed these in a
manner they're going to be there
a long time best the other piece
came
reinstalled six there will be
more to come
and it takes time you know to
figure out where do you want to
put the eject be strategic
because we're not dealing with
an unlimited amount of money and
at this point the money were
expending is what was
appropriate to us by the
legislature to do this work now
this shows
some of the issues it may be
impacting groundwater this the
red stars that you see or where
those are wells are now located
that we put in
and again likely there's going
to be more as we identify it but
we have issues with historic
fuel space truck wash run off
all those things that you don't
necessarily think about cooling
tower overflows brian
concentration discharges leaking
storage ponds decant basin
discharges ash handling fuel
storage tank decent leaks are
those types of things that are
not necessarily they they didn't
require discharge permit at the
time but if they get on the
ground they have the potential
to impact what's going on so
that's part of the historical
review in part of what will do
is go in and we've also actively
started groundwater and soil
sampling okay
a significant amount of that to
understand the scope the extent
you know contamination you is
you know three dimensional you
gotta know how long how wide and
how deep it is.
And so we're looking at that to
determine the concentrations and
also this helps in determining
how the clean up plan progresses
you want to you want to contain
it and you want to hit the worst
places first right to get the
most bang for the buck
we're looking at this project as
a series of smaller clean apps
right within this bigger process
each one's going to require a
different mechanism to
to deal with it based on the
type of contamination and the
impact of the ground water in
that area.
We are continuing ongoing
collaboration between our state
agencies p and m who's the the
operator are legislators of
course and the community
this is a crucial peace
obviously to to have the
community involved and I will
say
to just to talk about the
discharge permitting process
it's important to note that
under the discharge permits will
be a new permit or whether it be
a renewal
we get the application we have
to public notice the fact that
we've received an application
that we are going to do a draft
discharge permit and then the
public has the opportunity to
come in on that application and
request potentially hearing if
if there's enough public concern
and they're almost always is to
request a hearing then it goes
to the cabinet secretary who
determines whether or not to
hear it or not he has to say at
that point on whether to approve
the permit
guess prove the permit take it
back to groundwater for further
work
regardless of that decision
everybody on both sides of the
table then has the opportunity
to appeal his decision to the wc
who can overturn remand that
decision whatever the case from
their it can be appealed to
the estate core of appeals right
so there's a process and we've
had some go all the way the
state supreme court when you
talk about timeline and so and
i'm paying off some of the
questions you ask earlier so
thanks for that gave me an
opportunity to counterfeil some
holes.
Typically if permit is
uncontested we don't have a lot
of permit in hearings you're
looking at six months to a year
to take issue that permanent you
can have a permanent and we've
had some that have gone as long
as ten or twelve years because
of litigation and things like
that now that's typically not a
new permit that's generally one
that's in place that we're
having to allow them to operate
while we add additional things
to deal with public concerns
but.
I say that so that everybody
understands it with his
discharge permits again under
those ground water rigs and the
water quality act there's a
significant amount of
opportunity for public
involvement we go out looking
for it and opportunities for the
public to to interact and have a
say in permit it's very crucial
what we do.
This is just a quick review of
what we've done we have public
meetings in february twenty five
to talk about public concerns
that were raised we opened a
public comment window from
february to june we've got
another public meeting come and
july or august and leaning
towards august the way things
are going at this point
and then there is information
available on our on our round
water website with a code
because i've got younger staff
in their big on doing that kind
of stuff now
but we've also provided you like
I say in your hand out you have
the actual report that we did we
are not done by any means we are
the trainer's movement forward
rapidly but we continued to work
with our contractor and continue
to do the groundwater monitoring
in sampling.
Of the funding that was
allocated to us we have about a
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars left as of uh
june thirtieth of twenty five so
we're working with that that's
being used now to have our staff
go out and do the monitoring the
sampling things that that nature
but.
Realistically just so you all
are aware for us to move their
send to the next phase to
continue this work there's going
to need to be additional funding
to the department but we're also
going to be turned around going
back to pn and part of what
we're doing is telling him you
you need to do this this this on
your neckle but we have to
oversee that so.
That's in play I don't think the
large amount is going to
necessarily be there but there
will be if you will maintenance
cost associated with this as we
go forward and again
some of these discourage permits
at least the shamway permits
going to be around for years to
come
up with the others they may be
able to close out and and take
care of any of the
close amount to our
specifications they do any
available we are sign along with
that and it's all done then and
only then do we release that
funding we hold that financial
assurance so if they suddenly go
to front
the money is there for estate
and go in and complete that
clean up without spend in state
dollars to do it
and with that happy to answer
any questions.
Uh
sorry mr cheer steinborn
no I mean john it hit all the
high points we did make a.
Three d model of all the data
that we have in between the
discharge permits and our new
data from our new wells that
were shown so we do have a
ok well network at this time
but of course there's gonna be
more coming down the road we do
have initial data for the six
new monday whilst that we
drilled we were trying to drill
et however to them in the deeper
aquafur came back dry so we had
to plug in abandoned those but
yeah we we do also that's one
aspect that I wanted to hit on
is we do have a treaty model of
not only the thology below the
site but then also continues
throughout the years so then
tired out assets in that model
and we can actually do a time
lapse and see how
concentrations move and shift
throughout the years so would
you tell us your name again i'm
sorry cheer chairman stimeboard
sorry this is my first time
doing this sort of thing so oh
my name is paul chamberland with
grand water quality bureau
welcome is your first
legislature yes you're doing
great thank you
all right you're right and heard
with one of the most experienced
veterans are the circuit that
exists
if a good gaza I learn from
learner from son all right okay
committee
questions
i've got some questions so
or apologize I wanted to go will
start with you sediolo person
at all
you can as first at it doesn't
matter
all right
real quick will i'll keep it
real quick so good
so
it's great that the legislature
appropriate and what was it
happening
three hundred thousand
cherished my more and I think
the total was in the
neighborhood of.
About nine hundred thousand
split between them I think I
share that
there was little more than
actually was
four hundred thousand so share
that's great it's great that we
get this and could you say
this year club is really
involved in that and kudos to
them for paying an attention to
this issue back
but my question is I think
someone could look at this and
go
why is it pn paying the cost of
this where we haven't afflict
the bell to study cleaning up
their mess and why is that.
German and comma that's an
excellent question and the
answer is we wanted to get this
thing rolling quickly and so
this allowed us to avoid
potential litigation to get this
ball rolling I will tell you
that as we've mentioned there's
additional monitoring what else
we're going to require those
will be installed at pm cost the
amendment will be installed a
penium cast and we very likely
when it's all said and down may
go back and try and recoup costs
there have been expenditure
exchange yeah I mean you
mentioned that there is a
limited universal fine centers
we know with clean up you've got
a spend what it takes to assess
a problem and if this is that
significant of a technical
challenge to figure out
I think it's a little rough if
there's money there I think
maybe wrong to go the the
taxpayers and say we've got a
appropriate money so that we can
clean up their mass and protect
new mexicans from the mast they
created we need be going to them
and saying okay we need a
million dollars right a check
and spend what it takes to this
assessment
I I really believe that and I I
think there on the hook for that
money that ought to be our
approach but I understand what
you're saying speed is important
I think we've already invested a
lot of money like we put in a
significant car share any
getting this process started by
that's my feeling about it less
there's a good reason why we
shouldn't be taken out approach
the other thing is so as far as
like the remediation part of it
and continued assessment work is
there a bond there or what's the
financial mechanism where we
have a reservoir money from them
to continue to do this
assessment hand we have to go
and ask them for that money or
is there a bonds.
Thank you for that question a
chairman steinborn
really good question
I don't want to sure hand white
year but pn will be entering the
program that I work under those
state clean up program and in
that program we do enforce the
water quality act in any
regulations that we can enforce
under under the act and there is
a provision for financial
assurance and and also
remediation oversight fees and
things of that nature
and then also going back to uh
the previous common about you
know why why is it pn paying for
all the spread out gain and and
and you touched on it very
eloquently time is of the
essence but we're doing a very
robust status that for this even
more so than what's required
under discharge permits we
presented a list of all the
discharges that we're aware of
in all the issues so we're
having uhm
lies for a uranium radio to
twenty six to twenty eight fault
organic semi volta or again next
the list
list goes on and on and the more
of those exceedences that we can
prove the deeper we can get our
hooks into them
thank you sounds like
based on the summary of the work
you've done like paying a pretty
pretty extensive environmental
issue here of contamination and
threats is that accurate.
Yes it is
cherished in born this is a
complicated site and it's an old
site which means that a lot of
the things that went on weren't
an issue when they were first
done and so this is a matter of
understanding and going back on
that it is very complicated
later on issues
you know back to the question of
how is the financial assurance
held in this case first let me
say that premium is being very
cooperative and working well
with us so kudos to them for
that
there is portions of this that's
hailed under insurance through
through environmental insurance
policies that name the status
there the receivers
when we had and we hold steps
sometimes as bands what we
required to do is go to court
and file to get that finding
released to ask those gregors or
built in and to go and as I say
we are rapidly transitioning
this facility to the next phase
of the program is political so
that we can move forward but it
important to note that right now
pm is is being a good partner
well that's good and I encourage
him to continue being a good
partner
cause you know we're just
getting into this it sounds like
it is gonna be a lot more funny
needed and they're going to need
to write that check all right so
senator city low past
thank you mr chair
I really appreciate the the
report
there are a couple of things I
noticed that on the report did
you gave us on page six
the the concerns you have about
the the the changes to the
ground ground water flow
patterns seemed a lot more
significant than were presented
this morning
I I just want to hear a little
bit of a more detail about th.
Just in born and senator happy
to talk about that I think part
of it speaks to the fact that we
deal with the water side of it
versus mining the minerals who
doesn't in as as paul said we
have
moved forward to do a study to
help us understand what's
happening sub surface and how
that has changed and is changing
over time because it's certainly
dex and that's a crucial to to
understand where you need to
invest to do that the clean up
to do to hold that contamination
so
it it's real crucial and like I
say over the years that that
data wasn't developed but we're
likely science and allows us to
go back in fill in those blanks
so and we're trying to do again
with additional well so that
were not making a lot of
assumptions we like to work
solely from facts you know so
why were investing that time to
do that
thank you mister chair and the
other question
I really appreciate
the connection of the the
contaminant and the public
health impact the environmental
or the public health impact I
think that's very important have
you done studies or is that
planned for future studies to
see whether the population
near the nearby population has
been affected by these
detrimental health impacts
line born and senator so those
studies at this point you know
there have been a few done over
the years primarily dealing more
with their quality than the
water quality
um those are something that were
done with us epa because when it
was operational as facility was
permitted to under the clean air
act by epa resident the state.
There was not there was some
impact that I understand
identified and
don't have the specifics in
front of me but
not out of keeping with what
they saw other places with call
fired plants now I will just
take that gets me on a soap box
because i'm there is no
acceptable amount of impact as
far as i'm concerned to the
public
and so is there a need for
further studies going forward I
think so
we don't have defining and
mechanism in house to do that
but what we will have is we do
the next phase of the report
again this is not a one and then
will be back in a year with
around two report.
And we anticipate that there
will be recommendations coming
out of that it will need to talk
about
with the legislature and with
department house do these
studies need to be done you know
where do they need to be done
what's the impact but right now
the key is to get her arms
around the contamination and
control it so that it doesn't go
any further than it is right now
and
determine how it needs to be
cleaned up and how quickly that
can be done
thank you manager I think that
that's really important and I
think that some data may exist
cause I have seen
some data
and I think it was from the
department help but maybe you're
right it might have been the epa
charting the mapping some of
these health impacts based on
the air quality and so I think
you know when I looked at these
kinds of things that the
bit the desert is all the solids
and the other contaminants can
can do some of my more serious
than the air quality I mean with
them of course cancer is very
seriously measured cancer but
they also measured asthma and
other other things but this you
know neurological disorders
respiratory affects potential
carcentages you know this is
very significant and I think
that we continually need to
monitor that because one of the
things we haven't seen is
sufficient analysis of the
impact these contaminates have
on the residents the nearby
residents and we consistently
see residents opposing them
stating these impacts but then
we say what we don't have data
well why don't we have data
cause we haven't collected the
data and so I I appreciate that
and like I said it really
appreciate this for report and
i'm looking forward to round too
and I really appreciate the pm
is has been such a good partner
in this one thing is I was
assured by p and.
Has that that
these commitments that are being
made now and
and the liability responsibility
would continue
even if the sale of pm
goes forward
have they made the same
assurances to you
and are there ways of making
sure that any any subsequent
owner of the company is bound by
these requirements.
Need some more push and buttons
for me I guess madam during
senator while i've not had those
conversations personally we deal
with this all the time and so
when a discharge permit is in
place on facility and that
facility changes hands that
triggers the new process for the
new percentage to enter into a
new discharge permit which we
will upgrade is necessary at
that time so there's there's the
assurance based on our laws are
state laws that requires that to
happen in move forward thank you
I appreciate that and III want
to believe that they're adequate
but if they're any concerns
about that please please let us
know because
for obvious reasons it's really
important that the subsequent
phone the subsequent
owners continue being good
partners.
Thank you manager
thank you are there any other
questions from the committee
thank you very much for
appreciate your time and
representation thank you manager
next we have
the federal radiation exposure
compensation act resurrected but
it happens now
this tina court of a esco
founder of the two service and
downwinders consortium.
Yeah.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee sir it's a
pleasure to be with you
I don't know how many times i've
been here before today
I think i've interact with
interacted with most of you who
are on the committee but it's a
good day in new mexico because
we can finally celebrate
what i'm calling a crack in the
damn
not maybe the best analogy with
what's happening these days with
flooding all across our country
but hopefully there will be a
flood of additional benefits
that will come to us as a result
of the passage of the radiation
exposure compensation act
amendments in the side of the
reconciliation bill that was
recently passed in congress I
have with me today my colleague
and another downwinder from the
state of new mexico burning
skutih burnishes on our steering
committee and when I introduced
brings I always say this she was
born eight days before the bomb
in a community thirty five miles
away from the trinity test site
in cutty sources she's one of
the babies that survived that
summer
the the history of this is that
we had thousands of babies die
across new mexico that summer
after the bomb was debated and
no one has ever taken a look at
that until now bernie suspend
ours and hours looking at all
the death certificates that are
available for babies that died
under the age of one in those
months after trinity and what
she has found is staggering
this is something that deserves
further evaluation not just by
our organization a group of
volunteers but potentially by
the state of new mexico so that
we can better understand this
history and address what that
actually has meant for us
I often say that we've traveled
all across new mexico and we
visited with.
People in all the communities
and while we don't know of
anybody that died the day of
trinity we know it was the
beginning of the end for tens of
thousands of people and we've
documented many of those people
we've documented their families
and it was definitely the end
for those babies who died that
summer
obviously that's taken place for
eighty years now without
acknowledgment or assistance on
behalf of our government and so
those babies will not qualify
for any kind of coverage their
families will not qualify for
any type of coverage do the
radiation exposure compensation
act but we know that tens of
thousands of other people
absolutely will my goal today is
to sort of go through what what
it means to have passed this
bill and let me start out by
saying there's a horrible type
of that I didn't notice until I
got here the qualifying period
is one year you have to prove
that you lived for one year in
new mexico between nineteen
forty four in nineteen sixty two
pardon the mistake I just want
to clarify that before we get
into the report
so the bill was passed it's been
signed into law
basically what is going to
happen now is that we will be
given a two year extension to
the current radiation exposure
compensation act that to your
extension will will extend to
everybody in the state of new
mexico there's a misconception
about who was affected when the
bomb was debt needed at trinity
some people think oh it was just
those people who lived in the
surrounding area we've been
working with a science science
test at princeton university as
name is sebastian for leap
sebastian has used today's
technology and a forty thousand
dollar computer along with
weather data that we keep and he
has reconstructed the blast at
trinity and what we know now is
that the blast.
Actually heavily radiated the
state in new mexico and a
radiated forty five other states
canada and mexico
he has gone on step further and
recreated all the blasts that
took place at novada there was a
total that ninety three of
ninety three that actually debt
needed
we had monitoring stations in
new mexico during the time that
they were testing in the router
we already knew that new mexico
was down wind of divour but what
we know now from his findings is
that if you take the ninety four
total above ground tests one in
new mexico ninety three in
novator new mexico is the second
most irradiated state in the
country during our testing but
not surprising considering the
amount of radioactive material
that felt from the sky after
trinity those findings will be
be released very soon is in the
middle of pure review
fully supported by principle
university it will be minumental
to have this information
available to us
the addition of us into rica
while very arbitrary
actually will be supported by
science for the first time ever
so we're really proud to be able
to work on this project and to
have been a part of the project
one of the things I said to
sebastian from the beginning is
that a blast like this is not
static it doesn't happen and end
the same day that there's
fallout that essentially lasts
for days afterwards and then
above and beyond that and I hope
that everybody will understand
this the radioactive isa tops
that are released by a blast
like that have exceedingly long
half lives in the case of
platonium it has a half life of
twenty four thousand years in
the case of stranger that we
take up in our bones it has a
half life of thirty five years
so imagine that thirty five
years after the trinity blast
there was still strange human
or.
Environment radiating
anyone who came in contact with
it not a static event
so the new coverage will extend
to anybody who can prove that
they lived in new mexico from
nineteen forty four through
nineteen sixty two forty four
was established because that's
when ly salamos first started
testing radioactive lantherman
and we were being exposed to
radiation at the beginning of
those tests it extends through
nineteen sixty two when they did
the last above ground test at
nabada again does not go far
enough but it's the beginning
it's that crack in the damn that
I discussed family members will
be able to apply on decision on
behalf of deceased loved ones as
long as they meet the rest of
the criteria there are
essentially nineteen radio
genetic cancers that it covers
it's it's I try to describe it
this way it's all the cancers it
would be associated with
ingesting radiation absorbing
radiation or inhaling radiation
the coverage will increase from
fifty thousand to one hundred
thousand a one time payment
the iranian workers will now
the coverage for uranium workers
will now extend past nineteen
seventy one through nineteen
ninety two very grateful for
that they will receive health
care coverage downwinders will
not the health care coverage was
taken out during the
negotiations that senator holly
had to have to reduce the budget
for this.
We know that it's going to be a
difficult process i'm gonna get
to how the state can help us in
that process at the end
I mentioned that the
uranium workers will now be
included that mind between
nineteen seventy one in nineteen
ninety two they do receive
medical coverage and they can
actually qualify for up to four
hundred thousand dollars in
reparations we're very very
happy for that but what did it
leave out it left out like I
said the healthcare coverage and
it left out great parts of the
american west in guam that were
asked to expose during the
testing that princed in study
will actually help us to go for
coverage for the people who
lived in places like montana all
of all of nevada all of arizona
colorado all places that were
radiated during the testing that
took place in nevada the two
year extension will not be long
enough
but but once you open the door
to communities like hours it's
always incumbent upon congress
to continue to extend the
program when they realize that
the claims
are indeed high enough that they
need to continue the program
they also by the way we'll
continue to find it if the funds
run lowit's interesting but in
the history of rica the thirty
five year history of rica there
was a time when the federal
government was issuing io use to
people who qualified and then
eventually they paid up when
congress
reauthorized funding
so
here's the thing that we believe
is going to be necessary
to assist the people of new
mexico in enrolling in the
program and receiving all these
benefits that are there are
going to become available we
need to have trained individuals
in communities all across the
state.
Who understand the application
process we need to have full
cooperation from state agencies
and government agencies who will
hold documentation it's going to
be necessary imagine if you were
born in I don't know nineteen
fifty nine and i'm gonna use
that as an example
proving that you lived here for
one year could be pretty
difficult you're going to need
immunization records
potentially
some people who were at the time
adults might need a voters
record they might need a tax
record we're going to need
cooperation from state agencies
and government agencies to make
sure we can access
those that doubt of that
documentation without any
incumbents
the second thing is
having people trained in
communities
will keep the bad actors out we
already know because we've seen
an example of this with the
fires when there are funds that
are available bad actors come in
and let me tell you i've been
told by my colleagues at logon a
pueblo that there are already
people going door to door in
lagoona and asking people to
sign up with them as they're
claim
expert and i've heard that
people have already given des
certificates burst certificates
and source of security cards to
people now do we know whether
these people are legitimate and
not somebody that's just trying
to still somebody's identity no
we don't and so we have got to
get the word out that there are
legitimate
there are legitimate entities it
will help but above and beyond
that that kind of help is not
necessary because you have to
pay a fee for that and the way
this gets set up through the
federal government is that if
you hire an attorney or an
organization to represent you
that the claim cha.
Goes to that entity that entity
then deducts their fees and
you're out the mercy of them
eventually issuing you your
claim
not a good way to process things
when this can be a very simple
application process so when i'm
saying is first of all the doj
is not set up yet to receive
claims just yesterday I met with
senator luhan his office along
with senator crapos office out
of idaho has petitioned the
department of justice to open up
the claims price s to those of
us who are uranium workers
because that programs in place
and has been operating and down
windows they're having to create
an all new program for those
people who are affected as
those who lived close to a
nuclear dump site as is the case
in missouri so there is no
reason why we can't just move
forward with new downwinder
claims because they've been
processing them and new uranium
claims because they've been
prossing press processing them
but doj has not opened up the
claims process so I want to make
sure everybody understands that
and if you can show that
information through social media
or any other mechanism it would
be helpful we're obviously
sharing that information
the other thing is i'm hoping
that.
State government will realize
the benefit of supporting this
kind of training and outreach in
our state because i'm just going
to give you a very quick example
if we just register one thousand
people if we could just get one
thousand people into the program
that's one hundred million
dollars and I can tell you that
we have over fifteen hundred
health service that not only
document those people's cancers
but their families cancers those
numbers grow very very very
rapidly and we know that there's
going to be tens of thousands of
claims and by the way the
congressional budget office the
cbo has said that they believe
billions of dollars in claims
will be adjudicated in new
mexico
so this program has the
potential for bringing much
needed resources back to people
who have not had them before
they can use those resources for
a variety of things
they will likely use some of
that to address medical needs
because we all know and we know
because we've been health
surveying people for the better
part of eighteen years that a
lot of people use medicaid to
access health care when they're
downwinders when they can work
no longer and they don't have
access to their insurance you
there you know they're
important from their employer
then a lot of times their
private house insurance is lost
and they depend on medicaid
so we are going to look to our
state government to help us find
the funds to get people trained
and put into communities I
already have people contacting
me about all of this about the
claims process I have people
contacting me because they want
to learn how to do it and
implement it in their
communities so weeny and we need
to act fast because I don't want
people to become disappointed
that's going to happen in
everybody's going to have to
become patient.
The other thing I want to do
today is I want to talk about
very quickly the eightieth
anniversary is next week of the
truty one and through the
amazing work of vice chair
ferrari
for the first time ever all
coming together at the same time
a state acknowledgment and a
federal acknowledgment there's
going to be this big beautiful
same place out at the starting
gate enter institution
vice chair ferrari and I have
been working on this for a while
without her leadership and her
push in the state legislature it
would not have happened we're
gonna have the sign there that
will tell the history of how the
people of new mexico were
enlisted into the service of
this project without consent
your knowledge and how we've
been dying ever since and I
mentioned recently when I was at
an event and leg and I hope that
senator charlie will also do the
same thing for the communities
of looking at acama and have
markers place there that
acknowledge the uranium workers
and the way that they were
sacrificed as well these are
hard histories in our state but
their histories that need to be
told when we were out there this
week and they placed the same
you know the thing that it would
it was it was emotional for me
and I will say that I thought to
myself my great great
grandchildren will pass through
here some day and they will see
that sign and they will know
that their family was a part of
the enlistment into this project
so these kinds of things are
important and they're important
for the healing process please
join us with a sign dedication
at eleven am
it is a little remote it's
twelve miles east of sounding
torn you're off highway three
eighty the department of
transportation has been gracious
enough to take a can and pre out
there chairs podium microphone
water.
We're gonna have
police officers there to control
traffic it's gonna be a
beautiful event and I hope that
all of you will be able to join
us and then aside from that in
tulorosa in the evening this
will be historic at the urging
of archbishop western all three
bishops will be in tourist at st
francis do powell catholic
church for a mass bishop walls
from gallopish baldikino from
los cruces and archbishop
western we're gonna have of a
mouse we're going to feed
everybody afterwards and then
we're gonna hold our sixteenth
annual candidate vigil
those vigils are beautiful
tribute we like limit audios
with the names of our deceased
loved ones will have over a
thousand of them this year we
have a contingency coming from
the good publo they're doing
their own limit audience to add
to our event
we read each name it gives us an
opportunity to recognize our you
know our lost loved ones I
always said that if no one else
is going to recognize them at
least one one day a year we're
going to say their names outloud
so they're never forgotten.
I also have included in the
packets disbeautiful magazine
that the producer of the film is
now distributing we have this
wonderful documentary about the
new mexico downwinders they're
actually scrambling to make a
new ending who would have
thought that we're going to
finally have a good ending
anyway they're scrambling to
make a new ending the film is
winning awards all across the
country at film festivals
film critics are giving it very
high marks but we don't have
distribution in a state like new
mexico where the film industry
is huge you invested it's a
shame we give tax credits to
these organizations they come
here they take full advantage of
everything we have to offer our
great vistas are ready work
force and i'm not i'm not
criticising because my brother
works in that industry it makes
a very good living working in
that industry but when i've been
him or one the academy award for
cinematography they didn't even
say new mexico they would have
never won that award without our
beautiful landscapes investors
this picks up were up and himer
leaves off this is the story of
what happened to the people of
new mexico this is the most
important part of the story to
those of us who are new mexicans
and so if any of you have any
ideas how we can just get in
front of netflix or nbc
universal they have an
investment here or any of the
other studios just get in front
of them I want them to see the
film and tell us it's not worthy
of a streaming contract when a
film winds a words at at film
festivals received standing
ovations when they have to add
additional screenings because
people are upset that they
haven't had an opportunity to
see it the film is worthy of a
streaming contract and it's also
important right now because it's
the eightieth anniversary of
trinity and we're in the middle
of a nuclear arms race again
there's talks of of starting up
testing again.
There are no safe ways to test
nuclear devices and we're the
eighty year old history of that
so
with that I think i'll end i've
said so much if anybody has any
questions i'm glad to answer
them I can't even begin to tell
you all how great for we are for
this recent turn of events but
we're also incredibly grateful
because we've always received
amazing support out of this
committee and out of our entire
state legislature when other
people that we work with in
places like idaho and you talk
can't get the attention of their
state legislators we have always
had the most amazing support and
from the governor and for that
we are forever grateful
thank you and bernie did you
want to add anything.
Not really other than
it's amazing i'm still kind of
been a shock that we finally
finally received compensation
unfortunately it's scott
shortcomings cause it's not long
enough and it cut out the health
care which is one of the most
important facets of the belt
that was needed and we've got
work to do and we'll continue
working to to achieve that.
Thank you so much for all of
your efforts and
your consortium has worked so
hard for so many years we have
questions senator city locust
and then represent block
thank you madame chair I first
want to thank you to know in all
the members of the consortium
bernies everyone because
you did it you did you know I
know it's not complete but like
you said you're you open that
crack so i'm just really so
excited for you and in happy and
grateful there was a little
silver lining in that nightmare
bill
and so I also had a couple of
questions I remember
and this is when I first got
into the legislature having a
discussion about you had
problems accessing the data
how are you able to get the data
and do we need to do anything so
that we can ensure that this
doesn't happen again.
We never received the data you
didn't remember it okay so mary
were able to access the
information for eight counties
so that was when I started
looking into the the church
records but the church records
it's only for the catholics
and so it's not it's not a
complete daily even though I
have lots and lots of pages are
babies that died I mean lots of
pages so it was that year that
disappeared because that I
remember writing an email to the
architects people saying what's
going on with them and it wasn't
for lack of trying we've tried
every avenue that we could think
of and we've never been able to
access the information
and is it that the data doesn't
exist or they must it or what is
the I mean that's what it was
not clear when when we were
discussing it very early I was
not you know they kept saying
what we don't have it is like
how could you have a gear
missing that didn't make sense
while the library had it but the
information is so blurry you
can't make it out
we were told I don't have any
way of proving it but we were
told that the information
doesn't exist there anymore that
someone took it I think that's
what they said yes
chairman from singer several
opens what we need to have
happen is we need for somebody
who's familiar with the state
archives prices to take a look
at the information that exists
for nineteen forty five specific
specifically desert to figure if
we can just access them we can
then evaluate because we just
have to look for those eight
counties we don't have to look
at all of it we have the rest of
the data but we need those eight
counties and we're we're glad to
do the research if we can access
but we have never been able to
gain access it's really
interesting because there was
one woman who was app.
The email or just that work
there and she was very incurred
in the beginning and then we
couldn't she wouldn't return
phone calls or emails was like
did mono have anything to do
with it anymore it makes this
very suspicious because we've
also been told that that whole
year of records is gone and so
if that is indeed true then we
also need to find out why why
why were those records removed
that's state you know guarded
information should never have
been removed if there is any
help that anyone can give to us
will be glad to do the
investigation if we could just
access
thank you and remember all I did
was a little email because you
know whatever and I didn't get a
satisfactory response
I hope that we can move forward
and I hate to save this but
the demand law school said this
to me went just because your
paranoid doesn't mean they're
not out to get you
so hold I hope I hope we can get
it and I hope that nobody did
take it in that that it's just
lost or something that does turn
up because it is very important
data
to think of all the thousands of
babysit down and I know babies
died in nineteen forty five at a
higher rate than they do now but
was it even worse and it tell
you telling me that yes it was
and that I think alone is is
reason for being included in
rica can I can I just say one of
the thing please we also have
available to us and amazing
resource right now there is a
gentleman his name's doctor
joseph shonker he worked on the
ten year loss almost historic
document retrieval in assessment
project he has moved from
georgia to new mexico because
his daughter is a professor at
unam anyone's to be close to the
ground babies here is now here
available to help us with the
evaluation and ready to go he
too has not been able to access
the records he's a foremost
authority and could be
invaluable he's retired will
give us time to it.
We just need to have access
the paranoid piece of me just
wonders if there was state
complicity and that you know
back then and that's just again
you know just because your
paranoid doesn't either know
to get
them the second question the
specific cancers that are listed
the nineteen cancers
how did they identify the list
of of their counters what kind
of date what kind of medical
data did they have because the
follow also affected the soil so
it was not just breathing this
stuff it was also probably
you know continuing continuing
contamination
chairman first your chair and it
madame chair whoever had
membership center several opers
when they established record in
nineteen ninety they just
randomly chose some cancers that
they believe to be radiogenic we
now know that there are other
cancers that should be added
that will be part of our
continuing fight as an example
prostate cancer is not included
it absolutely should be included
the list needs to be further
expanded and we were working on
that we actually had asked and
in the original bill that passed
in the us senate last year they
had added some additional
cancers but in this bill they
were not kept in so that's
another part of this fight we we
would like to have whatever
further expansion takes place we
would like for that to take
place based on science not some
randomness and so we will
continue to fight we will
continue to ask experts to
educate so that we can get
additional cancers added but you
are right it's you know it's you
are absolutely right it is
lacking
income being in being complete
yes yeah that the data to to
support it and I hope we can
get that fix as you know new
mexico has one of the highest
cancer rates in the country.
The ignore their badless that
we're on
this I think is another
indication of why thank you very
much madam chair and i'm just
so happy and thrilled for you
and with that there's still a
lot of work to do thank you
thank you represented block
thank you madame chair and thank
you both for being here and it's
being a hard fight for both of
you and I really appreciate you
for sticking it out and i'm
grateful for the president i'm
grateful for congress the people
who voted for the bill because
there's just so important to
pass it across the finish line
and yes of course you know
congress it's never perfect but
i'm glad that we at least have
two years I mean that's
something so
I was taken aback a little bit
about some concern that you had
regarding potential fraud in
these claims and that's
something that I am just like I
can't imagine being a person who
wants to defraud a down window
about the god awful things you
could do to somebody that so i'm
just wondering have you spoken
to the department of justice
here in the state of new mexico
and the attorney general to
maybe be on the look out for
be a little more
on the look out for any kinds of
potential fraud that could occur
chairman ferrari and
representative block yesterday
in the conversation that I had
with senator loupon he was going
to talk to the attorney general
because he said that in the past
the attorney general has had to
intervene when we had bad actors
coming here after the fires and
so once he heard that we already
have people on the ground trying
to defraud others he said I
think it's time for us to reach
out the attorney general and let
him know he needs to issue the
same sort of warning and so will
stay on top of that but yes
absolutely we're gonna have to
have the engagement of
their office to at least put
some sort of warning out there
in the public view.
And thank you so much for madam
chair and thank you for both
both of you for that and so I
guess my my next question is
just gonna be about
implementation
I know that we we need all these
documents to prove that the
person lived there for a year so
i'm just wondering are we
building kind of a consortium of
people right now or a group to
start getting information out to
these communities so that they
understand what they need their
their ready excitement to the
dmv we all have our mv and it's
just it's total heck you know
it's it's horrifying and they're
like oh you you missed one
document you can't get your your
new id so i'm just wondering how
can we as a state as this local
communities to get this
information to people so that
they're ready they're going to
get the information to the
federal government it gets
approved doesn't get kicked back
two times and then by the end of
their cycle it's done two years
is gone because two years is
very very quick as you've been
fighting for years and years and
years you know how quickly time
passes so i'm just wondering
what kind of things can we do is
a legislature to assist those
people to get the information on
the ground to get the
compensation as soon as possible
chairman ferrari representative
block I think the first thing we
need to do is start having
discussions around how do we
you know how do we set aside the
resources so that we can train
people and get them on the
ground to do number one research
in finding the information that
we need and number two and
helping people fill out these
applications I will tell you
that the way the program is set
up
if you file three applications
that are rejected you don't get
an opportunity to file fourth so
it's very important and the way
it has worked in the iranian
mining communities is that they
will not use an attorney or an
organization to represent them
and they'll fail two claims and
if they get two rejections then
they go find an attorney.
That they know has success in
filing claims and we have some
of those attorneys already in
new mexico that had been filing
claims successfully and know
exactly how to get it done so we
need resources we're volunteer
organization I mean every now
and then we'll get a check in
the mail from somebody for fifty
dollars and we're excited about
it because it keeps us having
the opportunity to print stuff
and you know and and going to
communities and do the work that
we do but we need to set up
you know I but i'd love to see
how happened is if we could
actually start some committee
work to develop a structure for
how we how we do this it has to
be more structured I
I can't do it I own a business
as a maria factor's time
burnings I get to see martinez
hall
and the other the whole right
here that my company just re
roofed and haven't even been
here because i'm so busy with
this work I can't do it we can't
do it as volunteers we have to
have a structured approach to
how we're going to do this we
need to train volunteers get him
into communities and we need to
file as many claims as quickly
as possible and we're gonna have
to look to our government to
assist with that or if there's a
foundation out there that you
office would support something
like this i'm all ears it's just
that we can't do it as
volunteers were we just don't
have the resources or though the
bandwidth
thank you madame thank you for
that and I know it's difficult
to get funding for anything
honestly I mean even if you gave
away free puppies people
wouldn't even come you know
sometimes so it's it's just a
it's a conundrum but you know my
office I just have one assistant
but it's better than a couple of
years ago where we had zero
assistance so if they want to
contact me I will do whatever I
can to get in contact with
whatever federal partners we
have so that's on the website I
give that out to my constituents
who are indeed downwinders so.
Yeah please just send people my
way and i'm sure other
legislators on on this panel
will be more than happy to to
help coordinate because more
eyeballs on these forms even if
we are not experts on how to
fill them out it's good at least
have double checks just in case
there is a typo or something or
a missing document so I just
would definitely tell people to
go to the legislative website
and call your legislator they
probably can help you I know
i'll try my best but thank you
both and I think that the fight
is still ahead of us we still
need to continue to expand but
we got her foot in that crack in
the door and I think that was
what it's going to take to get
this across the finish line so
thank you both and god bless you
from your work and keep it up
thank minimiter
thank you sender steinborn
madame chair
tina bernies I think we should
all give you guys around the
plaster of the travel.
What an epic win
really and I know all the other
issues involved in the bill or
whatever what in epic went in
the legislative process you take
that win where you can get it
and could us to senator holly I
don't you know kudos to our
delegation whoever was involved
behind the scenes but I know
center holly was really out
there and but to you teenager
bernie said not all the
downwinders I mean my hats go
off to you
for your tireless lifelong
commitment to getting just.
You know it's just so amazing
sometimes with these battles you
you honestly doubt whether you
ever will win right sometimes
but you just never gave up and
sure enough you pulled it out
and
not a day too late
so I just want to celebrate you
I mean take this moment to just
bask in your wind here it's just
so incredible and
and yeah you know through the
years i've been here a while but
I know I mean we've been
supporting you in our own little
minor way because you're out
there doing it but but it's
still great to have this
so in terms of action
the chair and I we were talking
about some ideas to maybe trying
to activate government to to
help with his training process
but i'll let her talk about that
you have asked me for a help to
reach out to netflix and I think
I I do have some contacts I mean
I know I don't know the right
contacts or whatever but i'm
sorry it hasn't happened yet but
i'm gonna commit to you now
follow up and
see if you know now it's a good
time I mean it was good time
before been housing a time too
now that this has happened it's
kind of like been legitimized in
a way by congress and its own
way right so maybe they'll be
even more encouraged to do that
at this moment so I will do that
and
yeah I think it's applicant you
as you say we do have more work
to do and but the good news says
is once you get your foot in the
door I think it was wrong on the
reagan who said the closest
thing to eternal life is a
government program sorry to say
that I know I hate that because
that the flip the other way but
truthfully you know what the
history of rica
you know extended an extended I
mean now that you've got new
mexico included in that.
Right you know hopefully once
they see the need and it's just
going to continue to grow in the
door won't close on that
hopefully but you can't take
that for granted we're gonna
have to keep fighting in you'll
be at the spirit about that of
course I can use the word we but
it.
Mary and everyone else so
at all safe for now and just
really proud of you and appreci.
Thank you again and some of the
other ideas we had to enlist
people to help with the
applications those applications
first of all they go to federal
doj is that correct so our ideas
to check with department of
health and also work for
solutions to see if they can be
trained to help people
we might even as a
representative black was talking
about as his legislators in our
assistance to also be trained on
how to do that
and then also
I think we should have if you
think this is a good idea a
house memorial for a study by do
each on the infant were
retaliate and take what you've
been able to the information the
data and see what we can do to
get more validation from the
state and be able to use that in
maybe the next steps
also
let's see
our tobacco settlement committee
met last week at
this week was monday it was
monday all last week
at a unm cancer center and
their director missed yoli
sanchez she said that people who
aren't covered by even medicare
or medicaid
can get assistance from them so
we might check to see you know
for free and so let's make that
connection for a lot of people
because of the health care being
left out
and people might already be
going there but how we can
improve and get that assistance
for maybe even.
Even travel reimbursement and
things like that
and then
senator charlie if you would
like I can help you with a
memorial for the uranium mind
workers recognition we learned a
lot in one committee at
transportation committee and
then also through this process
so
i'd be glad to help you with
that okay and was there anything
else you'd like to add.
I would like to thank you by his
chair ferrari the memorial is
beautiful we went and saw them
put it up they let us paint the
post and got pin all over but
that was okay
but it's thank you so much it's
beautiful I can't wait to see it
wednesday when we have the
formal dedication then you know
our colleagues can attend that
would be terrific
thank you
I were able to be there
and chairman for a chairman
steinborn I I just want to
have follow up to something that
you said
this took an amazing effort in
congress and we are very
grateful for the work that
senator holly did it hasn't
heard us that his wife is from
new mexico
from the day that I met him he
said that to me and she had a
lived experience with all of
this and so I think it was very
helpful to us I think that's one
of the reasons that we were
included in the final negotiated
bill but I also want to say
that senator louhen has been
working on this for more than
ten years representative lead
your fernandes is been working
on this for more than four years
all of them representative of
vascust representatives are
stansbury sender heinrick if not
for them keeping this effort
alive in congress and out there
in front of people in congress
amongst the leadership and and
all the other members that would
listen enjoying with them
because it it started out
fifteen years we've had bills
introduced and last year was the
first time we ever had a vote on
the bill fifteen years
but they kept this out in view
of congress and every chance
that they got they put this out
in front of them.
And so without their willingness
to be real champions we've never
made it to the finish lane
we're so very grateful for
everything that they've done and
you know
we just know that we wouldn't be
here today with this celebrating
this win if not and we will
forever be grateful for senator
holly because he brought along
the republican support that we
needed and it was essential and
so we take the wind like I said
and we recognize its a crack in
the damn and we continue to move
forward to work very very hard
so that we someday have the
health care coverage that's very
necessarily in and needed
and we thank you for the time
today on the agenda always a
pleasure to be here with you
thank you again in
congratulations and we just got
to get paw back to single us
again
he's always ready willing in
available we were just at route
sixty six cause there's a
conference there and they
screamed our film and he played
there but he couldn't come here
because he has a gig this
afternoon
he lose an alberga while he
lives in the east mountains is
it we're going to have a meeting
we extend an invitation form
their creating a music video
with his anthem in an overtill
we win and it's going to be out
there and it's going to be viral
one of these
thank you
thank you.
Absolutely good job vice chair
ferry good job alright
yeah real quick committee when
we take out the minutes real
quick of our first meeting yet
you can take a look and then
after you've had a minute i'll
take a motion to approve those
minutes in
the mid.
I'll take one of soon as well as
someone's ready okay we have a
motive for senator charlie a
second repair vice temporary
anybody opposed to that motion
the minutes are approved
yes exactly
what is.
The.
Yeah absolutely speaking of ab.
Alright
well chairman steinborn and
committee members pleasure to
speak to you again i'll try and
keep it short and suite and
leave time for your questions
was asked to give an update on
what we're doing with the twenty
million dollars that was
appropriate to intermediate for
dealing with
couple items neglected
contaminated sites and abandoned
uranium minds and so i'll start
off you have a hand out that
they're graciously turned into
something we can see on the
screen as well.
Um it is broken out by sight so
there's there's different ones
but i'll start out by saying
that
you know the the twenty million
our goal and and are what we
were directed to do we just get
it spant boots on the ground
this fiscal year and so I took
that as a personal challenge.
And i've said many times that if
you invest the money with any
mean date we're going to invest
it back in your communities on
the ground that's a quickest way
to give it to your constituents
and that's what we're doing with
this so we'll start out the
first one that I want to talk
about is the neglected
contaminated side and when I
talk about these these are
sights both iranian mind and
other types of contaminated
sites where there is not a
responsible party doesn't mean
that there's not a property
owner better but the original.
Perpetrator if you will I hate
to use it term but I will
perpetrator of the contamination
is not there to deal with the
clean it up and so there's not
been a mechanism to deal with
these.
The first site that we're
looking at is a ground water
site in its located ah actually
near bloomfield it's the former
ericss refinery.
And so we took the twenty
million dollars we ear marked a
portion of it to ground water
for cleaning up neglected sights
we took twelve million and and
obligated it for you rainy minds
which will get here shortly and
then in two million of it that
were using through our petrol
and storage tank bureau to deal
with clean ups of abandoned uh
underground storage tanks with
fuel and clean in that app and
we'll talk to those specifically
so the erx refinery again
located in in bloomfield
was operated for years as a
crude oil refinery
approximately from nineteen
thirty two to nineteen sixty the
early sixties a was dismantled
in the eighties we have got soil
contamination both patrolmen
heavy metals
a lot of that has been well
identified with got contaminated
ground water that is limited in
extent depth the groundwater and
this is a problem you see and
these contaminated sites twelve
feet so it doesn't take much for
the contamination to hit the
ground water and from there it
travels
this particular site was looked
at with regard to super fund
there were some honor from wells
installed
back in the
in the nineties to determine
this it did not rise to the
level where it would make the
super fine listing and will side
bar note you know we were
pleased to have a side in alba
kirky listed on the national
priority list that announcement
came out last week
yep and we're excited about that
but we're not excited about is
the fact that now that is listed
when we start talking about
worst money to do the clean up
there's concerns about how
quickly we're going to get
funding to do that so I will
tell you that we are moving
forward with funding that we
have internally within the
department to begin some of the
the clean app dealing with
somebody me contamination
because.
People are impacted by this and
they will recoup those costs
from the federal government at
some point but
just get a listed doesn't clean
it up that yes is my point in
and this is a different animal
we're now down with courtesy of
the legislature we actually have
the ability to go in and address
the problems
the site was evaluated it's had
both phase one pays two
assessments done and a brown
fields program which is also
under media in the groundwater.
Um
and we have moved forward
to look at at how to remediate
the site
so the timeline for this is
we are working on a technical
proposal right now this month.
Uh from an any media contractor
for the removal of the
contaminated soil
uh monitoring well abandonment
and monitoring well replacement
within the east parcel where we
need more information so that is
active right now we're moving
forward with it again the the
goal is ticked at twenty million
and spend that twenty million
and have something to show for
the end of the day uh I fully
intend to come back to this body
and to the legislature is a
whole in our next session and
say.
Here's what you get for twenty
million dollars here's what you
bought now I need more so that
read the thing
so as you'll see where on the
second page for that on the
action timeline
we're looking at november twenty
fifth uh twenty twenty five
through january twenty sixth is
implementing the remediation
pays the first phase of it and
then february twenty sixth
through june twenty sixth
will assess the need for a
secret mediation the implement
that
the benefit to this and and I
always like to emphasize this is
this this is going to turn this
property into something that
this that the city of of
bloomfield will be able to do
something with right it'll be
cleaned up to a level where they
can develop it for something
else it can be sold it can be a
benefit to the city instead of
an eyesore okay the second
project on page three is the two
come carry truck terminal
we've had some conversation
about this this is a located in
the same two comparing new
mexico it's an old truck
terminal that operated from
nineteen fifty eight through two
thousand four.
It's a twenty two echo parcel
that has since it uh went out of
service has fallen in the
disrepair it's experienced
vandalism uh some of that
vandalism included puncturing uh
a bug ground tank that had waste
oil in it allowed it to drain
out in uh we were heavily
involved with our
has waste programming help and
get that clean death right away
and prevent it from getting any
worse
but the again another site were
groundwaters about sixteen to
twenty feet and we have
contamination in the soil we
have some in the water so we're
moving forward with this one
as you'll note under the first
bullet we actually found free
petrol and product in two of the
monitoring wealth
which means it's made it to
water in the ideas
the only good thing about that
is patrolling floats on capital
water and so it's a little
easier to to clean off once you
get there it doesn't mix well
we've been involved for several
years with this again in a media
with the five department in
responding to different things
brown fields investigations the
core of engineers direct that
are phase one environmental
assessment back you know nine
and a second phase two in in
twenty eleven
the uh epa has targeted some of
this for brown fields in brown
fields will provide funding for
claims and development of
properties but it's an
interesting
situation it's kind of the you
have to be careful of the
legislatures because if you buy
the property and then you do the
assessments you can't get
funding for it it's not eligible
you have to assess it before you
buy the property and then it
makes sense running available so
we've run into problems around
the state usually with with
local government energies that
buy a piece of property and then
they want to come get funding
for and we can't work with them
because they're out of step and
that's not my room at a federal
requirement.
So
the in this case that hadn't
been an issue because it it's
been a known problem hadn't had
ownership
this documents and I won't go
through the detail but it shows
a very different different types
of releases
we did remove as I said due to
some bandalism from above ground
storage tanks
these were removed by our
petroleum storage tank bureau
this last year
and now we're in for in the
process of working with the new
owners because it is
it is now owned by or take a
shall clause incorporated and
under the legislation that got
passed by my you folks this last
session speed twenty one which
was our surface water permitting
but it also had a piece in there
that allowed us to take the
definition of a responsible
party that's used in circle in
the federal superfound
regulations and make it part of
our state law which now means we
can go after somebody that
didn't create a contamination
but they
are an owner and in list their
support of financial and
otherwise to help clean it up
that's a crucial peace because
up to that point it was really
kind of a voluntary situation
now tonight now I say that to
say that when we talk about a
responsible party it doesn't
help to identify somebody as the
rp and they don't have any money
to do this you don't want to you
don't want to break them you
don't want to bankrupt them but
with that certain definition you
can go back and look at the
ownership over the historic
ownership of the property and go
back to some way that no longer
owns it and invite them to be
part of the cleaner process and
I use invite as a very light
joking term because that's not
the way that works it's you're
gonna involve yourself so.
Big move something huge that
that again that you guys took
care of that really changed the
game for how we can address
these sites
crucial to say a separate
success
so again the property is in the
process of being claimed once
it's done it'll be redeveloped
and on page for again
there's the time frame I won't
go through in detail but again
all the work you'll note
everything is gonna ending in
june of twenty six because the
commitments to spend it out and
get it done this fiscal year and
so our work plans are based on
there
used a little bit different
approach we said here's your
deadline to get this work done
now build a work plan that gets
us to that deadline and has it
all finished instead of letting
it
scratch out
again this is going to benefit
the city of took him carry
it's a brighted property it's
going to change it to something
that's viable it's going to
reduce the crime that goes along
with any kind of a
vacant property like this so
again economic development peace
to this as well there's already
been some jobs in two comparison
associated with removing ours
tanks and things like that so a
holistic approach right there's
there's benefits everybody that
I want to shift to page five and
start talking about some of the
abandoned uranium minds and this
has been a multi stage effort by
the legislature again thank you
very much
you know developing and
providing a fund for moneys to
go into and providing the
funding for us to identify and
higher a coordinator is merry
harms and allowing you to do the
same in their minding the
minerals division to begin
working on these first couple
years was identifying how the
heck we're going to move forward
with this year with that funding
that you gave us again we bought
here mark twelve million dollars
we're looking at three mind
sights.
The first one is mow number four
which you can see on page five
and there's a photo of the of
the mine opening that were
dealing with this is AAA
declined mine angles down into
the ground it's been a bound a
long time this when happens
beyond state land
which for a starter project if
you will make sure the little
easier to do because we were
able to get all the access
agreements with coordinated with
the state engineers you know
because a potential water
impacts we've coordinated with
uh
everybody associated with its
state land office blame and now
we're moving forward
this particular
project as you'll see in the
timeline the contract for clean
up is actually in place it
became effective july first and
i'm gonna i'm gonna say kudos to
the department of finance and
administration because for the
first time in my entire career
at any with state government
they're funding that the
legislature allocated for us to
use was available to us to use
july first usually we don't get
access to that money authority
to use it until august september
sometimes october but it was
ready to go july first
that contract went out the door
july first we were ready to sign
it so it's a huge team effort
but again couldn't happen
without the legislative support
and the years that built into
this where we're in a good spot
to move forward
the project kick off we're
estimating
was july tenth
yesterday I
believe they had a post poner is
likely going to start next week
but we'll double check fed and
then again the contract
finalizes that works got to be
done by the end of june
in this case since a little more
extended but this funding first.
Cranches spent by june thirtieth
of this year the ultimate clean
up is going to take longer than
that just because it takes time
to to fill their sand now early
we talked about uranium and
moving stuff off site will treat
every mind sight as a separate
energy we're looking at what
works best in that location this
particular site there's not any
inhabited roadings or anything
close to it this is out in the
the embrocial basin you've got a
better map that shows there I
apologize it's so small kind of
where this is that in this case
we've determined that the best
mechanism is going to be to
collect all of the the waste
rock the mine was struck and
we're talking to low level rate
you act material place it back
in two thousand the opening of
this mind into that decline seal
it so that it can't wash down
the ground water
yet in this case best mechanism
and best use of the money that's
a big piece of this we don't
want to spend
all the money holland stuff
around if there's a quicker
simpler way to put it in place
capital that's not going to be
the answer for all of them but
for this one it was determined
that it was the next site that
we're going to flip to on page
six is known as the red bluff
number one mine and you can see
the picture there's not much
there right there's not the in
this case not an opening but
there is waste rock spread
around from when they close it
out so we're going to be pulling
that up again we issued that
contract july first
we're moving on that that kick
off dates august first again
same time lane timeline to the
end on page seven is the third
you're any mind the smith
declined mine and you've got a
picture of it and this is one of
the hazards this is you've just
got this.
Open hole on the ground that
anybody can walk into and there
have been deaths in new mexico
from people kids gone and
exploring this hole in the mind
walking in there and you know I
I worked underground in uranium
for years before I got on the
other side of the table and
started doing clean up and one
of the things you always have to
be careful of with an open hole
is there venelation and so you
can have crap gases and stuff
that'll take it out let alone
following rock things of that
nature but these are some of the
openings types of things that
need to be addressed right they
need to be protected first and
then cleaned up again on this
one
five voice pile rocks it's not a
huge huge cleaner but it's a
necessary one likely this is
going to be the same we're going
to put the rock back into the
whole and then close the entire
thing in security again july
first kick off just happened
we're moving forward with this
one again these are these are
simultaneous we're not doing one
in moving the next I want to all
go at the same time by alley we
can multi cast.
And then flipping to page eight
I mentioned that we had set
aside two million dollars or we
took two million of that and
decided to use it for our patrol
him storage tank bureau to
facilitate some tank cleanups
and I did that specifically
because they had shown already
projects but no money to do
anything with
and so you know contamination is
contamination we looked at those
projects and determined that
this would be a very good way to
move forward and and make a big
difference right this will
prevent further contamination so
between july first of this year
and june thirtieth of next year
they are implementing this phase
corrective plan they're going to
remove tanks assessed
contamination at twenty one
sites and then they're going to
once they recess that
contamination if anything will
develop plans to deal with that
as we go I have to say that part
of what we do is we we evaluate
these sites in all three of
these particular areas when
we're looking at and we're
exploring the history the site
we're doing essentially an
environmental assessment we're
looking at past ownership we're
looking at where can we go to
recoup costs where can we you
know post somebody and help do
these clean up so it's an
ongoing effort
when we originally started
looking for funding for this you
know we were looking in the
neighborhood of a hundred and
fifty million and it went to
fifty and we walked away with
twenty million and i'm i'm
thankful for every dollar of it
we started high because there is
so much need in this state it is
just unbelievable there is no
shortage of sites to clean up
and
you know effectively
we could spend billions of
dollars to an s
then make sense that
necessarily
throw all the money at one time
cause we can only move so
quickly but we expect.
To be an intend to be efficient
just like we are right now spend
a net money in and making a
difference showing something
viable to the communities to the
legislature to the people
impacted by the assault you can
see here their time frame
they're looking at six sites a
quarter
to move through this until they
get to the the third and fourth
quarters it'll drop down a
little bit total of twenty one
sites costs two million dollars
to to clean those up and and
have those sites where we have
eliminated the potential risk
for contamination to ground
water and began to remediate him
we also you know continue to
to look at other sites and to do
evaluations we were doing those
before we got the twenty million
that's how we knew what we
needed to ask for that continues
ongoing you know our our
superfined folks are
brownsvilled folks all of our
programs were actively engaged
and we appreciate the
opportunity to have money to now
make it happen and i've said
before that the legislation that
the folks passed last session
including their spending is our
opportunity to change the legacy
in this state
we can have a different legacy
going forward this is the start
this is the first step to to
kick start this thing and we're
going to come back with results
that are in all honestly I hope
makes it very easy for you to
feel good about funding
additional work in this area
with that i'm happy to answer
any questions you may have.
Thank you mr chair
this is an incredible report and
i'm so thrilled to see all of
this work done in in such a
short time yes the legislature
did it but you had to implement
it and so congratulations and
kudos on that I have a a
question about the the
I get so annoyed when these
companies disappear and whatever
and so
this on page three
or take a shell plaza is a new
mexico company but it doesn't
have any assets so is it it's a
shell for some other company and
what is that other company do
you know and can we pierce the
corporate veil because it looks
like just from the little the
little blurb is better created
as shell to avail liability.
Chairsteinborn and senator I
appreciate that question and I
will say that you know as we
evaluate the sites were looking
for these responsible parties
and thanks again because of the
legislative language change it
was done to allow us to look at
responsible parties that are no
longer part of the mix we are
digging into that we don't have
that particular group yet but
eventually we will one of the
things that we hope to do moving
forward if you you will I phase
if we get additional funding is
to put on additional attorneys
who sold job is to do this kind
of research and to go after
these folks
again I
you know the first concern is
clean up the contamination so
new mexicans are impacted by but
the second one is to clean up
that contamination at the cost
of the people that caused it not
to taxpayers
so that is part of our goal
moving forward is to be very
aggressive about recouping cost
and holding the actual
perpetrators accountable I
really like hearing that and
just you know this is kind of
silly but
when I was a law student I wrote
a comment there was a published
in the back in the
usa law review about piercing
the corporate veil the ultra you
go theory of corporation and
this is exactly the situation
that deserves a
liability being traced to the
perpetrator because this this is
fraud when they create these
shell corporations and then
disappear it's fraud
and then the other question I
have also related to
no responsible party so when
they're located on state trust
there had to be an operator rate
and there had to be an owner you
know it just
an owner of the company they did
the operation so I just is this
also going to be part of the
aggressive.
Follow through mr chip
mrperiod chair and senator is
indeed that's one of the things
that were actually doing as a
say as we research these
properties is looking at the
history
you know some of these
unfortunately when the mining
industry bone early on you had
the big players who someone were
still around but you had a lot
of small entrepreneurs if you
will that went out and filed a
claim and don't hold in the
ground and didn't wind up doing
much of anything with it and
then they're gone and they
weren't big corporations they
weren't financed that way and so
that becomes an issue
you know we were not always
going to find that deep pocket
turn to reach entered to help
before the cost but we're not
doing our jobs right if we're
not looking for that
well and there may be other
consequences other than pay at
the payer
so think thank you mister chair
and again I appreciate the
presentation also very much
appreciate the work thank you
mister chair
center charlie think mr chair
thank you for the presentation
who's actually doing the clean
up is that the department or is
it contacted out
mr chair in center charlie we
don't have and I really don't
want a construction arm in the
department so this is work that
way
you know I we get some spare
time but not enough for that
so we're contracting this out
using third parties the rfp is
for
heavy construction earth movers
you know there's some the money
going to
engineering firms to to help do
the sampling and things like
that we have added some staff
internally to do this work and
to do the oversight because i'm
you know I grew up with the
trust but verify concept and so
I want to see for sure what
you've done so it's kind of a
joint but the bulk of the actual
work is being done by third
party contract.
And are those based in new
mexico contractors and do we
have a skill to work force to do
that in new mexico I mean this
is it is a job that could go in
our to perpetuation are
redeveloping a work force to
focus on.
Sure steinborn insider that's a
a really good question the
answer is yes we're working on
developing the workforce one of
the other outreaches it we're
doing now is trying to develop
with work for a solution's
training programs
the beauty of these types of
cleanups were talking small
enough that we're not going to
necessarily entice any the big
national contractors to come in
and in fact our preference is
gonna be we can't officially
have that preference but our
preferences that is going to be
local into these local
contractors that get this work
you know being from the
grandchildren I would love to
see a contractor come in high
local people to do this
there's a lot of the skills
involving each tax or cleanups
that already people already have
you know that live here and so
yeah that's where again we were
playing a loan game here this is
this is round one but we want
something where this is an
ongoing clean up process for
years to come long after i'm
gone long after probably most of
us are gone that this is still
happened because it's going to
take us a lot of years to deal
with the contermination in this
state
thank you mr chair
okay so thank you john for being
here and I just want to kind of
level said a little bit from my
colleagues here.
So
so i've been another
seventeenth year.
Since I got elected we've been
hearing about this problem we
need to do something about it
and earlier we have
representative i'll consider
here and her son and then they
left I think it was but one of
the acknowledge him because he's
a forming iranian minor and
we've been talking about this
from aber federal congress
congress have been talking about
this pointing their fingers
saying someone really needs to
do something about this but no
one's ever done anything about
it because they are no known
responsible party so finally we
got sick of not having a
solution in this committee
actually several years who we
passed a bill creating uranium
minor mediocre coordinator
positions requiring them to
create a dashboard requiring
them to work with work for a
solution kind of an only best
approach but the thing that
wasn't there and it's not there
now remotely is the billions of.
This last session because we
have so much money and just to
get started but it was also
comprehensive wise we fought
like hell and I want to give lot
of credit to terminate and small
the agreed per fifty million
dollars in the budget with a lot
of support work from
representative of their time
you're your new colleague from
sale on the county
heard and accord senator charlie
and others in the senate and
of course center city and opens
and represent part you guys have
been along for for years now by
we got fifty million dollars in
the budget but that fifty
million dollars included some
things that then it got cut back
to twenty million that we lost
this is what we need to keep
funny so we have a thousand
right john a thousand of banning
iranian mind sites some of them
within the same mind but a
thousand sites were talking
about five sites here and by the
way the reason we came to grants
new mexico today was because
several years sites that were
going to start cleaning up or
just have the road from here so
we wanted to come to the
effective community and you know
give anyone interest in
opportunity to talk to us today
but hopefully they'll hear here
about us being here and now that
this is really important us but
but what can I cut out when we
went from fifty million and
twenty million a
characterization of these
thousand sites that is going to
cost millions of dollars by
itself because you don't know
what you don't know and once you
start getting in the car rising
a site scope the contamination
can be more and more of asking
your spending more and more
money to get to the bottom of
the scup of the problem like we
are talking about with the piano
now the who generating station
is just a bottom was pit
sometimes so we want to really
characterize the thousand sites
and create a battle plan we're
gonna have to appropriate the
money to do that
and then as john said hopefully
the federal government alright
is to check at some point but
the other things we need to do
is we need to really.
We've I mean this was their idea
but we need to find it is to
really create a robust legal in
my opinion a legal effort of
people pursuing every one of
these thousand sites is there a
known responsible party should
it be a super fine should we be
going after estates you know a
more tie prawn thousand point
battle plan this is not about
four sites this will never get
this done will never have enough
money to do it ourselves
resources and well before we
ever get to the end of it so
what
which needed moving forward is
we need to find the bigger
strategic vision in my opinion
and this is where we all need to
work together in a work in our
budget committees and
continue to talk to the chairs
of these committees is
we need to find this legal
effort.
We need to continue to find more
clean up in my opinion we need
to be looking at legal action
with federal government and
working with the attorney
general and frankly the
environment department
themselves who is wage
successful or pending legal
battles with the federal
government of a contamination of
dod sites like we have a legal
cause of action here because
these sites were created for the
federal government for the
national security mission of the
country these are
defensedashrelated sites that
then were left high and dry and
are
and
are we need to change the
dynamic here because if we walk
away and we will walk away right
now we sell great we can feel
good about ourselves we spent
twenty million we're leaving
ninety nine percent of the
problem intact and so
and that's what we lost we went
from fifty nine a twenty minute
this last session we lost the
money for characterization we
lost the money for this legal
effort we're going to do it all
and sell
I don't if we walk away we're
kicking the can down the road to
some other feature.
When are we going to get tired
without this for twenty years
and me why have generations of
communities that are left.
That's my ask the environment
department is that they don't
say we create the end thank you
very much they're they're trying
to sell good faith into the
legislature that they can spend
this money if we can appropriate
it but and they're fighting all
the fires we give the fight then
answer I mean but this is a
really important one so anyway
that's my ask of you are as if
we team up and we go back and we
ask our budget committees for
the next tranche of twenty
million or whatever it is and
frankly there is ideas out there
to create a much bigger clean up
fund I mean we did what two
three hundred million for these
other environmental phones right
the last few years you know when
is contamination gonna be as big
of a priority we give a hundred
million dollars for a clean up
fund and we do a lot of clean up
and we kick a lot of but from a
legal friend like when is that
going to become an equal
priority to
us and the community out there
cares about these issues so and
especially on that point mister
chair when the department is so
efficient about cleaning up you
know and using that that um we
should be able to prove that you
know this is working already and
we need to expand it because
exactly they know that they are
going to show results that at
the same time you know now
before we have a change to
administration is one we need to
put a think a bigger strategy in
place and we need to really
launch a massive thousand point
battle plan again.
Ultimately holding result in
federal government well a
comprehensive effort with a lot
of solutions that address on
site so that's my.
Here here but may I ask what how
did we lose the twenty minute
what happened that we like this
is fifty million
and then when the budget came
over to the senate and sent a
finance
did it stick a reduced from
fifty to twenty
you could talk to the chair
about that but but
it was his decision and you know
many of us fought that and
fought like hell to keep it at
fifty actually they were taking
there was someone wanted to
reduce it to enough or two or
three million and we fought like
how and we kept it we at least
got twenty which is a huge
number but you know and all
fairness the budget committees
are dropping billions of dollars
and competing it's back
but that's where it passed the
house
or mr cheer I think that this
presentation is revealed how
effective the department has
been in in using it in my hope
is that is we can change that
dynamic and also when we get the
little request that we get every
summer about where it with the
budget priority should be I
think in addition to your ask we
should all commit that senators
to put this to put this on I
usually put environment but I
wasn't that specific last year
so maybe we should be specific
about this is being a priority
in our little question here that
we have to file
it's going to come back to the
environment department really
helping to help kind of be that
quarter back like you did less
last time you came with a two
hundred million dollars but he
said john you might be again
that was not an unreal
reasonable number on costs or
nap but could you know I just
encourage you guys you'll make
your own decision about what you
ask for in the lfc pric.
Pixer space too as you put okay
anybody else had me comment.
That concludes my tetal thank
you very much
thank you all and thank you john
our compliments and appreciation
everyone at the
solid so without going to public
comment right
anyone online if they want do we
have anybody online that has
public.
Please raise your hand.
Okay.
Okay
okay sure okay what time do we
have r.
Okay we're going to do three
minute comments and we have one
person online and we have one
person in the audience we'll do
the one online first
when at silly at city
yes thank you
I appreciate the mexican
legislation radio
when do you want to check your
might there oh hello no
no
can you hear me never hello
faintly
bear whether six second.
Hello keep keep talking winning
hello
much better
turn the not the other way
hello you can't hear you when
hello hello
hello
hello hello
hello
hello
hello
i'm still here.
Hello hello.
I I
hello
okay yeah let's try that.
Okay
hello
hello
hello
hello
hello.
The.
Hello.
Hello.
I can try to call in.
Hello.
Hello.
The.
Her mechanism.
Hello.
I don't know what my buyer mess
okay thank you so
he got him.
Okay when you were going to try
some different why don't you
kind of give like we're going to
need to make it maybe a little
bit for but just kind of give us
a short little couple sentences
and then we'll just repeat what
you tell us in a microphone
so everyone can hear what you're
saying so sound alright
yeah can you hear me now yep go
for okay I appreciate the
committee there I just have to
share a couple concerns when
hearing about the transport of
the renewal or
from the minds of them rocar
honda from the energy fields to
white mason mill
there is a lack of transparency
with the tribal communities.
I'll stop credential and now but
you guys ok
so
when he is concerned about the
transportation from the york
hundred to.
White mesa milk to the weight
mceml I guess a new top and the
lack of transparency within the
native community
yes so there has been no public
sharing of the terms of
agreement or memory memorandum
of understanding from energy
fuels to the tribal communities
and even areas that are
confidential could be redacted.
As the public has a rate to know
what's in the agreement.
Okay we're now
we're not hearing you because we
turned up our speakers we
figured out how to do it so
the last thing you said and you
can keep talking and from the
**** up
thank you so there's huge
concern to the transport of the
renewal across iranian or across
the nation because it's
inconsistent with the intent of
the need never read you active
and related substance equipment
persons and materials
transportation act of twenty
twelve regardless of a
jurisdictional limits of
highways and a roads there we
hope or terrible leaders and
mexico government leaders don't
repeat the historical mistakes
meteorenium as we feel that
there is still need to partor
priorities public health and
safety and ecosystem of health.
So overall it's just tough to
find any of daily information
from the tribal government even
when attending meetings that has
been given no notice to tell
finding reports on mismeatings
for any form of the community to
review is the central to keep
moving forward in progress to
all these matters where never
communities as we need
transparency and progress at
every level and health and
environment thank you.
Thank you very much is there
anybody else online that wants
to give a public comment
and I was given another bite at
the apple all right okay I know
all right russ
just go ahead and introduce your
stop and come up to the
microphone and turn on the my.
Am I on now very good a rest
smith.
I'm from las cases
chairman and committee
it's one thing to hear wonderful
comments and ideas that come
from this table to the committee
and and and those ideas are are
stipulation and and great.
It even better when I recognize
and I enjoy hearing the idea to
come from you
which are responsive and action
aurion so I love that you come
up with ideas that go into the
future it's it's good stuff a
pass you come in about joint
comment from the environment
apartment it is so powerful to
recognize that that department
is very much department is so
stimulated by the ideas of
opportunity and
their capabilities to do
wonderful things to come to you
with a list of or by the way we
did this or by the way we did
this or by the way we did this
and or by the way we can do more
it's good to hear
thank you
we agree
we agree could sometimes you
don't get yes we can and we're
ready to do more editional so it
is refreshing to have part of
our government this already to
level up to the challenges that
are state faces if you don't
have a clean environment and
clean area including water and
clean land you don't have
anything doesn't matter how much
money you have.
Some say it should be in the
constitution.
Anything else committee for
reader
you turn to my car against staff
thank you for all you do
truly sarah we appreciate you
guys so much they've been back
there good job that you guys the
committee have a safe drive home
and I will be joining us thank
you all for being here for
safety thank you everyone where
john.
