to gather less in it.
Thank you for being here for the
second day of the science
technology and telecommunity
should communications committee
will start off this morning with
doctor rodlin if you like to
come up and join us please.
The.
Members of the committee
ongoing.
Introduced myself just to set
some time so i'm rod land i've
i'm out was almost national
advertise.
I've been there for.
Almost thirty five years.
Ah majority that time i've been
doing things related to fluid
dynamics but
also a big big part of my job
has been wildfire science and
wildfire modeling over that time
started in late nineteen
nineties.
Doing that work at the lab.
The.
And.
So probably what I should start
with is just telling you why
why landls.
In that space and how we got to
that space first of all for sale
almost have an inherent
interest.
In environment fire based on its
vicinity to fires.
It's ongoing the exposure to
both the natural fires as well
as things like our operations
that it could start fire so we
have to we have to always be
trying to manage
that's interesting
we always have to be managing
our landscape for both the
natural and the act that a
vagenic account to fires but
when lounge started in it was a
silent serving society effort
how can we take the things that
ran all has done historically
fluid dynamics he transfer high
performance computing and and
use that for societal problems
and wildfire was one of the
problems it was chosen a long
with
water resources and actually
epidemics and so
so was almost australian they
said we'll how do we take what
we do
and move into that space.
And.
The what when you think about
fire and you think about all of
the physics that drives the
behavior
it's all interacting and that
goes across many of landlines.
Space is that that we work in
that are outside of this one and
so
how do we leverage all that
stuff so that's why my talk to
you a little bit about today.
What are the things it's really
important for fires is pop fires
don't work in a vacuum.
They're they're always
interacting with the environment
around and the fuels the winds.
Both in how they behave as well
as what they're affects or so
that's a big part of what we do.
While in fire also has a lot of
synergy with other things that
lost almost as interested in.
Weapon effects national security
and so there's a nice tire that
continually feeds from the
mission spent the cormission
space of the laboratory in the
fire science that we do and
back.
So lannell has two tools.
Two marlin tools that were
developed over the last couple
decades fire tack is a high
performance computing platform.
Tool that we use thousands of
processors and get really
detailed results and can learn a
huge amount about phenomenon the
interaction between fire and the
atmosphere and fire in the fuel
structure.
But it's not necessary the right
to for practice yours to be
using to play on their sky fires
or to look at at risk and look
at the effects of fitting in
mitigation so we developed quick
fire as a way to leverage all
the things that we learned out
of that high performance
computing based fire type.
To
to enable practitioners to use
some of that signs for more
opportunities
bother those tools about one or
india one hundred.
Yeah.
So over the years this is been
a.
A center piece for a lot of
collaborations for the
laboratory with agencies.
And entities that we don't
typically work very closely with
it including the us foresers the
US geological society is a
special wildlife the stated in
mexico the canadian forest
service
and then the french government
but it's also been in very
recent years is huge source of
collaboration for work with dud
but what people don't understand
or realizes that deod does more
prescribe fire than any other
agency on a paracle basis for
what they own and the reason is
is because they first all have a
mandate to be responsible with
their land but they also know
they're going to start fires
just through their natural
operations right if you're doing
municious testing you're going
to start fires so you've got to
be aggressive and you've got to
get out there manager landscape.
So dud is after one become one
of our strongest supporters and
strongest.
A funding agency is because they
want to be proact.
So i'm gonna back up a little
bit and just talk about
wildfire modeling in general
just so that we we may be
changed some perspectives so
historically the focus of
wildfire modeling has been the
big crazy fire when it after
it's already started where is it
going to go this afternoon where
is it going to go tomorrow where
do we do evacuations etc.
And all of the emphasis since
the nineteen sixties has been
put in that direction.
The.
However we should put this in a
context.
Because if we think about what's
important for that application
of wildfire modeling it's speed.
But the details aren't as
important.
And part of that because the
fires that those fires are being
driven by
strong winds broken department
fee heavy fuels and they're
actually.
The details aren't so important
it's the big growth behavior.
But the moment we start to think
about.
Being more proactive and start
to add an additional application
spaces like community community
planning
resource benefit decisions are
we gonna let this wild fire
bone or are being an attack with
everything we have.
The mobile you start to do those
the details become really
important you want to you're
trying to to draw really fine
line and decide which way which
side of that line
so how do we like prescribe
fires how do we put them out
there safely when do we do it
etc those are very detailed
questions where you might not
be.
Just interest in the fire
behavior might be interested in
what in the ecologic outcomes
what are the watershed outcomes
down the road so now the details
of what has to come out of that
become really important
unfortunately for this proactive
applications the tools that we
used in the past for wildfire
response or not adequate.
They're different they're
different spaces in the
requirements or have much every
more heavy on the details so
that's the space where los
alamos has been focusing on it
of attention.
So what makes wildfire modeling
so hard first of all.
If you think about whether
moment how often do we get the
weather perfectly right we're
getting better all the time but
they're still a fair amount of
error now take that and think
not only do we have to get the
weather right to get fired right
but we have to understand in the
fuels we have to understand.
The dynamics app say pinied off
scales and everything in between
so this is huge range of scales
that are important that effect
the way these.
These fires behave.
Unfortunately from a competition
standpoint that is really nasty
that is a really hard problem so
that that range of scales but on
the right side of the screen you
see the cartoon of all the
different things that go to
gather to make wildfires behave
the way they are it's not simple
and just pulling all those
different processes and
accounting for them together is
a challenge by itself.
Then if we think about what's
burning.
If you flew over any of these
through pictures from the air
you'd go oh that looks pretty
homogeneous it's just a
continuous forest but when you
get down to the scale of the
vegetation it's not homeless in
this.
It's not the same as if we are
burning across this carpet.
That had a genetic effects the
way things happen and that's why
fires are so sensitive to sudden
changes in the conditions.
Fires are not all the same I
mention this a little while ago
there's the intense fires that
are driven by really strong
drivers and they're not so
sensitive to little
loans in the wind they're not so
sensitive to a you know a trail
through the words they just blue
right past the.
But on the other hand the lower
intensity part of fires which
includes the backing and flaking
part of of large wildfires those
are very sensitive to does
august hit at the moment when
that fire has to leap across
that trail.
If the if the gust doesn't
happen in that trail might be
enough to stop those law
intensifiers.
So in some senses law intensity
portions of a fire are harder to
predict its hearted to
anticipate.
So I just want to strike with a
simple and scenario wind come up
with for fire you've got a
constant wind it's burning
across the field it's flat to
partner fee.
In that scenario you would say
oh we should be able to get that
we we know the fuel would know
the wind we know the moisture
the fuel that should be easy and
that's what our current
operational tools require to
predict fire behavior but if I
look at the three pictures on
the screen right now or the
three fires on the screen right
now
they're different.
They have obviously different
behavior they were look at the
same time
but they have different spread
rates different size different
ships what's the difference the
difference is the size of the
line at the moment when they
were ignited.
So now we now it's not just the
ambient conditions that dictate
fire behavior is the fire shape
it's the first size and so
there's an except there is
acceleration there's all kinds
of other things that happen.
If we put this into a couple of
fire amounts for a model like
fire check and we have two fires
here that are in the same exact
conditions flat part of the
homogeneous grounds constant
winds but we have different
windignitions
the emergent behavior is that
they have different spreadsheets
based on those ignition sizes
so.
Why don't our operational tools
capture that it's because
they're not focusing on the fire
the atmosphere feedback with the
fire fire makes it on winds you
probably heard that before.
It makes it on its local scale
as well as large scale that
feedback is the big diff.
So historically there's been a
lot of work to make simplifying
the assumptions about fire where
we could think of it is just a
wonder spread it's going to go
this way based on my slope and
my moisture my wind and that's
fine that allows us to simplify
things computationally quite a
bit and so that's the approach
that's been going on
unfortunately if we look at this
picture that's not a wall of
right this is not the same as
this from a fire behavior
standpoint right this allows
area to go through
where this would force it down
or force the window go up
that's a big difference
and so by starting this to
couple fire at my sipulations we
understand better how to handle
this and and improve our
simplified tools so the
simulation you see right now is
a fire that's coming out the
viewer.
A long with that quite line
there's a plane and on that
plane there's a series of
vectors.
The the red zellas and greens
are light blues are coming out
of you the dark blues are
actually getting pulled back in
towards the fire as they
approach you and what I want you
to think about is how much that
fire is changing the atmosphere
around it as it approaches that
plane and so you're going to see
that that all those winds that
are being caused by the fire as
it comes toward just they're
going to break down into these
towers and trust see him right
there where you've got updrafts
and then the gaps between the
updrafts are aware the harder
comes through the fireline in
heat the fire in front or each
the fuel in front of the fire
that doesn't armick and that
interplay
is missing
from a lot of the tools that are
out there now
and so if we want to make more
robust tools that can operate in
a wide range of scenarios
this is one of the opportunities
so i'm just going to talk a
little bit now about the
opportunity spaces
we can we can use these next
generation tools to evaluate
risk.
Two communities or
infrastructure.
Here are we we had a particular
site that was of importance and
somebody else is to do some
analysis think about how this
can in my change of the fire
behavior whether it would stop
it or not
when we do these simulations you
the nice part is these are three
dimensional representations of
the vegetation so you could go
in there and you can
mechanically treat right remove
the fuel
remove every other tray or the
small trees are the big trees
from the scenarios change as far
as behavior we can think about
how would prescribe fire change
the fire behavior we can even
think about how would climate
change or evolving conditions
change fire behavior and the
risk to critical.
We can look at scenarios that
are high consequence but low
frequency events this is if you
think about you you feel that
gust before a thunderstorm comes
in that doubt is because the
atmosphere is coming down and
it's pushing it around
this is a scenario where that
density current that that dense
area that comes out in front of
the thunderstorm can intersect a
fire and and there are scenarios
where that is caused fitalities
for our firefighters the more we
can understand the phenomenology
the more weakened safeguard are
practices and put up the right
alert so we're we're aware so in
this case that that back
spending motion as that density
current comes around and on the
top you see the the gray is the
surface is just the indicator
where that and
on the bottom right is
is the vectors there are caused
by that as it rules across the
intersects the fire which is
seen as that back spending
motion as it moves across drives
the hot air down to the ground
accelerates the fire spread
makes it so the heat can escape
that you can't get up so it's
not just a little bit stronger
and wind it's actually this
complicated dynamics in the
atmosphere of this this having
the feedback where the fire we
can study that stuff and improve
the faster running tools with
our understanding.
So taking down a little bit
further here's another example
of a density current and this is
from the dude fire which had
three fatalities I and if you
can sell my speed I can't see if
they're unfortunately very well
there's I guess in the upper
right you'd see through dots
those who were there with
italities those are the
locations of the face
so there was a desert credit
that rolled across the landscape
and intersected this fire and
caused it to go much excellent
and got much faster than
anticipated unfortunately we had
people that weren't didn't know
the density current had occurred
the downwash
and were maybe down in a
depression or an small valley
and they were cut off card the
more we can understand this
phenomenology and figure out how
to give the right alerts the
better off we are but the other
part of this is how do we train
our fighter fires with this kind
of technology so they can see
and understand what they're up
against out there.
Prescribe
is something that the mexico has
has unfortunately had some bad
experiences with.
Though more weekend and jack
science in two understanding
what sets up a successful
prescribed fire versus
unsuccessful or disastrous
prescribed fire the better off
we are so this is a big place
that the laboratory has been
pushing over the last five or
six years.
Anyone was taken up prescribed
fires.
They land in the space down
below where it's very sensitive
to the fine scale activities
where the finest deal conditions
on the landscape and so there
are actually harder to predict
because you are trying to put
prescriber into a little box
rate we're trying to to do it in
a certain way it takes a lot
more science in a lot more
understanding to predict exactly
how they're going to cur.
So what makes prescribed fire so
different than wildfires
well the first thing is we have
the ability to plan how to buy
and where to burn what bond and
windowburn right
that's great that means we
should be able to dial this in
if we understand the way fire is
going to respond to its
environment which be able to
dial that I
unfortunately that also means we
have a lot more responsibility
every time we but the sky fire
on the landscape we need to be
able to dial in and and and work
very hard to avoid this
disasters
so we also need a right you know
we can just pick the range day
in person I fire out there
because then we don't achieve
our objectives but how do we
balance achieving the objectives
of the prescribed fire without
an unintended disastrous or
harmful outcomes
so
with prescribed fire
one of the things that were
really working with d the US
forest service on is how do we
help refine prescription windows
how do we better understand
the the weather conditions and
the fuels conditions that are
going to lead to surprises
the answer should not be we just
keep restricting it could then
we're not putting any fire in
the landscape we're not getting
back to any kind of balance the
answer is we need to understand
it because there are probably
some conditions that were on
comfortable burning because we
don't understand and conditions
where we think we are safe and
or not we need to we need to do
a better job of of refining
those thinking about how do we
use our ignition strategies i'll
talk a little bit more about
that but what people also don't
understand about prescribed
buyers often times is that they
were purposefully engineered
ignition parents to meet the
objectives the practitioners are
putting more fire on the
landscape or less fire in the
landscape or change in the.
Patterns to achieve specific
objectives including safety and
so how do we help increase the
learning curve so that that's
something that is inherently
better understood by younger
firefighters
so along that note here's two
examples of prescribed buyers
these are real prescribed buyers
there's the drone that was being
used to ignite these fires
had a gps so we know exactly
where the ignition spares were
dropped
out of the drone this is in the
southeast not into mexico
and on the left is the actual
prescribed conditions and on the
right was just slightly dryer
and you might say what they look
the same but if we look down in
the lower left there's a hairpay
and road there that's captured
on the right or captured on the
last but on the right you see
down here in this corner it's
spelled over it's a escaped rate
that's just a slight change in
moisture with the in the unit
and now we can see at at the
late stage as it's also escaping
on the upper side of this burn
but being able to define what
that looks like and just because
it might escape doesn't always
mean you don't do the prescriber
but it means you put some
holding resources on that port
portion of the line to deal with
it so
doesn't doesn't important thing
so here here is a seven
simulations or one simulation
are they
that was amongst several
simulations where we're
exploring a passible prescribed
buyer in band a learner and this
was a really interesting
analysis because
inside the unit
it was hard to get the fire
intensity high enough to get the
objectives that they wanted.
But if you look at the upper
right hand corner there are
still a couple of escapes it's a
pretty steep slope up there that
they were lighting off of and
with this particular ignition
scenario they actually got some
escapes
again that doesn't mean you
don't do it it means you have to
think carefully about it whether
not you can hold it there but
the rest of the burn here said
this was not going to produce
sufficient fire risk reduction
or fuels mitigation to call it
as success
so what are the big differences
in the big challenges for this
kind of modeling is how do we
get the fuels right this is not
pencil landscape and say that's
upon russia for us that's all we
need to know
we're actually putting three
dimensional vegetation in these
tools because the gaps between
trees matter as much as the
trees themselves the gaps
between the surface and the
crown whether it's dead or live
and whether it's that are live
batters a lot so the so part of
the game known is we need to
rethink how were measuring the
assessing and characterizing our
vegetation on the landscape so
that we can drive his next
generation tools so that we can
do all the stuff I just talked
about and so were working with a
variety of partners but a lot of
our efforts have been how do we
use things like lied are which
is basically using the laser
sending aways are out and
looking at its return time and
mapping what mapping are cloud
of things that it hip so you can
actually map a tree by sending a
laser out and letting respond
and there's two is to do that
one is take a try part out with
this thing on it.
And it scans are scene but that
only gets about thirty meters
from your chipot
the other one is your flight is
something over the top and you'd
take a downward look and but
that only gets what it can see
from about it gets a great map
of what it can see from above
but it doesn't get the trumps
doesn't get all of the
understoreant in a dense forest
so one of the things that
automatically work in very
diligently I have is how do we
use the machine learning an aa
to to dove tails bring this
together learn from the
torrestor one the one it's on
the ground which you can't do
all over the landscape right we
can't map new mexico
learn from that one how to infer
what the structure is an
associated that with what's
coming what's being viewed from
above
the other thing that we're
working hard in is not just
looking at fire behavior but the
side call of fire fire facts the
hydrology the ecosystem or
forest response and how that so
far goes so that you can think
about how do we optimise if
we're going to do forest
management or prescribe fire how
do we best
plan ahead what's the meat and
schedule right do we need to
plan to put something out there
every every fifteen years in new
mexico in in the hames for
instance in the south is down
the dod lands that we work in a
lot there are having to
prescribe fire to keep things in
balance what they feel like is a
property ecological bounce they
burn ideally every three years a
given piss a land not one fire
on their base but every part of
their base scam bond every three
years
there are folks that say the new
mexico should be boning every
every location
somewhere ten to twenty years.
There are some people people to
come up with other numbers i'm
not i'm not giving out debate
but understanding that and
understand the implications for
the hydrology and for the
systems as well as fire risk
it's all a coupled system.
And I think the the thing i'm an
end on here is the fact that
were also working to accelerate
training or could this is a
small company in south aside
this to
and they're working with the
laboratory through the trigger
program to
create virtual reality based
training tools that they can
accelerate while then fire
training to
understand fire behavior
understand these complex
dynamics that I just want to
long talking about and
an increase there the rate which
we can have people qualified to
do for sky fires in the safe way
increase the rate at which were
pretty simple wild and
firefighters
so this is again this is a
trigger program with side
estimates and and I think that's
why I will leave it.
Thank you very much we have a
few members with questions and
it to buy us and we'll start
with you.
Um hey if that was interesting
at long in detailed but really
interesting um are you the only
ones at at length that have this
program or do you give other
agencies around the state or
country access to it.
So thank you for the question
the the tools were developed at
landline they are the forest
service has them done has them
your special wildlife i'm have
them especially quick via the
one that runs faster and some of
the prescribed buyers and
relations those were quite bad
but yeah we're the laboratory
it's we're not charging for
other people the to use it or
anything like that fire tech is
also available in the forest
service has had it in the past
and so forth but you have to run
it on super computer so it's not
quite as easy for everyone to
use
the universe california san
diego is taking quick via and
embedding it in their in some of
their operational systems that
they're making available for so
that cal fire can use it for
instance and we've been talking
a lot with lower my current
cartee here in the state in the
mexico how do you agree some of
the stuff into
her
program
thank you and i'm madam could
share are there scenarios where
you kind of alluded to it in one
thing but are there scenarios
where you decide i'm a
prescribed burn is not prudent
in those cases or with this
program to people call in the
goats do they have a a combo do
they just leave it like what are
different options.
So again thank you for the
question
the
there are certainly scenarios
that these programs identify
that dangerous
dangerous prescribed by a
scenarios and in dod which are
which is the agency that's
currently taking it closest to
operations they're having their
practice learn from it and and
change their
guidelines for for
when is appropriate to write the
fires you can also change the
ignition parents or just change
the number resources
so so
so the easiest way to do this is
is in your first california san
diego is doing it with this tool
is to run on samples of hundreds
hundreds of simulations for a
given perspective that nap the
different moisture and wins and
areas that you might see on a
given day since you can such a
bounds a little bit more
carefully and understand
even if I if you started the
fire in the morning and then the
windstructure change you need to
be alert that this is getting
into dangerous territory maybe
we need to shut it down maybe we
need to get some our cruise out
here before it gets bad and all
what people don't always
understand about prescribed
fires when they're done right
there well engineered there well
thought out they're not just i'm
not like some fire and
let it go in the wind
thank you manager so the fire
that we had here a new mexico a
few years ago that was a
prescribed fire that did go out
of control was a tool like this
use okay and am going back to my
prior
I mean I can't laugh asking this
but is it only fire that's an
option or I mean I there's a man
in real ranch or the reason why
i'm asking I think he's in real
around show and he has a company
where he sends out goats even
comes.
Down to the real ground area and
I mean it's amazing what they
clean out obviously they can't
clean out an entire forest but I
am like the the little area that
you showed us with the canyon
and that building and they
wanted to know what would it
look like in with the canyon
start it
are there times where people use
other means other than
prescribed to fire to clear how
do they do that there are
definitely I mean
part of the problem that we're
in
well first fire is a natural
part of the ecosystem
we we have a as a country about
very hard for many years to keep
it out of our ecosystem and now
we've got this back long we've
got a lot of force that aren't
in the natural condition they've
got a lot more
buy mass both living and dead
that's there
and so the first trick is how do
you get rid of that excess and a
lot of the excesses on the
ground and so there's a lot of
methods to get out that goats
are one you know mechanical
treatments are another
unfortunately there they tend to
be kind of expensive
and and honor when when people
are practised in doing it and
especially if it's been done
before
a lot of agencies I do are going
to prescribe fire because it's
the cheapest
and it's getting fireback on the
landscape which ultimately gets
you in that regime where you
want to be but goats or
I mean
mechanical treatments those are
all things that help you get
where you want to go and there
are folks rich network who is
the fire management officer
atlanta
he's done a lot of work where
they found that a combination of
mechanical treatment and
membership is the most effective
thing so you're you're dropping
the risk with the mechanical
treatment then getting the fire
on the landscape and then it's
sustainable unfortunately that's
expensive it's.
You're your parador cost with
the chemical treatment and I
suspect but i'm not sure.
Sorry there are lots of options.
Thank you thank you very much
think you senator and just to
let them know I have
viable people on the list and we
are we have a tightstore
schedule today so if we can keep
the questions and answers as
tight as possible representative
thinks madam chair and thank you
this was fascinating especially
I mean it's relevant to our
state but all over the world
there's huge fires
so one of our sources of fire in
many places but especially in
our dry climate here lightning
so once a fire starts is there
any kind of mobile unit that can
start dealing with the input of
these factors when it's not a
prescribed fire.
So this is a little out of my is
it's out of outside of my area
that I actually work
but I can tell you that there is
a lot of effort going on
nationally for a faster
detection
and then be what are our what
are the options.
To get resources to that to that
fire faster I mean there's
there's always that the heart
shots and things are goes but
sometimes you've stratched your
resources pretty ten
and so one of the keys then is
to be able to tried and
understand which fires do we
really need to get those high
end resources to and which fires
can we do something else with so
there is work on a national a
lot of work on national level
associated with that there is a
national account measures turned
last year on that topic
thank you over many other
questions but i'll just ask one
how is federal funding in effect
all this obviously it's
expensive there's multiple
people around the country doing
it in other countries are you
feeling any impact yet
i'll just say that a fair amount
of our work historically has
been supporting the service or
indeed programs and US g s and
use fish awhile life
and so the answer to your
question is way outside of my
expertise but
the fate of those entities will
directly affect this work thank
you
thank you representative of
senator thorton
I think a better chair and just
have a few questions for so I
think that thank you for your I
appreciate your presentation
i'm i'm a sifty guy I retired
from sandy allowed to chapter
twenty seven years and so so
this was all period to me and I
loved it all uhm
one of the things that you
mentioned that you demonstrated
the sensitivity to the initial
conditions that you apply and
and also the your also talked
about understand the fuel
structure you know what was the
fuel health way it out there.
And so for my perspective I I
think these could be predictive
tools by a question to you and
maybe you can help me with this
these simulations take time to
set up you know understanding
that the degree added to
established initial conditions
to bound the conditions how
quickly can you turn these
around it and i'm saying you
have fight attack or quick tech
which is for quicker analysis
but how quickly can you turn
these around given it's it's
it's still not fire started in
the east mountains where I live
uh cedar crashed over to heroes
or something like that and
all and we know that it started
on search blocked from somewhere
how quickly can you turn around
with analysis to predict where
it might go given that you have
to bring in the weather and
everything else the society with
that area so it's it's it's a
great question and it's an a
part of the answers that's one
reason why we spent time on some
of these other applications
because that is a very hard
challenge however the us forum
service has been investing
significantly likely and being
able to generate
first cut fuels for this credit
to all and it's available online
we can pick up any any location
in the country
i'm at least the clinton nine
states but I believe the entire
us and generate the fuel
structures for these models
within an hour
then we have ability to bring in
weather streams from there now
or somebody else might pretty
producing so you could get it
going relatively quickly
and depending on the size that
you're interested in fire can
actually run two or three times
faster than real time smaller
damage we got a big demand start
so much
so i'm going to say hours
potentially we haven't put it.
Our focus hasn't been to develop
an operational center it's been
to develop the capabilities but
I think the combination of that
and the four service and best of
an etc is getting us and costs
okay I can appreciate that madam
so I can appreciate that I I
think.
I understand how much time it
takes to pull put these models
together and sell and and in the
course given the sensitivity to
all these other conditions
so I was curious if in your
boundary conditions do you
change the wind voluntary or
would typically do to have a
fixed wind bossy fixed direction
when you run analysis or do you
have the ability to put it like
a cyclic so one of the details
that I didn't mention is in that
so there are the two percent
buyers one was drying one was
not
that was actually using the
actual winds from from the day
and so there's a there's a
little error that does this
during doing the simulation to
indicate that I didn't point it
out but yes it's dynamic and
it's
touring following etc very good
I saw that you were getting your
your you in august this
initially was there started from
ldrd so I so could good on you
for taking that and expanding it
tired is I think the the really
valuable thing about the already
here is fire tech was started on
an
and not gonna sin with the
foresers and optus game momentum
and then the laboratory saw
value in investing again
injecting with elderty and that
got quick fire up in our quick
fire is often running with you
as for a service and the
extraordinary agency so the has
been a real important catalyst.
Two
to the transformation of changes
in the program very good just
want to ask the question are you
familiar with the sandia two for
way go or have you had
interaction with them at work
with the the team they're
starting way back when lugrid so
was there is now from global
right available those folks and
and still work with your again
missing say high to glow if you
see him and tell him and said
high thank you very much
thank you senator representative
little
think you madam chair don't
really think you so much for
this presentation I really
appreciate
all that's being done to take a
look at this scientifically and
the analysis that has been
taking place over time i'm
curious you mentioned a partners
that you work with it to develop
to refine this information i'm
curious about how the
communities that's around this
area might wait into this
modeling
specifically err
we've had stewards of these
lands who have lived in these
areas of new mexico for hundreds
and thousands of years if you
well and I know coming from the
public sample piano house we
have we have history the
narrative of
big incident events that have
happened
in nature madam chair and so i'm
curious as to how and at what
point
this
indigenous or community
knowledge because there are
spanish communities that have
been established here for over
five hundred years how
win that opportunity comes in
for that and has it come in
madam chair thank you.
So
locally I I find some of the
most interesting conversations
that i've had had the
opportunity to have as a
laboratory employee is with like
the four four pleblos and so
forth when they come visit and
we talk to them about this stuff
because of exactly what you're
saying adult and and so they're
very interested from exactly the
standpoint from a larger scale
of national scale I probably
bend to five meetings in the
last year and a half where AP
focus of these national meetings
including things like
the national science foundation
I hold meaning holy meanings of
how do we tap that indigenous
knowledge how do we tap the
indigest understanding of how
you use fire because there's
there's a a large scale
realization that we've gotten
ourselves to replace now where
we're behind the curve because
we've
we haven't embraced fire as a
natural part of the system and
obviously we don't we want to
manage fire and it's influenced
with people and infrastructure
or not houses and communities
but there but but that the
the folks had been on these
lands for a long time had a
different approach to.
Think you made him change at a
quick question and i'm happy to
talk with you offline about this
and it might be because somebody
else is dealing with this but
i'm wondering how um I
appreciate all of the the
natural um
elements that you're deal that
are being dealt with i'm just
wondering how and if you factor
in buildings commercial homes
otherwise these structures that
have been pleased in the four s
I mean I can think of several
places that I probably will not
if it's it's challenging to
beautiful but challenging the
imagine being prepared how I
might
deal with the an event such as
fire that comes up thank you
madam chair
wikis dancer and I realize where
we're at a time here is that
we are we are actually currently
moving into that space there's
we just received an old already
that will start in october topic
accelerators into that worry the
wild and urban interface space
are working very policy with
folks at all you see and yes for
a serious forest products to
to be able to account and
understand and and factor in
structures that are better
thank you thank you for that
response and I just want to
finish manager with a quick
statement about a quick a
comment about
i'm really glad to hear about
the indigenous contributions to
this I think that that
experience can help compliment
and probably already has
complimented the work the
scientific work the analysis
it's being done but thank you
very much for the information
thank you madam chair thank you
represented every of two more
representative martinez.
Think a man charities had a
quick question you're talking
about the instances where
there's an escape and you
referenced holding resources
what what exactly is a holding
resource in that sorry so a lot
of times i'm prescribed bios if
you know I mean let's say the
wind is going this way and
you've got a line that you're a
little concerned about first of
all you usually light your
prescribed fire
moving up wind but that doesn't
mean you're not going to go
spark over over that line and so
a lot of times your put when we
can't hold in resources which is
a crue with water
or or other tools down window
that to look for those spots and
to put out fires when they're
really really small when you can
manage them you get into trouble
if you don't have any resources
there you don't know that the
spots occurred and then they're
often running
but but that's a very common
practice i'm prescribed buyers
is to
if you understand where the
risky spots are you you treat
them as risks and and manage
them accordingly.
Thank you representative against
us
thank you madame chair I think
my question is and follow up to
senator thought in then some
other ones is you mentioned in
here about how everything needs
to be considered when you're
mapping out
you know the simulations
and I guess my question is you
talk about drones but how are
you actively collecting like
some of that real time data you
know wind speed you talked about
you know the fuels on the ground
fuels crowns
like or andor is new mexico
currently mapped like what is
the process of collecting all
those data points that need to
go into the simulations that
you're using to make it actually
available to for prevention real
time you know you mention it
took about an hour to maybe put
one together but just curious
about how you're collecting some
of those data proposed yes yes I
think there's two parts of the
the drunk fashion and i'll talk
about
the one that sort of feeling
what I was doing but actually
other people in the items could
probably talk about
there are also drawns being used
for understanding fire
conditions
but from a perspective of
understanding our fuels and and
understanding senators there's a
lot of work right now to use
drones to do to take light on I
mention this laser based
assessment of fuels but also
there's things called structure
for motion where I can I can fly
over it with a really high end
camera and as long as I have
enough overlap between my flight
passes I can answer mount the
trees just by doing by taking
multiple views of the tree and I
can I can wrap it out as a three
dimensional object from that so
those things are all coming
there they're being tested and
use to some extent in the mexico
I don't think new mexico has.
Gone after a wide spread program
at this point to do it across
the landscape california for
instance has
a huge fraction of its lands are
napped with airborne light at
this point i'm but but it's not
it has a cost
however in out at the lab we're
also working really hard and how
do we use satellite imagery to
back out
tree hate true diameter and then
you can also use the higher
resolution imagery to back out
species so one of the things are
dod we're doing for due to is
how do you get rapid refresh
anywhere in the state
using that it's not quite as
high fidelity is if you do a
blue and drawn over your your
small piece of property but it
gets you
we're open and get you eighty
five percent of the way and and
that's a lot better than where
we are now
thankful for that response and
thinking madam chair and just
in response to that maybe what
do you see is the practicality
of the application of this
technology I think it's amazing
technology and coming from an
area severely impacted by a
prescribed burn I highly wish
that you may be some of these
would be considered in any
future burn you talk to a lot of
residents in highly dense areas
and prescribed words prescribe
burns are no no there you know
they're they're feared there but
they are could be used as
practical responsible force
management but something like
this or maybe what's the
practicality of this application
understanding the cost in the
time and everything it takes to
put in realistic data points but
to use these and every
perspective going forward as a
practice don't think the
technological barriers to having
the available in the relatively
near future are that big
I think there is you put your
friend ran of really important
issue though there's a social.
There's there's a social piece
of this there's acceptance of of
a scribe and I mean every time
we have a catastrophic fire
or a base has no we're not doing
that for for a long time
so I think there's another piece
of it which is helping people to
understand the homework that's
been done for prescribed fires
to help them understand how
they're supposed to go to help
them understand how bite size
peace per sky fires might be
used to then bootstrap up into
larger landscapes in the future
so I think there's a
communication is that I didn't
spend a whole lot of time
talking about that this current
technology could help out with
this
thank you for that in you know
and in just coming coming from
that background I think you know
putting some of this information
I think would be helpful going
forward to maybe you know some
piece of mind knowing that there
was some effort and that in
science and data put into maybe
some of these locations and
plans for these per screen
boards but thank you manager
thank you and I just have one
quick question it was exciting
to see that you're working with
a local company that sibester
are are there any other local
companies you guys work with
some distinction we actually
have their there at least three
additional so trigger so so this
is the big one but then there's
there's a company called
firescape which is actually a
spin off company somebody that
was at standard has now jumped
out
and there's at least two other
companies that have that started
small business
assistance collaborations with
this topic within the last six
months
great that was what I was hoping
here thank you very much for
your presentation I think we all
really enjoyed it this morning
and since we're s.
Behind we have to jump to our
next presenter but thank you
next step we have doctor carlton
coffering.
Great thank you whenever you're
ready.
Testing disabled okay great
thank you for the opportunities
to maybe i'll just for assess
the question manager what how
much time would you like to make
this session I can adjust
accordingly let's see if we can
fit it into an hour including a
that's very easy I mean I was
planning for forty five minutes
with about half of my time
talking great well I then i'll
jump right into it so my name is
cardinal coffin I am a staff
sign to a step was almost
national lab i'm one of the labs
experts on quantum computing
technologies and I was asked to
give you guys a talk about
column computing data centers
kind of the current where we're
at now and where we think this
is going in the future.
Uhm so i'll be telling you about
that next week.
So
I just want to start with a bit
of motivation I think data
centers are a hot topic these
days uh you've probably heard
through you know the headlines
that the next generation of a I
data centers are anticipated to
require just an incredible
amount of resources to motivate
that I just pulled some data and
I should say i'm not like in
hyperforms computing expert i'm
acquired computing expert but I
just bought data on this classes
system that was developed by
xaid in the last you know year
or so this is being used to
train large language models as
based in memphis tennessee it is
and really incredible facility
they have a about two hundred
thousand hyperformance ai
computing chips and to support
that level of
chips it's
the has a peak energy uses
around three hundred megawaters
which is a huge number and it
uses watercold servers has
significant water resource
requirements
to roughly you know there there
isn't perfect data on this out
there but when you look at the
infrastructure impacts of
building this data center
they immediately could not plug
it into the grid it would have
overloaded the power grade to do
that so they're using ten to
thirty natural gas turbine
generators locally to supplement
the power grade while they
upgrade it to to be able to
support this data center and
it's estimated that it requires
at least one million dollars of
water per day that is a huge
number it may even be higher
than that the good news is that
wastewater is viable for this
type of uh requirement but what
I read is that they're still
working at adapting the
infrastructure to do that waste
water utilization so
if you're thinking like wow you
know infrastructure requirements
for high tech computing could be
really high for this I think
that is a correct assessment but
i'm here to talk about quantum
computing so let's go to the
next slide
so just to give you my bottom
line of.
Front the data center
requirements for qua- large
quantum computers are expected
to be very different than this
large a idea to centers so i'm
really happy I have the
opportunity to tell you about
this because it is not something
that you could easily it's not
you know being talked about in
the news all the time uh and so
I can give you kind of the
basics of
what's going on so to summarise
what I see as the requirements
for these quantum computing data
centers they're going to require
modest amounts of energy and
power not like dramatic amounts
they're going to need minimal
amounts of water
the thing that's really
interesting about them is that
they're going to require more
cutting edge technologies than
current data centers so cutting
edge cooling technologies i'll
talk about some examples on the
right of the slide
things like vibration isolation
can be important for quantum
computers and even potentially
cosmic ray protection that is
still a bit of an open question
for the scientific community but
we're learning a lot about it
there have been ideas of about
barrying quantum computers are
putting them in mountains to
protect them from these cosmic
race so that is a very
interesting uh development
to
and I should also mention you
know those are the broad
requirements these types of
requirements very quite a bit
between different types of
technology as we have a tomic
chronic computer as we have
superconducting concrete for
tonight quantum computers they
all have slightly different
requirements but
did the broad strokes I gave
here are accurate let me take a
moment to describe what the
images are on the right of the
slide so if you google continue
computer or you
you know see a flashy article in
the new york times or something
like that about a quality
computer usually what you're
going to see is this shandal
lear so that's the picture on
the top right corner that is
essentially the.
A control and cooling system for
a very high tech piece of
computing but the reason why
it's like a cylinder and kind of
you know a tall in narrow
cylinder is because it's going
inside of one of these solution
refrigerators so those are the
two images on the bottom these
are technologies that can cool a
small piece of metal down to
about one calvin or even lower
so extremely colder than outer
space is what these types of
technologies do it's really
incredible and basically if you
look at the blue for his example
that white cylinder right you
can imagine the sandalia above
fitting inside of it that's
exactly what they're doing their
engineering the thing to fit
inside the cylinder
and blue forest is definitely
the dominant player in this
solution refrigerator technology
uh there's a start up in the
mountain west code nearby that
is doing very interesting things
as well that i'm highlighting
here but i'm deeser the examples
when I say you know we're gonna
need cutting edge new
technologies for this this is
the kind of stuff I am referring
to and they have these unique
requirements like you know to
run one of these refrigerators
you need a stable supply of
water but you don't consume a
ton of water running it you need
a stable supply of uh liquid
nature than and you actually
need a stable supply of liquid
healing or helium that can then
be like a fight on honsight so
all those are important but
they're not like you know
gigantic volumes.
Let's go the next slide
so that's kind of the basic
infrastructure needs let's talk
about quantum computing today
you know as it is today.
Um next live
this is a list of different
quantum computing companies that
are us based uh I can pile this
list because I want to emphasize
a couple of different things
first it's kind of a long list I
mean you think of com computing
as like an exotic technology
it's you know shocking to me how
many different companies we have
better making very serious
players at building one of these
you know commercially relevant
quantum computers you can also
see that there are kind of
clusters there's a cluster of
innovation on the east coast in
de boston and kind of dc area
then we have a cluster of
companies that are based kind of
on the west coast you know think
wash seattle washington so I can
valuaria and then atom a quantum
computing has found a home a lot
in colorado so you can see like
inflection and continue and adam
computing these are all atomic
physics based corner computing
companies based in the
nationwest so
it's a really exciting time for
this field with companies all
over the place.
Let's go to the next slide
so it turns out that many of
those companies not all will
happily sell your common
computer today i'm showing you
three pictures on this slide the
first one is ibm system to this
is a like a very resent release
from the ibm company with this
long legacy of classical
computing that is based on
superconducting technology it's
a very beautiful computer as you
can see from the picture
the next picture i'm showing is
incuse four day system this is
based on atomic technology and
in the back of that picture if
you look closely you might see
someone in a lab quote standing
vice which gives you a sense of
scale for this device.
The last one I picked was
quandella their system is called
dollar nose uhm and that's a
photonic company I picked these
three because I was able to find
the best pictures of what their
technology looked like not
because you know they're the
best companies that my favorite
companies but these are really
emphasis to you that these
devices are not gigantic you
know these are um you know small
room or like medium size room
devices and once you get that
advanced technology in place and
you get those you know basics
apply chain in place you can
really put one of these in many
types of commercial buildings
with minimal renovation so back
the the technology today is
pretty easy to put into existing
buildings and I mention this
before they do require very
reliable supplies of power water
liquid nitrogen there may be
others based on the specific
technology but uhm the
reliebility of that is very
important and the reason for
that is when you install these
computers you know you build
them on site you put them in
place it can take up to a month
to calibrate them and get them
ready for running and if you
have interruption in one of
those key pieces of the supply
chain like water or power it can
cause them to cease operation
and then have to redo a month
long calibration process so the
reason i'm emphasizing
reliability here is that you
want to do that calibration once
and then kind of run for the
whole lifetime in the sheen with
zero interruptions otherwise you
get significant downtime.
Yep let's go to the next one so
in this next section I want to
give you some view on where
quantum computers may be in the
future and when I talk about
future we're really talking in
the next five years maybe five
to ten years but this isn't like
distant future this is what
companies are racing for
right now.
So think twenty thirty let's go
the next slide.
So this is a picture from ibm's
quantum computing roadmap and
this is very nice be as a kind
of shows you where things are
today and where ibm sees them
going in the future in the
illustration you can see there's
little images of human so that
gives you a sense of scale these
is not you know this isn't a
gigantic facility this is like a
big industrial room
and on the right side of this
picture where i've set where
i've highlighted size of quantum
computer today that is only the
ibm system to which was in the
picture I showed two sides ago
so that if you are going to buy
one of those today that's how
big it is it's the main computer
with a couple of like black
servers behind it supporting
that main computer and it's a
relatively small system you
could install it in any places
what ibm is communicating with
this roadmap is actually what
they think that the state of the
are qualm computers going to
look like in twenty thirty three
so if you look at the bottom
left part of this picture you
can see there's kind of like a
line of different boxes and
those are different components
of the quantum computer that
would need to be you know
stitched together to scale it up
to a really large and powerful
device
so that is the proposals for the
twenty thirty three machine and
again not dramatically huge it's
definitely going to need you
know ten ex more power than the
current system more liquid
natures and supply but it's not
going to require us to build a
gigantic new facility to install
that type of system
I will compare and contrast that
with what we have in the next
slide so this is we can think of
that one is kind of a building
you know a room scale deployment
of a quantum computer.
A situation which is a fortonix
quantum computing company it's a
start up that's based in a
pollow alto california they have
a very different approach to
qualm computing which may
require a much bigger facility
and they have teamed up with the
state of ill annoyed to try to
prepare the infrastructure for
that facility so let me first
talk about the picture that's in
the lower rate so if you look in
the far distance of the picture
it's the skyline of chicago so
this is in the suburbs of
chicago it was an old steel
processing area that the state
has re allocated to be a quantum
and micro electronics park
the state has invested seven
hundred million dollars and
basically renovating that site
to support quantum computing
companies that may have special
infrastructure needs
part of that you know seven
hundred million dollars is a two
hundred million dollars for
building a crio plant so that is
a special type of infrastructure
that allows huge amounts of
cooling usually through liquid
helium to different quantum
computing devices and they will
be providing that as a service
to like all the tenants of this
facility like this micro
electronics park they'll
basically just have a port they
can plug into and get liquid
healing to run all those
solution refrigerators.
So this is an exciting
development in the picture
the the warehouse if if you look
very closely it has the
cyquanten logo on it you know
that is because cy quantum
anticipates that they would need
that size of the building with
this large amount of cooling
power to build their quantum
computer that's a a very
different requirement than to
what we saw on the ibm example
before so if there was going to
be one you know this is maybe
the other extreme you know we
can install the quantum
computers in in kind of standard
office buildings or industrial
buildings with minor uh
modifications or there's other
people proposing ideas that
would require much bigger
investments but i'll emphasize
again it's not like dramatic
amounts of power it's not
dramatic amounts of water it's
just a buyer sophisticated high
tech cooling system that is
needed for this space
um and let's go there next line.
So i'll just try to summarise my
key points from this part of the
talk I have some backup slides
about applications if anyone is
interested about that but for
the key piece on infrastructure
I my summary is that today's
quantum computers do not require
dramatic changes to our critical
infrastructure we have roughly
sufficient space power water to
install them the main change for
present day is this high
reliability so that the
computers can run continuously
for all this time as we look out
five or ten years to the future
quantum computers
I would expect we'll need some
upgrades to critical
infrastructure but they look
like modest ones not dramatic
ones the criteria capabilities
are the most interesting
indifferent thing than what we
have for industrial sites today
and then a robust supply of
liquid nitrogen and helium may
also be important
and I think based on the fact
that you know those two facts
above now is a really good time
to start engaging with this
quantum industries you know I
gave a list of companies before
on the previous side and just
ask them like what are your
requirements for these computers
in the next decade because now
we could make a strategic
investment to be prepared for
that industry to come to a place
like new mexico.
So are we going to excite with
that that's the marks at remarks
that prepared i'm very great
happy to answer your questions
could we go ahead and could you
like quickly run through these
backup slide sure I don't know
if you need to open the keep
going
yeah so there was when we are
planning this event it was split
like should we talk about
infrastructure should we talk
about applications my expertise
at landlines actually
applications what are we going
to use these quantum computers
for a and
we have it been working closely
with darpa over the last couple
years in a program called corner
bench working to try to figure
out like these guiding stars
what are the applications that
can on computers cannot do today
or you know next year but when
they can do them with
fundamentally change
the world if you go to the next
slide the bury the preliminary
findings in that program where
at lanel was very deeply
involved was that there are a
bunch of very interesting impact
for applications these include
things like designing new
magnets high temperature
superconnectivity designing
catalysts for a various types of
processes there is you know it's
it's uncertain this is high tech
stuff but they're incredible
arguments that we would be able
to dramatically reduce the
energy requirements of
agriculture through preparing
for lizers for example that we
would be able to dramatically
reduce energy requirements for
like medical technologies that
require very high power magnets
so all of the basic science that
underpins those types of things
it seems like a quantum computer
can help us all them we wrote a
very large report which is
referenced here it's open you
can look at it if you like about
basic research questions plus
almost national advertory would
use a quantum computer for and
we were just part of like a
whole effort that darpa did
which included industry.
You know buying was involved
academy was involved and this
plot is summarizing some of the
cool applications that were
discovered next slide
we also did a survey of what we
use our classical computers for
as part of this project which
was are very interesting and we
discovered that about one third
of our classical computer cycles
were doing work loads that could
be accelerated by a quantum
computer so this made the case
that oh yeah if we had a
classical computer and a quality
of computer at least almost it
would be pretty useful for the
science that we're doing.
Um list do next slide.
This is a brief overview of what
is in that huge report the
highlight I mean the most
important thing to understand
from this is it really spans the
brath of science you know we've
got magnetic materials we've got
super good documentaries quantum
chemistry optics nuclear physics
I mean there's for the types of
science low salamos does there
will just tons of problems where
one of these computers would be
useful.
The last three sides are about
workless almost would use the
first really large really
impactful computers for their
kind of in the weeds and the
science so maybe i'll just skip
to slide twenty and mention so
these are two applications that
we think will be like the most
like the first ones that would
we have a really big impact of
the content computer and the
thing that's interesting about
them as they support
experimental facilities so less
almost has a large magnetic
laboratory the high national
field manage laboratory and we
have believed that they would be
one of the first to benefit from
a quantum computing capability
and then the other one which is
chapter three is based on new
tron scattering sources oakrage
has a very large new trying
scattering source in many
scientists that lost almost use
that for their science and we
were able to articulate how
quantum computer would help them
do material science research
more efficiently
so yeah that's the brief version
of the backup sites
thank you very much I currently
have five people on the list I
will start with representative
gonzalez.
Think you made and charles try
to be brief you know thank you
for your presentation a have a a
vested interest in building a
stem work force here in our
state and so some of the
comments you mean you know some
of the things you addressed here
the infrastructure challenges
specifically water so it's good
to see that some of that
technology's being developed
totally be able to use some of
those recycled water
technologies and some of those
and then maybe looking at the
future of quantum computing
coming here to new mexico in and
if maybe you can elaborate more
on the economic benefits of
bringing that here knowing it
may be what are some of the
challenges and bringing
that sector here to our state
knowing we need to build up our
stem work force capability
talking about his assist
engineers computer scientists
developers saver security person
now so maybe just some of your
thoughts on what the economic
benefits could be of bringing
something like this here in
being technology hub possibly so
thank you manager yep so yeah
madam chair and representative I
think there's a lot of potential
economic benefits this is an
emerging technology if it goes
the way many people think it
will grow dramatically and ha-
and create a lot of new types of
businesses that we'll need so I
think there's a lot of
opportunity there for economic
growth training a work for
is a important thing and I think
the labs in the universities in
new mexico could have really
help with that type of activity
in terms of barriers I think
right now the companies there's
a lot of opportunities across
the nation different places
different hubs incentives for
them to come to new mexico are a
great thing and as I understand
that the EDD department and the
governor's office are very keen
to try to make those things
happen I think those are great
ideas and will position as well
to
you know be a hub for this
growth in the future.
Thank you a scenario to buy some
thinking madam chair thank you
for the presentation i'm I kind
of joke with friends and
colleagues every once a while
that if I get another return at
life i'd like to be a quantum
physicist so I I think it's
fascinating and it's really an
exciting time and science for
sure so i'm first off what's the
average lifetime of a quantum
computer and does it differ
based on the applications or you
know the purpose of the computer
sure madame chair and
representative or senator I
should say
the usually we think about
deploying quantum computers and
like five to ten year windows
but the technology moves so fast
that you'll usually be upgraded
during that time so you know I
gave the delusion refrigerator
example that that for friday
will be put in a building
there'll be some support
infrastructure around it and it
was sit there and run and people
will use it for their science
but every let's say once a year
it might be shut down for a week
they'll install a new chip bring
it back up and then they'll do
more science but like better you
know with with more capabilities
so but get the core
infrastructure usually kind of
deployed for five to ten years
but we should always plan for
maintenance and upgrades because
the technology is just
involving.
For that and manager and your
your three photos of the
computers can had me chuckling a
little bit because it reminds me
of the very early computers rate
so I imagine back in what the
sixty user whenever that fifties
m that they couldn't foresee
what computers could do where
would be calm just like they
probably never really thought
we'd have our whole lives on our
phone rate which is I barely
crack open a computer at this
point so
can you foresee or maybe you
can't where this could
potentially go that's beyond the
scope of wait you know different
groups around the world are
working on with contempt
computers
sure thank you manchester and
center d.
I would say that
um
five years ago if we didn't have
a lot of clarity on like what
the applications of these
computers would be and that's
why darpa ran that con and
benchmarking program to figure
out like is there a for those
applications now we think we
have a pretty strong case that
you know there's a probably
going to be a big impact in
material science chemistry like
some high tech industries.
Whether it's gonna be of course
scientific discovery labs and
assess you know those types of
places whether it goes beyond
there and becomes really like a
commodity for everyone is less
clear to me that's very
uncertain but I think you make a
good point which is.
No one intersperate what was
going to happen with classical
computers and so that the realm
of going beyond those material
science and chemistry questions
is the land of well that would
be one of those big surprises
that no ones for seeing but it
could totally happen thank you
and manage her one more question
do you foresee how we could not
only make quantum computers
smaller going forward but not
require and the cooling
mechanisms that you're talking
about today
sure thing the
what I
I would say all the companies
are looking to reduce the
requirements of their technology
and probably once one or two
companies has demonstrated like
a very i've super high value to
industry then that will super
charge like the development of
mutualisation reducing
requirements uhm
so I think everyone's working on
that it's I didn't go into it in
my sides but if if cooling is
your major concern if you look
towards like the atomic quantum
computing platforms those have
lower cooling requirements so in
some sense you can pick a con on
computing technology based on
the kind of requirements you
want and it's really hard to
know which will succeed long
term right now but
we will see if if atomic and a
becoming like the way to go
cooling may be much less of an
issue
great thank you so much thank
you manager thank you
representative little
thinking madam chair actually
following an along the line of
that it was senator by since
last question my question has to
do with trying to rap my head
around and understand when we're
talking
to a machines I I appreciated
the especially the pictures of
those of the actual and.
The physical
m devices that are being used
but a beautiful you were talking
about the
very journal terms and others
have or i've not been privy to
some detailed information but
you were describing madam chair
the modest amounts of power that
it needed to be stable and i'm
glad to hear that we swatter or
agree water might be used but
could you help me please medium
to to understand or define what
what.
Let me say before these the for
the sizes that you were showing
us
how much what are the set
translate to what does this
piece of equipment of that size
require per day if you well in
an estimate I yeah so think you
better
matter and representative little
I
unfortunately like I don't know
all the specs off the top of my
head but i'll give you my best
impression so for the continued
computers we could buy today
we're talking kill a lot of
power so like dinner it's not
much more than one household's
worth of energy maybe the less
than one households worth of
energy
when it comes to water
my understanding it's very
little like a few gallons per
day because it's mostly a close
loop system they're using liquid
nature gen and the could helium
for cooling and the water is
just a small part of the
beginning of that cycle of
cooling.
When we talk about those larger
systems the twenty thirty
systems it's going to be higher
but
you know the details of that are
are now being figured out inside
of the companies which was why I
encouraged at the last point
like talk to these companies I
think they'll be able to ask
them that question what do you
really need in twenty thirty or
twenty thirty five and I think
they'll give you some really
useful information.
Okay i'm thank you very much and
madam church has one follow up
question we are talking about
the in your estimates the
minimum hook
power that would be quote would
be required where kilo and you
describe it as a work one
household might use is that
madam chair pretty or per year
please thank you
madame chair and representative
per like it it's a roughly the
amount per day right that a
household reduced per day so you
think about like one small
household per year as well you
integrate over time it works.
Well appreciate your estimates
very much madam chair thank you
that's my end of my questions
thank you next we'll have
representative on
thank you madame chair thank you
for the presentation mexico is
investing in quantum
computing and as i'm trying not
to be as big for notice I am in
this realm of things that the
power need is there I mean the
the energy need is is higher at
this point you're talking about
future and what we want to get
get these needs and that the
cost of materials and.
And you know we healing i'm in
nitrogen in other sort of things
aren't aren't forever rate as
far as abundance and so what is
the circularity if any that
you're looking in modeling for
reuse continued used in scaling
down venture
madam chair and representative
loan
the so first is far as I can
tell there isn't any like finite
supply that these computers need
to exhaust the reason is that
for the helium they use them the
best systems use close loop so
they will collect all the
healing and cool keeping a close
problem that's good when it
comes to nature gen we need to
have liquidified nature gen
which requires energy to do but
that just goes back into the air
and then we can collect it from
the air relatively easily and
like a fight again so there's a
nice close loop there in terms
of energy if they will require
energy yes and we should find a
way that we have long term
energy
cability but part of the reason
I motivated my talk with the
data centers for ai is that it
looks like the energy needs for
these computers is going to be
so much dramatically less than
that
I I don't foresee we're going to
need like dremet ring need to
build a new power plant to run
the huge parliament computer but
again you need to talk to the
companies to know what they're
really thinking for twenty
thirty or twenty thirty five.
Thank you I appreciate it in the
company that we have here what
what are their do you know about
them what they're using what
their models are
chair and representative could
you clarify the company we have
here your time in new mexico
I I don't I can't give you the
name I I was just kind of
looking into like the details
like the nano science that we
are we are now capable of using
and that is I mean in your
presentation that's why we need
to stabilise vacuum type system
in order for this these
are
computing functions to exist
even so that's that's that's
that's another challenge so if
we're looking at scalability
we're talking in the future
we're really not there in your
top we know we're talking twenty
thirty twenty twenty thirty five
point forty but for any kind of
scalability for it for average
use is really is really far off
because of the challenges the
scientific challenges of nano
science in and of itself and
with that means
mountain yeah so a manager and
representative so first what do
we have in new mexico you know
because of the national labs and
unam atomic physics is a
strength here
so trapped iron machines are one
of the really popular ones I
don't think we like I think
there's a great strength that we
should play on but I would also
encourage us to be open to like
any vendor who wants to come and
set up shop in our state a
going to the scale ability there
are a lot of challenges but I
think the really fascinating
thing is that industry is doing
incredible things so there is a
darper program called the
quantum benchmarking initiative
which is trying to figure out if
the industry can scale
dramatically faster than we all
think in academia may be
possible
and so I think it's prudent for
us to pay class attention to
that and also just get ins like
talk to industry and and figure
out what they're thinking.
Because it's quite a bit
different than a conventional
wisdom
thank you really I I do
appreciate that and I wish they
were here with us too so that we
had the full scale this this
discussion and we will
eventually but I think that this
is quite frankly a great
investment that we're looking
into is there any any reference
or knowledge of
you mention that states are
joining forces
what it would
would it would mean if we did
you know really come to your
kind of provision a type of
place worth quite a mechanic
sick we put it in the mountain
it's fully functional what does
that mean for the united states
or for international.
Oh need if you will mind manager
manager and representative the.
I mean I think when the
secretary of energy talks about
technology you know he usually
mentions ai and quantum
technologies as like the two big
things and I agree that those
are some of the most
transformative technologies that
are kind of forefront and I
would hope that uh if we lead as
a nation in those technologies
it will leave to great economic
prosperity and you know
competitive advantage.
Thank you i'm just thinking
really futuristic like we how
many bigs and I mean.
To comprehend what nano
technology is doing already now
that we can comprehend really
ever until this week you're
meeting the time in the need
right now but it would be my my
thought prices to say we don't
need as much rate it's a
condensed.
Technology it becomes a
condensing technology of need or
use or sharing
that can be
maintained as a small component
if you will thank you
yes i'm adam chairman represent
I would say to that like.
There's many different types of
crown technologies you know
quantum communication consensus
these may be totally because and
will just have it everywhere
when we talk about quantum
computing specifically which was
my focus i'm inclined to agree
with you that probably the first
generation is for big science in
industry use so maybe we need
you know like one at every
national lab or one at every
huge
chemical processing company
right but not like you know
thousands of them everywhere if
the
you know sender advice's idea
came like where it was like
something dramatic happen and
also in everyone he had a qualm
computer then it would be much
more you because then just high
tech science discovery thank you
thank you for presenting and for
the answers thank you
thank you senator souls thank
you madam chair
all of this very interesting
exciting one a little
disappointed in new mexico
because we were looking at
putting some investments in the
chronic materials and computing
before the pandemic started and
it was kind like oh that's two
new we want to want to do that
and all the other states have
caught up with our research
universities we could have been
the world leaders in we kind of
decided that's a little scary
and didn't do it
there was a senate bill center
pathy and I were carrying to
support industries and companies
coming here I think one of the
main ones looking here is called
continue on my think you had it
on on your list but this is
potentially a couple billion or
couple of billion dollar
industry for new mexico.
And we've got the brain power at
our national labs are
universities to do this if we as
a legislative body choose your
inside
I I hope people get lots of of
that
talk about how much do we need
or is there still going on in as
far as basic research and
applied research are both into
the quantum as well as the users
of quantum then afterwards so it
makes sense what my question
yes madam chair and center thank
you for your marks I agree this
is something that you know being
strategic on is a good idea
regarding basic research.
Vs his applied research I work
in applied research so you may
get a bit of a bis answer from
me i'm very excited about what's
happening in the industry and
i'm looking for how can we use
what the industry is building
too transformed the country and
I think there's many of tough
challenges what are the
applications what are like how
do we discover make a
breakthrough that will save you
know
the economy dramatic amounts of
money or or or grow the economy
duratically
and and so i'm working quite
actively on that when it comes
to basic research are in the I
think it needs to be selected
very carefully because there's
so much innovation happing in
the companies you really have to
find an angle that is different
than what all these companies
are pursuing because they're
dumping like billions into their
internal r and efforts that's a
lot to compete with
recently there was a call from
darpa about basically plugging
two very different types of
quantum computers together and
they were like will that change
the story of common computing
and that what I think was a
great that's a great question
for open research because the
companies seem to be kind of
silent and like different
technology sectors and it was
trying to break down the silos
um developing new types of queue
bits or q debts would also be a
big impact because right now
everyone has like justice but
there there's a certain set of
technologies they're building on
which the office of science
pointered like twenty years ago
but that engine of basic
research will help make the
quantum computer companies of
the next twenty years
so I think there's room for both
if you ask me I like applied
work but that's my buyers
thank you I I know in the
research areas of higher
education they talk about the
valley of death in research
where there's the the basic over
here and the companies need
applied and the universities can
do a better job of of filling
the rd for companies within that
then I think we do in higher
education.
Uh
about a me right now we see
across the country the data
centers I drive by las lunis and
see the huge solar field you
know a couple of square miles of
solar panels to run that one
data center
what about that what's the
difference in energy use if that
were all quantum as opposed to
traditional
ones in zeros running all of
that and you talked about for an
a and I looked at the numbers on
here and it staggering the
amount of information in data
that they can manage
I think the
took a little bit more about the
energy use because I think
everybody's concerned we've got
to build more power plans to
fund all of the a ice centers in
the data centers were with
connom it's the energy of a
house I mean substantially less
resources for the same
information could talk a little
bit more about that please sure
man chair and sender d
as far as I can tell the energy
requirements for the
contributors that are being
planned are much less than
current and identity the centers
so if we wanted to run a quantum
computer one of the ones you can
buy today probably a small
amount of solid panels on the
roof of a building plus a
battery is going to get you
covered uh so I think that that
is not a huge problem when you
go to these you know building
size things you probably have to
upgrade your local supply but
it's not going to be like
upgrading the transmission line
that comes to the site either
it's not so bad so
like i'm not the right now it's
it's easy to buy and install
economy computer
in five to ten years less clear
but i'm general it yeah I would
say it's generally expected
there.
Going to be more energy
efficient for the types of
computations they can do which
is a very limited special subset
of all of computations um
there'll be more energy
efficient at doing them done a
classical comp.
Thank you some of the estimates
i've seen for like data centers
is there a thousand as much
energy intensive for the same
amount of storage capacity and
and processing capacity and
things which is a huge advance
going forward when we're trying
to electrify everything and
we're not spending it all on you
because I put in a chat gbt
request yet it uses you a day's
worth of energy somewhere
I think it's really exciting and
I hope this committee in
particular will help push those
on the finance committee to make
these early investments I wish
we'd done it five years ago when
it was really a still hot area
but you know the old I think
it's a chinese outage the best
time plan a tree with twenty
years ago the second best time
is today you're in so hopefully
we'll be making those
investments because I think this
is a transformative technology
for the country and new mexico
is well suited with the brain
power and expertise we have to
be leaders in this area and we
shouldn't wait to be followers
thank you
thank you and last week
representative
thanks manager thank you so much
just one of most exciting
presentations i've heard ever
I went to my first quantum
conference at twenty twenty two
at until and everybody here
needs to understand we have
elevate quantum it's a
consortium with colorado while
mean in new mexico so we're not
super behind I think it's
important that we acknowledge
that new mexico is a quantum
state so please said it took
future presentations
this is really exciting I went
to a data center proposal thing
last week and none
senators then it was a company
that wants to do a ai data
center and you know they wanted
to use produced water and global
bubble but but this has so many
positive implications for what a
water
poor state I mean.
Yeah we can talk about produced
water and everything but this is
such exciting implications where
a state so
can a I data centers
they're not using if they're not
using connem computers
they don't have access to these
innovative emerging calling
technologies.
Is that the question yeah okay
have to give a complicated
answer either no so madam chair
and representative the
they don't the way currently I
works it doesn't need
sophisticated cooling
technologies because they're
using non quantum chips they're
using classical chips and so the
problem the challenge there is
just scale they're just trying
to get like more transistors
into like a finance volume of
space and so marked that
transmissors means more cooling
more energy the climbers are
just really small so
you just kind of get a lot of
technology in a very contact
space.
And once you get it called
enough then it works well great
and then my my last question is
just I know that already the
community colleges are working
on a quantum work force because
technicians don't need doctors
they don't need master's degree
they it's it's like when uh
until started there ship
manufacturing program a local
community colleges do you have
interaction with the academic
community on these merchant
things especially since you're
interested in that practical
stuff
yeah ma'am chairman I was I
personally have not been
engaging in those but I do know
many other scientists at lennel
who have been and I think work
force development we add at
universities as a high priority
for all of us are in addition to
training them for industry also
become candidates to higher at
the lobs which we struggle to
recruit high tech people
in connorm as well so I think we
the more of that we can be doing
across the state the better
great thank you very much thank
you in senator thought in go
ahead if you
think amount here
thank you mister carter for your
presentation appreciate it
even mentioned that there were
three three technologies for
claiming quality super
contacting a tomic which I
trapped alliance and then for
tonic.
Do you see one of those winning
in the marketplace or is it
still too premature to make that
assessment.
Yes ma'am chair and sender the
the short answer is it's too
premature to make that
assessment and I will say that
one of the things that so fast
thing about con and computing
technology right now is it's
kind of pre like transistor
there's no cubit that has been
better on all metrics than
another cubit so a thomas cubits
tend to be kind of slower about
higher quality superconducting
ones tend to be faster but lower
quality and it's like well we
there's just so many different
trade species it's like
impossible for anyone to
forecast food will win and
that's why the venture capital
world is investing so broadly
right because there's actually a
credible story for everyone
these companies that they would
be the winner
thank you for that like
someone the the biggest concerns
I think for quantum computing
and in terms of as it advances
further as national security
issue of communications
with rsa encryption and things
like that becoming available or
becoming vulnerable do you have
any anticipation as to when that
met might occur in terms of
where we are today versus when
could tiger fee and
communications and also
financial systems to the banking
system uses on it when those
might become vulnerable to
attack if corner becomes a
what kind of what kind of I will
give a five years ten years
twenty years out before we have
to worry about those kinds of
things
madam chair and center that is
that's definitely a important
question i'm not the right
expert to answer it
you know I would direct that
towards people in dc what my
work has been showing is that it
looks like there will be science
applications relatively soon and
so now is is the time to
get ready for really big
scientific impact
but I know less about national
security impacts
okay well then we will talk to
some money from the federal
government to help us with that
answer so thank you very much I
appreciate your presentation.
Thank you so much
for being here this morning I
think it's definitely we need
more of us and as much of this
as we can get so think you and
thank you for the work you're
doing my pleasure
and will go ahead next to our
next agenda item with a update
from lennel and i'm sorry that
we we have to condense it to
roughly thirty minutes because
we need to be out of his
building by eleven forty.
Okay we need to be out of here
by eleven thirty
we have to end at eleven thirty
so i'm sorry there's only thirty
mins left with hopefully that's
enough time thank you.
Up thank you the executive
officer in the w director for
our size technology and
engineering and i'm joined today
by kathy keep who is our
director for a communi.
And you are headed to a land on
next so we're going to give you
just overview that um hopefully
will speriod some question.
Um lana was founded with an
urgent purpose world war two
that was to develop in a town.
Today we have that same urgent
purpose as we tackle.
Are chief responsibility still
remains to ensure a safe secure
and effective nuclear deterrent
but we do so much more than that
and most of our work at the
laboratory is performed for.
Although we support a host of
other sponsors including across
dod
the department of homeland
security and industry in.
I work as well supported you can
see
our hiring we went through a a
very fast
hiring curve over the last
several years we have slowed
down um starting in twenty three
twenty four and twenty five have
slowed however the
reconciliation bill and the
fiscal twenty six budget request
look like they could mean a
significant boost to our budget
in twenty six so with that mind
we are continuing the men
mentioned that we have on the
projects that were working on
and we're also looking to
continue growing.
Alright so a few highlights
so in our weapons area
over this past year we have
assembled the first b sixty one
thirteen gravity bomb ahead of
schedule so in a world where
everything is behind schedule
that is is up there ahead of
schedule should have been bolded
big deal for us we've been
working with an answer stracom
and the navy to assess the
different design options for the
w ninety three
i'm sure that you've heard about
our super computer vanada
we have move that recently into
our classified world on our
classified networks and we have
a collaboration with open a I to
put chat algorithms there on our
classified network that's a
really big deal open a eye has
not allowed
their products to the off of
their cloud computing networks
and so this is really the first
time that they're allowing it
and it's because it's on our
classified network is very
closed environment
and we have begun twenty four
seven operations at are
plutonium facility to support
our mission to produce nuclear
pets.
Alright on our science writes on
the highlights that I like to
make is we've got two scientists
rendered increase and hammerster
will
who have been elected to the
national academy of sciences
for science nerds that's a.
Um we hosted this summer over
nineteen hundred students on
campus as a matter of fact
yesterday did the student
symposium at the end of the
summer that highlights the work
that they have accomplished in
the diff.
We are planning new investments
in super computers so vanado is
awesome we're looking at the
next versions of banado um for
both are open computing networks
as well as.
We've begun producing medical
isotope called acting to twenty
five for cancer there be clima.
And were very hopeful that this
clinical trial will demonstrate
that acting to twenty five is
really an effective cancer
treatment
and finally we launched a mind
soon one which is a suburban sub
orbital flight test at white
sands it's a new flight vehicle
that we launched on june
thirteenth
by our staff and our space
division as well as external
collaborators at a white sands
and this is a demonstration
where we were able to it's the
first time we've been able to
launch a classified and
hazardous landlord pay load all
in wonderfly
within the collaborative.
Good morning members of the
committee catherine keith with
us alamos national laboratory
just a couple of highlights so
safety and security always
important at any rd facility I I
hope you'll see a little bit of
that and of those of you who've
worked in this environment
before when you know you have
people in laboratories working
with chemicals then high
electricity you have to make
sure that they're safe we worry
about that because every one of
these people is on a mexican
right when we want to keep them
safe so we're gonna talk to you
about tracy and dart um in the
real world for those of us who
don't use those uh those numbers
everyday or there's acronyms
it's total reporter cases of
injuries and days away
restricted or transferred
basically if you were injured on
the job so we're happy to report
that our numbers are on the
decline in terms of safety of
those reportable incidents and
we'll tell you that our our
biggest challenge is really not
accidents that happen in our
high tech facilities as much it
is what we call walking through
life so I get out of my car I
walked down the stairs of the
parking structure and a trip
that is reported as an accident
just like any high hazard
accident and in a facility and a
scientific facility would be so
i'm always in a keeping in mind
that every everyday counts every
step counts we want everybody to
be safe and to get home to their
family safe in the evening
so driving is also another big
hazard or laboratory director
will tell you that the most
dangerous part about working at
a nuclear facility this nuclear
facility is actually driving
your car here in the morning and
home in the afternoon so number
of accidents we have taken very
proactive measures first of all
by installing speed cameras on
site
to curb speeding while you're on
laboratory property and were
also proud of partnerships with
our regional law enforcement
agencies have done a nice job of
cracking down on speeding to
help a safety of everybody
coming to this facility.
Ah I think that we are we have a
highlight a little early on that
we just completed a new facility
the flight instrumentation test
lab um which again was finished
ahead of time
next slide
we just want to highlight to you
or our work that we do in
community and and a lot of that
is really geared towards these
days skilled workforce so to
represent in a garage point k
through sixteen rate we all need
that as a major employer new
mexico and a major science and
tech employer in the state we
were not running school systems
you make the investments in
those but our conversation is
what resources do we have so
that we can improve to not only
develop a work force for
ourselves but develop a more
work force
robust work force for the state
of new mexico as a whole so we
have a multiprone strategy on
that first of all that came
through twelve education
outreach and really where we
focused there on that outrage is
we think it's really important
for students in new mexico to
see people who are employed and
signs and technology to
understand what there's their
pathways were to get there to
understand what education they
would need and really have them
walk away with that moment of r
you know to say that's cool I
want to do that some day we want
some inspiration that comes out
so we've invested in some
traveling trailers were happy to
mention to you that we have
as of last week five thousand
students in new mexico will walk
through those students through
those doors that the trailers
since january first of this year
and their primary purpose there
is to kind of they get a feel in
those trailers of what a
scientific work space looks like
but more importantly they meet
one of our technicians and
employee here who's working on
environment to support the site
or a scientist and have a
conversation with them about
their pathway.
Understand them as a human and
hopefully walk away with it
saying this could be me someday
I want to go and pursue a queer
and science and technology
we also have extensive
partnerships in higher education
so are strategy there has been
working with our regional
colleges in northern new mexico
this includes investments in our
partners new new mexico college
we have a big investment there
in radiation control technicians
and it and trades we have an
investment with sanity community
college in machining and
outreach and really that's about
the same thing that we're doing
reaching out to regional
students bringing them into some
scientific typic facilities that
they have and really talking to
them about what a pathway
forward in science and
technology starting at your
local community college which is
accessible to all umm also a
robust partnerships with new
mexico highland university in
the area of it and loot a
community college we have a very
successful relationship in terms
of welding they are producing
welders who come to work on site
here and we also know that that
is a skill said that's in demand
across the state of new mexico
key partnerships through the new
mexico consortiums of the new
mexico consortium is a an
organization that's made up of
los alamos national laboratory
new mexico tech university of
new mexico in a mexico state
university making investments
first of all in joint
appointments so this is
important that those faculty
members who are in the classroom
with students have the
opportunity to come here and
work side by sign with our
quantum researchers like carlton
to understand what that
technology looks like and
incorporate those things into
the classroom as they work with
students also making investments
in those three research
universities so in the last
three years we've invested three
million dollars in project
management and nuclear
engineering programs at u and m
four point four million dollars
in radiological control.
Materials and engineering
programs at new mexico state
university and three point one
million dollars in materials and
engineering programs at new
mexico tech
we also have some out of state
partnerships that we want to
mention so texas and university
university of california are
clearly important to ask that
their operators of the
laboratory and we have one going
partnerships with them as well
as university of michigan and
produce university so university
of michigan we haven't computing
an ai research facility there
we've been asked the question by
many legislators why not new
mexico and I think that that
question has really been
answered before us this morning
um highwater high electric
demand right so a data center
wasn't appropriate for northern
new mexico and expanding their
so we found partners who we
could do that with at university
of michigan we have the natural
resources to support that and
perdue university primarily for
hypersonic materials so they
have a state of the art program
in that and we have been able to
greatly benefit from that
relationship with them.
So just a a quick update on
where our partnerships are and
work force development I welcome
any questions that the committee
may have on that I just won a
highlight first of all I want to
thank you for being in lost
almost this morning having these
hearings around the state I
think is so important and while
you're here one of the things I
just want you to observe is what
it looks like to have a major
rnd employer in a rural
community
so he's trouble with work force
those roads that you drove up
this morning that were very
thankful to the state and our
partnership with a state for the
transportation in and out of
this community eight thousand
people come to work at this
facility every day and they
commute from outside this
community so we're a work force
of about seventeen thousand and
sixty percent of our employees
live outside of los alamos
county so we're thinkful for
this state and the support that
we get in that infrastructure so
that we can move a work for in
and out of this community we
also rely on partnerships with
the county so you have nine
hundred scientific facilities on
over forty square acres which
will see a little later today to
give you scope so that's intel
time six
in a rural community and it
takes lights of community
support including firefighting
services in
in helping us defend those
facilities in case there were an
accident at any one of them so
we're appreciative to these
partnerships and work force you
know since our work forces
communing outside of our salmos
not only are we making
investments in laws almost
public school system but sixty
percent of our employees are
coming from external communities
and our future work for us is
sitting in classrooms across
this state so I think those are
all good things for us to think
about and keep in mind as we
look at growing this economy in
the mexico and knowing that
there are opportunities for both
our urban and rural areas in
this new economy thank you for
having us
thank you so much for that
overview are there any
questions.
Senator authorities
just a quick question
with regards to recruiting I
know you guys recruit nationally
install how difficult is it for
you to bring in scientists and
engineers.
To us almost you know once they
get here and then go this is it
I mean they see the great
science and technology that's
going on but they look around
and go to I want to bring my
family here how difficult is it
for you to recruit a staff so
thank you madame chair and and
senator
I was see so i've been at the
laboratory now about twenty six
years and are focus in
recruiting has shifted quite a
bit over that time um there have
been periods of time
over the past twenty six years
where we focused on trying to
recruit from schools on the
coasts and that doesn't
necessarily work out so well for
us because it's exactly as you
said people get here
and it's a very very different
environment than they used to
probably over the past ten years
or so as we saw a good portion
of our work force retiring out
and we really focused on
bringing in the next generation
we focus more heavily on the new
mexico schools and but also the
regional schools going to
places.
Or in utah where are environment
here is much more similar to
where they're coming from and so
they wouldn't get here in
immediately lose their minds
that there was no shopping malls
or restaurants open past eight
o'clock but instead we have
amazing.
No matter just about anywhere
that you live whether you're a
commuter or.
Those are the pluses that we
have really focused on
emphasising for our communities
so
especially for our science and
engineering community where a
lot of folks are coming from
outer state and that has
benefited us quite a bit
are rates of folks leaving if we
keep people for five years we
keep them for.
It's in the first five y.
And those numbers have been
shrinking
for better for worse people are
l.
So that benefits us
but it has been in.
Which are thank you for that car
I think having my credit cendial
apps we experience the same
thing and I think it's why is to
start looking beyond just to you
the eastern less colster to
bring in new talent so that's
important just one of the common
I was glad to see you're working
with produce that's my almost
modern and in hypersonics is
what I buy a background so it's
proud to see that you guys are
working very closely with him
thank you very much they have an
amazing facility.
The.
Thank you a representative of
martinez
thank you ma'am charges to a
quick questions very exciting
all the stuff that's going on
but I am very interested in the
acting two twenty five so it's
currently in the critical trial
fees is there an idea of when
there's going to be a widespread
deployment on this so thank you
madame chair.
Do not have the answer to that.
And where things.
Thank you
thank you representative looking
as we're talking about the work
force you've had.
Some decreases in the workforce
can you can you tell us about
that at all in what lead to
that.
I'm sure
sure madam chair representative
low high
we are actually having increases
in the work force right now and
not decreases but let's talk
about what that looks like for
us at los alamos so many chair
if I may it was in the santa fe
new mexican your
in my is that a mistake that we
that you're going to be
decreasing.
Positions here or thank you
madam chair and representative
we are shifting people currently
from
maybe less technical work to
more technical work right that
we have as our portfolio of work
changes that the laboratory
based on new federal priorities
we anticipate overall will be
hiring about eight hundred to a
thousand people in the next fy
some of that will be replacing
people who are retiring right or
who we've lost in the first five
years so a little that is to do
to attrition about also do to we
believe looking at the current
budget scenario in the federal
government that we will actually
see a plus up in funding next
year additional funding coming
in and may potentially be hiring
additional people on site to do
that work thinking I really
appreciate that that that's
great
that's wonderful as far as the
eight thousand that commute to
to work a day
have we
know that you guys are really
looking at how you're helping
your work force you've created a
and if you want to just update
us on the the child facility out
the car facility that you've
done in that investment and kind
of were
our future constructs like that.
In housing in the
were you guys moving with that
manager
thank you madam chair
representative luhan so first of
all I where as you drive over
this afternoon to the laboratory
as you're coming down the road
you're going to look on your
on your right hand side
bilingual montes sorry school is
the school that the laboratory
has made an investment in
expanding their location it's
just a cross from the hospital
that facility is licensed by the
state of new mexico to take up
to a hundred and seventy
students so you will see lots of
activity around that facility
we're happy to have made an
investment in it we needed that
especially when we see that our
work force is the workforce that
we've recruited in in the last
five years are average each has
dropped dramatically which means
that we're hiring young people
with young families and they
need school systems and they
need child care in order to meet
those needs and as we hire
probably not at the rate that
we've been hiring over the last
five years lost almost national
laboratory has hired five
thousand new employees
but even as we're hiring eight
hundred to a thousand new
employees a year their employees
were generally early in their
careers and coming with families
and need that kind of support we
anticipate our next investment
and kind of the wish list of
what we need is student housing
so we are having that
conversation right now with our
regional universities hoping
that maybe there can be some
facility sharing
you heard angela say we had
almost two thousand students in
turns on campus this summer when
you've got a situation where
your housing constraint already
when you bring students in you
know we read in horror on
facebook that they are camping
in the national forests around
us because there's no housing
available for them in the region
it's really a critical need that
we have to address that this
laboratory is finding safe and
secure housing for those
students who come for
internships.
And were hopeful that we can
also share that housing with our
regional universities who don't
have access to housing now as
well for their student body
I appreciate that thank you
thank you very much for their
any other questions if not thank
you i'm sure that will definite.
Uh members of the committee
if you can drop your cell phones
in your car is right now if you
can't david arrange for someone
to come and collect and secure
all of the phones in electronic
stuff and
you end then you will get them
at the end of the tour they're
going to collect him right away
and put them in the storage fall
and you will not get them for
