We have Lisa Cotilla, Rick
Thompson, Doctor John Stewart
Stormont, and someone I don't
know. So, if you'd introduce
yourself, when you speak, um,
you have to press the red button
where the person is to speak and
then you have to turn it off.
We'd only have one on at a time
without getting all the
background noise, right? Thank
you.
Good morning. Is that OK now?
OK.
Oh, got it. Thank you. Where's
the instruction guide.
One question, will, um, my
presentation will be available
for you to see on screen.
I do not. I, I.
OK, I will go ahead and get
started and perhaps we'll get
the presentation up so you can
follow along. Good morning, uh,
members of the committee, Madam
Chair, um, I'm gonna give a
brief update about UNM
rainforest innovations and then
we'll have the CEOs from three
of our startup, uh, companies
talk about, um, their companies,
so we are, uh, formed in 1995,
501c3 wholly owned by the
University
New Mexico. We have a staff of
15 people and 8 to 10 student
interns from UNM at any point in
time. Our board of directors is
made up of, uh, folks from the
university, senior leadership,
um, and faculty representation
as well as 60% of the board
comes from non-UNM
representatives, which include,
uh, all of the areas that we
work which include, um, you
know, in.
uh, investors, uh, economic
development, uh, etc.
So one of the unique things
about rainforest innovations,
and I have worked for 4 other
universities before joining
reinforced innovations in 2003.
Um, we have a really solid
model, I would say compared to
many universities. There are
some that are set up like us
too, which is a separate entity,
but it gives us more flexibility
in how
We operate and we can be more
entrepreneurial. The other
benefit is that we have,
according to our bylaws, no more
than 40% of our board can be
from the university. So that
puts us squarely in between the
university and the business
community, which is really a
great, um, benefit. And I can
say that from firsthand
experience working for other
institutions that are not
structured that way.
We have two missions. One is the
commercialization of research
results that come from the
university. And we will also
work with community members too
as they arise and we do that
occasionally. And our second
mission is economic development,
and I want to make sure I
qualify that as entrepreneurial
economic development. We do not,
uh, actively work on recruiting
companies to the state. We
support those that do, but our
primary mission is job creation
in New Mexico.
by virtue of helping to, uh,
facilitate the start of new
businesses with the help of very
talented CEOs, as you will hear
from today.
We have between 80 and 100 new
ideas that come from UNM each
year. They're called invention
disclosures, and our income
varies year by year, uh,
depending on whether there's a,
um, an exit from a startup or
some patent litigation that has.
Uh, resulted in a significant
income. So last year we had
close to $6 million in, uh,
income.
We're one of our most important
metrics on the technology
transfer side is the start of
new businesses, as I mentioned,
that's a primary goal. And we
are at a run rate of 8 to 10 per
year. Um, and we try to do as
many in-state as we can,
depending on the technology that
may not be a fit.
Start the business in New
Mexico, for example, in 2017 we
had three cancer therapeutic
companies formed and we don't
have yet the infrastructure in
our state to support those. It's
building, but we can do
diagnostics, we can do
instrumentation, we can do
devices, but we have a hard time
with therapeutics, for example.
We're very productive on the,
um development of patents we've
ranked in the top 100 worldwide
universities, uh, for the last 9
out of 10 years, uh, for a
mid-size research university
that's a major accomplishment.
Um, we do have a number of
active startup companies. There
have been 170 started to date
over the course of our, um, of
our life. 54% of them are still
in business. How does that
compare nationally? About 50% of
university startup companies,
um, survive. That's a major
reason why it's an important
economic development activity.
4 states and for universities is
that the average uh lifetime of
a startup company in general is
less than 5%. But university
spin-offs are at a 50% rate, so
you can see the, uh, benefits as
well as creating high paying
jobs.
So we have 51 of these startups
here in New Mexico and you will
hear, uh, I have a few examples
here in the presentation that,
um, I'm going to let our, um,
CEOs talk about their company,
so let me jump ahead a little
bit.
We have a number of programs to
support our startups, uh, within
rainforest. We have a small
venture lab. We have 8 physical
offices. We also have people who
are members, virtually, which
means they can access our
services, like using our student
interns for various projects.
Um, they are able to, um, have
the benefit of using our
databases that we have they can
use our conference rooms for
meetings.
They use their address for SBIR
proposals, etc.
We also run an accelerator twice
a year where people can vet
their ideas uh and determine
whether they have a viable
business model. This is for a
pre-startup. This would be an
early, early stage discovery.
Um, we can invest in our
startups. We've made in a
partnership with the UNM
Foundation. We've made $100,000
investments in 22 companies now,
so that's money from the UNM
Foundation that, that
Administer and invest in various
startups.
Um,
we partner with uh various
organizations like the New
Mexico Angels and others in
terms of, um, helping to form
these new companies and we make
regular presentations, um, you
know, I can remember meeting
with Tom way back when and
showing him a whole bunch of
technologies, and then it's up
to the entrepreneur to select
what they think is a viable
business, uh, and then proceed
to take a license to the
technology.
And we support them in their
fundraising and business
development.
So.
Let me skip through some of
these slides.
We have a program to recognize
our very talented faculty who
are called innovation fellows,
and they have a substantial
portfolio of intellectual
property and commercialization
outcomes and we have about 15 of
those now and some of them have
been inducted into a national
academy of inventors.
I'm going to turn to the
economic development side of
what we do, although they're
very intertwined, as you will be
able to tell. We use a model
called the rainforest. The
rainforest, why did we pick
that? We live, we're in a
desert, uh, climate, but it's a
model of entrepreneurial
ecosystems, and it is a model
that that means that the the
various species in the
rainforest need to work
collaboratively. So we need to
work collaboratively with
everyone.
In the ecosystem. And, and the
entrepreneurs, these folks
determine the business
opportunities, so it's a bottom
up type of model and it works
very well to develop an
entrepreneurial economy.
So UNM has been active in um
lots of, um, entrepreneurial
activity, and we've applied for
it and achieved
a innovation and economic
prosperity university.
Designation in 2015 from the
Association of Public and Land
Grant Universities, and we
received a, uh, uh, an award for
a place for our Lobo rainforest
building in 2018. We um have
received an extension on that
and we're a finalist for an
innovation award, which will be
um awarded in November.
Periodically we convene a
statewide economic impact
report. I think you've probably
seen um seen this report.
It shows that the university had
about a $5.2 billion economic
impact on the state, um, this
was an impressive number because
we thought post COVID, the
number may have gone down, but
it actually went up slightly,
so, um, we were still very
active and, and of course, the
federal grants that were
available made a big difference
during that time frame.
Once a year we work with our
partner institutions in the
state, research institutions,
uh, New Mexico State, New Mexico
Tech, Lano, uh, Sandia, um, AFRL
White Sands, uh, to showcase
technologies that um are
originating in our state and our
startup companies and we do it
once a year. It's a big daylong
event, um, great feedback about
the event. It's, we've done it
since 2015.
Um,
and that's, uh, I think an
accomplishment we we showcase
our state and our partnership
working together.
Uh, under a federal grant we
developed a lot of training
videos for entrepreneurial
training, and those are
available to uh any type of
business, um, and, in particular
during the pandemic, um, those
who were retailers had to shift
online these videos were
extremely important for them to
help them learn how to develop
their online, uh, storefronts.
We provide mentoring services,
um, on a regular basis, people
can come in person or via Zoom,
um, our latest grant is called
our Tribal Entrepreneurship
program. We knew we were missing
a component of helping to train
statewide, um, in our tribal
communities. So we implemented a
program 2 years ago called our
tribal entrepreneurship uh
We provide mentoring services,
um, on a regular basis, people
can come in person or via Zoom,
um, our latest grant is called
our Tribal Entrepreneurship
program. We knew we were missing
a component of helping to train
statewide, um, in our tribal
communities. So we implemented a
program 2 years ago called our
tribal entrepreneurship effort,
and we hired tribal liaisons,
entrepreneurs from specific.
Communities, uh, when we have 5
of those currently 5 folks from
various tribes around the state
that are assisting and, um,
convening and bringing forth a
work with the EDD Jedi Office
closely, um, and, and many
others in our state, um, and we
just hosted the Native Native
American Veterans boot camp last
week at the Lobo rainforest, a
week-long
Training program that was, uh,
very, very well received and
will lead to some new
businesses. We partner with uh
UNM's innovation Academy and
host pitch competitions, a small
one, and a larger pitch deck
competition, which has led to
some new startup companies.
Um, in the spring, we hold a
hackathon, so those uh
individuals at the university or
in the community participate in
teams and they compete for
prizes that we raise from
sponsors. Uh, we had in the
spring 16 teams, um, these were
2 to 5 people on a team, a prize
pool of $19,000.
Once a year we hold business and
economic summit. This is in
January. It will be coming up
again this January and um
You know, I think there's been
some really great outcomes from
this summit. We've, um, you
know, advocated for an office of
entrepreneurship, uh, and that
in fact, has now been created
and we're really excited to to
work with that office. So our
next summit will be held on
January 14th.
We have 2 new initiatives that
we're partnering with EDD on,
um, are you New Mexico research
university team pitch awards,
and you can see the winners
listed there, um, Sandia Medical
being one of them, and then our
advanced energy award pitch that
uh we partnered with ED Dion and
uh we have Pajarito powder and
TS Nano here represented that
one those two awards there.
We continue to work with Victor
Wong, the author of the
Rainforest book and he's now got
a right to start initiative and
been a great advisor. He cares
about New Mexico. He will be
here again in January to speak
at our summit.
And then finally, innovate ABQ
is our initiative in in building
an innovation district in
Albuquerque, um, and on the site
at Central and Broadway, and of
course that's where the global
rainforest is located, uh, which
houses 310 students. It's
completely full, uh, the ground
floor includes uh rainforest
innovations, Sandia, uh, rowing
horse consultant.
and indigenous um.
A group helping tribes and um
other tenants that are located
in our venture lab as well.
So
I'm near the end here.
Our, our site is a 7 acre site
and we are
excited about the developments
that have occurred along the
central between um the innovate
ABQ and the main campus along
central there, been a lot of
developments over the last 10
years. Um, we are in discussions
with a developer for the old
church building and the
two-story classroom, our highest
Priority is wet lab space, um,
and in fact, you know, we have
the bioscience Center. It's been
full for a long time, um, but we
need additional wet lab space.
So the two-story classroom,
that's what is targeted there.
We are actually losing some of
our startups out of state
because of lack of wet lab
space. That's how critical it
is. So that's our highest
priority, fingers crossed that
that lease is signed very soon.
So with that, I'm gonna turn it
over to our, uh, CEOs and let
them first introduce themselves
and talk about their companies.
So Tom Stephenson, please start.
Madam Chairman, members of the
committee, it's delightful to be
here with you this morning. My
name is Tom Stephenson. I'm the
CEO of Pajarito Powder. Now
Parito powder is a company
that's based here in
Albuquerque. That's right.
Forgot to push the button, um,
and, uh, thank you. So, um,
Porito Powder based here in
Albuquerque. Um, we started out
licensing technology from uh
from rainforest innovations as
well as some technology that
we've licensed from Los Alamos
National Laboratories and some
other institutions what we do is
we make catalyst for fuel cells
and electrolyzers. And so this
is for the hydrogen economy. In
order to make the hydrogen
economy work in order to make it
work economically. Uh, you have
to have better components and in
particular, you have to
Address one of the the most
expensive elements of it, and
that's the catalyst, and that's
what we do. Uh, so we formed, as
I mentioned, the company in
2012, uh, licensed technology uh
from rainforest innovations.
We've been based here since
we're up to about 30 people, uh,
right now. It includes quite a
number of graduates from UNM
from NMSU, um, and we're also
very proud to have brought back
uh some New Mexicans who
or might not have gone to
university here, uh, but maybe
who grew up here and, and have
boomerang back to uh to New
Mexico to to come and work for
us because of, of the
opportunities that they see in
in working with our company and
we're very excited about that.
So, um, you know, one of the
things that's sort of
interesting about about our
company is that you know we can
really look to to the
partnerships and support that
we've gotten from rainforest
innovations, but also more
broadly from the state. So,
Um
First of all, as a licensee uh
from the university, um, one of
the things about Lisa and her
group is that they understand
startups. They understand first
and foremost, that they don't
always go precisely to plan. Uh,
ours did not go precisely to
plan and, and so when it was
time to rework licenses when it
was time to look at how we can
work together to make sure that
the company can continue to grow
and be successful and in some
cases even survive.
Uh, the university particularly
rainforest innovations was an
amazing partner for us, uh, in
that regard. Sort of a step
beyond that though, we, we
wouldn't exist as we do today
without the support that we've
gotten more broadly from the
state. Um, we're proud to have
been participants in and to have
received a grant from this most
recent new energies program. Uh,
we received $7,766,000 that
we're actually using that right
now uh to build out the
equipment that we need.
The new facility that we moved
into at the beginning of the
year to allow us to help uh
continue our staff and growth
from the 30 that we are now to,
to probably 40 or 50, uh, over
the course of the coming months
and year. And then beyond that,
even there have been other
programs through uh the economic
development department, the STEP
program, uh, is one that we've
used for, um, going out to uh
visit trade shows
internationally because most of
our customers, uh, are
international.
It's one of the things that's
nice about our business is we're
a net exporter, um, but also
other programs, uh, that have
include uh working uh with
trigger with Los Alamos National
Laboratories, um, getting
startup grants from uh the EDD
when we were at an earlier
stage, uh, and also
participating in LDA and so I
think it's fair to say that we
wouldn't exist without that
support and if you even sort of
step back a level from that, our
initial equity fund
So we have a number of equity
funders today our bigger funders
include companies like Hyundai,
uh, Becker Corporation of
Belgium, Ecovis, it's based in
Pennsylvania. We're all
strategic investors that have
invested in the company. But
when we first started, our core
funding came from the Verge
Fund, which is one of the
participants in the State
Investment council's regional
investment program. And so it's
it's really because of that
support across the board that's
allowed us to, uh, to be able to
develop and grow our company.
Uh, and, and certainly after my
colleagues have had a chance to
talk if there's specific
questions you have about us, I'd
be happy to answer it.
Thank you.
Members of the committee, and
Madam Chair, thank you so very
much. I'm Rick Thompson and I'm
with Sandia Medical
Technologies. I'm gonna back up
just a little bit. I've only
been in Albuquerque for coming
up on 3 years, we moved from
Dallas. We were there forever.
My wife got a wonderful offer
with Sandia uh labs, little
place south of here. Um, so, uh,
and it was, it was a wonderful
offer and our kids are grown and
out and I reached out. I, I
wanted to know what was going
on. I first response was we love
the
Outdoors and Albuquerque is
great, so yeah, we're in. Um,
but I reached out to find out
what was going on innovation
wise, so I was looking at the
university, found the
rainforest, found Lisa, and
called and said, I'd like to fly
out and talk, um, most gracious
reception and flew out and
talked about all the things that
were going on within the
ecosystem and within rainforest
and uh, they exposed me with all
the technologies and the honest
truth was I was actually a
little stunned with the quality,
um, and maybe that's a rude
thing.
To say I was stunned, but
there's just a lot, lot that was
going on. And so we moved out
here and I got involved with
with going down and taking a
look at the different
technologies and uh helped uh at
least advised on a number of
those, um, prior for me was a, a
longtime career with the major
medical device company and, uh,
and a lot of a lot of
manufacturing as well, running
manufacturing facilities. So
anyway, I advised with different
companies, helped out, and then,
uh, you start having
I have become a little bit
favorites. And what I look for
in particular companies, at
least for myself, are ones that
one it it's a, it's a good
product, um, but the other part
of that is, is it's a, it's got
to be simplistic. And so I, I
need something that's
simplistic. I want to look for
something that's simplistic but
a really elegant solution.
You've got to look at what the
market is, uh, how broad that
market is, how full that market
is, what the opportunities are
in that market, and there's a
whole slew of other things.
Really go into that
understanding how complicated
it's going to be to make and
such. You want to make it closer
to home, uh, rather than have to
go off somewhere to do that and
so we did a, we, a colleague and
I did a regulatory, we do a lot
of regulatory work and we did a
regulatory seminar, uh, down at,
um.
The rainforest and had met a
group. They set up a number of
meetings, additional meetings
for us when we met what was a
group that was then calling
themselves Pika. And so when we
got together with the Pica team,
and that is a surgeon who runs a
fellowship program within the
university here for upper
extremity surgery, uh, and then
some key, uh, students,
engineering students, science
students, primarily engineering
students that were involved in
that and uh so we started
meeting with them and it was the
typical let's talk about your
Quality system, they had a lot
of napkins and pieces of paper
and things tucked in different
places. And we said, OK, the,
the moment you conceptualize
this was the time to start
keeping those records. And so we
got them moving that direction,
got together with them off and
on, uh, updating every so often,
and I guess it was late last
year, got a call from the team,
said we'd like to update again,
and I said no, we're, we're past
updating you guys see that it's
time to get out of the gates.
And they went, yeah, that's what
we wanted to update about. And
so
So we, they were ready to go and
they really needed to. They
were, it was becoming a spin
cycle where they were. They
developed enough within what
they've been doing. They had won
a number of, of awards, design
awards, and such, had a good
design team. It was the design
program here that put them
together with, uh, Doctor
Morrell, Nathan Morrell, uh, in
order to drive this thing when
we, so we, we went ahead and uh
licensed the technology out of
the university and uh when I
incorporated and
started everything here. So all
the, the key members of the team
have continued on with that and
are all major shareholders in
the company. We spread it across
that original team and so we
started down the development
road. What this is is, uh, when
I said I looked for elegant
solutions, I was involved way
back when they started putting
knees in, so I remember when
artificial knees, so I remember
when the doctors were saying,
no, you want to wait as long as
you can because we don't have a
great solution. And so I was in
those.
Surgeries constantly where we're
putting knees in, um, I was a
tech. I was a tech scrub tech,
and so I helped with all
surgeries and a long time
learned about all of that. Then
the next one up was hips. So the
orthopedic companies are always
looking for what is next and
what's the next big horizon. It
turns out that we have just as
many knees and hips and as we do
thumbs and so, and we have just
as bigger problems, but there
haven't been good solutions and
what has happened up until now.
As I started looking at them,
them, the team eco, and
Pika is now sending a medical
technologies and the device is
being renamed, um,
the Pea Device, uh, because it
also is the name of a childhood
disease, so we want another name
for it, but as we started
looking at these various things,
the, what has happened over time
as people have said, you know
what, the, the thumbs in the
next horizon. This isn't us,
this is whatever there's so, so
much research that says we got
the knees, we got the hips.
We've done the shoulders and
there are enough problems from
arthritis. Uh,
With that joint to the base of
the thumb, and that's just the,
the real key piece. And
everybody said, well, you know
what, the ball and socket worked
for the knee, the ball and
socket worked for the hip. The
ball and socket works we'll make
a ball and socket. It's not a
ball and socket joint. It
doesn't work there and so all
the ball and sockets they were
putting in that they started
putting a number of companies
started doing that worldwide and
it breaks the bones when you put
them in there. And so they got
the bright idea, we'll make
thinner metals and put them in
there. Now we're breaking the
metals and so.
none of those worked and this
team.
So why would we not just replace
it with the exact anatomy and so
the team, you know what, we're
just going, it's one single
piece and that joint comes out
and the new joint goes in and
that's it. Um, they're
prototypes are about 100
different ones using labs
available at the university and
all these things with the
university to develop this, so
it's at a point now that we are
working and we're having
conversations around the country
about the particular material.
We can't do the implant material
here in New Mexico, but we can
do absolutely everything else
and we are, um.
Excuse me, all of our regulatory
advice, uh, is with my colleague
that I've worked with for about
15 years and she's got
orthopedic uh background in
that. So everything is moving
along very, very well. We are
going to
uh
They had done so much prework
before they came out of the
university, so we're at a point
now by the end of October, we're
going to go for our
pre-submission with the FDA and
it turns out that although the
other devices don't work well,
that they're good for a
predicate, so the, the trip
through instead of all the
trials and everything else being
5 to 7 years, we're looking at
a, at a trip of about 2 years.
That's not through the FDA.
That's until we can get this to
market. And so we're working on
a number of things. We remain
involved with this. As soon as
the team said yes.
ready to go, I reached out to
Jeff Hall, who many of you may
know and Jeff had become a
friend and he had moved from Los
Alamos working with them to
economic development department,
and I reached out. I said, we've
got a, I've got to figure out
some things that we can do and
he said there's a new economic
development grant coming up that
fits you guys perfectly and so
we applied for that, uh, and we
were able to win one of the
awards. And then we also, there
was a pitch competition within
the university and we won that
as well. And so I've taken that
money and, and it's.
being put into all our
regulatory work, work on
additional IP and so a number of
areas that way and we'll, um,
like I said, we're headed to the
FDA and, and really, really
happy with the progress so far
and are very appreciative of all
the sort of support we've had
not only from the university,
but from the state so far
financially and hope for more of
that. Thank you all.
Madam Chair, committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
a little bit today about the
company I'm involved with, um,
it's TS Nano. We're a company
that focuses on sealing leaky
oil and gas wells. Uh, the
problem you've probably heard of
it, there's literally millions
of wells in the world that have
been drilled over the last 100+
years, and many of these wells
eventually become leaky and they
leak methane into the
atmosphere.
And methane is a very powerful
greenhouse gas. So with a
recent, uh, tension being drawn
to climate change, the methods
to eliminate greenhouse gas
emissions have become very
important.
We've started TS Nano, the idea
for TS Nano really began in
2012. I'm I'm a professor at the
University of New Mexico and one
of the founders and we developed
through a research grant with
the Department of Energy, we
developed nano modified
polymers. And so what these are,
these are, you take a small
amount of nanoparticles and you
add it, uh, to polymer base and
it creates remarkable changes in
the properties.
Of that material and it gave
imparted very favorable
properties for ceiling oil and
gas wells that could penetrate
small cracks that it doesn't
degrade over time like cement
does, and that it can withstand
the changes that happened in
these wells, the stresses and
strains and the temperature
changes.
Um, so we began that research in
2012, and as we were developing
these materials, this is where
the interaction with rainforests
really came in because they
provide essentially a service to
the faculty and the students at
the university in that they help
you, um, protect your
intellectual property. So they
helped us from the very
beginning all the way through
getting patents on this
technology. So the invention
disclosure.
Going through the patent
application process and then
working with patent examiners,
all of that was facilitated by
rainforest and worked out really
great for us.
We launched TS Nano as a
business in 2020.
Uh, we set up a manufacturing
plant here in Albuquerque, where
we manufacture these nano
modified polymers.
We've done field trials, uh, in
the Permian Basin of which New
Mexico is part of, uh, as a part
of the Permian Basin, we have a
field office in Hobbs actually.
We also have a field office in
Calgary, uh, in Canada, because
they have a big oil and gas
industry up there as well. Um,
We have about 10 employees and I
believe 5 are directly from the
University of New Mexico. In
addition, we have two interns
that are currently, uh, students
at the University of New Mexico.
Um, the other part of this that
I wanted to point out was the
orphan well problem that we have
in, well, I guess the world, but
certainly in the state of New
Mexico.
These are wells where there's no
longer a solvent owner. And so
they, these wells sit, uh,
sometimes they're, we know where
they are and sometimes we don't,
and they've in some cases,
they've just been walked away
from company goes bankrupt. Some
cases, people may be a long time
ago tried to put a cement plug
in or something to seal them,
but often these wells, which
have no owner and nobody has
responsibility for them leak.
And so,
What we're involved with another
part of our business is
monitoring leakage from orphaned
wells, and we do that through
contracts with the state of New
Mexico.
So if we can find the wells that
are really leaking, these are
the unknown, undocumented
orphaned wells for the state,
then the state can use their
resources prioritize which ones
are leaking a lot, identify
those wells and then put the
money that they have towards
sealing those wells. So we're
involved in that process as
well.
I did want to highlight we were
fortunate recipients of some of
the economic development money
as well, and that's made it just
a profound difference to our
company in that it's allowed us
to expand our manufacturing
capacity.
Uh, and it's allowed us to, um,
have a more documented and a a a
tighter operation we've we've
received, um, ISO certification
and we are following industry
protocols we're able to follow
them now because we have the
right equipment to do that, and
that allows us just so much more
access to markets where having
that pedigree or and that
ability to certify your
is so important. So I wanted to
really acknowledge that in the
role it's had in TS Nano and our
development.
Um, it, I'm happy to, and I know
the rest of the panel are happy
to answer any questions.
Right, thank you for your
presentation. Do we have any
questions? Representative
Garrett?
Thank you very much, and Lisa
later I need to talk to you
about those Korean statues. I'm
the person that wanted to know
about that, but not right now.
Um, there's Korean statues
donated by Japanese. It's a
whole political historical thing
that we won't go into, um, is
it, um.
Let's see.
Oh, my first question is about,
so Victor Wong has been
incredible and we've had him
speak at some of our, our
meetings. One of the things he
always stresses is getting the
right regulations in place. So
are there regulations that we
need to deal with a state
legislators that you feel would
make it more conducive for the
entrepreneurial process.
The short answer is yes.
There are things certainly and
actually on the right to start
website, he's got a list of
about 10 or 12 things that we
firmly agree with that, that
would be helpful, um, like
reducing licensing fees or
giving a one year grace period
is an easy thing to do, right?
Um, and, and there are many
others giving a uh maybe a 5% of
certain contracts going to
businesses less than 5 years
old.
That's one of his also big
things, but um there is a
comprehensive list on his right
to Star website, but these
gentlemen may have ideas other
than than those.
Yeah, the the only thing on that
is that that there was a recent
change in uh uh in the sick
leave law, um, which was, was
extremely well-intentioned and
well understood, but it had a
few uh unanticipated
consequences, I think for for
companies, um, particularly if
they'd come already like ours
from a place of uh offering a,
um, you know, fairly reasonable
overall PTO plan, and it, it, it
definitely, it caused us a
little bit.
Gymnastics to figure out how to
how to get it sorted out. I
don't know that may be something
that's worth revisiting in the
future. Again, not to the, the,
the idea of, of having the, the
required sick leave is something
that we very much support. Um, I
think it's just looking at the
sort of details of the, of the
implementation to make sure that
um that there aren't aren't any
unintended consequences. That's
one, but I also have to say
that that again, as, as I
mentioned before, you know, kind
of across the board we've seen
An awful lot of support, uh, and
benefit from, you know, from
being here, uh, in New Mexico,
and so, um, you know, that's,
that's sort of one thing that
comes to mind, but, um, but
there's an awful lot of great
programs that we don't, um, and
I, I caught myself because I was
very remiss in not mentioning
JTIP earlier because we've been
a proud recipient of JTIP on
multiple occasions, and that's a
fantastic program that needs to
continue to be strongly
supported.
Yep, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Miss
Casilla, you had mentioned a
one-year grace period? Is that a
regulation grace period similar
to a sandbox?
I don't know sandbox, but um, I
think what Victor was advocating
was that there was a one year
period where somebody wouldn't
have to pay the licensing fees
that they would normally pay,
uh, for the first year because
that's a very, uh.
You know, volatile time for a
brand new company and somebody
who's starting basically self
funding some small business,
they just having a little bit of
time is very helpful.
Thank you. Uh, oh, and we just
got, or they just got copies of
the handout, so there was some
really good graphs you had if
there's one particular page that
you want to highlight and say,
look at that so you can see the
economic impact of the
rainforest. Tell them what
Slide that is because they
didn't have it before. I think
the slide that showed you had it
up there for a while, the logos
of all of the startups, um, to
me that demonstrates the impact,
as I said, uh, news companies
spinning off of the university
based on UNM technology, the
more we can do there and the job
creation that results.
Over time is going to have a
huge impact on our state, so,
uh, we just need a couple of
them to grow into unicorns and
next step.
hearing that it's a slide 9 that
you're talking about.
And one more question, is it Tom
Felix, is that your name? I
didn't quite catch it. Tom
Stephenson. OK. Um, my other
question is, so now New Mexico
is in a consortium from the port
of Los Angeles through Kingman
Winslow, and um,
Albuquerque
Valencia County and Sandoval,
and one of the things is looking
at hydrogen as a fuel,
have you connected to that I-40
trade port um consortium.
That's kind of let out of the
county here. So, so
Representative, Madam Chairman,
thank you that we are a
component supplier, right? So we
make the catalyst that goes into
the fuel cell, that goes into
the truck that drives down the
road and so we're very strong
supporters of the refueling
initiative for me personally,
it's the thing I need to be able
to go buy a hydrogen car, um,
and we don't have that
opportunity here right now, but,
um, the short answer to your
question
we haven't connected directly
with them because um it's, it's,
it's sort of different parts of
the supply chain sphere, so, um,
you know, we're certainly happy
to, to support it as, as best we
can, but it's, um, like I said,
it's a, you know, someone has to
integrate our products into the
end products that ultimately,
but, but, but part of why that's
so important is that, um, you
know, for, for those of you who
may perhaps have followed the
hydrogen economy question is
that we
to have that, that demand pull
through, uh, to be able to
support some of the initiatives,
particularly, uh, for long haul
transportation, which is
generally being recognized as
the best uh mechanism for the
deployment of hydrogen in the
place where it fits best in
terms of decarbonization of the
transportation sector in the
United States.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Nix is
Senator Rodriguez. Thank you,
Madam Chairman. Good morning to
the presenters. Thank you for
all your work. Never enough,
right? Because there's so much
work to do, especially in the
area you are working in, um, you
mentioned, I think it was this
nice gentleman to your left. I
don't remember your name
anymore, but, um, you mentioned
you work in the area of ceiling,
and I wrote a few notes here,
ceiling, leaking oil and gas
wells, and you mentioned the
powerful greenhouse gasses and
emissions that they do put out.
Um, one of the questions that I
had is I, I heard you mention
that you basically identify
these whales and then after that
you, you, um, uh, the abandoned
wells I'm talking about, and
then after you do that you
recommend, did I hear you say
you recommend to the state which
ones are the most dire need or,
or what do you do with the
information that you get? The
maintains a database and they
make
Decision about which of those
wells are the most important to
seal immediately.
I see. So it's OCD.
I see. OK, makes sense. Then,
then let me ask you, do you play
any part, Madam Chairman? Do you
play any part in the
recommendations for
funding for these purposes, or
do you just let the state on
their own decide which ones and
how much it's going to be. No,
the State would make the
decision. The state is receiving
large grants from the federal
government for these programs
and I think they evaluate, um,
the, uh,
Roster of abandoned or orphaned
wells that they have
responsibility for how much
they're leaking, where they're
at, and then they contract with,
um, people to seal those wells.
I see. OK. OK, so Madam
Chairman, just quickly here, and
it will be my final, um,
question that your funding to
collect this data that we're
talking about. Does that come
into the legislature under an
RPSP or, um, rainforest or under
what category do you submit
through UNM, that's not, that is
not through UNM. No, that is,
um, yeah, we're a qualified
methane.
Detection company for the state.
And so we're, yeah, on a vendor
list.
So it has nothing to do then
with the University of New
Mexico and the rainforest
innovations directly,
no, that's just one part of what
it is that we do. We focus on
sealing wells, but this is just
something else that we are doing
part of that whole, the whole,
um, chain of identifying leaky
wells, ceiling leaky wells.
I see. OK, thank you for
clarifying that, Madam Chairman.
Lisa, you had your name up. Did
you want to say something about
that?
No, OK. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator Nix is
Representative Chasey.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I, I found your presentation
very interesting. And I just had
a simple question about the
funds that were available and
then you, I think in responding
to Senator Rodriguez who may
have answered that it's federal
dollars that are coming that
make the work that you're doing.
possible. Is is that from an
early um like legislation that
was 4 years ago, or is it more
recent? Is it American Rescue
Recovery Act or is it the,
the other big bill title is
escaping me.
Um, I, I do not want to misspeak
as to which piece I think was a
bipartisan.
Yeah, infrastructure or, yeah,
that one. Yeah, I think that's
where it originated, the, the,
the first funds.
OK
Thank you, Majority Leader
Chasey. Next is
Uh, Representative Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, Lisa
and gentlemen, thank you. I was
really happy to hear your, your
comments and presentation today.
I, uh,
I think it was maybe more than
10 years ago, um, the, the
rainforest kind of really got
started. You got a facility and
I remember, I think it was this
committee, Madam Chair, where
we, we started hearing about the
rainforest and kind of the
vision for it and.
And I know we were, we're all
hoping that you would get some
students that would be
interested and start filling it
and and it's awesome to hear
that you now have 310 students
and it's full. Um, that's,
that's just wonderful, really,
really great to hear, um.
Madam Chair, and, and I guess
just a couple quick questions.
Um, so I was looking at the, the
slide with all the logos on it
and that's that, I mean, that's
uh amazing all the different uh
entities that the rainforest has
been able to help. Um, but I'm
sure Lisa, maybe you can ask,
answer this question for me. I
was looking up there and there
seems to be a ton of bio.
Or therapeutic or diagnostic
related, you know, medical
related companies and I I
appreciate that we had kind of a
a cross section here of
different um but can you maybe
speak to why there are so many,
I mean, and what percentage are
are kind of medical related.
Madam Chair, Representative
Harper, good question. Yeah, I
think you had a presentation
yesterday from the UNM research
team and you probably saw that
we have research, you know,
across the campus in, you know,
engineering specific centers,
um, and health sciences and the
research funding is roughly
split between life science,
bioscience, and then engineering
and physical sciences. So if you
think about an invention.
Disclosure coming out of every
$400 roughly of research dollars
at the university, you can see
that probably half of our
startups are going to originate
in the bioscience arena, so
that's a high level explanation,
but it is the best one. We do a
lot to try to stimulate
disclosures and inventions. For
example, we have a new program
that just started this past
summer that rainforest, put
aside some
Money to um encourage PIs from
from North Campus and main
campus to work together on a
project we got new invention
ideas that we had never known
about just by putting a little
pot of money there to encourage
people to work together across
those disciplines because that's
often where invention
originates. So long winded
answer to your question, but,
no, Madam Chair, Lisa, thank you
for that.
and I think it raises an
interesting point that I hope we
all kind of understanding here
is that when research is funded,
right, and the kind of the
metric you gave was roughly $4
million in in IP,
um, we, if we are doing a good
job at um.
Uh, you know, incubating that,
and, you know, the rainforest is
a great example of that. We can
actually have companies that
spin up.
Um, from that, that research,
right? So if half of the
research being funded is
medically related. It makes
sense that roughly half-ish of
your companies are medically
related. So as you look at
Madam Chair and members, you're
not, I mean, uh, you know,
Senator Sewell's really
championed this effort to have a
fund to provide matching funds
for research, right? If you look
at what we are actually funding
research wise with our state
dollars that can directly feed
into IP and company starting up
and economic development and you
really have almost an immediate
economic impact because these,
like we mentioned yesterday, for
every dollar of matching, you
often get $5 of
Research from federal funds
back. So I just want to bring
awareness to that um and this is
a great example here of that
actually happening. Um.
So I guess, uh, Madam Chair, my,
my, my last question, um, and
really to, to anyone on, on the
panel.
Um, and we've had some, some
folks ask this question in a
different way, but really, if
you could, um,
Change,
you know, anything about kind of
New Mexico.
Um,
To help, um, it become more
friendly or or to help reduce
red tape or whatever it is to
help us take these, these great
inventions that are coming from
the universities and turn them
into products, you know, what,
what would that, what would that
be?
I can start, I think the two
programs that were introduced
this year, um, funded by the
legislature and EDD, uh,
administering through the
science and technology, um,
division, uh, are terrific
because they, they help some of
these gaps we talk about, you
know, crossing the chasm,
whatever gap you wanna call it,
but it's very real. how do
companies get to that next stage
of development. So funds.
That are available to help um
our fledgling startup companies
that at, you know, their early
stages and and later as well,
get going, I think are very
critical. Um, in addition, you
know, we need more venture
capital. There's no question
about that. Um, there's, we have
good programs, they just need to
be expanded. That would be my
other suggestion. Thank you.
I would also add 11 nuance to
the venture capital funding,
which I, which I agree very much
is one of the things that, that
that access to capital is is
pretty, pretty key, but um, but
one of the things about the
regional program in particular
and the programs that the state
is doing is to make sure that
there's capital at various
stages along the development of
a company's growth. And, um,
we've had some great emphasis
and some great programs for the
Catalyst Fund and others that,
uh, have really helped to
promote.
seed funding, um, in our
particular case, we're very
fortunate because we had a
partner for the Series A
funding. Um, once you get to
sort of be and beyond, you get
to a point where, um, more of
the investors are, um,
geographically agnostic, uh, and
so they don't care our beef
funders don't really care where
we are, um, but in that A area
is, is a place to, to continue
to provide direct support
because, because I think that's
where the, the risks.
Potentially lie. Companies are
still small enough that, um, you
know, that they, they might,
they might move or they might
need to have build management
teams that are based elsewhere,
um, and, um, you know, which is
a phenomenon that happens as
well, um, and if that, if that
funding is local, that helps to
promote the growth of those
companies locally and so, so
really it's when we talk about
sources of funding, you really
do need to look at a continuum
across the development and
growth of of these early stage
companies.
Yeah, thank you.
Again, um, thank you, Madam
Chair and.
A committee for the opportunity
to speak the, the funding and
it's uh I hate the aspect I mean
we're all talking about the
funding and hands out and things
like that to help us, help
others, but it, it really does
come down to the, the more
funding that comes into a
company.
As that extends out from this
area, then the more it dictates
where companies get headed. And
so if if money is coming, and
I'll, I'll address med device
this area I'm in, and as we
know, there's a lot of that, but
when you're thinking about med
device, the major funding for
device itself comes out of the
New England area. And so if
you're talking more of the
biosciences, then you're more
over into San Francisco and down
through San Diego and those um.
The people in that area doing
the investing and that's where
the, the huge majority for those
sectors, there's, it's spread
out as well, but those are the
big sectors, but the people that
are putting the money in, um,
more and more, they want the
companies located a little bit
closer to them and, and so if
they're the ones putting the
money in, they can dictate that.
And so the things that we can
do, the, the funding that we got
is hugely appreciated. It helped
us get a lot of structure into
place that we're still putting
into place, um, to build
everything out here.
Um,
But even if, as we accomplish
those things, if we accomplish
those things, all the as we're
supposed to in the timelines to
have an additional tranche
available, um, and you know
what, if you're hitting all
those things and there's a
tranche available to continue to
grow things here, then it
requires less of going outside
of the state to find uh funding
and so that's a real key piece
is figuring out some way that
there there's like a do these
things with this amount of
money, which is wonderful,
hugely appreciated.
But here's how it's going to
follow on with the next steps if
we get these things
accomplished. That's a big, big
piece. The other is the subject
comes up. You mentioned the word
incubator and uh I, the
rainforest does a number number
of things, a huge number of
things, and I think we've all
alluded to that and support
that, but this universe that
I've been involved with a lot of
universities and that's why I
reached out to the university
and said talk to me about
innovation, please. Um.
Universities around the country
have their own incubator, and
the incubator, um, is a little
bit different, um, or we'll say
bolt on or works hand it's not
an either or, it's a both and.
And so what an incubator does,
uh, associated with the
university and I've had a number
of talks with the assistant dean
of, uh, of engineering here as
well as Greg from Lisa's office
has joined us in these talks
about how do we create an
incubator and that incubator is
a, it's a stepped program
of educational pieces uh that
keeps these companies moving
along and is supported because
they don't have the ability to
go out and get these resources
and.
The other part of that is, is
that as you begin to grow out
that incubator, you're able to,
if you look at other
universities around the country
that build those things out,
they start getting striker comes
in, J and J comes in, and so
various companies Siemens come
in and start helping to support
that incubator and so it it's,
it's a next step of evolution
here that really needs to
happen. So thank you all so very
much. Thank you.
All right, well, thank you very
much for sharing that. I mean,
it sounds like we can look at um
What it would take to take the
next step and develop an
incubator and then also, are
there things that we can do to
help with the phase A funding
situation here. So very much
appreciate the time. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative N is Senator
Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and some
of my questions were already
asked, um, I think it's uh
Doctor uh Stormont, yeah, um.
I was just wondering with with
the company, how it just came to
be and how you kind of got into
this type of work, was it just?
Seeing kind of this need and
what was going on in the state
and just kind of your background
how kind of went into this area,
Madam Chair and committee
members, Senator, um, thanks for
that question. Yeah, I was a
researcher professor in
engineering at UNM and you're
always looking for opportunities
to, um, can, can do research and
where the needs are and the
Department of Energy is
recognized that
Sub-surface access is big for
things like hydrogen storage,
things like CO2 sequestration,
um, geothermal energy as well as
oil and gas development, all
important part of the, um,
energy portfolio and energy
transition.
So they started putting money
into research in that area and
it aligned with, uh, a team we
put together of researchers and
we were really just focused on,
uh, doing the research. We had
no idea about starting a
company, no, no thoughts about
that. But as we got more and
more involved and started having
success and saw that there was a
real need.
And that 4 better technology and
that we had a better material.
Um, and that motivated us, uh,
thinking, why not, why not try?
We see that, um,
There is this need, I think, you
know,
that was in retrospect it's
pretty naive because there were
a lot of things that we didn't
know like the industry's
reluctance to change from
traditional methods, um, has
been something that, you know,
that I probably wasn't, uh, we
weren't savvy too, but we've,
uh, we've been sensitized to
that. So it's just this, it was
just a, uh, and I also wanted to
mention the other part of this
that comes into
Play is the rainforest.
Um, this isn't the only
invention I've been involved
with and the people that the
other partners and founders of
TS Nano have been involved with,
and we get great encouragement,
file invention disclosures, try
to develop patents, then they do
market analysis for you. You
don't have to do that, so you
feel like, why not? This is such
a great opportunity. And um, so
because there was that sort of
culture in
With the team at UNM, uh,
facilitated so much by
rainforest that we got to that
point where we said, let's just
do this. Let's just make it
commercial.
I hope that answers your
question. It doesn't. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I just remember
undergrad doing uh some for
extra credit in chemistry, you
know, there some research money
we were working on some.
Research for better.
Uh, fire extinguishers or
something like that we would do
that in the lab, um.
Next question would be, I know
you mentioned, you know, some of
the abandoned wells, but also
just some degradation of wells
to where you're having some of
these leaks and so I'm assuming
over time this is going to
happen with the casings and
things like that, it's just
things are gonna break down, um.
And so we're going to have to do
something to deal with that
going into the future and I
think what you're working on
will help alleviate some of
that. Does it also mean that
maybe the work that you're doing
now will maybe change some of
the industry to where maybe they
use some of this material, um,
initially to avoid some of that
degradation.
Madam Chair committee members,
Senator, thank you for that.
That's a that's a great
question. That in fact is our,
our goal is we are involved
right now in
Mediating leaky wells, but we
see, and I think we're not the
only ones that see this that we
need to be, we need to do better
when we build these wells. The
wells are necessary, um, not
only for oil and gas but as
geothermal energy, hydrogen
storage, um, petroleum storage,
all these things require
subsurface access. And right now
the traditional materials been
used for over 100 years as
cement, and it's
Be used because people know how
to use it. It's relatively cheap
and it's just what's been done.
There's a realization we can do
better, that there's other
materials, not just what what we
produce, but other materials. In
fact, our, our, our probably our
strongest um material right now
is where we mix polymers we
modify cements with our
polymers. So that way, the
industry can use
What they're used to and we
have, we can put in place a
material which does not degrade
and seals better.
So a better material for future
wells indeed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Are you
working on a I've seen some of
these materials as well. Some of
them are almost like where they
can almost fix issues or cracks
or certain types of um.
It's almost like
These nanomaterials where
they're, yeah, almost like,
almost like a self-healing in a
way or is there anything that
you're working on or that's
still kind of some research that
other folks are looking at.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, thank
you. Um,
we're looking at, we also have
an SBIR grant where we're
looking at a new technology
where the sealants are activated
by the presence of contaminants.
So this is similar to what
you're speaking of, and we're
doing this specifically for CO2
sequestration wells and for
wells, uh, enhanced oil recovery
wells.
They use CO2 to sweep out more
of the
oil that remains behind, but CO2
is forms an acid which degrades
cement, um, and so these wells
often have problems and the
materials we're working on
through this SBIR grant are, uh,
it's a new generation of
materials that will, um, react
in the presence of CO2 and form
aceal, so it's very much related
to
you're speaking of.
That's great to hear. I, you
know, the last session we had
discussions on this and that was
some of my trepidation of, you
know, what happens with the CO2
and some of the reactions and
you know, um, and that really
wasn't being explained, so I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Next is
Senator Soltz. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Ms. Katila in, you know,
yesterday we had some
conversations in higher
education research about the
valley of death. You alluded to
that a little bit, um, and it
works both ways. It sounds like
rainforest is working on
assisting research and moving
into commercialization, you
haven't talked much about moving
the other side of it, which is
do companies come and ask for
research to solve their
problems, or is it one direction
for the rainforest or are you
really working
on both sides and how would that
work?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Solis,
uh, yes, they, it does work both
ways and we use a number of
mechanisms to promote our
technologylogies online and
there's a worldwide system
called Flint Box. It promotes
500 research institutions. So
people, companies will do
searches on that, and they're
not necessarily looking for
technology. Sometimes they are,
but sometimes they're looking
for expertise and like you
mentioned.
They want something, some work
done. And so those companies
contact us through that
mechanism or they just are
researching the university and
what areas of research are going
on. So there are contacts with
of course the university handles
those research agreements,
rainforest doesn't, um, but we
often collaborate with UNM on
those kinds of connections
because the companies of course
want access to IP and so we help
negotiate those.
Agreements, um, and when we're
reaching out to contact
companies and I didn't talk a
lot about our marketing process,
but we do use commercial
databases. We do reach out to
companies and so sometimes when
we transfer a technology, it's
not ready for prime time, far
from it, and it may need some
additional research and they may
want that done at the
university. So there's a
research agreement put in place,
so.
It, it, it we're very flexible.
We will accommodate however we
think the best method is to get
that technology commercialized,
what the company is interested
in what the entrepreneur or
investors are interested in, we
try to have that level of
flexibility.
Thank you. uh,
cause I think in a lot of ways
for the economic side in New
Mexico, we want to fill that gap
both directions. Doing a great
job in, you know, moving the,
the research into
commercialization, uh, and nice
that you're helping facilitate
the other side of connecting
companies with UNM faculty that
are doing research that may so
they may have just a small
research question and not have
the staff of their own to do it,
but connecting with the
university.
And then getting those
connections with companies. I
know it's very important for
longer term collaboration with
the universities. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, and thank
you for your presentations, um,
a couple of things I,
I carried Bill on carried Bill's
last session on leaks and spills
and the oil and gas industry. So
it's great knowing we have the
technology out there. And I
hope, and you, I assume you're
working with Emner to kind of
get this done and that's great.
And I'm hoping you get a lot of
um a lot more work from them
because we have so much
pollution out there, um.
Uh, part of the statistics I saw
was there's 4 leaks a day,
possibly and with 70,000 wells,
there's a lot of leaks and, and
trying to find them and find
different things. That's, that's
where, so it's good to know you,
we have something out there. Um,
it is a shame that we have to
use the federal government to
clean up this products that a
billion dollar company should be
cleaning up themselves, but and
um.
As far as the rainforest. I've
been asked to carry a bill to
help with funding that not, not
the big projects that we know
are going to be successful, but
those lower tiered ones, um, and
what, what do you think it would
cost to help the the ones that
aren't going to be successful
right away? Do you have any
ideas on that?
Um, Madam Chair, maybe if I had
a little bit more information
about the types of projects I
could give you more precise
answer right now it's just, um,
all I know is they, they work,
it's it's been out there.
There's a, um, I forgot the name
of the group that's out there
that funds this, but they're not
getting any funding at the lower
end of the, of the special
projects. I'm I'll I'll I'll get
back to you on that, actually.
OK, thank you. I mean, obviously
if it's a, if it's a small
project, for example,
we have funded through
rainforest a gap fund. We don't
have nearly enough money, but we
give $25,000 awards to a faculty
member who has, uh, an
invention, but it needs more
development work. It may need
more data for a patent
application. It may need to have
a prototype, some more testing
done, and those are one year
projects we do them every year.
We're just in the process of
awarding this year's projects.
So you can tell from that's not
enough money.
Of course, but it does, it
helps, can pay for a graduate
student, you know, maybe do buy
some small piece of equipment,
for example, so those that that
level of money does make a
difference.
Do you know Francis B or Sherman
McCorkle? I do. That's who I'm
working with. OK, then I'm
familiar with that project, um.
And I think the, I think he was,
they are referring also to the
kinds of projects that um we
have ongoing with EDD now, you
know, the advanced energy one
and the university team pitch,
uh, very valuable types of
funding.
We're, we'll try to get you
more.
All right, I think that they're.
All right, well, thank you. I
appreciate your presentations
and enlightening us more on
what's going on in the
rainforest and all your, your
great job. Thank you.
Right,
OK.
I don't know what you're talking
about.
Alright
And, um, methodologies of
creating a successful investment
program.
We have, um,
State investment officer John
Clark.
Um,
Ryan Decker, capital strategist
and Nora Sackett, Office of
Strategy, Science and
Technology. Welcome.
And whenever you're ready.
No
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, are
you all able to hear me OK?
Perfect. Well, thank you so much
for having us here this morning.
We really appreciate this
opportunity to present to you.
Uh, so I'm the, uh, state
investment officer, essentially
the CEO, director of the New
Mexico State Investment Council.
Uh, I took the position in
January of this year and, uh,
this is a position I have been
interested in for the last 9
years. So I'm thrilled to now
hold it and look forward to
sharing with you some great
things about how the SIC is able
to impact the state.
If we could move to slide 2.
Just a little bit of quick
background. Uh, so we were
created in 1958 and the primary
purpose at that point was to
manage the land grant permanent
fund. Uh, today, we oversee a
little over $58 billion in
various funds we managed 12
different funds, uh, we managed
9 until this fiscal year and,
uh, the legislature gave us 3
additional new funds to manage
this year. Uh, we also invest
funds for 25 different.
clients across the state. We
can, uh, invest, uh, funds on
behalf of other governmental
entities, either state agencies,
local governments, um, and the
great thing about uh how we're
able to do that is that, um, all
of our funding comes from
internal, uh, funding through
the, uh, permanent funds. So
when we invest money for
clients, uh, we do not charge
them, so they receive 100% of
the benefit of those
investments.
Now those are exclusively going
to be long-term investments,
any, uh, state or local
governmental entity that wants
to just hold money for a short
term, um, project, uh, that
should, of course, uh, reside
with the state treasurer. Now,
we have uh a council of 11
members, uh, on there by
statute, we have the governor,
the land commissioner, and the
treasurer, and then 4 members
appointed by the governor, 4
members appointed by the
legislature. The structure of
the
was changed in 2010 and I like
the way that it's structured now
because now, uh, these 4 members
appointed by the governor, the 4
members appointed by, uh, the
legislature don't serve at the
will of those entities. They are
on set 5 year staggered terms.
That helps, uh, that helps to
remove a lot of the, uh,
potential political influence
from a body that really should
be set apart from politics. So
I'm, I'm glad those changes were
made back in 2010.
We are now the 2nd largest
sovereign wealth fund
organization in the country.
Texas has two different
sovereign wealth funds, uh,
managed by two completely
separate organizations, but we
just overtook the larger of
those two this year to become
the 2nd largest sovereign wealth
fund organization.
Uh, we are also, if you combine
our uh permanent funds taking
out all of the other reserve
funds and client funds that we
hold, just looking at our
permanent funds and combining
the value of those.
We are one of the 35 largest
sovereign wealth funds in the
world. So that is pretty
incredible. This literally is a
world-class asset that the state
of New Mexico has.
Going on to the next page on
page 3.
I'm going to cover two primary
ways that the SIC is able to
impact the state of New Mexico.
The first is through providing
money back to the budget. So
this year in fiscal year 2025 we
are sending a little over $2
billion back to the state and we
are responsible through those
distributions for funding 27% of
all K through 12 education, and
58% of all early childhood
programs. That's pretty
incredible. That's something.
That is hugely important to me
and to the members of my team.
It's part of why we go to work
every day, uh, and are excited
to do this because we know what
an impact that is already having
on the state.
Now going to page.
Uh, pages 4 and 5, I'm not going
to go through all of these funds
that we manage, uh, but I wanted
to provide them here for you to
take a look at, uh, and again,
we did get 3 new ones. Those are
shown on the bottom of slide 5.
and there are already some
discussions about the
possibility of creating a new
funds. Uh, I think that the
legislature has clearly made
some excellent choices in recent
years to take some of the
windfall revenues that we have
today and set them aside for the
benefit
of both current and future
generations.
Going to slide 6.
So we've heard for years about
the impact of oil and gas
revenues on the state. We know
that they're responsible, uh,
both through indirect and direct
revenues for a third roughly of
state revenues. And we know that
that importance has grown over
the last 5 years. And the
question was, OK, eventually
when our, uh, uh, when those
revenues start to decline, what
happens then? And we got a
report from
The consensus revenue estimating
group of economists that said
working with, uh, national
experts working with local oil
and gas industry experts.
There's going to come a time
when we simply won't be able to
drill new wells fast enough to
offset the decline rate of
existing wells. So apart from
any state-level choices on the
demand side apart from any
national choices on the demand
side, we're going to have a
supply issue where we're simply
not going to be able to drill
fast enough.
And we're going to end up in a
situation where every year there
is going to be a little bit less
revenue generated by the oil and
gas industry for the state of
New Mexico, especially taking
inflation into account, then in
real dollars, the projections
said that the legislature every
year would come and have less
money to work with than the year
before.
When I was at the economic
development department, I, uh,
had my team take a look at
modeling out can we diversify
the economy quickly enough, uh,
because before this report came
out, we thought we had probably
20 plus years before we
essentially reached peak oil in
New Mexico. Well, this report
said, no, you have about 10
years. So after doing the
modeling turned out no, uh, the
state cannot diversify its
economy, quickly to offset it,
and it's because the state
doesn't really have
An economic diversification
problem as much as it has a
revenue diversification problem.
The oil and gas industry doesn't
represent a very large part of
New Mexico's workforce. It
represents obviously a very
outsized share of the state's
revenue source.
And looking at
The job creation from the
economic development department.
We had just come off of two back
to back record breaking job
creation years and the data
said, OK, we're going to have to
do 4 times that every year for
the next 10 years. If we want to
have a hope of diver
diversifying the economy quickly
enough to offset that oil and
gas loss. So that wasn't going
to be possible in that time
frame. So then looking at page
7, what can we do about it?
Well, luckily you as
The legislature and the governor
took care of this problem last
year. You passed and the
governor signed Senate Bill 26,
uh, which caps the amount of
current oil and gas revenues
that are sent to the state and
send them sent to our severance
tax permanent fund.
And that we have now been able
to model and the, uh, state, uh,
economists have been able to
model what that impact is going
to look like. And the impact is
profound. It, it really is a
generational change for how
we're going to be able to do
things in New Mexico and you can
see here this graph on the left,
those yellow, uh, uh, parts of
the bars represent the
additional revenue coming into
the severance tax permanent
fund, just as a result of this
bill.
And then you can see on the
right, the severances permit
from distributions back to the
general fund and you can see
that they're projected to ramp
up significantly over time. And
that is in large part because of
this bill.
One additional benefit that uh
the state economists have noted
beyond just being able to
provide a growing source of
revenue back to the general fund
over time is that this has also
now become the most stable
source of revenue for the state.
And the projection is that over
the next several years, we will
be able to remove a significant
portion of the volatility from
New Mexico's revenues right now,
New Mexico is, uh, I think
ranked 3rd or 4th.
Nationally for having the most
volatile revenues. Imagine, uh,
over the next several years,
getting to at least mid pack on
the least revenue volatile side
and potentially over time being
one of the least, uh, revenue
volatility states in the
country. That gives you as
allocators of funding much more
predictability from year to
year.
So going on to slide 8.
I just want to give you a
picture of what this is going to
look like comparing FY 24 and FY
50. So you can see that our in
green, our distributions back to
the general fund last year
represented about 11% of all
general fund revenues, severance
taxes, rents, and royalties, the
just direct oil and gas
contributions were 24%. And
again, there were indirect
contributions that showed up in
income taxes and especially in
sales taxes. Now we move to FY
50, severance taxes and rents
and royalties have dropped to 7
But permanent fund distributions
have increased to 32%. By FY 50,
our distributions back to the
state will be essentially a
third of your entire revenue
source. And because of the way
that it is given back with a
5-year average, it is going to
continue to be a very stable,
smooth revenue source over time.
And moving to slide 9.
Just want to highlight something
that was put out by, uh, the
Department of Finance and
Administration. So they cited
the consensus revenue estimating
group in putting
this, these numbers together,
they said that they anticipate
that by 2039, the distributions
from the, uh, uh, permanent
funds back to the state will
eclipse oil and gas revenues as
the single largest source of
revenue for the state. That is
not very far off. That's.
15 years from now, I hope to
still be at SIC to see this
happen. So I, I, I think this is
just incredible. And again, this
would not have happened without
direct action from you as the
legislature and the governor
signing that bill. I, I can't
understate the importance of
this legislation. This really uh
changes how New Mexico can
budget, how we can fund things
for generations moving forward.
Now, going to slide 10, what's
the other way that we can help
New Mexico. We're helping on the
budget side, but we can also
help with direct investments
back into Mexico's economy. Uh,
you can see on the right there,
we have, uh, a, a piece of the
legislation that enables us to
make private equity investments
essentially venture capital
investments, uh, to support
economic development in the
state of New Mexico. The
legislation focuses in
particular on technology
and commercialization out of our
labs and out of our
universities. And as a result of
that, our council has focused,
uh, our investments primarily on
frontier technologies.
Going to slide 11.
We're not alone in this, and
luckily that's the case because
we can't, uh, uh, do this by
ourselves. Uh, we really need a
lot of great partners in, uh,
the ecosystem to help build the
entrepreneurial ecosystem and we
have great partners including
the two at the table here. Now,
on this page, uh, we have the
New Mexico Finance Authority and
the Economic Development
Department represented here, so
I'm not going to cover those at
all, but I will highlight the
small business Investment
Corporation, the SBIC, which
receives an allocation.
2% of the severance tax
permanent fund, uh, for
providing traditional small
business loans.
Now, going on to slide 12. Uh, I
just wanted to provide the list
of the technologies that we
focus on.
If we receive an incredible
opportunity, uh, to benefit the
state through an investment that
doesn't fall into one of these
categories, we can still move
forward. But these are the, uh,
technologies that we're focused
on.
Going on to slide 13, what have
we been doing? So these are the
investments that we've made
through the New Mexico program
over the last two years.
And you can see over the last
just 2 years we've put more than
$650 million into venture
capital funds with the focus of
helping to start up high-tech
businesses here in New Mexico
or, uh, to a lesser extent, but
something that we're also now
looking at taking high-tech
startups from other places and
bringing them here.
Uh, so this is a this is the
current formulation of the
program. Uh, we have run this
program in other ways in the
past and they were not
successful. This has started to,
uh, become successful, but also
we have looked at best practices
nationally and around the world
for how do areas really build
thriving entrepreneurial
ecosystems, and we started doing
that by making a shift in, in
what we attack. There are two
things that we
He continuously, uh, that, uh,
are challenges that New Mexico
faces in having a thriving
entrepreneurial ecosystem. We
don't have enough experienced
entrepreneurs, and we have gaps
in our capital financing system.
So if you'll turn the page to
14.
We've recognized that and we are
now working with partners to try
to address both of those gaps.
So on the capital financing
piece, we are working with a
venture capital groups to try to
uh specifically fill in those
gaps in the capital financing.
So maybe a company was able to
get pre-seeded funding and then
they, they currently don't find
any source of funding when
they're ready for that next
stage of development or make it,
maybe they
make it to Series A funding and
then they want to go to Series B
funding because the company is
doing really well. They're
growing, and there's no Series B
funding in the state and so they
leave. We have all seen those
stories play out in the, uh, in
the papers. We're working with
partners now to try to fill in
those gaps, either individually
where they are able to provide
funding across that ecosystem or
uh cohesively, uh, with all of
the groups that we're working
with and again we've invested.
over 650 million into more than
20 different venture capital
groups over the last two years.
Now, the other piece is, how do
we have more experienced
entrepreneurs here. Well, there
are two ways that we can do
that. We can either train them
or we can bring them in, and we
don't think it's an either or
approach, so we're doing both.
We're working with the venture
capital groups to set up actual
operations here where they're
not just providing funding, but
where they are also either
bringing in experienced
entrepreneurs from the outside,
or they're, uh, taking the local
founders and matching them.
Up with highly experienced
entrepreneurs and providing very
close one on one mentorship, uh,
over what is likely to be a
period of a few years until the
point where they are ready to
graduate out of the program, uh,
and hit the ground. So that's
the shift that, that we've made,
uh, we think this will help
address some of the uh gaps in
having a thriving
entrepreneurial ecosystem. But
again, we are one piece of it.
I'm very glad that, uh, our
partners are working to
Address other components that
are equally as needed uh for a
thriving entrepreneurial
ecosystem. And with that I'd be
happy to either stand for
questions or to turn it over to
my partners here at the table.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. So my
name is Ryan Decker. I'm the
policy and capital strategist at
the New Mexico Finance
Authority. It's a pleasure to be
with you today to share our
experience, uh, with state
investment programs. Ours
touches significantly less on
technology than um the program
that John just described at the
state investment council. Um,
but it's really great to be here
also alongside, um, the SIC and
NMEDD who
we've worked closely with in
developing our venture capital
program over the last two years.
Um, so what I hope to cover
today first, um, just how we've
implemented our state investment
program, including the role that
expert consultants and targeted
research projects have played in
helping us identify capital gaps
and other challenges faced by
local entrepreneurs. Um, how we
look at risk and expected
returns relative to the economic
development objectives.
investments we've made and also
where our program has been
active, uh, with respect
specifically to technology.
Um, on slide 2, just a, uh, an
overview of the venture capital
Program Act, which created our
investment program two years ago
in 2022, the venture capital
program Act authorized the NMFA
to make investments in funds or
investments directly in New
Mexico businesses to enhance
economic development objectives
and create job opportunities.
Um, one of the things I'll point
out is in contrast to the
statute that John just described
that's relevant to the state
investment.
Council and their local
investment program, there is no
emphasis in our statute, um, and
our statutory authority that
focuses our investment program
on science and technology or,
um, uh, research spin out
ventures.
Um, our purposes are to provide
capital either equity or debt,
um, to startup expansion,
product market development, um,
and, uh, yeah, for the
development of early stage
businesses and, uh, the
parameters described in the
statute funds themselves must
have one full-time experience
manager and businesses must
demonstrate local substance. Uh,
the statute also specifies
concentration limits.
And reporting requirements.
Um, and lastly, uh, the statute
authorizes NMFA to make what it
terms differential rate
investments for the purposes of
economic development. And what
that means is that we can accept
a targeted financial return that
is relatively lower than your
typical market rate return
target, um, uh, in exchange for
the, um, expected economic
development impact. So typical
venture capital investments,
market rate, uh,
venture capital investments. Um,
they're typically targeting a
relatively high financial
return, and that is because
investing in startup and early
stage businesses is very risky,
um, venture. They're also
traditional venture capital is
typically focused on
technology-driven sectors where
underlying businesses, um, are
projecting in some cases
exponential revenue growth,
which is driving the, um,
relatively high returns. So in
our program, we're able to
Look at funds and strategies
that are targeting a relatively
lower um expected financial
return, um, and, and that's at
the, um, for the benefit of the
economic development impact, um,
that we're targeting. And I'll
go into a bit of those
objectives on the next slide.
Um, last but not least, on
capitalization of our program is
$50 million came from state
appropriations. We also are
working closely in partnership
with the economic development
department on the implementation
of the state small business
credit initiative, uh, award to
the state from the Department of
Treasury and through that, we
have a roughly additional $200
million. Um, so in total 700
million and again compared to
660 million at the State
Investment council, our, our
program is
Significantly smaller and, um,
actually quite different.
Um
So on the next slide, um,
What I'd like to highlight here.
Uh, in the first year of
implementation, we hired an
investment consultant to support
on our program strategy and
execution, including due
diligence and investment
monitoring, um, that consultant
has been, um, incredibly helpful
towards sourcing opportunities
and helping us implement
industry best practices,
particularly in the evaluation
of fund opportunities, um,
qualifications and, and fund
structures. Um, we've also
learned, worked very closely
with other agencies and learned
a lot.
From the state investment
council's experience in
particular from um multiple
decades of investing here in the
local venture capital ecosystem,
and with the economic
development department on
strategic objectives and sectors
of focus, um, with the
forward-looking perspective of
helping support the
diversification of the state's
economy. Um, so all of this led
to the development of an
investment policy which guides
the implementation of our
program. Uh, we first adopted
this last summer, um, and it has
5 core objectives.
The first two are what I might
characterize as um more
conventional economic
development objectives, uh, uh,
supporting investment in local
businesses and also uh helping
support the creation of local
jobs. Um, the third, um, helping
support the diversification of
the state's economy. So, uh, we
do this in a couple of ways. Um,
first focusing where we can on
investments in uh the targeted
sectors, um, by the
in the statewide economic
development plan, um, and, um,
we've also looked at other ways
that we can focus on
diversifying venture capital,
access to, for example, rural
communities and geographically
throughout the state.
Um, 4th, uh, we have an
objective to increase access to
capital, access to venture
capital for, for entrepreneurs
from underserved communities.
Um, so that includes rural
communities, but also, uh,
traditionally underrepresented
founders, uh, minority, uh,
business owners, including
women, veterans, and founders
from indigenous communities, um,
Tim Mae.
And lastly, um, our program
seeks to attract additional
private sector investment and
investors, particularly from out
of state, um, to invest here in
local businesses. Um, this is
one we came to appreciate is
really important um from some of
our learnings from the State
Investment council's experience.
Um, it's really important to
build that ecosystem of
investors, um, for those follow
And lastly, um, our program
seeks to attract additional
private sector investment and
investors, particularly from out
of state, um, to invest here in
local businesses. Um, this is
one we came to appreciate is
really important um from some of
our learnings from the State
Investment council's experience.
Um, it's really important to
build that ecosystem of
investors, um, for those
follow-on rounds once local
companies, um, start gaining
market traction and need
additional capital.
To expand.
On slide 4,
This, uh, talks about the two
different types of allocations
that we've made in our program
to date. We've made 7
commitments to two different,
uh, across two different types
of funds. One I would
characterize as local funds, so
those are locally based, um,
emerging fund managers with a
specific sector expertise, um,
and, uh, a key benefit, um, of,
of this type of fund is that
they're making investments
directly into local businesses,
um, and building investment
capacity here on the ground.
A particular sector sector where
they specialize, um, some of the
risks we've seen with these,
with the local ecosystem, um, to
some degree it is um relatively
focused on a more tech driven,
um, sectors, some of the other
more mission-oriented investment
strategies that our program has
looked at, um, uh, there are not
many managers here on the ground
that focus, uh, for example, on
investing in businesses founded
by underserved entrepreneurs.
And some of the local groups,
um, uh, uh, haven't yet
demonstrated I would
characterize all of them as
emerging fund managers. So, um,
from being able to demonstrate a
track record or a um more
substantial investor base also
of institutional investors, um,
they are still developing and in
the early stage of development
there. Um, we've also seen in
the last 9 to 12 months actually
relatively high turnover among a
handful of them.
Um, they also tend to have
smaller funds which
operationally can be um less
sustainable, um, and lastly, um,
we have encountered some um
structures that have, um, a
potential for conflicts of
interest where you don't have
fully dedicated investment teams
focused on, uh, solely invested
on focus focusing, um, on
investing the fund, um, some of
those, um, uh, funds are staffed
with individuals that are also
managing investments elsewhere.
Um, so that is not typically a
structure that we would deploy,
um, a state resource to in terms
of an investment.
Um, on the national funds, so
one of the advantages um we've
seen is that some of those
managers have brought in and are
active here in New Mexico and
are bringing um sector strategy
and investment expertise here to
the local ecosystem and to local
entrepreneurs. Um, they tend to
be a bit further along, uh, in
their own organization's
development and are raising
larger funds, which translates
to larger amounts of investment
capital being available for
their portfolio companies.
Um, and they do have more
traction with, um, institutional
and follow on investors that
they can also attract um to
local, local businesses. So some
of the challenges with the
national funds is a commitment
that they'll deploy here when
they're um geographic scope is
broader than New Mexico if they
find investment opportunities
that are, um, relatively more
attractive. They could allocate
elsewhere. Um, so that's one,
One challenge we've been
navigating in terms of how we
negotiate our commitments with
these types of, um, these types
of managers.
Um, our investment policy, uh,
contains specific parameters and
restrictions to mitigate risk
risks with each types of, of
these allocations, um, in, in
particular, our requirements for
national funds. So, um, during
the diligence period, they must
demonstrate that they have local
pipeline or um they must have
already committed to local
businesses here. They must make
a commitment to staffing uh uh
local staffing and having um
professionals here on the.
um,
or they must commit to deploying
capital, um, and supporting the
the entrepreneurial ecosystem.
Um, this is typically done
through a commitment to come a
certain number of times of years
and host what they typically
called office hours, um, where
they spend time with local
entrepreneurs, um, and explore,
um, uh, explore investments and
also just work with them, um, on
their investment readiness.
Um, I wanted to highlight as
well to you all two pieces of
research we've done to help
inform the strategy for our
program and the implementation,
um, so first, uh, in, in the
summer of last summer, 2023, um,
we worked with a group called
Next Street, um, which is a
national consultant that has
worked in over 20 different
markets here in the US, um, very
much focused on small business
needs, uh.
Uh, both capital and also other,
um, professional services,
technical assistance needs. Um,
and we engage them when we were
first starting out with the
program because we knew that um
our program, we were looking to
do something different and
target um the types of
businesses that aren't typically
targeted by venture capital
investors and we wanted to
understand better the types of
capital products that those
businesses needed. Um, in
addition to other potential
services that they might need.
The research piece also aligned
well with the partnership that
came together last summer with
the New Mexico Economic
Development Department on the
state's small business credit
Initiative award, um, and so,
um, we, we commissioned that
last summer, um, and N Street
spent about 4 months, um, doing
a combination of macroeconomic
research and also extensive
interviews with stakeholders,
um, including a small groups of
entrepreneurs from different
parts of the state.
And representing different um
sectors and communities in order
to come up with their
conclusions. Um, the full final
report is available on our
website, um, and has been since
last October when it was
published, um.
And what's before you on slide 5
or just um was is one of the,
um, one of the graphics where um
they highlighted 5 different
capital gaps here in the red and
the green and the yellow, and
they characterize them in
different ways. Um, and I might
call your attention to, um, from
the left to the right, you have
the stage of business, so
starting on the left is
basically it started up and then
as a business gets more mature,
you move to the right. And then
there are two rows there. First
is, uh, capital options for.
Growth industries, or what I
would characterize in this forum
as maybe technology driven um
companies and then capital
options for other industries. So
industries that um are not um
really technology driven and one
of the other um interesting um
uh, facts, um, that this study
points out is that actually most
small businesses in New Mexico
are in that bottom group of
other industries. Um, they're
not high tech.
And tech-driven businesses. So
that's very much, um, where we
focused on, on, on those gaps,
um, facing those businesses and
thinking through um strategies
that we might, um, uh, that we
might support with our program.
Um, you can also see there, um,
so in the top row, you have um
uh uh representations of
different um kind of uh groups
that are here locally in the
more traditional venture capital
ecosystem.
The top row, and in the bottom
row you have, um, groups that
are more, um, what I would
characterize as alternative, um,
financing for those small
businesses and other industries
and actually, um, the small
business Investment Corporation,
which was one of those other is
not represented here today but
was in John's presentation, um,
works very closely with this
group of community development
financial institutions in
supporting the products that
they offer to small businesses
here. Um, lastly, I'd just like
to point out
no man's land gap, um,
highlighted in the study, the
need for alternative growth
capital products that bridge
between micro and commercial
capital options. So, um, between
what CDFIs are offering here
locally, which tends to be more
micro lending and smaller loan
products, and then what more
mainstream commercial banks and
community banks offer. There's a
gap there, um, that's the gap
that we um are seeking to
address with the new fund that
we created with $100 million
from the.
that I'll highlight later. Um,
so that was one piece of
research we concluded last
summer and then just this summer
actually presented to our, um,
board last week, um, our
investment consultant Mikita
Investment Group, um, did a bit
of a deeper dive into, um,
probably more related to some of
the topics that you all have
been talking about, um, today
and yesterday, um, but the
viability of these proprietary
spin out funds, um, and also
just looking at what it takes.
Um, some models for success, um,
looking at different ecosystems
throughout the country and best
practices to support spin-out
ventures, meaning ventures
spinning out of, um, higher ed
and, and our research labs, um,
trying to commercialize
technology. Um, uh, I heard you
all speaking earlier about the
valley of death. That's one of
the um uh uh um uh uh one of
the realities that our
consultant point.
out as, you know, very, very
real and something that um all
the startups are facing, that
space between a promising idea,
um, an intellectual property or
patent, and then, you know,
getting to be an investable
company. Um, and that, that, uh,
chasm or val valley of death,
um, as they characterize it. Um,
they emphasize that it it takes
a significant amount of work,
resources and expertise, um, to
cross that.
And to go from intellectual
property or a patent and to
reach an investable company that
can actually attract investment
capital and is successful and
viable.
Um, and on the next two slides,
I've just um summarized a couple
of the, uh, key messages and
conclusions from that study.
That study is also available on
our website, uh, slide 7, they
profiled the Stanford office of
Technology Transfer that was
established in 1970 and um is
considered the leading
technology transfer office, um,
in the country. One of the
things they pointed out um is
really interesting is this, this
notion of a funnel.
And, you know, going from, uh,
4,273 active technologies,
roughly 1000 investable ideas,
um, that led to 568 new
technologies, which led to 173
patents and all of that led to
to date 27 viable startup
companies. So, you know, the
leading ecosystem in the country
has a funnel like that where
they
Created 27 viable startup
companies. So that just gives
you a sense of how many ideas it
takes in order to generate, you
know, what 27 arguably is, is,
is one or maybe two fund
portfolios.
Um, they looked at, um, other
national and regional ecosystems
in their report you can read a
bit more about, um, uh,
ecosystems in Michigan, Georgia,
and North Carolina. They also
looked at our regional ecosystem
in particular Colorado, and
pointed to Utah as being a
really great model with a
statewide coordinated approach,
um, that has led, uh, both by
the governor and also statewide
university efforts to support
the local ecosystem, um,
One of the things they very much
focus on too is initially there
was an emphasis on patents and
prosecution of patents and
intellectual property and um uh
now ecosystems are shifting and
really thinking more
intentionally about how they can
support entrepreneurs and the
entrepreneurial ecosystem. Um,
so that was one of the, the
things they emphasized.
Um, and on slide 8, just to
highlight, um, they highlighted
5 different main risks and
considerations, um, so first
that funnel I mentioned
mentioned, just the volume of
ideas it takes to create a
pipeline, um, and they also
concluded that, um, really the
pipeline coming out of any one
institution isn't going to be
enough to um capitalize a
dedicated successful fund.
Um, the other risk is that often
companies spinning out um of uh
research institutions are often
too early, um, in the
commercialization process
process. There's a lot more that
needs to happen in terms of
commercialization and developing
uh product and market fit in
order to become investment
ready. And what they really
characterize this as is, is the
need um to really fill a
professionalization gap, um, and
they emphasize that it's really
not.
Just about capital. It's really
about this professionalization
of of the businesses themselves
and the development of the
businesses themselves.
A few of the other challenges
they highlighted, um, there's
not always an alignment of
interest between um research
institutions, um, and the
companies that are trying to
spin out in terms of um the
value of the intellectual
property and also the talent,
um, that developed it and, and
where those individuals sit, um,
they pointed to a need for
follow on investment and, um, if
a business is too attached to a
research institution that can be
harder to attract that type of.
Capital, um, uh, they pointed to
a cultural, um, a cultural, uh,
kind of gap where employees and
faculty often don't don't have
the same qualities that
successful entrepreneurs, um,
often have and, and what it
takes to, to put their sleeves
up and run a, run a business.
Um, and lastly, just that
professional and management
expertise, um, that's really
needed as a support, um, here,
here in the ecosystem, in order
for spin out ventures to
succeed. Um, in terms of um this
studies uh specific conclusions,
um, so, and, and they did look
also at the Catalyst Fund, which
was a state-backed um fund of
investment fund program that
invested in a number of
underlying um
Ones that focus very much on
spin out ventures from different
research institutions here in
the state. One thing they
observed is that there was
actually a lot of overlap in the
investments, um, and some of
those funds, which created some
um uh unfavorable competition
between them that wasn't
particularly healthy for the
local companies. Um, and also
that speaks a little bit to the
pipeline, um, issues that that
they highlighted elsewhere. They
also met with Roadrunner
Ventures.
Studios, which um was a recent
development. It was in um the
slides that John went through in
August 2024, um, the state
Investment council made a made a
significant additional
investment into a local group
that has a venture studio model.
So, um, in that model, they are
not just, um, uh, uh, it's, it's
not just about investing in
technology, but it's really
about commercializing and
working with a team to build a
company, um, around, around
that.
Locally, um, uh, locally
researched and developed
technology. Um,
Our consultant thought that um
that team was excellent and they
actually think that that model
is, is addressing a very
critical need, um, right now,
and the State Investment council
has allocated significant
resource to that. Um, so in
terms of the conclusions from
this study, um, one, the
conclusion was that one
institution itself doesn't
generate enough investable ideas
to to merit its own captive
fund, um.
a fund, a viable fund would need
to really be more of a statewide
and kind of open, open sourcing
in order to have enough, um,
enough pipeline to actually be
sustainable and to um uh a key
gap around professionalization
um of uh local spin out ventures
is currently being met by that
Roadrunner venture studio model.
Um, and on the last slide, I
just wanted to show you, um, on
slide 9, what are um portfolio
looks like today, um, in terms
of the seven commitments that I
highlighted. So, and as I
mentioned, we really haven't
focused exclusively on science
and technology. We were excited
to support two local emerging
fund managers that are um in
technology sectors and two of
the sectors that the economic
development department, um, has
targeted for
Um, a future economic
diversification that's Tramway
Ventures. Um, that's a local
homegrown women led venture
capital firm. They are in the
process of raising their third
fund and targeting a $40 million
fund, um, that fun 3 was
anchored by the State Investment
council, and we made a
significant commitment up to $7
million into that fund. Uh,
we've also supported dangerous
New Mexico fund one. That fund
was also
Anchored by the State Investment
Council, and we made a
commitment up to $50 to that
fund. Dangerous is focused on
climate technology and
sustainable technologies that
are and and businesses that are
based here in New Mexico. The
3rd local fund we've allocated
to and committed to the $100
million to advance New Mexico.
That's the strategy, um that was
developed on the back of the
next research. It's actually a
debt strategy. It offers
flexible um debt products to
Um, and, and targets underserved
founders, so small business
owners and rural communities,
um, or from uh basically
minority business owners, um,
and that fun coming back to the
concept of differential rate
investments are actual financial
return expectations for that
fund are, are relatively and
very low, um, in terms of the,
the dollar return we expect on
our investment. Um, and that's,
um, the trade off for that.
is that we're we're increasing
the access to capital, um for um
minority business owners so that
they can grow and expand their
businesses.
Um, the other 4 commitments
we've made are to national
funds, um, Raven, um, they
invest in businesses led by
indigenous, um, founders,
Tiverton is focused exclusively
on the agricultural production
sector,
um, and we also have, uh, one
fund in the later stage of our
pipeline also focused on
agriculture. So this is
agricultural production
production and farming and
increasing access to capital.
For um growing farms here in New
Mexico, Tiverton already has a
local investment in a local
dairy, and they're looking at a
number of other um crops that
you all are familiar with, um,
Chili's, pecans, um, that we
have here in New Mexico. Um,
Vamos is focused on investing in
businesses led by Latinx
founders, um, and last but not
least, our our latest commitment
was to rethink, which is focused
on, um, early stage businesses
founded by um women.
So, um, I hope that gives you a
flavor of our uh state venture
capital investment program, very
different than the State
Investment council, definitely
not exclusively focused on
technology, um, and yeah, I'm
happy to answer any questions
after.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me. Uh, my name is Nora Meyer
Sackett. I'm the director of the
State Office of Strategy,
Science and Technology housed at
the New Mexico Economic
Development Department. Um, you
know, through the, these three
conversations we've sort of been
progressively dialing into this
program, to our programs, and
I'm going to continue doing that
my programs are a much smaller
scale than the other two
previously discussed and a bit
different. Um, so at the Office
of Strategy, Science and
Technology, uh.
Our mission is to connect New
Mexico's innovation
infrastructure to the commercial
market. Um, we work with New
Mexico startups and early stage
companies in science and
technology, um, to support them
to grow and expand and
ultimately create tax base here
in New Mexico and to create
jobs.
Um,
We have 5 target sectors of the
state's 9 identified
economic focuses, advanced
computing, advanced energy,
aerospace, bioscience, and
intelligent manufacturing.
And we support those, um,
sectors and, and early stage,
uh, science and technology
companies in those sectors
through our grants. Um, so we
provide non-diluted funding for
New Mexico-based early stage
science and technology
companies. That means we're not
diluting the equity stake of
investors or owners of that
company. So, um, their grants,
they're not, uh, an investment
for a portion of equity. Um, and
we have, uh, 4 that we currently
operate with a bit of flex in
that number.
I will get into, um, so on the
5th slide, I'll start with the
um science and tech small
business startup grants, one of
the, um, longer standing ones,
um, this, these two grants on,
on slide 5 have historically
been funded by funds internally
set aside at the economic
development division of the
Economic Development Department
to fund these grants, not
necessarily, um, a specific line
item.
Uh, that was appropriated for
these grants, so it has been an
intentional um directed uh
appropriation, you know,
internally of of a use of the
department funds, recognizing
the need to support these early
stage science and tech
companies. Um, the science and
tech small business startup
grant historically has been
between 4 and 6 awards, um,
every fiscal year of between
$10,000 and $25,000
these are two early stage New
Mexico companies um in science
and tech.
To support business development.
So that is, um, often market
research, intellectual property,
um, legal fees for the
intellectual property, items
like that. Um, this year I'm
excited that we'll be able to
evaluate, uh, proposals with the
hope of making words between 25
and 50k, so increasing that
number a little bit, um, for
context, so we have averaged
about 4 to 6 awards per year.
Um, our cycle, our application.
This award just closed for this
year we received 41
applications. So the demand is
much higher than the what we
were able to to award. Last year
it was about 50, um, so kind of
around the same, uh same amount,
um, and I'm, I'm very excited
that we'll be able to make, uh,
larger wards, hopefully a couple
more as well in terms of amount
of awards, um, incorporating
additional funding that we are
very grateful to have received.
Um, also on slide 5.
The SBIR STTR matching grant, so
that is the small business
innovation research grant. Those
are, um, federal grants offered
by numerous federal agencies for
R&D in, um, in science and tech.
So we have historically awarded,
um, there are different phases
for SBIRs, a phase one and a
phase 2. There are sometimes
phase 3s, but typically we look
at phase 1 and 2, which are
exactly what it sounds like just
earlier and later stages of of
R&D, um, typically for phase
ones, we have a
Awarded $25,000 of matching
funds and $100,000 matching
funds for phase twos. Those have
averaged about 5 awards per
fiscal year as well. Um, and
this year again with uh some
additional funding resources or
looking at being able to bump up
the phase one award to 50K,
which again, there is great need
on the SBIR grant, I think I'll,
I'll note this one in
particular, um, if folks who
have gotten a federalist.
BIR ward they have already gone
undergone additional vetting,
right, by tech technological
technological experts in that
field in those relevant federal
agencies. Um, so it is not only,
you know, my office and our, our
technical or technology research
collaborative Board who is
evaluating them, but really
we're looking to sort of add on
to that investment, uh, already
being made at the federal level.
Um, on slide 6, we have two of
our new programs, um, and I was
so glad that Lisa was able to
touch on these, on one of these,
well, both of these earlier as
well. Um, the Advanced Energy
Award pilot program launched
last year, um, and it was funded
by, um, there was a 2023 uh
special appropriation in
Advanced energy funds to the
economic development department.
Um, we made 7 awards in the
first year, um.
For a total of about 3.4 million
in the awards ranged between
300,000 and 750,000, um, both of
the, uh, two of the companies
that were in the previous panel,
TS Nano and Pajarito powder were
recipients of this award as
well. Um, this award, as well as
the Research university award is
run in partnership with UNM
Rainforests. We've been very
grateful to have their support
in
um administering this uh
programs. Uh, the awards this
year were made to companies with
technologies in water
treatments, um, solar energy,
hydrogen, battery storage,
methane emissions. Um, in the
second round will, um, run over
the turn of the new year.
And second, new program is the
Research university Team Pitch
Award pilot program, and I have
only myself to blame for that
very long name.
Um, we made 3 wards in the first
round of $200,000 each, um, plus
entrepreneurship consulting
services. Um, this award was
really to target much earlier
stage to kind of coax uh those
technology out of the
universities,
um, it is a bit different than
the grants we have run in the
past, so it is a pilot program
and so we're looking at how, you
know, we can best move forward,
what are the best ways to target
that? But um,
Another award we've been
grateful to be able to run with
additional funding.
Um,
There are a couple additional
funding that is kind of in
progress, um, that is, uh, came
from an appropriation made in
the last session to the economic
development department. Um,
The New Mexico is part of an
economic development
administration at the federal
level tech hub program award,
which is the elevate Quantum
tech hub, um, and New Mexico is
part of that with Colorado. And
so we have set aside some funds
for competitive grant deployment
that partners with that elevate
Quantum tech hub to
um support uh quantum startup
growth here in New Mexico in
partnership with that federal
funds. Um, and then we also, uh,
Deploying, there's an RFP out
for this right now, um, but at a
competitive award process for
pilot projects in advanced
energy and or water treatment,
so a technology that has been
proven at a smaller scale but
has not yet been enacted at at
larger scale, um, to continue
advancing that sector.
Um, I want to hit on a couple
lab initiatives that are kind of
run in partnership with my
office but not directly overseen
by my office, um, that I'm sure
you all have heard several
presentations on by the labs,
um, but the Mexico Small
Business Assistance Program, the
NMSBA provides funds, um, to
provide technical assistance to
New Mexico small businesses, so
the labs get the funding, get a
tax break, essentially, um, to
provide that technical
assistance. Um.
And the one I I work with more
in more particular detail is
trigger the technology readiness
gross receipts Initiative, which
provides up to $150,000 worth of
technical assistance from Los
Alamos and Sandia,
um, to New Mexico science and
tech companies with a reta,
which is a collaborative
research and development
agreement. Um, this is really a
unique, both of these programs,
but particularly trigger um a
unique assets that New Mexico
has to offer, um, when I
In conversation, you know, with
startups in other states who are
perhaps looking at New Mexico.
These are something that I
definitely um focus on because
there's technically one other
state with two DOE national
labs, but it is a rarity and it
is not common to be able to
offer uh uh this kind of
technical assistance from world
renowned experts in the field,
so that is something that has
proven to be a unique asset for
us and for companies.
Um, it does require a crater
which can have a bit of a both
time and financial aspect, um,
but it is a unique program that
has, has been very well
utilized.
Uh, so that is kind of the
summary of the programs that my
office offers, um, looking at
kind of, I wanted to provide a
bit of a perspective of where
those programs may sit in
comparison to a few other
similar programs. Um,
Starting with the SPIR matching
grants. Um, so about half the
states, including New Mexico,
provide SPIR matching grants.
Um, and in looking at those
amounts, uh, at least 9, I think
it was a bit more, but some of
them the details were a little
hard to get to, um, provide more
funding than New Mexico, um, our
SBIR STTR matching grants are
excellent. Um, they're something
not every state has, um, and,
but it is interesting that other
states who do not have
The kind of federal labs and
federal assets. Again, this is,
you know, federal grant funding
that we have are providing
higher amounts than we do. Um,
you know, our SBIR matching
grants are funded higher than
our other, uh, startup grant to
begin with because those
awardees have already undergone
rigorous vetting and approval,
um, by the federal agencies that
are experts in the field of
their technology, um, but you
can see in some of the states
listed here that this is just
an example of some of them that
offer considerably more funding
than we do, for the, for their
SBIR matching grants.
Um, I wanted to provide an
example of one of our, our
neighbors. I have a particularly
working with on the elevate
quantum tech hub been working
closely with the Colorado team
because they are a partner state
in that tech hub. Um, and have
been learning more about the uh
non-diluted funding
opportunities that they provide
for their science and tech
companies. They typically refer
to those as their advanced
industries, um, and I wanted to
just provide a little bit of
First, their advances advanced
industries, um, are very much
aligned with our target sectors.
The advanced manufacturing,
aerospace, bioscience, energy,
natural resources, um, and their
grants are, are operating at a,
at a larger scale, I'll just say
so um the one that is most
similar to our science and tech
startup grant, um, is their
Colorado Advanced Industries
early stage capital and
retention grant. They're
awarding up to $250,000.
For advanced industries,
technology businesses, um, there
are several differences between
ours besides just the much
larger amount of funds. They are
also um for R&D and and
commercialization as compared to
our business startup grant only
being for business development
purposes. Um, another
interesting difference is that
they do require matching funds
for this, um, which has pros and
cons. Ours does not require
matching funds, which is a pro
in some fashion because that
means that the smaller
earlier stage companies who
really need a bite at that apple
are able to do so, um, but for a
larger award amount, there is an
argument to be made for
requiring matching funds as it
unlocks additional funding. Um,
it's, you know, bit of a
guarantee for the state
providing the non-valued
funding, but also on the other
side, a guarantee for the
venture capital or other source
providing that matching funding
that there is additional dollars
coming in. Um, another
interesting difference is that
these grants have a
A longer period of time to
deploy the funds as compared to
ours. Um, ours must be expended
by the end of the fiscal year.
Um, and I haven't gotten a great
answer as to why that is the
difference for Colorado, but
they do have much longer amount
of time to to use their funds.
Um, they also make far more
awards. So I mentioned, you
know, we average about 4 to 6
awards per year for each of
ours, um, they run this program
twice a year, uh, and in May of
this year, they
Announced 34 recipients, and
they will run it again this
fall.
Um, another Colorado example I
wanted to hit on was the
advanced industries
collaborative infrastructure
grant. Um, this is really built
to build out infrastructure for
the State's advanced industries
ecosystem. So there was some
conversation earlier about uh
incubators and accelerators kind
of targeting that aspect. Um,
they were up to $500,000 for
these programs. Uh, some of the
awards made include, um,
The Rocky Mountain inosphere,
which they were awarded funding
to develop additional wet lab
space after there was a report
at the time that found that the
Denver area was lacking over
1000 square feet of wet lab
space that there would be used
for if it existed. Um, it was
also an award to the University
of Colorado Denver. I thought
this was really interesting to
develop a gear innovation lab
for Colorado's outdoor rec
industry, really interesting
kind of crossover between two
industries that New Mexico
It also focuses on, um, and to
the uh Catalyst campus for
technology and innovation for
space technology and national
security acceleration programs.
So this is just kind of another
example of funding going not
necessarily directly to those
businesses but to the broader
infrastructure that supports the
growth and attraction of those
businesses.
Um, finally in Colorado is the
CHIPS Community support program.
Um, I think we're all familiar
with the CHIPS Act at the
federal level and the funding
that that is providing um for
various federal funding
opportunities, and Colorado
created this program to award
funds to local governments and
regional EDOs, economic
development organizations and
consortia of the two,
for industry advancement and,
and
Necessary studies to advance
their ability to receive the
federal funding opportunities
from the CHIPS Act.
Um, finally, I wanted to just
land on on.
A very interesting example that
I've come across,
Madam Chair, I'll be clear, I am
not proposing a legislative bill
in this conversation. I'm just
providing some interesting
context compared to, you know,
what I, what I hear when I'm
talking to startups,
particularly that I'm working to
attract to New Mexico, um,
Startup New York is there uh
kind of startup focused
incentive program in the state
of New York. Um, it's it's kind
of a wild slide that you'll see
here, um
But they offer new and expanding
businesses, the opportunity to
operate tax-free for 10 years on
or near eligible university or
college campuses in the state.
Um, so that, you know, is
requiring an interesting kind of
co-location and partnership and
resource sharing, um, and
providing an incentive for that.
Uh, and within that, within that
10 year benefit period they
provide an incentive for
employees of those startup New
York startups, um, to exclude.
All are part of their wages from
that company from their personal
income tax. Um, you know, in
looking at sort of this broader
national landscape of startups
and particularly when we're
looking at startups that are
grown in, you know, born in New
Mexico and trying to grow in New
Mexico and perhaps facing
difficulty or startups that
we're trying to relocate to New
Mexico from elsewhere. Everyone
has a different variety of
assets, you know, New York has
assets that New Mexico doesn't
have. They have indust.
density population, but they
have a higher cost of living,
higher cost of doing business,
so there are tools that they
have to deploy to combat those,
um, whereas we have, you know,
other assets, lower cost of
living, lower cost of doing
business, national labs, etc.
Um, one thing that has come up,
uh, that has been interesting as
well is looking at, you know,
the state incentive programs
which we are, as we rightly
should be very proud of and have
an incredible ROI, um, but they
are not designed for startups,
right? Uh, they're fully
designed for later stage
companies, um, and so in, you
know, the work I do looking to
really capture those early stage
companies, we have these
fantastic
grant programs, but just, you
know, I'm I'm out there casting
a net for what other levels
levers are available to pull to
incentivize startups to come
here, grow here, and succeed
here. Um, and thank you very
much. That is all I have for my
presentation.
Thank you all. Um our first
question will come from, uh,
Majority Leader Chasey.
Thank you very much. Let me get
my notes. I
I, I have a few questions for
John Clark. Um,
On page.
Let me, let me go back here.
I've got to find page 4 of
yours.
Here we go.
And I was interested in this
because I used to co-chair the
tobacco Settlement Revenue
Oversight Committee and at the
bottom of page 4 I do indicate
that the tobacco settlement
Permanent Fund.
will be distributing 4.7% of its
revenue beginning in this fiscal
year and or excuse me, next
fiscal year FY 25. Madam Chair,
and, uh, representative, uh,
this year, so we are beginning
to send that back to the year
25. All right, OK. I was right
the first time when I said this
year. So, um, when that, I was
chair of the committee when we
created the permanent fund and,
um the whole idea
was to have another source of
revenue. And, and not let
the because the the fund, the
settlement itself actually
favored the tobacco companies
and we didn't, although it's
supposed to be in perpetuity. We
had no guarantees that that
would be the case. And, um, then
we diverted the the
appropriation to the permanent
fund a number of years because
there were hard times and so
forth and we were really trying
to
Um, and I, I, I guess what I'm
surprised about and I serve on
the interim committee now is
that the corpus is large enough
to do that,
right? Madam Chair
Representative, yes, the corpus
has grown to the point where
it's large enough to do that,
uh, and it will continue to grow
over time because the,
the annual return target is
higher than the 4.7%
distribution. So those will just
continue to grow. That, that's
really great. And it's really
not intended to just go to
Tobacco program funds but for
health and education programs.
Um, and, and I, I'm just
thrilled and I, I mentioned, uh,
Sean, um, serves as the one of
the attorneys on the tobacco
settlement revenue Oversight
Fund, and we've, we've had,
fortunately, because of
circumstances that allowed us to
do it. We've built the corpus
up. We've tried to, uh, make up
for that, but I, I'm just really
excited about that. And um
And the other thing that I was
interested in was your efforts
to reduce the volatility of our
um our revenues and my first
question was, well, by what year
do you aim to reduce that? It
appears to me that it looks by
2039 is where when its surpasses
oil and gas, is that the goal to
reduce the volatility? Is that
your benchmark? I'm, I'm just
wondering about.
So Madam Chair and
Representative, that has never
been a formal goal of our
organization, uh, but when I
came in, I found out that our
organization hadn't done any
strategic planning in 11 years
and so we're doing that at the
end of this year, and, uh, part
of what I'm asking for is I'm
asking the council to decide
what is the precise mission of
our organization because right
now our mission is, is very
broad and honestly kind of
vague.
to become a respected
organization nationwide and to
grow the funds with that being
pretty much the extent of it.
Uh, but I'll say in terms of
revenue volatility for the
state. We don't have an exact
target at this point, but if I
remember correctly, the
consensus revenue estimating
group said that they expect that
over the next 5 years that we
will take 55% of the volatility
out of the state's revenue.
Um, Madam Chair, and, um,
Mr. Clark, I really think that's
a great idea because at any time
we ask for any increased
accountability from the oil and
gas industry we're just told,
well, you know, we're we're the
source of all your money, so
just go away. Um, so, and, and,
and yet there are very
responsible actors in that
field, and I know from having
spoken with them, they wish that
the nonresponsible actors were
Perhaps reduced in number or
eliminated. So, um, I think that
that that that's really, really
worthwhile. And just 11 more,
you've said at one more point,
at the very beginning that we're
the 3rd highest in our
volatility right now, and we
would like to get uh lower. Do
you know other states who have
the permanent fund capacity to
stabilize their um overall
picture.
So Madam Chairman,
Representative, uh, other states
do not have a permanent fund,
the size that we do uh with a
state budget that is as small as
ours with perhaps the exception
of the Alaska Permanent Fund,
which is the largest, but rather
than sending money to state
government to use for its
budget, they sent money each
year back to the residents of
the state directly, so it just
it operates a little
differently. Uh, I anticipate
that in, in the
Very near future in the next
several years, we will probably
have the largest impact on state
budgeting uh of any sovereign
wealth fund in the country.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
just really great news. Thank
you very much. I appreciate it.
Thank you. Um, next is, uh,
representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It was
mentioned earlier as part of the
NMFA presentation that efforts
are made to bring in outside
companies to invest in New
Mexico.
Uh, I'm curious how, what that
effort looks like.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
and Representative De la Cruz.
So, um, uh, when we're working
with fund managers that are
located outside of New Mexico,
um, we, um, make an investment
in their fund and, um, they
commit to, um, a number of
things. 2 of 5 things that are
articulated our investment
policy. Local staffing,
providing office hours for local
entrepreneurs, um, coming to New
Mexico a certain number of times
a year.
We are working with some
managers to actually commit to
deploying a certain dollar
amount here in the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, what
is the biggest challenge to
having that happen? I know we
need more of it. I'm just
curious what what makes it
difficult.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
for the question. So, um, I
think, um, when you have an
investment firm that is managing
a fund and executing on an
investment strategy and trying
to meet certain objectives for
that funds investors, um,
oftentimes those objectives are
around a financial return. They
may also be around certain
impact metrics, um, but when
that fun
Manager is, um, sourcing
investment opportunities, um,
that's a funnel. They'll look at
a, uh, uh, a large number of
investment opportunities and
screen those diligence and
ultimately execute on a
relatively small, small number.
Um, each of those investment
opportunities to some degree are
competing with others for
capital from that fund. Um, so
when we have a, a national fund
that's looking to deploy here
those local
Businesses are to some degree
competing, um, for investment
capital with businesses located
elsewhere. And um I think uh
feedback I have heard is that
oftentimes, um, New Mexico
businesses maybe earlier,
earlier stage, um, then, um,
investors are typically ready
for, um, in terms of, of, of
deploying, um, so that's maybe
one area where they may present
as being less competitive.
Lastly, Madam Chair, uh, it
seems that.
That well on occasion we see
that international out of
country businesses locate to New
Mexico.
Do you, what aspect are you all
involved when it comes to
international efforts.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
can speak to that, um, a bit.
It's not the central purview of
my office at EDD, but it is, you
know, a focus of the economic
development department for sure.
Um, there is a.
A strong push on international
business recruitment and we've
had several successes over the
past couple of years. I can
think of off the top of my head,
um, there's an Australian
company, Star Scientific, that
is a hydrogen use company coming
into Masa Soul, um, there is the
company, a German company called
Mtex that is making the new
dishes for the VLA, um, that
they're going to be making them
here in Albuquerque at the
Sandia Science and Tech Park.
Um, there's a Taiwanese.
Um, auto parts manufacturer that
makes the auto parts for Teslas,
that's um setting up as we speak
in Santa Teresa. Um, there are
several others that I apologize.
I'm forgetting off the top of my
head right now, but it is
absolutely a focus, um, the, the
global trade and sort of global
manufacturing relocation is a
focus of the department and of
the governors. Um,
That is something I'll, I'll
just add from my office. I get
very excited about because the
presence of a large sort of
private sector prime, as we
refer to it, is, uh, an integral
aspect of a growing and thriving
science and tech startup
community. Um, those kinds of
companies often are able to
provide capital or even just the
presence of the people working
in that sphere, um, greatly
assists the growth of the
startup eco.
System. Um, so it is kind of
multiple pieces of, of one big
puzzle.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Nix
Representative Arar.
Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I had a couple
clarifying questions for Ms.
Decker. I'm looking at, um, the
last page of your presentation,
kind of look at looking at these
mini pie charts, um,
And it says like the expected
impact of each.
Um, objective assess from like
low to very strong. Um, so
first, and this is just for me,
that first column of pie charts
it says low costs, is that like
the cost of the what is what is
cause I just don't get it. Madam
Chair, that's actually
companies, um, COS
just as a, yeah, that's
companies. OK, thank you. And
then, um, second question,
looking at low jobs, it looks
like all of the projects are
rated as medium, and this is by
no means a criticism.
I was just wondering why the
local projects are, I would
expect national projects to be
about medium for local jobs. Why
is that also the case for local
projects?
Yeah, Madam Chair, so this is
just more reflective of the
stage of business that these
funds are targeting and
typically a startup could have
one employee or maybe 4,
so on the scale of what we would
consider, you know, job
creation, um, arguably every
venture capital fund is going to
be investing in a relatively
very small business.
OK, thank you very much. That
was all I had, Madam Chair.
Thanks.
All right, next, Senator Soz,
thank you, Madam Chair. I was
going to start with only a
couple a question or two and
then my list got longer, um.
So
First, you know, John, I think,
you know, as I'm looking through
the various pieces here on, is
it the 2nd page? There are $58
How much there's a chart later
that tells where each of them
was formed.
Is there a chart? Can you get
us? How much is in each of those
different pieces and then kind
of a follow up which of them are
protected essentially where we
can't touch them except for the,
the spin-off revenue and which
of them are more open towards if
there's an economic downturn
could be pulled back in, could
be used if needed.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, uh,
I, I can absolutely get you
that. That's information we
have. Uh, I honestly actually
have that pie graph in here and
then thought, well, that's not
the focus of this presentation.
I'll take it out. In hindsight,
I should have left that, but no,
I can easily send all of that
information was looking through
and was looking like on each one
that there'd be a number next to
it.
Uh, we will give that to you.
And does that also have which
ones are protected funds and
which ones are more open for for
distribution. So, Madam Chair
and Senator, not that graph, but
we have a listing, uh, that, uh,
essentially, uh, lumps them into
categories of you would need a
constitutional change. You would
need certain, uh, budgetary
conditions to be met and
legislative authorization or
just legislative authorization.
But I'd be happy to get you that
chart as well. Thank you. That
would
I think that would be very
helpful, or at least I'd find
interesting, um, Ms. Decker, on
page 8, let me find your report.
Page 8 of your report. Yesterday
we had a lot of conversations
about the technology enhancement
fund and the need to make some
language changes in that meeting
last year with people on the
finance committee, it seemed
like they often confuse your
technology.
Funds with the technology
enhancement fund, which is more
for universities and my
understanding that correctly,
uh, they were talking more lots
about this money only could be
used for translation of techno
of uh research into
Business where I think the
universities understood was the
technology enhancement fund was
more for supporting research.
I'm not sure where the question
is. I'm kind of looking back at,
at, uh, Mark and, you know, uh.
People back there, my
understanding is that where you
see the confusions.
I'm not sure who I'm addressing
to this because, because it
really is the confusions about
the technology enhancement fund
and the things that you're doing
out of your office and which
ones of those.
Do supports us, nor if you would
please, yeah, Madam Chair,
Senator,
um, I think, I think you are
correct. There, there is a
difference and a distinction. So
the technology enhancement fund,
I'm the economic development
department's, uh, representative
on the evaluating board and um I
know there are many ongoing
conversations about the TEF,
but, um, as it has been
operating and as I believe was
the intention. It is solely for
uh
Search with
A future commercialization
potential, ideally coming out of
the universities. That is
separate from, um, the sort of
larger, broader scale technology
investments that either the SIC
or NMFA are making. Those funds
are going into investments in
companies that already exist via
venture capital and, and
investment funds. Um, the
technology enhancement funds are
not going to companies at all.
They're going to universities
where they're doing research.
And developing technology that
my hope and I think the broader
hope will then we're we're doing
the groundwork to set that
technology up for
commercialization. um via the
tech transfer offices of the
universities that my office
works with, um, to then become a
company that can then hopefully
receive investment from the
venture capital via the funds
run by the SIC or administered
by the SIC and NMFA.
Thank you, Nora. I, I appreciate
it because I think that's where
a lot of the confusion is the
technology enhancement fund was
a fund that was an empty shell
that was sitting there, that we
then put the money into and the
requirements on the shell didn't
match exactly what the needs
were, and I think that's why
there's now a need to, to clear
up the language of that fund so
that it doesn't get confused
with the stuff that economic
development is doing in others
is that
And Mark, you, you're nodding
your head or can you come up and
does that make sense?
Mark Swether New Mexico.
Thank you, John. John's helpful
when he's at LLC. He's he's even
helping me now, um, yeah, so no,
that is fair to say and that's
our, our goal is to, we will be,
asking the committee to support
legislation to change the
language and the fund to do
exactly what you're talking
about, Senator Souls. Now the
example with Nora and her
presentation, you've looked at
the slide 7 where they talk
about the, the quantum EDA tech.
That's a great example in terms
of the partnership with TEF and
economic development, and I
think it was more just last
Friday, I think there was a
quantum medium right? that was
with both groups and so, um,
that's also, you know, uh, uh,
something that there's a lot of
potential there to, to work to
use both of those funds to work
together. Senator So, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Thank you and I appreciate
clarifying because I think the
technology enhancement fund.
is further upstream on the
research side where some of the
things in economic development
are after the technologies have
been demonstrated on moving them
towards commercialization.
And so we need to get some
language that sort of clarifies
those differences, I think is
what we're working towards. I
see everybody kind of nodding so
that that's a good thing. Madam
Chair and Senators, the TAF is
also to allow us to be more
competitive when it comes to
those federal grants that we're
going after in terms of um you
and I discussed werewy, for
example, is looking at New
Mexico as a model in regards to
um us being more competitive now
because these, for example,
these, these, these federal.
Um, awards are looking at New
Mexico because we're able to
show we have this money in the
fund ready to match, which makes
us far more competitive, so.
Thank you. And I think that's,
that's kind of the, the goal of
doing those.
And Ms. Decker on page 9 then,
um, and the various
Let's see, funds that there are,
the dangerous New Mexico, how
does a company or a small
startup find or get in the queue
to apply for grants like that,
who do they talk to? How do they
learn about it? How do they
know? I'm thinking of a small
business that's got some
interesting things going on down
in Las Cruces. It probably could
benefit from this, but probably
don't know. Who do they talk to?
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Sewell, so, um,
generally speaking, once we
You've made a commitment to one
of these funds. We put their
basic information on our website
and we asked them for contact
information we can put on there.
A couple of them have actually
also included links to forums
where a business seeking capital
can fill some basic information
out and we'll circle back with
the entrepreneur, specifically
dangerous New Mexico, um, they
actually have one of their
partners is based in New Mexico,
um, he lives in Santa Fe with
his family, um, and I can attest
to him uh traveling frequent.
ent ly throughout the state, um,
at, uh, many, many local
tech-oriented conferences, um,
uh, because if you send him an
email he gets back to you 3 days
later. Um, and so, um, I think
whether that business reaches
out to him through his contact
information on our website or
meets him at one of the local,
you know, startup or um lab or
university sponsored tech
forums, they would probably um
come across him.
Thank you. So if I were to tell
this person to go to your
website, he could navigate
through it to find this
particular one to get contact
information and move forward
from that.
Madam Chair, yes, OK, I often
see lots of my role as a
legislator is not doing the
work, but just connect the right
people to talk to each other.
And so that's helpful.
Madam Chair, Senator, may I add
on to that, if you don't mind I
would just also say please feel
free to connect them with me in
my office, um, you know, while
the funds that NMFA is investing
in, those are venture capital
funds, so they're only going to
be making investments in
companies, so sometimes a
company, if they're not ready,
you know, to give away equity or
if it doesn't fit exactly.
With the portfolio, etc. but my
office has non-dilutive grants,
uh, so we're not taking anyone's
equity and can kind of come in
at an earlier stage sometimes
than the venture capital, so
would love to also be connected.
My office is also we do a lot of
connecting with the companies
with VC as well.
Great, because you were on my
list also with, with those
things. So thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator, sorry, on, on
that point, I, I would just
suggest that Nora's office be
the first stop for anyone that
you're recommending, who is an
entrepreneur and wants
assistance because uh the
economic development department
has a variety of programs, but
also, uh, the Office of
Entrepreneurship exists under
Nora. They are trying to hire
for, uh, to fill that position
now, but that person will
Keep track of all of the um
local, uh, investments that both
NMFA and SIC have made into
these groups. And so I think
that would be the one stop place
for anyone to go, uh, to figure
out which groups should I try
reaching out to? What other
types of assistance may be
available.
Thank you. Yes. Now, this
All very, very helpful, uh,
Madam Chair, this now gets my
list for, for you, Nora or Miss
Sackett, um.
Do you have a problem of not
enough?
Money for grants and startups.
Right now we are flush with
money that is particularly,
that's most of it non-recurring,
um, it seems like we would
almost start talking about money
that's semi recurring. We expect
it for a couple of years, but it
may not be there forever. Do you
have enough for all of the, the
ones you had indicated you had
50 requests and could only fund
a few of them are the others
worthy and why do we not have
enough money to fund them and
let me kind of group.
A bunch of the questions is your
office through the
administration requesting a
substantial increase so you can
fund all of those in your budget
request to finance.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
for the question. Um, I think I
would say, you know, they're,
they're, we're always able to
demonstrate additional need for,
um, for funds to go to startups,
um.
I do want to say, you know, we
are very grateful we had, uh, we
did receive a new appropriation
to EDD, um, in this most recent
session, um, that is intended to
be deployed for science and tech
and it has a first sort of
deployment going out to kind of
lay the groundwork for things.
My hope is that it is intended
to be recurring, um, and my hope
is that in the 2nd year of it,
we would be able to use more of
that.
really dial up the amount of
grant funding that we're able to
do, um.
I think there's also it's a
Often in this universe, um, it
is a chicken and egg problem
with many things, um, so in, you
know, some of the conversations
we've been having with my
colleagues on the panel of, uh,
not they're not being, you know,
enough, um, investable quote
unquote companies, um, and so
then there's not enough capital.
It's a, it's a chicken and egg
problem, right? The capital
wants to be where there are more
investable companies, but the
investable companies aren't
going to be here if the capital
is not here. So all of us are
trying to
Buy a chicken or lay an egg or
what have you, um,
and.
Um, fair enough. And, um, so I
think, you know, there is the
grant aspect, uh, you know,
certainly perhaps in comparison
to Colorado, which, um, I should
have done kind of a per capita
amount, right? Obviously that's
a bigger population state, but,
um, but then there's also the,
the surrounding infrastructure
element. There was some
conversation earlier, um, I
think from Representative Harper
about, um, incubators.
accelerators, um, and there is
not a dedicated, um,
source of funding or
appropriation for incubator
funding. There has been, there's
currently, I think it was a 3
year appropriation a couple of
years ago, I think we're in the
last year, um, of a one time
appropriation, um, for a pot of
funding for incubators, but it
is, um,
limited, and it was a one year
it was a one time appropriation,
so there is no de
stream of funding currently that
my office or any other office
that EDD receives to support
incubators, despite the State
having a certified incubator
program. There is no dedicated
funding, uh, source for that,
and that's a critical aspect of
infrastructure. Um, there's
also, uh, a need for physical
space. So there's been
conversations being had about,
you know, there are these
startups that my grants are
supporting, um, but they, they
have very limited available
funds, right? Everything needs
to go to the most important
thing to develop their tech.
Um, but they need an office.
They need a lab to make their
prototype, etc. Um, and so there
are ongoing conversations on
that, um, and I will, you know,
defer to my, uh, department
leadership on the, the, the
funding requests, and we just
have a new secretary, so I think
there's a lot going on there, so
I wouldn't want to get over my
skis, as they say, um, but I
think there are a lot of
elements where
Uh, additional funding could
certainly be deployed.
Thank you. Um, you know, as I
look through, you know, on the,
the numbers, the size of our
budget and I think they're
projecting or looking at 25%
cash reserves. Well, each 1% of
cash reserve is $1000. You know,
if we were to lower that to 24%,
that frees up, you know, where
you could make 1000.
$100,000 awards and grants. Uh,
and it just seems like in a
state like New Mexico when
we're, we know we need to start
moving off of oil and gas and
find other things that this is
an area of
Of growth that we ought to be
putting lots of money up on the
early side to see what happens.
I was a little disappointed at
the cup meeting a month or so
ago when the executive director
of the finance, uh,
Committee indicated, well, we
shouldn't be going into new
areas. We need to just be making
investments in what New Mexico
is already good at.
Uh, that kind of sent shivers up
my back like, no, what we need
to be doing is using the money
of what we're good at now, the
oil and gas and extractive
industries to finance and move
towards newer areas. Um, and so
I, I hope that your department,
I realize you're not the head
person doing that, but that we
really start making
Some investments in new
technologies in entrepreneurs
and other things to move New
Mexico into an information and a
knowledge-based economy into the
future with the investments now.
But yeah, I see you're ready to
answer. I'll be quiet and let
you all talk instead of me
talking. No, not at all. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Senator, just
to build on that a bit, I think,
um, an, an additional aspect
that can be considered, you
know, I mentioned the elevate
quantum tech hub that
We are in, in partnership with
Colorado and New Mexico's
partnership was critical to
landing that, but it was in, in
truth, largely helmed by
Colorado. And part of that was
because of their existing, um,
funding structure that I do not
pretend to be an expert in, but
they have an have an economic
development council that has a
fund, and they're able to
allocate funds for large scale
consortium projects like that
with
Of ease. I'm sure they might
roll their eyes at me saying
that, but comparatively, um, and
there was that funding was kind
of was put up by them to to.
Catalyze the consortium that was
able to successfully land that
tech hub. Um, and you know,
there are numerous big federal
funding opportunities like tech
hubs, NSF Regional Aviation
Engines, um, build back better
continual programs from EDA and
NSF, etc. that are going to be,
as long as they continue to be
funded at the federal level,
they are approved to continue to
be funded for several years. Um,
and the intent is to do exactly
what you're saying, right, is,
is capitalized and
on the, the kind of economic
groundwork of states and really
seize onto where things have
potential and be able to build
on to that potential. Um, and
that is an element that was
critical to elevate quantum, um,
from the Colorado side that we
don't have as much of a
mirroring, uh, ability to fund
that, um, kind of consortium
building currently. Um, I will
also, I, I mentioned the $5
million that EDD received in the
past.
session that we are currently
deploying and part of how that's
being deployed is in an effort
to really, um, build the
groundwork for how to best
deploy the next $500 which is
building on the state plan, um,
in a way that really dials in on
the science and tech sectors
because those are going to be
critical to to advancing New
Mexico's economy, um, and so
really answering the question of
which ones are we most
competitive in, so which ones
should we be?
Really focusing our resources
into, um, to be good stewards of
that, of those funds, um, and
really looking at what are the
most critical aspects to invest
in and put those funds in, um,
and to attract companies here
and grow companies here, etc.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, yesterday we
heard lots about the quantum
program and New Mexico being
recognized as
Fertile prime ground for for
quantum, 5 million doesn't seem
like we're putting nearly enough
in, particularly when we've got
money to do that for something
that is so groundbreaking, uh, a
little bit of criticism of
higher education, the faculty in
that are not particularly good
ambassadors for explaining what
that is to outsiders. Do, does
your office have the expertise
to get the rest of economic
development, the governor's
office, the other people to
understand
What quantum is and what the the
huge upside to that technology
is so that we're making the
large enough investments that
instead of Colorado, we can be
partners with, but New Mexico
has the brain power in in some
head start on others to do that,
but we've got to make sure we
get that out to the the people
making the big idea decisions.
Does your office have expertise
and understanding and being able
to translate that information to
others about what
is and does.
Madam Chair, Senator, great
question. Um, I think I, I would
say yes, uh, I think, you know,
I am not a technologist. I'm not
a scientist by trade, um, and I
think that is an asset for
exactly the reason that the
example that you give, um, you
know, we could have a much
longer conversation about
quantum computing alone, but one
of the ways I've been describing
it is, it is a method of
computing that we don't even
understand yet that will allow
us to do
Things we can't imagine, right?
So it opens up just a whole new
portal, uh, a whole new world
of, of scientific achievement.
Um, I do not try to explain how
quantum computing works because
I'm not a quantum scientist and
I don't think it's critical to
Be able to explain how a quantum
computer works in order to
identify the economic, uh,
potential for it. I'm not being
asked to build the computer. I'm
being asked to grow the
ecosystem around it that will
create jobs and generate tax
base for the state. Um, but I
think you're absolutely right.
There is a lot more, um,
education that needs to happen.
Um, that is something we're
working on with the elevate
Quantum Consortium for sure, um,
but I, I'm, I'm fully on the, on
the same page as you,
absolutely.
Thank you, because, yeah, I
mean, for people who don't
understand, all they hear is
physics, and physics is hard. I
didn't do well in that in school
and you know, they, they run
away type of thing without
understanding how
transformational quantum, the
upside, the potential can be for
for our lives, but economically
for the state of New Mexico
could be huge, but getting
others to, to recognize that I
think is one of the big
challenges. And so the people
who can talk enough science and
technology without getting.
down into the weeds of the
researchers who start talking
about quirks and, you know, all
kinds of gluons and, you know,
other muons and all of those
kinds of things with it. I, I
think is where we're really
missing and we need to get
people at the highest levels of
government to either trust the
scientists or to understand
enough of it to make those
investments. I've talked too
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, great
questions. Um, next,
Representative Harper. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I'd like
to spend the next 30 minutes.
It's explaining what a quantum
computer is and how it works.
Um, uh, no, Madam Chair, um,
actually, that'd be fun maybe
later, but, uh, the, the 32nd
version is, you know, we all
know binary, right? Binary. The
reason we have binary is because
how you build a computer chip,
it can store information in an
on or off, a 0 or a 1, you know.
So we have two bits
And we are juicing those
computers getting as much out of
them as we can, but being
limited to two bits, um, limits
how fast you can do things. And
quantum computers open that up
where you can have dozens, uh,
maybe even hundreds of bits,
which means you can do things
exponentially millions, billions
of times faster. Um, so anyway,
that's, that's, that's what I
can quantum computer is. It
gives you more than 2 bits.
Um,
That said, uh, Madam Chair and
panel members, um, I am so happy
that I was able to attend this
presentation because usually
what we have, Madam Chair and
committee members, we ask, can
someone give a presentation on
how I can help startups. We get
a presentation that talks about
JTI about
Lita about high wage jobs, tax
credit, and, you know,
industrial revenue bonds, and
they throw in a little bit of
the inva you know, angel
investment tax credit, and we
hear that over and over and over
again.
I love that we've heard about
all of the other things that are
available in this presentation,
you know, things that I was not
even aware of, you know, after
being here for 12 years, and I
was just super helpful and I'm
still trying to digest all this,
but going from, you know, our
wonderful, um,
Uh, permanent funds and other
funds and ways that they can
help
to fascinating information on,
on, you know, a study. I want to
talk about that for just a
second and then also hearing,
you know, kind of the details of
our programs and how they
compare to Colorado and New York
and other states just really
wonderful. So thank you very
much. I, um, and I'm, I'm gonna
be brief because I know we're
we're going into lunchtime here,
but
I guess my, my first question of
just a couple, um, uh, Ms.
Decker.
It was on page 7. I just want to
make sure I'm digesting this
chart right. This, this is the
first time I've really seen
numbers like this, um, that
we're not kind of hand wavy, but
actually based off of an actual,
you know, venture fund
organization. So Stanford, if
I'm reading this plot correctly,
Madam Chair.
They have about 4000 active
technologies that they are, that
are in their portfolio. That's
the number in the.
Far upper right.
Um, of those about 1000 of them
are actually generating money
and royalties. So there's about
1000 of them that people care
about and they're trying to look
for ways to commercialize them.
So roughly 4th of all the
technology they've got, a third
of it is actually generating
some, some kind of interest.
And of that, going to the bottom
number in the left, you've got
27 startup companies. So roughly
3% of that one force.
And, and not listed here is how
many of those startup companies
are successful.
So I mean that just that blows
my mind, right, that you can
have 4000.
Active technologies, amazing
ideas.
And you've got a fraction of
that that results in startup
companies and who knows how many
of those are going to be
successful.
Am I reading that chart right,
Madam Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair, um, and
members of the committee, so
this, um, our investment
consultant that did the
research, they actually pulled
this, I think, right from the
Stanford TTO office website, um,
and not having done the research
myself, but having also listened
to their, um, uh, delivery of
the research and the findings
and conclusions. Yes, it was
very much an emphasis on, um, a
large number of technologies
Translating into a smaller
number of technologies that are
generating revenue, translating
to a very, very small, you know,
uh, percentage they're actually,
you know, companies that have
been created on the back of
those technologies.
Yeah, so, so Madam Chair, Miss,
Ms. Decker, thank you. That,
that is just fascinating to me.
And, and I think it, uh, it just
is again a cautionary tale to
us, right? Um, what are the
changes, man, I'm sure that, uh,
Mr. Clark mentioned to the State
Investment council is we have a
board now that is less political
and you see that they're
investing in venture funds now
instead of specific companies
because what happened about 10
years ago, maybe a little bit
more. Um, was some of that money
was being directed to
friends, right? Or maybe not
wise investments. And we want to
be careful with the people's
money. And so I, I really
appreciate the changes that have
been implemented, so it's less
political and has a greater
chance of actually resulting in
a startup company that becomes
profitable instead of, you know,
rewarding a political friend or
something that sounds neat to a
politician, but someone with a
little background in, in, in the
industry would know that that's
not a viable product, right?
Um,
So, so I guess, um, Madam Chair,
uh, uh, Mr. Clark, my, my, my
question to you is, I think
you've done a, a, a brilliant
job and kind of showing the
power of these investment funds,
how they're helping our state,
and really the main goal when
they were started was to help
offset.
The revenue that we would lose
from oil and gas when that
resource is no longer viable.
And we see that, you know,
before our eyes here, which is
incredible.
But one of the other potential
benefits is we could perhaps
invest in some New Mexico
businesses and help diversify
the economy. So my question is,
how do we balance those two
things because um uh manager
and, and Mr. Clark, um, when a
few years ago we looked at
expanding the service tax
permanent fund's ability to
invest in startups in New
Mexico, I actually voted against
it because at that time, the
service tax permanent fund was
dying. And, and we couldn't give
up an extra 0.1%.
Of, of earnings. Um, we know
that.
Investing in these small
businesses is gonna have a less
of a return than just investing
in the market. So how do you
balance those two, trying to
make sure that we have the funds
for the budget to replace oil
and gas.
Trying to expand New Mexico's
economy.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, that's a great question. And
so we're doing that, uh,
primarily by treating the, the
venture capital investments a
little differently than we have
in the past. So more and more we
are working with venture capital
groups that have been there and
done that, that have experience,
uh, building, investing in and
building startup companies to
the point of growth and later
success. Some of the uh venture
capital funds that we have put
money into.
In the last couple of years, um,
have worked with multiple
unicorns and the unicorn, for
those of you who don't know the
term is a startup that ends up
becoming a $1 billion dollar
company. And so,
That means we're not investing
as much with New Mexico venture
capital companies.
The problem is that New Mexico
venture capital companies were
predominantly emerging managers.
They didn't have that
experience. Just as I mentioned,
you know, we have a lack of
experienced entrepreneurs in New
Mexico. We have a relative lack
of experienced venture capital
fund managers in New Mexico. We
still, you know, saw some local
venture capital funds that we
thought were worth investing
into, and we did that, but more
and more because this is such a
high-risk enterprise. We are
working with
National partners that have that
experience and who have an
interest in bringing that
experience to New Mexico.
Previously, this was viewed as a
differential rate program for us
where the assumption was we had
to assume we were just going to
get a lower rate of return, but
that that was OK because we were
going to get an economic impact.
We're certainly to view it very
differently now. There's a
differential rate of risk. There
does not have to be a
differential rate of return.
Venture capital returns can be,
uh, you know, about on par with
the rest of our private market
portfolio, but it takes what
we're doing now, shifting to
partners who are who have this
experience and are bringing that
experience to the state and who
are also, uh, focused on trying
to help uh plug those two gaps
that, uh, for what we're focused
on, we see in the system, you
know, lack of experienced
entrepreneurs and gaps in the
capital financing system so that
as those companies
continue to grow, they can
continue to stay here. So we
don't really view these more
recent investments as even
necessarily having to be part of
a specified New Mexico program
with a specific carve out for
differential rate. If we're able
to achieve, you know, higher
rate returns, and we think we
can, then there is no carve out
that applies to it. As long as
we are achieving the
Those higher rate returns, we
can do both. We can have that
economic impact on the Mexico
and we can achieve returns that
match the rest of the private
market, uh, portfolio. And so
that's what we're working
towards at this point. So I
don't view it as an either or
anymore because of the strategy
that we're following.
Yeah, so, so ma'am sure and Mr.
Clark, thank you. That's, that's
fascinating and I'm hopeful that
uh uh that that does result in
the, in the positive
non-differential rate of return.
Um, and, and you kind of led
into kind of my last.
Train of thought questions which
when you mention that we're no
you're no longer focusing so
much on investing in New Mexico
ventures, but venture companies
that have experience, what
you're really talking about here
is, um, these venture firms are
investing in businesses. They're
not the businesses you're
investing in, right? And so when
you say you're um investing in
a, a more experienced venture
capital firm. They are still
sending that money to New Mexico
businesses, right? Uh, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and representative,
that, that's correct. Yeah, you
said spot on. We don't invest
directly into companies, we
invest, invest into funds. Yeah,
thank you.
Oh, no, one last question, I
thought you were signaling me.
OK, Madam Chair and Mr. Clark.
Um, so I, I guess my last
question is, you know, I'm slide
13, you list all of the, the
funds that have been invested in
over the last few years. Um, is
there a, I mean.
Is it public knowledge or is it
proprietary? What businesses
they actually invest in in New
Mexico? Is there a way we can
get a list of those companies
that they're investing in?
Uh, so Madam Chair and
Representative,
It, it depends. Unfortunately
with private markets, that's
where uh we are not able to
share all of the business
information that they have. So
some of their investments,
they're willing to share some
early stage ones they're not.
Uh, we get all of the backend
data, so we can share all of the
performance data of, you know,
they are providing this level of
performance for us and they're
providing this level of economic
impact for us. And we're going
to be much more
Analytical and transparent about
that economic impact than we've
ever been before because
historically, we just looked at
job creation, but now we're
going to be doing a full
economic impact analysis for
these investments to see, OK,
not just what job creation, but
what was the impact to the
state's economy as well to try
to get a better picture, but,
um, I would say it depends on
the individual fund and it
depends on um their willingness.
To share what companies they've
invested into. One thing that
I'm committed to is making
everything we do as transparent
as possible to the general
public. Right now, if you go to
our council meetings, it's very
transparent because we provide
just reams of information that
uh uh hundreds and hundreds of
pages and hours of discussion.
But for a member of the public
who just wants to spend 5
minutes seeing what we do, it is
not transparent because our
website was
put together with paper clips
and chewing gum and our team has
done the best they could to
manage that website, but we're
going to be hiring hiring a
contractor to completely revamp
the website as part of that, we
want to make it as easy as
possible for people to see what
venture capital funds we've
invested into as part of the New
Mexico program so they can
realize who they want to reach
out to and then also provide
significant information on what
the state is getting on the New
Mexico program and on the whole
portfolio.
And we're going to have a
dashboard, uh, showing all of
that so that someone can spend
just 2345 minutes on our website
because they heard about us and
figure out who we are, what
we're doing, and what state's
getting for its money.
Yeah, Madam Chair, and, and Mr.
Clark, thank you. Um, that, that
was my, my last question and you
answered it beautifully. Um, I
really just believe that.
When New Mexicans can see what
is being invested in and that
there's a return and that
there's, you know, something
positive coming out of that and
that it's, you know, they can
look through the list of
companies and it's not just a
bunch of political friends,
right, that, you know, that
gives your office and all of us,
you know, something to be proud
of, right, um, so uh thank you
for, for working to to open that
up, um, to the extent that's
possible. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I do
want to say it. I'm going to
miss that amazing brain of yours
and your wonderful explanations
and I know the house has
benefited from you breaking
something technical down to
where we can understand. So
thank you for that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanted
to comment
that
when I was setting this panel
up, I thought the discussion
would be just a discussion that
Representative Harper and John
had that it would be focused on
that and then on.
On, uh, Ms. Decker's, uh, slide
number 3, which lists the goals
of your program that doesn't
have any sort of formula or how
to break that down, you know, it
does creating jobs,
uh, outweigh getting a return on
investment, uh, increasing
access to capital. Is there some
sort of formula there? So, uh,
the chair and I, while you were
having that discussion, uh,
decided that we were going to
try to bring this.
Panel back maybe even before the
end of this interim to get into
that because that's the, that
was what this panel was
hopefully going to do. I think
everything you presented
probably set the stage for that
discussion and probably needed
to happen before the committee
could really dig into it. So
that was very useful, uh, from a
drafter standpoint, when I hear
the states giving grants to
this, that and.
XYZ private uh companies. The
first thing I say is
anti-donation. Oh my God,
they're violating anti-donation.
My guess is that you're skirting
along the edges of Leda
authority and that this
committee, if it wants to really
get into investments, might have
to look at expanding or
modifying LEDA so that there is
an exception for grants made to
foster economic development
as opposed to, uh, investments.
I mean, I've always pushed
investments because that's
something the state can do
because you get an ROI on that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. All right, our last
question from Representative
Garrett.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Um, I love the way this was put
together because we're hearing
uh
Continuum of how we get money
and um Ryan, I, I've heard this,
it's like this all is making
sense from NMFA oversight. It's
like, oh, OK, now I get it, so
thank you. Um, and I also want
to say, you know, this
committee, we heard a lot from
um New Mexico Tech, their
research, we heard a lot from
UNM and I think that's the
bookends of this also where we
get money for investment and I
just, um,
The questions were asked, but I
do want to say to Senator Sols
that um the elevate group from
UNM had a two day seminar two
years ago and they had one on
Friday. And what I want to say
because I see Alex Greenberg in
the audience from the Governor's
Council is there's a lot of
confusion as we look at
investing in artificial
intelligence and quantum, there,
I think there needs to be more
communication of how they
relate, because some of the
stuff when I, I, every place I
go, I ask a quantum question
now.
And one of the answers I got
from the AI person was, I don't
think it was correct, so I just
think there needs to be more
understanding about how these
two incredible uh
opportunities and technologies,
uh, why we're on the cutting
edge, what's being done, but
also how they work together.
That's it.
Yeah
Right, thank you for your
presentation and maybe we can
get you back soon, hopefully.
OK, thank you.
All right, the last thing we
have is public comment and we
just have one.
Right, um, Ashley Wagner, come
on up and we'll have 2 minutes.
any, any, any microphone.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Ashley Wagner, the vice
president of government affairs
for the New Mexico Oil and Gas
Association. I'm commenting on
agenda item 5.
US power and technology
companies have expressed
concerns that the country's
electric electrical systems are
not expanding fast enough to
meet the rapidly growing power
needs of technology such as
generative AI. Data centers that
are necessary for AI have the
potential to double their energy
usage by 2026, and AI data
centers are expected to consume
almost 1 10th of total US power
demand by 2025. These data
centers will require multiple
energy sources to be reliable.
and continuously powered and
renewable energy, which requires
battery storage for reliability
will not be sufficient to
facilitate the rapid growth of
electricity-starved data
centers.
An increase for AI demand will
put a further strain on the grid
and further increase the need
for reliable, affordable energy
options. Natural gas fulfills
that need.
Because of this, the demand for
natural gas could be
significantly boosted in the
second half of the decade by as
much as 8%. Natural gas is the
Earth's cleanest burning
hydrocarbon. Its generation
helps to keep greenhouse gas
emissions low, is affordable,
immediately deployable,
extremely reliable.
And the key to meeting the
demands of the current and
future AI rollout. Thank you.
Thank you. All right. Anybody
else want to speak on anything?
No.
All right, we are adjourned.
Thank you guys.
