Good morning, Chairwoman. It's a
pleasure to be here. I've never
been to this particular
committee, so I'm happy to learn
a little bit today and always
happy to see our our our
audience and our other members
and I'm Art De la Cruz. I
represent District 12, which I
like to describe as the heart of
the South Valley. If you imagine
the lines of demarcation central
on the north, I-25 on the south.
I'll be smack dab in the middle
of that area. So, good morning
again, thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members and members of
the audience, um, Representative
Christine Chandler from Los
Amos. I'm happy to be here.
It's, it's a beautiful day,
beautiful morning in
Albuquerque.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
State Rep Joey Garrett, uh,
Northwest Albuquerque, home of
Petroglyph National Monument and
a thrilled to be back in this
beautiful rotunda.
Good morning audience, and, uh,
Madam Chair, other legislators,
Bill Souls from Las Cruces. I
drove up this morning and it was
a lovely drive. It's nice and
cool finally in the mornings,
um, I represent the East Mesa
side of Las Cruces, where the
beautiful Oregon mountain desert
Peaks National Monument. Thank
you.
Mhm
Representative Grola.
Um, Buenos Dias, good morning.
Uh, Jeanila Gurola, the
representative for District 16
West Side here in Albuquerque
and funny story, I'm in a staff
meeting for my day job across
the building, so I'll be back
and forth. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair.
Senator Michael Padilla
represents Senate District 14,
uh, large part of the southern
portion of Bernelio County,
service the Senate Majority
Whip, and I enjoyed chairing and
vice-chairing this committee for
10 years. It's one of my
favorites. Thank you.
Good morning to everyone. My
name is Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez. I'm from Santa Fe
District 24, and I've been in
this committee for many years. I
don't remember. I don't know if
it's 10, but I think it's more
than 10 because I've been in the
Senate 29 years, so it's
probably a long time. Thank you
so much. I have a cup of coffee,
Madam Chair. We made it.
And the market you on to your
staff.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Mark Edwards. I'm the lead
staffer from the Legislative
council Service for this
committee.
Ralph Vincent is uh our
Tech expert and his staffed this
committee for many, many, many,
many years and Sabina Gaynor,
uh, will be your new elections
expert drafter uh for this
coming session,
uh, and she also helps staff
this committee and then over on
my left, way over there in the
corner is our webcaster. Bob, I
don't know your last name, Bob
Sanchez.
Yeah
And I am uh Debbie Serraignon. I
represent House District 21,
which is the northeast-southeast
quadrant of Albuquerque by
Monzano High School. It's where
I used to teach, um, and
welcome. uh, excited about
today, a lot of AI and, um, we
have some great speakers, but
we're going to go ahead and
introduce the audience if you're
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Helen
Maestas deputy chief of staff at
UNM Health Sciences.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Nathan Bush. I'm
director of government relations
for the University of New
Mexico. Thank you for joining us
today.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
David Hanson, Assistant vice
president for research at the
University of New Mexico.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Hangarei. I'm the interim vice
president for research at HSC.
Thank you
Good morning, committee. Peter
Mantos, uh, UNM computer science
alumni.
Alumnus, sorry.
Good morning. I'm Randy Burge. I
am representing the New Mexico
InfraGard chapter, which is a
cybersecurity uh organization uh
housed in the FBI.
Good.
Morning, Madam Chair and
committee members Ryan
Cangelosi, director of economic
development at Health Sciences.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members. Uh, my name
is Leo Lou. I'm the Dean of the
College of University Libraries
and Learning Sciences at UNM.
Good morning, Linea Montoya,
associate director of government
relations. It's nice to have you
guys here at UNM. Thank you.
Right, thank you, Mark. All
right, we're gonna go and get
started, um, first up is David
Han Hanson, vice president of
research for New Mex UNM and Ms.
Raisy, um, Vice President of
Research Health Sciences Center.
And whenever you're ready, thank
you. Make sure you press the
red.
But.
You only have one on at a time,
so whoever's starting, OK.
There we go.
Thank you. Um, good morning
everyone, and, uh, welcome, um,
we do appreciate the opportunity
to have you all here so we can,
we can share with you some of
our accomplishments as well as
future plans and some of the
restrictions and limitations we
have had and so hopefully we can
have your input and insight as
how to move forward for the
future. So I believe you all
have the slides and I am going
to get started. I understand we
have 20 minutes.
Then we will have, so we will
have enough time to answer
potential questions.
So I would start with um the
second slide after the first one
that has all of our names and
introduction.
I would like to start by
highlighting the profound impact
of research on our world and
research is not just the pursuit
of knowledge. It is the very
foundation of education. Um, it
equips us with the tools to
understand innovate and solve
the problems in any field that
we practice on. Um, and more
research is a beacon of hope,
especially when it comes to
biomedical research and it saves
lives by driving medical
advancement, improving public
health and also opportunities to
shaping policies and protecting
our communities. Next slide,
please. When we talk about, um,
biomedical science, it is very
important to point out that
research is the cornerstone of
progress in clinical work and
healthcare. And as you see in
this graph.
we are talking about a cycle
what we practice is
evidence-based medicine and the
evidence comes from the research
that has been done at by us and
our colleagues as well as what
has been done in anywhere else,
and we use that evidence as part
of our practice and to teach our
students to practice
evidence-based medicine and at
the end of the day, the uh all
of our patients benefit from
this practice.
Next slide please, number 4. So
here you can see the trend line
for UNM research and you can see
the acelerations that we have
had. This report has been
generated by the National Center
for Science and Engineering and
higher education research and
development, the data they have
is up to 2022. So what you see
here is that we have added 2023
and 2024 to this graph and you
can easily see the, you know,
the the the trend.
A positive trend and we do have
a new trajectory which we are
very excited about and we are
having a goal of $500 million of
research expenditure in 3 to 5
years and of course this is
where we can use a lot of
support from all of you guys.
Next slide please.
This slide shows you again the
details of research expenditure
for both main campus, main and
branch campus, as well as HSC
Red represents mainland branch
and the blue or greenish is
representing HSC. You see a
lighter green for year 2021 and
2022. That is based on COVID and
the hers of funds that we
received about $200 million to
address the issue since it was a
one time thing we like to
represent it as
As you see here.
Next slide please.
So university research is not
funded by instruction and
general funding that is provided
by the state, as you know,
federal grants and are the ones
that provide the support,
financial support for our
research, specifically NIH is
number one federal agency at the
HSC and NSF is the one in main
campus. We will also receive
other states and local grants
and awards. We also have
industry partnership which is it
is below the national.
average and most of our
relationship with industry is
pharmaceutical companies and the
clinical trials that become part
of this, but we are hoping that
we can expand that relationship
with um in New Mexico um
industries Foundations, you are
very close to the average, but
we are also exploring more
opportunities with that.
I would like to point out the
overhead or what is called
sometimes FNA, which is
facilities and administration
funds that come as part of
funding from federal agencies,
as I'm sure you are a very
different institutions have
different overhead rates, also
different agencies have a
different um over allowable
overhead rate, for example, for
NIS we have an overhead rate of
51.5% when it comes to PCO, it
is 40% and when you cut her side
it can be up to 20%. So they
All have different
rate for the overhead that they
are allowing. And what I would
like to point out here in this
opportunity is that there was a
report from Association of
American Medical Colleges and
what they showed was that for
every federal dollars of direct
and indirect that medical school
receives, the school has to
contribute an additional 53
cents.
So when we talk about again
being funded and having overhead
that comes with that, um, please
be mindful that we still do not
have enough funds to support
everything that is needed and
considering how old our school
is. The building labs,
equipment, that becomes very
essential to have more support.
Next slide, please.
So competition for research
funding is intense, as as I'm
sure you all know, Grant cycles
are slow. It might take about 6
to 24 months depending on the
agencies, grant preparation and
planning the infrastructure is
very expensive. collaboration
and interdisciplinary are
increasingly important. Team
science is the name of the game
these days. So, um, that also
brings another level of um
complexicity to these grants.
And then when it comes to the
RFAs and the grant.
requirements, we talk about hard
required matching financial
matching, which is a fixed
percentage, and those are the
ones that usually see, for
example, with Department of
Energy. They specifically say we
need 100% matching funds or up
to 20% matching funds and of
course having technology
enhancement funds and New Mexico
Department of Finance
Administration match has been.
Amazing. They have been um game
changing. However, there are
also soft required matching, and
those are the ones that
specifically with NIH and NSFUC.
You do not find requirement for
matching in the RFA. However, in
order for us to be competitive,
we do need to show the support
from institutions and we do need
to show that institutional
support and unfortunately
technology enhancement funds.
And DFAs are limited to those
applications that RFA
specifically mentions the
percent matching requirement,
and this is where we are hoping
we can actually amend the bill
for technology enhancement fund
to have more opportunity to have
the justified institutional
support for the grants to become
more competitive.
Makes the slide please.
So let's talk about university
research and innovation. I'm
pretty sure you have seen this
schematics before and what is
the technology readiness level
pathway and does it matter and
where we are with that at
University of New Mexico as a
reminder, technology readiness
levels are a method which is
used to access to access the
maturity of a particular
technology. And it was developed
by NASA in 1970 and it provides
The pathway to evaluate the
progress of technology from the
the idea, the concept to fully
operation system.
Uh, and again, as you see, there
are different levels, levels of
1 to 9, next, next slide,
please. Slide number 9. So where
are we with this technology
readiness level support when it
comes to UNM.
So we have the university, we
have all of our faculties
students that they create IP as
we train the students. We have
university technology transfer
offices such as rainforests that
handle the patenting these um
IPs and getting the licenses.
These are going to be too low to
medium level of this technology
readiness level, and then we
have um and and the startup and
industry partners do the
commercialization and again you
see.
There is a gap or we call it the
value of death between uh
government uh research funding,
and when it comes to
commercialization industry.
So challenges for developing
marketable intellectual property
is that protecting IP is
expensive and requires a culture
of innovation training
entrepreneurs and connecting
them to inventor is very
difficult. There is a lot of
effort, but again it is
challenging and funding to
advance research beyond the
concept stage is a very
challenging and again that is
where technology enhancement
funds and the FAA can be very um
um.
Crucial to make this a step
work.
Next a slide, please. So we
would like to point out some of
the selected research priorities
at UNM main campus as well as
HSC main campus, you're going to
hear about new Earth Institute
as well as New Mexico later on
um by my colleague, um.
As well as later on in this
afternoon and also again main
campus, you see a lot of other
efforts with regard to substance
use disorder, climate and
environmental health. With HSC,
we have a focus on research
infrastructure. I will tell you
more about this a little bit in
the next few slides and then of
course, substance use disorder
has been a focus and we continue
to make that a focus memory and
aging and we have the first
Alzheimer's disease research
center at UNM.
We are now one of the 18 states
that has a center as such,
health disparities and of course
environmental health. We also
have new university-wide grant
challenges teams that they focus
on uh matters um uh the research
focus that is matters in New
Mexico in order to have an
impact in New Mexicans and that
would be the sustainable space
research and collaboration, just
transition to green energy and
child health and maltreatment
prevention and inter.
intervention. So we're gonna
talk a little bit more details
um and um share some more
details about these activities
with you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I was
going to continue with this, um,
presentation. What's what's
really difficult is deciding,
you know, what to what to
highlight right when each campus
has like 900 applications or
grants funded every year. So,
um, but we just ended on
focusing a lot on some new
institutes, and very exciting
new things that we're doing, uh,
and the first one is the Aro
Institute, which is advancing
resilience and innovation in dry
lands. Uh, dry lands are
obviously really um important
for us and the world. And this
really, uh, enhancing the
Zillions of communities and
ecosystems and the economy to
climate change through inclusive
and equitable research.
Education and collaborative
partnerships in New Mexico and
dry lands worldwide. And so this
was really excited that this is
uh fully launched. We'll see
later how we got to launching
such a large institute like
this, um, through the Grand
Challenge's efforts. Uh, but
it's, we have a large, uh,
leadership team of over 20
researchers across 11
disciplines, right? So these are
university-wide centers, um, and
they are studying a wide range
of projects including things,
uh, understanding the ecosystem
resilience and the healum.
hydro hydrologic modeling and
biogeochemical networking, uh,
impacts of wildfire and forest
management practices, um, which
are very important, uh, for us
these days. Public perceptions
of potable water research and
and the new Soviet long-term
ecological research program
which got a huge amount of
support from the TEF now to
really make that competitive and
win, right? We don't win that
every year. We win it most
years, so that's very exciting.
That really comes to that we've
just since 2023 when this
started, right? We already have
over 18
$1 million in new funding
through the center, right? So
these large efforts to come
together are are amazing, um,
uh.
Investment and we're going to be
coming back to the, to, uh, the
legislature to ask for an RPSP
to support this level of $3
million. They're really
stabilize uh operations and, and
really give that broader impact
to the to the whole, uh,
statewide with education and
training programs, right? Help
that that outreach, that public
service with our research.
So it's a big, a big effort. Uh,
the next one, we launched
another big center, QNMI. I'm
not really going to talk about
it much because you're going to
hear from me and others at the
end of the day again, but it's a
corner of New Mexico Institute.
There is just um our big, uh,
symposium last Friday, um, and,
but this also the center this
year alone is also, um, uh,
acquired over 12 million in new
funding and it's doing a lot of
things in workforce development,
uh, theory and, uh, other
engagement.
Where the now just slide 13 for
Dr. Ray.
Sure, thank you. So I would like
to point out again sure a few
information about UNM clinical
and translational Science
Center. This is one of our
research infrastructure centers
that I mentioned earlier, it was
initially funded in 2010 and
every five years we have to
reapply and get funded, so we
were we were renewed in 2015 and
2020 and um it is built on
collaborative networks, the
ground by itself for 5 years is
about $25 million but we
been able to bring in about $330
million as the network with
other institutions and other
cities. The key components are
pilot funding, education
programs, very structured
mentoring program for the
faculty that they get hired as
well as enhancing technology and
component lead research,
different cores that are related
to research are supported by
this program. Next slide,
please. I would like to show you
the impact of centers as such
that we can provide support for
Research infrastructure. If you
look at this is the, the data
from uh fiscal year 2010 when
they got funded, the orange
line, the lower line shows you
just see, um, uh, funds, um,
before CTSC and then the the
darker line shows you the funds
that have come to institution
based on the support provided by
one of the cores of CTSC. So
again, you can see the
difference that it has made.
With regard to
obtaining extra mutual funds.
Next slide please, slide 15. So,
um,
We are in the process of for a
competitive renewal or grant was
submitted in May, so the next
cycle is going to be June of
2025 and now for the first time
and this grant is going to go on
for 7 years. There was a change
in the infrastructure of the RFA
as part of this proposal, we are
actually going in in partnership
with the University of Arizona
and we are calling our center
now is Southwest Center.
Advancing clinical translational
innovation Southwest cacti in
the schematic, it is very small,
you will see the opportunities
for the impact and growth
between both institutions as
well as how we can catalyze some
of the activities in addition to
complementary activities we
have. We are very excited about
this effort and keeping our
fingers crossed for funding.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
members of the committee. I'll
continue on with uh talking
about a bit about how we sort of
grow our big ideas, um, uh, at
the university as a grant the
grand challenge program which we
really sort of invented to, to,
um, restructure a new philosophy
that starts kind of small, has
groups come together and then
walks them through multiple
stages. So that figure up on the
top right hand slide 16. It has
just different tiers and levels
where you can come in at one
level, enter, get some
experience, and maybe go up
further or maybe step back out
again if it wasn't working or.
Reorganize and come back in. So
I have many sort of in and out
exit points with the idea that,
that with a broad community, uh,
and building, it takes a lot of
effort to, to really build large
interdisciplinary projects
across the university, um, and
that, uh, you need a lot of
mentorship in that process. It
takes several years, so we're
building that up. Uh, and then
eventually when we're successful
we do something like launch the
arid Center, right? Um, and
that's really just a structured
way to build up that, that
organization. Our other center,
the Kunnamai, did not go through
a grand challenge.
Process, right? It was uh
excellent that came another way
and still got elevated to a
level 3 center so there's more
than one pathway, but this is a
structured way to help develop
that. Um, we have some new, uh,
some new, uh, level 2 centers,
which is that, um, that are
going to be now getting ready to
see if we can advance them to
larger projects, uh, over the
coming years. One of those is on
slide 17 now the sustainable
space, um, grand challenges
team. Uh, that's really focusing
on expanding New Mexico's.
of creative and economic
horizons beyond Earth through
university commercialization,
commercialization and national
lab collaboration. But people
just don't realize here enough
is we do amazing stuff in New
Mexico in space, right? There's
a huge, uh we have a huge,
really long history, both
geologic and and scientific
history uh related to to to
space that's really broad and
this is designed to really
promote that. uh, and, and, uh,
bring it together and really go
after big things with it. We've
got
Over 40 faculties in in STEM
departments including arts,
right? 9 research focused areas
we're connecting with the space
Valley, which is the the
external um uh private sector in
the area.
Uh, and really working with a
lot of workforce development.
There's a really fun thing we
even got some federal funds now
for advanced AR headsets to this
Artemis and 3D program to get
students and people experiences
which we which we hope to have
on your heads later, uh, this,
this year or or in the coming
year to be able to walk on Mars
yourself with real Mars rovers
images, right, and do the
exploration of there as well as
many other projects.
Uh, the just transitions on the
next slide is 18, just
transition, uh, to green energy.
Grech's team is is the next one.
It's missions lies in creating
economic opportunities and
equitable, uh, pollution
reduction for communities in the
transition to clean energy and
climate resilience, right? This
group is really coming to make a
huge difference for the people
in New Mexico in transitioning
our energy, um, and really has
really interesting, um,
leadership and policy and law,
population health, engineering,
and other management areas,
right? These groups are coming.
helping people write grants,
right, to get funding to do
things that, um, uh, that really
matter to our community, uh, on
a very personal level. They've
had funding from broad-based,
uh, approaches over 550K in new
funding, uh, from many sources,
and it's, and it's really
growing fast.
Uh, next slide is the child, uh,
19 is a child health grand
challenges team, um, with our
mission is to build a
systematic, systemic approach to
improving the lives of children
and families by preventing child
abuse abuse and neglecting New
Mexico, right? Really critical
things that we've been building
on understanding that that that,
um, our legislators and our
communities want, um, and we're
focused on really everything
from the individual to the
family, the community and to
society levels, right? It's it's
solving these problems at
multiple levels over 2014
members and 1 million.
dollars in new funding already.
So it's really, uh, growing to
to help do the research that
that to solve really and um.
Critical health problems.
Slide 20 is, is really sort of
build on this and saying how we
are trying to align where it
makes sense to to align our
university research with the
state of New Mexico priorities,
right? There's a lot more we can
do together, um, uh, when we're
really trying, uh, to do that.
And so, you know, we think a lot
on on larger initiative of how
to incorporate the state agency
priorities, uh, interim
committee work plans and
legislative feedback into our
work, um, and an example that
becomes when you look at the
Northomic Development department
and their areas, their target
industries.
Why we've been trying to develop
proposals in many of those areas
including aerospace and
bioscience and cybersecurity,
etc. right? It's, it's, um,
helps, uh, us to understand how
to align the best.
We use it a lot in very large
grant proposals, um, that are
targeted on regional funding
opportunities like the EDA Tech
Ub Award that was in Quantum
that we, uh, just got, you'll
hear more about later the NSF
engines, uh, efforts that are
large regional, um, efforts, um,
other,
You know, to be able to do this,
having things like the, the
technology enhancement fund and
the match fund are just
Game changing. We couldn't do it
without him, period. And, and
the other support that we're
getting from the legislature.
These are big things that
require lots of, uh, lots of
support, um, and that really,
you know, we also have things
like the state science and
technology plan which which
guides all the EPScore research
in the state, which is a huge
effort, right? You guys have
been extraordinarily some sort
of supportive or EPS score
program, uh, and it's, and it's
yielding more and more
dividends.
Um, some of our examples on
slide 21 you can see that the
techor awardee. You'll hear a
lot more about that was in the
quantum, um, elevate quantum
tech hub, right? That total
amount of funding is $127.5
million over five years, right?
Now, that's actually only 40.5
million of that is from EDA,
right, 10 million of that is 5
million have been committed for
through the technology
enhancement fund which bought us
really got it from the door.
Another 5 is being, um, uh,
pursued through more legislation
and then more effort and, and
Colorado has really jumped into
that. So it's a huge, uh, uh,
example for success, uh, and
you, and, uh, you'll hear more
this afternoon. The next one
after that, it's like 22 or the
uh is the NSF Technology
innovation and Partnerships
program. It's a, it's a whole
new program that, that's coming
up in the last couple of years
since 2021, 2022, these regional
innovation engines.
Um, are to going after our funds
for up to $160 million over, uh,
10 years that we had success in
an engine that involve all the
Navajo Nation, all of New
Mexico, and, and the El Paso
area of Texas.
Uh, that was on clean water and
clean energy, and we got a
development award for that. And
the TEF also helped match those
funds to grow and be prepared
for the next round, which is
now. And we're putting in
another clean water and energy
one that's the energized
watershed now, um, that we, uh,
we're talking about and there
will be also a quantum effort um
too. And so we're really trying
to lead that and build that to
to get capital the large
resources we need. Both those
cases, those large things
require like the the engines,
it's not a required match. It's
a required commitment.
For the, for the region, right?
So it's in a soft money
category, soft commitment
requirement. And then this the
the EDA techup stuff, these
dollar amounts have to be larger
than the regions are putting in
than even the award itself.
So these are areas where it's um
where you really need to grow
our, our, our capacity and I
mean, it's been fantastic. We,
we wouldn't be here for either
one of those without the support
you've got. They're big wins.
Um, slide 23, um, uh, are
ongoing, uh, evolution of uh
research infrastructure needs,
right? We still need lots of
infrastructure to continue to be
successful. Uh, state of the art
competitive, uh, facilities
where 21st century research can
be performed is is a huge deal.
We have to support the
facilities needed and need to
make them full of great
equipment, uh, and great, uh,
scientific equipment and
hardware and, and, um, and
computer resources, right, that
becomes more and more important
to have really high
High performing computational
capabilities, um, and great
space for joint and
collaborative activities, right?
We want to be able to do
working, working spaces with our
industry partners and with our
community and across the campus
and also secure facilities.
Slide 24, or, um, is the book
again, highlighting that
collaboration is the key, right?
That should be the biggest theme
of today, I think, is that
collaboration is key. We've
talked about the grand
challenges you guys, we've
talked some about Escor, and you
know a lot about that and the,
and the tech hub and the
technology.
Enhancement fund has really
helped us do that.
You said if you guys work
together and plan together,
we'll give you money across the
state, and we're listening and
doing that really well and
that's, that's really important,
uh, um, in a great way, a great
carrot.
And it's really helped make a
lot of personal relationships
very strong.
Uh, the last two slides here is,
um, one is other, other examples
of cleverative success. We have
lots of success on the health
campus, uh, uh, um, side two
with the New Mexico Alzheimer's
diseasesearch Center. Uh, it's a
large P30 grant. You get all
these great P numbers from the
HSE huge collaborative grants,
um, but, but they're P30 uh, is
there, um, the Southwest no for
the, uh, for NIDA clinical trial
networks for doing that clinical
trialing work is on national.
Institute of drug abuse is huge,
right? Derby is a major issue.
And then a really nice uh cross
campus collaboration for the
climate change and Health
Alliance for and novelly of
geospatial exposure science
changes centered. Now that's
really clever acronym. It's hard
to read it all out, but as a P20
grant again funded by NIH, uh,
and, and has been critical for
you guys, um, it's a critical
effort. So really the last just
saying we want to thank you guys
on slide 26, um, the
Our legislature, our executive,
um, and federal research
agencies and our community
partners for their collaborative
support. We are really together
creating public knowledge for
the public good, diversifying
New Mexico's economy.
Establishing guide guideposts
for the future of education and
health care delivery and
supporting high-quality jobs,
uh, for New Mexicans. Thank you
very much.
Right, thank you. We'll start
out with questions from Senator
Soltz. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and it's nice to to hear how
much the technology enhancement
fund. It took us several years
to kind of get that going and it
sounds like it's working very
much like we planned for it, but
you had indicated we need some
tweaks to it are the VPRs
working together across the
universities to come up with the
language that needs to change
that needs to be happening now
so that we can get it drafted in
time for
the legislature, uh, certainly,
you know, and I'm happy to carry
it or have others carry it or
whatever, but you know, we can't
wait till January to have it
drafted. We want it sitting on
the desk is one of the first
things to go through. And so if
they aren't, please, you know,
we can get them to, to get
working on what needs to change,
what language needs to change,
um.
Couple of questions, and I think
I understand. I'm not sure
others do. You talked about the
valley of death, which is well
known in the research areas of
higher education. Would you talk
more about that and, and how we
start to, to work better to
align research at universities
with needs of industry and how
that helps both sides.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Senator Souls.
Um, yeah, no, I'm happy to
address that. There was the road
map there, slide, I forget which
number it was like 8, thank you.
Um, that really does show about
the idea of the whole pathway
there from going from basic
research all the way to the end
and it's really that
transitioning from government
support to industry support. Uh,
and, and it's, it's, it's a
difficult, um, uh, space in
between. And there are a couple
of really interesting ways that,
that we bridge that. The most
one
I'm actually most excited about
this kind of a different model
is,
uh, in the quantum information
science space we're
understanding that, um, you
know, theoretical physicists are
needed to for the industry to
keep their, their top advantage,
um, and, and to work there.
That's that's an unusual
connection. So, so when our when
fundamental research is really
key for industry to be
successful, then they will start
investing and picking up those
funds. That's how we're trying
to bring folks here. But it is,
um, a lot of
Things like these large uh tech
hub grants and, and engines
programs are designed to help.
Uh, bring together the uh.
Region to support like
Places where you can do the, the
prototyping and test and
demonstration facilities that we
need, right? So investment in,
um, large, uh, uh, facilities
where people that have proven
technologies that, that are
working, they're they're getting
a market going, but they're not,
they need to be operated at a
larger scale that they can
actually go and use those
facilities, um, things like the
desalinization plant down in
Eguardo that that facility
there, we need more of that kind
of uh investment to, to prove
and really make sure that the
industry wants to, to do that.
Does that answer your question?
Yes, I think so. And like I
said, you know, I, I pretty much
understand, you know, and the
industry has needs and
university has basic research,
you know, and how do we
Yep, bridge those to to match
and get the basic research more
into industry as well as
answering the questions that
industry needs and, and often
they kind of wave at each other
from across the room and and
don't actually get it. That's
typically kind of at least
that's how I view what is
commonly called the valley of
death in between, that the, the
better we're able to, to bridge
that, then both sides are doing
better. Industries is getting
the research done that they need
and universities are getting
more grant money and
And helping out on, on that side
as well, if I'm understanding
that accurately. Yes, Madam
Chair, and Senator Sols, uh, I
just would say it is, it's a
derisking aspect, right? It's
derisking every industry is a
simpler way to say that, and we
have to do that, we have to be
talking to industries, right? We
have to get out of our offices,
which we're doing a lot and
talking and using your help from
our community to, to make those
connections in industry and say,
well, what, what is the risk,
um, that, that you see what, uh,
that, that's going to get you to
invest here in our state with
our
Technologies. Thank you. Thank
you. And Madam Chair, you had
talked some about the, the
intellectual property of the
grants and things of that sort.
Does UNM have a patent attorney
on staff that works with faculty
from conception all the way to
fruition of, of the research?
Yes, Madam Chair and members of,
yes, we do, and it is actually
part of the UNM rainforest, so
they can provide that guidance
and hand holding from step one.
Wonderful. I'm more familiar
down with New Mexico State. They
tend not to bring in the patent
attorneys until late in the
process and you know, they can
be very helpful in helping guide
the research towards things that
will be profitable and
patentable later on, so that's
nice to hear that you all are,
are front loading that a little
bit more, uh, than trying to
push you NMSU that they ought to
put a, a line item in to have a
patent attorney on staff all the
time, not just some that are
contracted.
needed
Man and, yeah, I mean, I know we
do a lot of contracting also to
that to whether they're on staff
full time, I'd actually have to
look with, um, with, um, uh,
Lisa Killala from the rainforest
technology, to be sure. I will
say that we have also in our
office added in, um, uh, some,
uh, folks with IP background,
um, uh, in our office to to also
help in that process just on, on
the really early stage when
people are even nervous about
talking to rainforests.
Sometimes people are too nervous
for that.
Thanks. Thank you, Madam Chair,
I, I think it's Texas Tech has
something like 12 attorneys that
are staff members of Texas Tech
that are just work on that which
is really important when you're
trying to to build strong
research programs. Um,
Lots of what you're talking
about and I'm glad we've got a
couple of members of the finance
committee that that are on this.
This, uh, panel or our committee
because so much of this
understanding how much research
at universities is a
diversification of the economy
as New Mexico's moving off of an
extractive economy to an
information economy we've got
brain power here, but it
requires support. Could you talk
a little bit about how much
additional grant money comes in
for every investment dollar we
make as a state and also how
many
Faculty and graduate students
and others that it supports
through that that this isn't
just money that goes away, this
is money that turns over within
the economy and brings in other
grants.
So, Madam Chair, and, and
Senator Sols, uh, I don't have
the exact numbers, uh, on me for
the that investment return, but
it's been the last time I looked
it was around a fivefold or
greater return on Madam Chair,
for a moment. So every dollar
that we invest or have a grant
that comes in, we get $5
additional dollars of additional
grants and
And money is that um,
Madam Chair, and again, I don't
need an exact number, but right,
right, so, so just to clarify,
um,
when we look at the, the T and
the technology enhancement fund,
uh, and, and that the matching
we use for those grants, so the,
the total size of that award,
um, uh, is usually, uh, 5 or
more times greater than the than
the amount of the TAF
investment.
Uh, and then, and then we do try
to use, uh, um, a lot, uh, a lot
of support is going towards, uh,
students, um, and, uh, and
other, uh, hiring other
technicians and staff at the
university, but I don't have the
numbers, but we can get that for
you. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, uh, panel, the, you know,
I'm one of the ESOR legislators
that's on there. Um, and I know
some of the data we've gotten
out of that is for each of those
grants that EPSCOR supports.
brings in a number of other
grants around it on something
like $9 additional dollars for
each dollar of the the basic one
as well as, um, all of the
patents and other things that
spin off and the entrepreneurs
that that grow around all of
those and so it, you know, it's
a really big ROI, you know.
Big is a very technical term, as
you know, but it's a big ROI.
Madam Chair and Senator Sols,
thanks for bringing up the
scoreboard because it is, it is
a huge multiplier. Uh, and it
also falls in these categories
of right now just because of
some challenges in the way they
shifted around, the matching for
it is also soft, right? You,
it's traditionally had a hard
requirement in written that you
had to have it every year, but
right now they're in a weird
spot where they made a mistake
and didn't get that in there and
so soft, um, uh, matches are.
Required and we had a lot of
work that that our federal
legislators also, um, uh, worked
on to make sure that our funding
is, um, continued for that
office and though the office,
uh, serves the entire state, um,
in this weird transition between
uh mechanisms. Our offices has
actually added in and made sure
to support that office during
the transition so we don't lose
any of those people, it's gonna
be good now. All the new
funding's coming, uh, most of
the new funding is coming
through, uh, through that, but
it, it really ramps out the
whole program.
There's, there were 3 new, um,
or, uh, track 2 awards that are
each $6 million that were just
awarded this year that involve
us and two other states in that
case in different areas. Those
are, again, uh, the whole
statewide, uh, and they, on the
back end,
um, you get a lot of Esco funds
that top up grants or or push
grants over the line that we
never see directly. It's hard to
calculate that that investment.
But you see the total dollars
that that that, um, up there,
going to Epscor states.
Going up and that really, uh, is
a big factor there. The, they're
further required to do a lot
more. Thank you. Thank you. And
Madam Chair, it was nice hearing
you talk about aligning the
research with the more the
agency needs within the state.
Uh, lots of the agencies have
pilot programs. They have other
programs that need evaluation
and it's very difficult to go to
university. It's like, well I've
got $10,000 for a valuation that
hardly gets anything started.
Do you have any thoughts or
ideas about how as a state we
could better support those small
nonprofits, uh, agencies that
are doing pilots that need to
know whether they're being
effective. How can higher
education research, work to help
that, and I'm thinking also on
the other side it supports lots
of young faculty as they're
starting to build their research
portfolios with, you know,
smaller grants of that sort that
may be state level.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for the
question. It is absolutely
necessary to have those seed
money, seed funds in order to
support those pilot projects.
For example, as part of our CTSC
clinical translational Science
Center. We do have a pilot
program. We also have like this
corporate grants that they
provide pilot funds,
but of course again it is
essential and we can provide
more support for the faculty. So
111 aspect of that was again to
just set things up for pilot
funds. We have done this.
For example, with tobacco
settlement funds to do that. I
know again the grand challenge
also comes with that pilot seat
fence. So for our investigators,
they have to show the
collaboration and they have to
have those pilot projects before
they can actually apply for um
um
extramural funds. That being
said, again, it is back to what
we were talking about the
technology enhancement Fund and
the FA when we talk about some
of the activities and centers,
especially like again CTSC.
it clearly states that cost is
not required, so we cannot ask
to, you know, to take advantage
of the test for DFA funds
because again it is not allowed
in the RFA, but we, we have the
opportunity to do that. We have
the infrastructure. We literally
need more funds in order to
provide more funding and with
some of our pilot projects, we
require working with the
community or another institution
again the team science is the
word when it comes to
And research.
Manager and Senators, um, thanks
for the question. Uh, it, it's
the first thing I want to say is
that because of the support you
guys are already giving, right?
It's, it's actually is helping
us uh free up some resources to
to try and invest in in efforts
like that now. So, so we have,
um, uh, programs that are that
are supporting the faculty. We
can even use some of the, um,
uh, the, the matching funds we
get to, to even support
community members in in that in
the sort of effort um to, to do
that, this kind of work. So
it's, it's, it's, I'm not gonna
say
We don't need more help because
the state needs more help. Our
community members really do need
that and effectively need, need
a lot, um, and, you know, if we
were to, you know, I, it would
be very interesting to think
about having uh funding for seed
grants that was specifically to
look at, uh, to work with
community members on a project,
uh, that is, uh, I think there's
a lot of interest from faculty
to, to do that. We try to tie
that into grants here or there
as we can put into our broader
impact sections and to do that
work, but if we had something
targeted that would be very
helpful.
And of course we we do have uh
Bieber, you know, our, our, if
you want the economic research,
um, analysis that that you can
fund for the
for that organization.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
was going to say Bieber is the
one that most of us as
legislators have heard about and
know, but I think there
certainly is opportunity in many
of the other, uh, areas in
particularly in areas
psychology, sociology, where
there aren't the big uh National
Science Foundation grants those
faculty need support also and
help build the state of New
Mexico. And so, you know.
If there are ways that we can
help and again most of this
comes down to money and so I'm
looking at my finance chair
friends, uh, but research in New
Mexico is a huge diversification
of, of economics and the growth
that comes out around that. Uh,
kind of my final comment is
you all, we all need to do a
better job of letting the public
and the governor's office and
others know how much this is
economic growth and development.
We don't tell that story well
enough and
So we need better media, social
media about, I mean, you've got
a huge presentation of
incredible things with millions
of dollars of grants, and
nobody's heard about it. And we
need to do a better job of doing
that. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I'm next to
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
for this presentation. I really
appreciated the nuts and bolts
and, um, Doctor Ray, the
research is the cornerstone of
progress that's going to go in
my quote of the week pile,
and, um, also the fact that
these huge grants, you said it's
53 cents per dollar. That's very
sobering. Uh, when the
legislature starts budgeting,
and I can't emphasize enough,
um, already, Mark Edwards is
drafting some research funding.
Um, legislation because we have
to actually kind of internally
pass it before January, if I
could say that. Um, two
questions. So when we were at
New Mexico Tech, um, that soft
money that's not required. Um,
one of the deans there said
they'd like to see $200 million
pot for that. Does that align
with your thinking? Like a
dedicated
what he got a big smile.
I was like, oh, that would be
great,
it's just, I mean, I heard that
over and over again. They don't
say you have to have it, but,
but if you don't have it, you
don't get the grant.
Uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, I appreciate the
question and 200,000 can be a
start and we can show the
progress that we can make, but I
can also tell you about a little
bit about the numbers in FY 24
HSC has about $256 million
awards, but would you like to
know how many awards we actually
submitted, how much we asked
for, we did about 8230
This is what we're talking about
that with a little bit of more
support we can become more
competitive. I'm not saying
every single grant that has been
submitted it would get, it would
get funded, right? Some of them
they need revisions, they need
to have pilot funds to show, you
know, to have a better proposal,
but even if half of these
submitted grants, we can provide
some support to become more
competitive. There is a lot of
room. The effort is there, the
faculties are there. So we just
need to provide some financial
support.
These grants to become more
competitive.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Garrett, thanks
for that question. I just want
to add two things really
quickly. One, I'd be remiss if I
didn't state that of that, you
know, the 53 cents, which is
calculated federally, right?
They, they, uh, that's needed
for every dollar. Um, we
actually only recover, uh, about
half that.
Right, in the in the upper 25%,
25% or so from the grants
themselves because of all the
limits, limits that are put on
them. So there's also a huge
amount that we are, you know,
covering, um, the institutions,
um, so we always like to remind
that the real rate that we get
back is not, is not 50%, 53%.
Um, and then yes, the, the order
of magnitude is, is, is, is
wonderful and I just wanted to
say that, you know, I've been
here at UNM for 22 years now.
Uh, and for the 1st 20 of that,
these discussions
happen that I ever heard of.
Like they weren't, they would,
I, I would feel we would be
laughed out of the out of every
room I was in, not, not, not,
not, not fair to any of my
colleagues, no one would believe
that we could be doing these
kind of investments that we're
doing that you guys have been
already doing, and that's very
exciting.
Um, Madam Chair, my second
question is, at that same
meeting, we talked about
establishing some central
office, uh,
To oversee this stuff. And the
question came, I mean, it's here
and there like the universities
have offices, but if we made a
state office that could have a
comprehensive look, making sure
we get all the grants helping
everybody. The question is,
where would we put it? Like,
would it be in higher education?
Would it be in the economic
development would be at a
stand-alone. Have you thought
about anything like that? Do you
have any
Suggestions.
Thank you, um, uh.
Cheers, Madam Chair, and
Representative Garrett. Um,
yeah, I, I, I think, to me, uh,
my personal preferences is to
have something that's flexible
and and dynamic, right? And, and
that can really respond. And so,
uh, having a newer, uh, a new
organization I think would be
very good for uh, for something
like that that we really had
this task to be able to respond
quickly and flexibly. Uh, I also
think it is very nice to have
someone that's making sure we're
collaborating.
To be honest, I mean, we all,
we're working really hard
together, but you can never stop
pushing that button in, in my
personal opinion, if you really
want to see that success for the
state. Um, and, and so I, I, I
think that kind of a structure
would be very, very nice to try.
It'll have its own.
Challenges, I'm sure. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I, I, I, I don't
believe it matters where it's
gonna be housed as long as again
as um as you heard from Dave, if
there is a flexibility and there
is that timely attention to the
details and matters that is the
key. Otherwise we can make it
work. We can have a different
scoring system. We can include
again, multidisciplinary
approach and team science
economic development,
all of those.
Criterias we can certainly do
that. I don't believe it would
make a difference where it's
going to be housed as long as
there is enough support and
infrastructure is clearly
defined.
Thank you. And my last question
is about the, um,
Um, the bioscience Center. I
followed it because they
pioneered having a
public-private partnership,
which automatically lends itself
to connecting research to
industry. Um, any, anything on
how that is going?
And it's, it's kind of a model
for how to integrate the
research and then the transition
to actual industry.
Um, Madam Chairman, members, I
do not have an update for you,
but we are certainly working on
that.
OK, thank you. Those are my
questions.
All right, um, any more
questions from the committee.
00, all right.
Senator, go ahead. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Uh,
good morning to the presenters,
Dr. Raisy, and is it Doctor
Hansen or is it thank you so
much for all your work. You
know, I was looking at your
front page first of all when you
started presenting and, um, and
I'd like immediately I noticed
where it says research is a
future because you go on, you
say Rees is that research is
education, the future and then
researches creativity, and you
know it it really caught my eye
because truly without research,
we can't have a future. We can't
just
And they're stagnant and falling
behind all the time. So, um,
anyway, I had a minimum, right?
So, Madam Chairman, uh, if you
can allow me, um, Doctor Ray
said to go to page 12 or Doctor
Hanson, uh, page 12 of your
presentation. Um, let's, let's
just briefly, uh, talk about the
AI program that you have that
RPSP, and I, I really like that,
um, because it, it, it does so
many great things truly, but one
of the questions I had is on the
last bullet, there's 4 bullets
where it says our.
TSP request for the €3 million.
Is that already the request put
into the LFC budget through UNM?
It is OK, just wanted to, to
make sure we're now looking at
the final, um, request and I
wanted to kind of look at that
one flag it if possible, um, and
I'll tell you why in a minute
because, um,
Uh, you know, not only, it seems
like it's not only going to
stabilize the language says it's
going to stabilize the
operations and, and build
broader impacts, but it's not
only going to stabilize. It
seems like it would in building
a broader impact is going to
grow, to grow the program to be
able to do more and so, um, I
just wanted to make sure we're
on the same page on that because
if any one of us here are all
together, speak for your
program. We want to make sure
we, we
can say that, hey, it's, it is
gonna grow. It's not just gonna
keep things there stable, but
they're doing more with it. So,
um, anyway, um, so that's really
what I had and, 01 other final
thing is that, um, I'm happy to
see that the letter,
I always say salvieta, it's not
that, it's seveera, um, the, the
refuge there is part of this
whole sampling of Erid projects
that you have, you know, we went
to visit Madam Chairman, a while
back, uh, my husband and I
The, uh,
Took our bikes in a, in our van
and we decided we were going to
drive around that area. It's
been several months, and we just
rode around there and we
actually went to the, to the,
uh, wildlife refuge there and we
visited with staff and so on.
And I was amazed at how much
they do. Um, I tell you the
truth, I never really used to
think about that, about that
refuge and, and the work they
do, the labs they have, and just
everything.
amazing. I came back very
impressed. And, um, I just, I'm
happy that you have some of that
in there and final, Madam
Chairman, is, um, doc, well,
yes, it's also Dr. Sol, Senator
Souls, Bill Sols always brings
up. Thank you, Senator, for
always bringing up the returns.
The fact that we invest money,
um, into programs like these,
whether they're research or
otherwise is one thing, but we
don't do a real good job
That measuring all the returns
that we get because the benefits
that we get as we know, um, are
very far reaching for the future
and and you know many times we
just see a large amount of money
being requested, that we forget
that, you know, this 3 million,
for example, or the 18 million
funding that you have through
the feds and the state, uh, will
be very much, um, returned to
the state in many ways and to
the people of New Mexico so I
don't have any questions.
Madam Chairman, I just wanted to
say what I felt here about all
this. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator. Um, I just
have, and thank you for your
presentation. I just have a few
questions, um, the engine, when
you talk about the engine, um,
as a grant program, can it be
folded into another pot or does
it, is it a standalone? Can you
explain that to me?
Yes, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, so that the NSF
engine, um, itself, uh, is then
unlike say the, the Arid
Institute or whatever which
actually involved and it, it is
a regional region-wide effort,
right? So there, there will be,
it will fund, um, uh,
institutions across the state
and through and through and
throughout, um, uh.
The Navajo Nation in West Texas.
And so the we do try to, we
decide on or the way we sort of
fold things together is what I
would say is by trying to
focusing focus engines uh on our
large init initiatives already
that we've already, uh, worked
with, um, you know, it was the,
the first round of this engine
was um, you know, on clean
energy and clean water was a
focus of a uh a seven
institution organization called
the Northern Rio Grande Corridor
Collaborative that was the
National Labs, the, uh, tech.
Um,
make you take NSU uh UTEP, UNM.
And uh and Navajo Technical
University. And that, and
that's, that has continued on to
be this this larger coalition,
but that um a lot of that effort
said we, we needed to um really
align with big with the sort of
grand challenge and water that
we had going on already, uh, and
help us sort of build that Arid
Institute. So it is, um, it is
its own separate, um,
Uh, funding stream, but it only
makes sense if it's, if it's
building into the stuff we are
already doing and the quantum
engine if we were happy to get
two or one or the other would,
would do the same sort of thing,
right, right, to go forward it
to build on that, um, our
existing strengths.
OK,
thank you for that answer. Um,
the reforestation, I think you
talked about it on one, on one
of the pages. Where are you at?
I know you're working with
Highlands and, and NMSU. How's
that going? How's the
cooperation going? Tell me
what's happening there. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair.
to my best of my knowledge,
right, there's going to be
another update soon. I like, I
think it's October 10th,
there'll be another, um, meeting
to talk about having, uh, I
think the
I think 70 million that they
would need to complete all the
reforestation center.
Um, there if other funds don't
come through, right? We're
still, I think, I think
everyone's still highly
optimistic that we're going to
get a lot of funding, uh,
outside of the state from uh
federally to make that, uh,
center go, but it's already
they're, they're up and doing a
research um in there growing,
putting out the seedlings and
making them more hardy.
Yeah, it's very exciting. I was
on with Senator Woods and I
carried the bill for the, the
office. Where did it end up
being?
Being placed. I don't even know.
Madam Chair, it's in Mora. OK,
great, beautiful, beautiful
facility if you have a chance to
get out there. Beautiful area.
Um, the last thing, um, so the
center we would, um, that
Representative Garrett and
Senator Sols, we were talking
about, um, from the last meeting
we had, I think you said
innovation and Research Center,
but that's what we were gonna
name it or something, but any
information you can give us,
like Senator Sowell said, you
need to toot your horn, I guess.
Any information you can give us
to help us pass these bills.
As we go through would be great
if you could have someone start
on, you know, what you've done,
how we can, especially for
appropriations, how we can
really say this is what's
happening, this is what they're
doing. These are the great
things that are happening. This
is why we need to fund it. That
would help us, all right?
Right, I think that is it. Thank
you so much for your
presentation and coming for us.
Thank you.
When, um, if the people who just
came in could introduce
themselves we have Senator Pope.
Senator Lopez, Senator, uh,
Represent Harper and
Representative Chasey. So let's
start with um um Majority Leader
Chasey, would you introduce
yourself?
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Happy to be here this
morning and uh welcome to
everyone to the district. I have
been privileged to represent for
almost 28 years now.
And
I'm passing the torch.
Thanks. Thank you. Senator
Lopez.
Oh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and good morning. I'm
Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, Southwest Quadrant
of Bernalio County, and I'm here
as a guest today, but this
particular topic interests me,
um, so I'm here to learn. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator. Next,
uh, Representative Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's a
pleasure to be here, Jason
Harper. I represent the Northern
Rio Rancho area in Sandoval
County and, uh.
Yes, I, I, I love, yes, I am a
scientist and I love this
discussion. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative N, um,
Senator Pope, Madam Chair.
Senator Harold Poe Jr. District
23, northwest Albuquerque, Burn
Leo County. Happy to be here.
All right, our next topic,
artificial intelligence literacy
program. Dr. Leo Liu.
Thank you.
Thank you, and whenever you're
ready.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, thank you for
having me here.
Uh, I'm Leolo, Dean of the
university libraries and
Learning Sciences at the
University of New Mexico. So,
um, just a very quick background
about me, um, and why am I
talking about AI literacy. So
I've been conducting research on
AI literacy, um, and I've used
my research to uh findings to
develop AI literacy programs for
faculty, students and staff at
UNM. Um, and I have also
published, uh, my research in
peer reviewed journals and.
consulting for a number of
universities on their AI
literacy programs and
assessments.
And, um, in addition, I'm the
current president of the
Association of College and
Research Libraries, and I've set
up a national task force to
develop a set of uh AI
competencies for library
workers.
So today I would like to share
why AI literacy is so important
and how we can ensure all New
Mexicans can benefit from it.
So we go to slide 2. this is the
outline that what I'm going to
be talking about in the next 20
or 30 minutes or so. So the
importance of AI, generative AI.
what is AI literacy?
And then how to develop AI
literacy for different
populations and the change
management that goes with it.
And I'll share a case study, one
of the AI literacy upskilling
programs at UNMI developed and
some key takeaways and I welcome
your questions and discussions
afterwards.
Go to
Slide 3.
So you're probably very familiar
with these. These have been
around for a long time,
captures, they are to test
whether we're humans or not.
Um, but this is actually us, all
of us helping to train AI.
To do math to recognize script
handwriting, and teaching them
how to drive.
So machine learning has been
with us for a long time.
But AI really becomes the center
of our attention when OpenAI
released chat GPT to the general
public. In November 2022.
So all of a sudden, the world,
not just the tech world or the
research world could see the
amazing potential of this
technology called generative AI.
And if you go to the next slide.
So you probably have seen all
these headlines, chatchi BT can
pass exams, can do homework.
It can code, um.
And all of a sudden, um, it's
become a disruptive force in
many sectors immediately for
education for sure.
And you can do all these things
because many of the companies
have, I would say scraped the
internet for data to train their
training model to train the
models.
And because of that, many people
feel that their work's been, I
would say quote unquote stolen
without their consent.
So there are all these lawsuits
going on, um, we haven't settled
on anything, we haven't, you
know, it feels like the laws and
the regulations need to catch
up.
Uh, right now, just, let's just
say we're in a gray area.
Uh, eventually, hopefully we
can, you know, move forward when
and when regulations have to
catch up to this really fast
moving technology.
So go to the next slide.
So
Why is it important, AI and and
especially geneative AI right
now. Um,
Some say AI is a catalyst for
the 4th industrial revolution.
Um, the 4th,
so the 4th industrial revolution
is driven by smart technologies
like AI, robotics, the internet
of things, and this revolution
is I say transforming industries
by making systems more
connected, autonomous, and
efficient.
So to put it in context, the
first industrial revolution
introduced steam power.
The second brought electricity,
mass production.
And the third gave us automation
and computers. Now the industry
4.0, machines can analyze data,
communicate with each other, and
make decisions, creating smarter
operations across sectors.
So it's not just automation
anymore. It's about a fully
connected, data-driven world
that requires new skill sets.
And generative AI like chat GBT
like other things like mid
journey goes beyond simply
automating tasks. It creates new
content, whether it's writing,
images, or even solutions to
problems.
And this technology is
transforming fields like by
assisting with tasks that
require creativity and critical
thinking, opening up new
possibilities in areas like
education, healthcare,
entertainment.
So what are the broader
implications? While AI offers
immense opportunities, it also
brings a lot of challenges,
issues like biases in AI
systems, ethical concerns about
around AI generated content, and
the impact on jobs needs to be
carefully managed.
AI has the potential to displace
millions of jobs, but at the
same time it will create new
roles that require different
skill sets. So preparing the
workforce for these changes is
essential to managing this
disruption.
So what are the strategic
importance for New Mexico. I
think by developing an AI
literate workforce, New Mexico
has a chance to attract
innovative businesses drive
economic growth, and ensure that
we remain competitive in a fast
changing global economy.
Let's go to slide number 6. So
what is AI literacy?
I don't think there is a single
definition of AI literacy, but
to me, this is a pretty good
one. AI literacy has the ability
to understand, engage with, and
critically assess artificial
intelligence technologies and
their societal, ethical and
practical implications.
So if you think about AI
literacy, um, as, uh, similar to
the inter learning the internet
when it first emerged, just like
the internet transformed how we
communicate, learn, and work. AI
is now reshaping every part of
our lives.
By understanding AI like
learning the internet requires
more than just knowing how to
use a web browser. It's about
understanding the underlying
technology is applications is
broader societal impact.
So I would say that some key
components of AI literacy. One
is technical knowledge. So we
need to grasp basic concepts
like machine learning algorithms
and data processing.
Um, and recognize how AI is used
in fields like healthcare,
finance, and everyday tools like
virtual assistants, chatbot.
Um, ethical awareness is really
important. We need to be aware
of concerns like bias, privacy,
and AI's role in job
displacement.
And we need to understand how to
deploy AI ethically with
fairness and accountability.
It also requires critical
thinking, because we need to
evaluate the reliability and
biases in the AI generated
content. They're not always
accurate. They're not always
truthful. Um, and we need to
question the use of AI in key
areas like governance,
education, or justice.
Also, we need to be able to use
it, right? Learn how to interact
with, you know, these large
language models, data platforms,
GTI like Chat GBT.
Uh, we need to adapt to using AI
in the workplace alongside human
skills.
And also understand how AI can
affect social structures and
either reinforce inequality and
or create new opportunities.
And we want to use AI to
innovate, solve problems, and
drive progress.
So
AI literacy, I think helps
individuals make informed
decisions, understand the
technology's limits and
potential and shape how AI
impacts their personal and
professional lives. I think it's
foundation for thriving for in a
in a very, in the AI embedded or
driven world moving forward.
Go to slide 7.
There is an urgency to teach AI
literacy. I'll give you some
statistics.
So
AI will have an estimated 21%
net increase on the United
States GBT by 2030. So why this
matters? This search in economic
growth means that industries
across the board will be using
AI to drive innovation and and
efficiency. So, but however, to,
to, to fully harness this
economic potential, a workforce
that understands AI, how to use,
manage, and create will be
crucial.
And AI literacy ensures that
individuals are not left behind.
Another statistics, over 75% of
consumers are concerned about
misinformation from AI.
So with the rise of Give AI is
easier than ever for
misinformation, defects to
proliferate without a literacy
in the individuals won't have
that kind of mindset or tools to
critically evaluate AI generated
content.
So this creates a vulnerable
population susceptible to false
information.
We can have wide reaching
effects on public trust,
democracy, and social cohesion.
And AI literacy can empower
people to identify and challenge
these mis misinformation.
Another statistics, McKinsey
reports, 400 million workers
could be displaced because of
AI.
Now displacement doesn't mean
doesn't have to mean job loss.
If workers are prepared.
So AI literacy is the bridge
that helps these workers
reskilled, upskilled or
transition into new roles
created by AI.
Uh, another research by World
Economic Forum, AI will create
97 million new jobs. While AI
will create millions of new
jobs. These roads will require
solid understanding of AI
technologies and their
applications and AI literacy is
the key to filling these jobs,
ensuring the workforce is
prepared for future industries.
So if people are not equipped
with AI literacy, these jobs
opportunities will go to those
who are already well versed in
AI, widening the skills gap.
So, I'll say AI literacy is not
just a nice to have.
I, it is a necessity for
economic competitiveness,
workforce resilience and social
stability.
Uh, if you go to the next slide.
A slide 8,
so
And we need to support different
populations to gain AI literacy.
And these are some of the ones
that I
thing that should be the
priority. One is the educators.
Educators are key to preparing
students for this AI-driven
world. But many, if not most,
lack the training to teach AI
effectively.
Limited training in AI, leaving
many, many of them, many
educators feeling unprepared.
And students, they need early
exposure to AI to succeed in
this new, you know, new world.
We are putting them in the tough
position right now because when
most educators themselves are
not ready to teach them or
sometimes even banning the use
of AI that creates a problem.
Um, and students need consistent
access to AI education and
hands-on learning opportunities.
Working professionals,
industries like healthcare,
agriculture finance, and
transforming with AI
professionals need to reskill to
stay relevant.
Um,
But with a lot of the
professionals.
Concerns about job displacement
also lack of time for
upskilling. That's a challenge.
Underserved communities without
AI literacy, they risk being
left behind again, widening the
education and economic gap.
Um, there's a lot of challenge
of access to technology and
resources. And then government
employees, AI literacy is
critical for public servants to
improve governance, policy
decisions, and public services
through AI tools.
Um, but I just listed these, but
obviously every community member
should be AR literate moving
forward.
Uh, next slide, please.
But implementing AI literacy
isn't just about teaching how to
use AI tools. It's about guiding
people through the emotional and
psychological changes that come
with adopting a new tech
adopting new technologies. So AI
adoption isn't really just
technical, it's cultural,
emotional, and deeply human.
And we need empathy and
strategies.
Many people fear AI because they
don't fully understand it. I've
talked about job loss or uh uh
uh and, and these anxiety
creates psychological barriers
that we need to address. So
transparency and empathy are key
to overcoming these uh
anxieties.
So we need a clear long term
plan that doesn't just educate
but provides ongoing support,
um, engagement isn't just one
time, it's continuous. And
So clear communication is
critical. People need to see how
AI benefits their daily work
with real examples like boosting
productivity or problem solving
uh active participation is also
really important. Let them
experiment with AI fail safely
and learn by doing and providing
them with ongoing support and
feedback.
Uh, slide 10, please. So I
conducted two national surveys
on mostly academic library
workers.
The first one in May that was
about 6 months after Cha GBD
came out, another one this
summer in June. So just share
some key findings. Now
participation in training
generally increased AI literacy
level by about 5 to 15%. Um, so,
and over the one year more
people have taken part in
trainings.
However, those who have access
to the premium version of AI
tools have a 16 to 40% higher
literacy level than just, you
know, going, taking some
one-time training. So since last
year, about double of the
respondents have paid for
premium version, so about 8%
versus 19% this summer.
And more than about double her
participate in some kind of AI
trainings in professional
development. 34% versus 66%.
And throughout, you know, in
these studies, people ask for
more training. They need more
support, more hands-on
experience with AI tools,
especially addressing the
ethical issues of AI.
Uh, next slide, slide 11.
So based on the findings, um, I
have developed um some programs
at UNM. Uh, we want to upskill
our faculty, our staff, and
students. Um, these initiatives
were built on two core
principles, basically using the
research findings from my
national studies and also
applying adult learning
principles. Adult learning very
differently than, you know,
children or students in the
classroom.
So I designed the training
program uh using the, the
findings and
Giving them access to uh premium
tools and um creating um
communities of practices, people
wanted to learn with each other
and share with each other and
want that human interaction. Um,
since, especially with people
having more time working
remotely uh since the pandemic,
human human interactions
actually craved by many people.
We applied adult learning
principles. That means they
learn by doing.
Working hands on with AI tools
and directly applying what they
learned to their own work
immediately.
Our goal is to make AI less
intimidating and just more
accessible.
And we focus a little bit more
on journalative AI because that
is the thing that is disrupting
higher education and teaching
and learning.
Um, and we want to make sure
that
People who can who can use it to
apply to the rework immediately.
And the participants work on
projects that allow them to
explore how these tools like GBT
or GBT 4 at the time can enhance
their teaching, research, and
even administrative tasks.
So I'll share my program at UNM
slide 12. So one of our most
successful, very promising pilot
programs, we call it the GBT for
exploration exploration program.
If follow a structure of
three-phase approach. First, we
offered workshops introducing
participants to the base of AI
and generative AI tools, and
then they moved in the hands-on
experimentation, applying these
tools to their projects in their
own work, whether it was
teaching research or even with
selling one on.
Academic advising.
Finally, they share their
experiences helping build a
learning community in a way we
hope to train the trainers.
If you go to the next slide, 13,
this is kind of the structure of
it, um.
So phase one is introduction and
training. We provide workshops,
introducing them to to the
tools. So this is to make sure
everybody start um on the same
page.
Regardless of their prior
experience.
So phase two, exploration,
experimentation. This is when
they dive into the hands-on
project using AIWork. They each
design a individual projects. We
want them to have the motivation
and help drive to do something,
whether they're in teaching,
research, administrative task,
um, they want, we want them to
see the immediate value. And
then phase three is evaluation
training, I mean sharing, um,
they share the outcomes, tips,
uh, lessons learned, tips,
concerns, the
So some really important data
for us to move forward to design
to modify for the next cohort,
basically. It really reinforces
learning and also builds a sense
of collaboration and innovation
across different departments and
units. Um, the outcome was
really promising. It seems to be
quite effective because you're
combining hands-on training,
community practice with access
to the tools, the premium tools.
We have seen the 54% increase in
AI literacy among participants.
So that's higher than the in the
um in the research studies.
So now we've done it first in my
college, we expanded this summer
to teaching, uh, cohort of
instructors using Gen AI for
teaching, um, designing, uh,
assignments and other things. A
court of faculty using AI tool
or site. AI to do literature
review for their research
project. And we have um one for
open educational resources. So
OER is one of our priorities and
we want to explore using
generative AI to develop and
enhance.
So yours because that can really
help you save money.
So we paid our faculty to
experiment with it and the
deliverable was to provide case
studies for the AI chapter of
our guidebook for faculty
learning how to use, uh, how to
develop OER. So now we're
preparing to expand the program
to advisor with the goal of
becoming a leader in using Gen
AI for academic advising.
Um, if you go to um slide 14.
Testimonial some of the things
people participants have said
about the program. This program
changed AI from a threat into a
collaborator, I gain confidence
in using AI to enhance my daily
work rather than replace it. The
freedom to experiment make uh AI
less intimidating.
And some key learnings, hands-on
experimentation increased
comfort with AI prompt like
prompting a practice built
critical skills and tailor
projects amplify engagement. But
also there are a lot of some
challenges. Everybody was
worried about data privacy. What
can we, how can we use these
models and prompt engineering,
which is how you interact with
AI is difficult but essential.
and AI lacked uh subject matter.
Expertise at these these LLM
models, so people need to have
bring that um mindset into using
it.
Go to slide 15.
So I want to maximize impact
through research. I think we
need to use a research-driven
approach to AI literacy. One is
to understand the unique needs
of different populations. It
shouldn't be a one size fits
all. Different groups have
different levels of knowledge
access needs when it comes to AI
and I think doing more research
and assessment can help us
identify these unique needs and
barriers and allow us to design
programs to address them.
Um, without clear understanding
of where the gaps are, there's a
risk of creating programs that
miss the mark or fail to engage
those who need, need them the
most. So we want to base
decisions on evidence and data.
Um
And AI, AI and AI technologies
are really involving really
rapidly and so are the skills
people need to survive to
succeed. Uh, so research driven
approach can help us stay
adaptive and forward thinking.
Um, and building trust and
engagement is really important
when programs are built on based
on real data and insight,
participants are more likely to
trust the process and engage
fully. So doing research on this
allow us to co-create solutions
with the communities and the
sectors involved and ensuring a
higher buying rate, uh, and the
higher rates of success.
So in conclusion, I say a
research driven approach is
essential, informed data back
decisions are key to creating AR
literacy programs that work.
Um, if you go to the last slide
16, um, as we conclude, I think
there are 3 important takeaways
to remember. First, AR literacy
is urgent. It's not just about
keeping up with technology. It
is about shaping the future of
our communities and ensuring New
Mexicans thrive in this AI
driven world. Second, we must
take a research-driven approach,
understanding the specific needs
and barriers of different
groups. And finally,
AI literacy has the potential to
empower every community in New
Mexico and with the right
support, we can ensure that no
one is left behind.
So some suggestions. I urge you
to support research and program
development, uh, together we can
create AI AI literacy initiative
of STEM Power workforce
educators and underserved
communities, and we want to
collaborate and engage across
sectors, educators, policy
So some suggestions. I urge you
to support research and program
development, uh, together we can
create AI AI literacy initiative
of STEM Power workforce
educators and underserved
communities, and we want to
collaborate and engage across
sectors, educators,
policymakers, businesses to
ensure that New Mexicans have
the skills they need to succeed
in this, um, so thank you very
much for giving me this
opportunity to share.
This with you.
Thank you for your presentation.
The first questions will come
from Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you for the presentation,
um.
And really what you laid out,
um, I know I've been involved in
some meetings along with the
Majority Leader Chasey. There's
the AI multi-state working group
kind of looking at a lot of
these AI issues.
Um,
One of the questions I have is
what kind of lessons can we
learn from
Say when we started with the
Internet, I guess, have we
looked into how we can, you
know, maybe when the internet
came on board where there's some
lessons learned that we didn't
do well as far as educating
folks and um I look at, look at
this as
There's the issues of
Misinformation, disinformation,
the fear that she laid out of
jobs, but the fact is it's here,
um, folks need to understand it.
Um, and so how do we get, get
that out there, um, but at the
same time, how do we get it to
folks everywhere in our rural
areas, our tribal communities
when we're still even right now
trying to get everyone.
Proper broadband, right? So, um,
just wondering if you've
considered some of those factors
and some of those issues that we
have to deal with. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam Chair, and
Senator Pope, um, uh, so it's
great that you make the analogy
to learn, how can we learn from
the the teaching of the internet
in some ways. Uh, I think a lot
of the people at the time.
Didn't have the awareness until
much later and um.
And a lot of people want to wait
until it's perfect to learn it.
uh, and, um, it's never going to
be that perfect and we still use
the internet, everybody, but
knowing how to use it a little
bit better like you talk about
misinformation. How can we, so
I'm a librarian, we teach
information literacy. How can we
make sure that uh we know how to
evaluate different ways to look
at information on the internet.
I think it's the same way for um
uh learning AI.
Or how to use AI in our everyday
life is to have that mindset, to
have that awareness that not
everything it creates is going
to be perfect that we need to
apply our own critical thinking
skills and therefore
I really advocate for.
Developing AI literacy standards
and having that as part of our
teaching to first of all, young
kids and even people who are
already adults basically, we
need to be ready for this, um,
in terms of reaching everybody
that would take some efforts in
clear planning, obviously, but
um,
I think, you know, I'm speaking
as a librarian, a library,
libraries are, you know,
community hubs in so many
communities. In fact, that's why
I'm pushing for a lot of the
library workers to become AI
literate first, so that they can
enrich their communities in that
way. So there may be other ways
that we can do through different
channels, but the first thing I
think is to have that.
Come understanding of what AI
literacy we need to teach people
so that they can, they can be
there, they can succeed
basically and not be vulnerable.
Sounds great. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and you know, when I do
go to the library still every
now and then, um, you know, used
to be like, who's got books,
who's going to the library, but
you go there and the computer
labs are always packed. That's
where people are using it. So I
think definitely that could be a
location where a lot of this
education, uh, could occur. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I have. Thank you. Thank
you, Senator. Next
Representative Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Dr.
Lowe, thank you for your
presentation. I'm actually very
pleased to hear many of the
things that you've talked about,
um, because I've had some
concerns, I believe many of us,
probably all of us in this room
share, um.
Uh, kind of going off what
Senator Pope said, Madam Chair.
I feel like we initially thought
it was the advent of the
internet.
And the ability to get so much
information, to have access to
so much information and to be
able to find what you're looking
for very quickly.
Um, that the information age
would have led to a more
well-informed, uh, pop,
populists, right? Well, more
well informed, uh, public.
But I think in many ways we've
seen the opposite, um, there's a
lot of misinformation and also
because it's so easy to find
what you're looking for.
I feel like we no longer retain.
And, and remember many of the
things that used to, you know,
memorization used to be really
important. Um, and so I really
worry, um,
Uh, I feel like the reason
Einstein was so successful.
It was because he was just so
good at math that he could look
at something and understand how
to represent it with an
equation.
Um,
But I worry that
We're going to lose our
potential new Einsteins because
folks can just go to the
internet or to chat GBT and ask
them how to do a homework
problem and they write it down
and then they're done and they
forget it.
Um,
So, I, I, I really love some of
the things that you brought up,
and I want to maybe just ask a
couple of questions. Um, going
to slide.
It was your slide 6.
Um, so page 3 of the handout.
Um,
You mention several key
components of AI literacy, you
know, technical knowledge.
Ethical awareness, critical
thinking skills, um, I think
these are super important
because, um, I'm sure all of us
have had a similar experience.
My, my wife just a couple of
weeks ago actually, she teaches
a class and she's like, oh this
could be fun, and she used chat
GBT to develop a lesson plan.
She asked for these particular
topics, a quote from this
particular person, and it spit
out a wonderful lesson plan.
But she looked up the quote and
it had totally made it up. That
person had never said that
thing.
Um, and so,
Being able to think critically
and not just take what ChatGPT
spits out as gospel, but you'll
say, I'm not sure this is right,
and how do I look up and make
sure, you know, can you maybe
speak a little bit more, uh, to
how we can implement something
like that, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chan.
Representative Harper, those are
extremely good points and um the
reason I am so um um passionate
about push advocating for a
literacy was when Chef GPT first
came out, a lot of students came
to my library asking our
librarians to look up books and
articles that did not exist.
That's exactly and those were
teachable moments, but we were
not ready for it.
Right, so you were talking about
how can we teach them, those
were the moments when they
encountered something that is
not right or they are not using
it in the correct or intelligent
way, we as educators should have
that knowledge to teach them.
Look, this thing is really good
for these things. But if you
want to look up information,
perhaps use our library
databases or other things. So,
um, that's why I think AI
literacy is really important for
educators first so that we can
teach them and then help them
with that. Um, AI doesn't, you
know, it is changing, teaching
and learning for sure, just like
the internet or calculators and
computers have changed teaching
and learning. We may need to
think about how we want to um
adjust, adapt, even transform. I
think this is a great
opportunity to think about what
are some of the potentials we
can use AI.
so that we can still remain
critical to be intelligence and
keep our memories, but in a very
different way and take advantage
of it. 11 cup real big potential
for geneative AR is personalized
learning.
So I, I will share a very quick
story. When I was about 10 years
old, I asked a question in the
chemistry class and the teacher
thought it made me feel very
stupid about asking and I was
very embarrassed and never found
out the answer until chat GPD
came out. I was playing with it,
asking questions, and I remember
that, and I asked that question
and then they explained it to me
and I understood it and then I
asked you to explain it to me
like a €10 who likes.
Spider-Man, and it did.
I was emotional. I wanted that.
I wanted to have that when I was
a kid. I want other kids to have
that opportunity to be able to
learn in their own way. And this
is a huge potential for
geneative AI granted, it has a
lot of issues right now. It
hallucinates, but we can teach
people how to use it, the
technology will keep improving.
I think we are kind of in the
dial-up stage, if you use the
internet analogy. So I think
we'll keep moving and we need to
keep moving with it. uh, and
think about how
We cannot transform teaching and
learning as well.
Yeah, so, Madam Chair and Doctor
Lowe, thank you for for sharing
that experience and those
thoughts. I, I, that means a lot
that you'd be willing to share
that with us. And I think it, it
paints a good picture because,
uh, if used properly, this, this
is really is a powerful tool.
You know, I read a, a paper just
a couple of months ago, and
there were some researchers that
were trying to use ChatGBT to,
uh, coax out a better way to
develop a battery.
And, and of course, it, it
outlined the steps they went
through and it took several
weeks of, you know, teaching it,
no, you can't do it that way.
No, you need to understand this
material and no, that's not
possible. But after, you know,
several weeks of training it, it
came up with actually some
innovative new
Um
Potential research avenues that
they're now exploring, right?
So, so if used right, it, it
really can be a wonderful thing
to help people understand things
or develop new, new ideas.
So, so I guess my, my question
is,
Um, you know, kind of, I was
also interested in your slide
10.
Where you talked about folks who
have access to premium versions
had much higher AI literacy.
I don't think that's because
they, they could afford it and
they paid for it and that's why
there are more, you know, you
know, they're smarter for some
reason or something like that, I
think it's, I would, I would
assume, maybe correct me if I'm
wrong, they just had more
exposure to it, right? Because
when you pay for it, you can ask
lots of questions before it
says, I'm sorry you've run out
of, you know, free questions.
Um,
So, so I think, um, part of
getting,
The professors, the educators in
a place where they can take
advantage of those opportunities
that you mentioned, so that
they're able to teach.
But also looking at getting
exposure and where the folks get
the most exposure. I think it's
probably, probably high school
and college where folks are
really using these tools to try
to help them with their homework
and their learning.
So, um, just, just thinking out
loud here and you don't have to,
you know, agree with me just to
make me happy. But, um, Madam
Chair and Doctor Lowe, I, I was
thinking
maybe our universities should
have like a general ed
requirement, like a one credit
hour lab, um, that they need to
take in their freshman or
sophomore years.
Where they actually sit down
with a bunch of their peers and
learn about these tools, learn
about these things you talked
about how they work, um, what
their limitations are and
actually have them exposed, get
a premium on account and, and
spend that, that one credit
hour.
Helping these these students
become AI literate. Um what are
your thoughts?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Harper, it's a
great idea. In fact, some
universities are doing that
advice on on some of these
programs like a hackathon,
people get together and learn
how to use it for certain
things. Um, and, um, my college
has a one credit I see um course
with it's a pilot course we're
trying it out with different
students how to use it. But, um,
providing that access is also is
not that easy, only a few
universities have the enterprise
version.
At this point. So it does cost
money and it does take um.
Cup um.
A strategic thinking on how we
want to use it in a larger
scale, so that is something we
need to consider and think about
how to support that because if
we encourage students to use it,
if only certain population can
have access or are able to
afford the pay version that we
could widen that digital divide
again because the, the, the
technology can potentially
narrow that decision by,
but we have to be careful on how
we work.
want to implement it and
I, I love that idea of having
just people, you know,
experiment together, and we may
want to do, we, we may do
something like that too,
actually, so.
So Madam Chair and Doctor Lowe,
thank you, um, very much. I
really enjoyed your, your
presentation and I'm glad that
we have smart people like you
thinking about this and how we
can roll out the literacy. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Right, next is, um, Majority
Leader JC.
Which
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
want to echo, uh, Representative
Harper. I really appreciated
your presentation and your pace
and your and your thorough
explanation, pace is helpful to
some of us who didn't grow up
with this kind of technology.
Um.
I, I think Representative Harper
got it a couple of my concerns,
and that is, I don't want to end
up.
With a generation who isn't able
to think critically themselves.
I don't want this to be.
Oh, I don't have to learn to
analyze things. I mean, I, in my
dissertation, the adolescents
had to learn to um isolate one
variable to manipulate at a time
and, and, uh, I read the
Albuquerque Journal sometimes
and I think they don't quite
have that ability, um, to
analyze a situation and
therefore are not formal
operational. Um,
And I like Representative
Harper's idea and you agreed
with it on having a
A required course if people are
going to use it and and there's
no getting away from using it
now. I mean, the one piece of
legislation that we did get
passed.
In this 30 day session was not
about the use of AI, but just
about the requirement to
disclose use of AI in a
political ad if
The other party was unaware of
That particular application. So
wasn't um a restriction on free
speech at all, but um just to
help inform the public.
But I guess I'm concerned and I
don't remember the name of the
scientist, but I, and, and
here's where I get my I got my
news from, um,
The, um,
and from CBS and the person who,
um,
Actually started it all feels
like it's gone too far and there
will never be able to stop it
because the, um, it's gotten so
intelligent that it will
outthink us and take over, and
it reminds me of 2001 A Space
Odyssey when Hal became very
dangerous. So I, I'm just
wondering, uh, if you have any
concerns like that and we've
had, uh, let me just say that
several legislative committees
have been getting presentations
now for a couple years.
years
on AI, including this one and
courts corrections and Justice
and the chair of that committee
is is here as well. So we know
Dr. Moses really well and
looking forward to hearing from
her again this afternoon, and I
worry that some of its
applications, which are unknown
to us because in some cases
they're proprietary.
discriminatory.
And, and they aren't necessarily
designed to be that way. They
just are.
So I, I worry about guardrails
and just wonder if you have any
advice for us on that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Tracy, um, great
question, um, there's a huge
concern right now a lot of the
tech companies are they're not
very transparent, let's just put
it this way, we don't know that
the models, the way they train
their models and the data they
use, they are not, they're quite
opaque. And we don't know enough
about
That in order to decide certain
things, uh, hence all these
lawsuits are going on to um
Ask for
You know, to advocate for more
transparency, and I think that
will help. Um, but in the
meantime, in the process, I
think a lot of the special
policymakers, lawmakers, uh
having
And
AI literacy will help them in
understanding even more
on why that is or how.
How we can, you know, set up
regulations to protect our
communities basically.
So
To answer your question, yes, I
have big concerns about that and
I feel like it's always, you
know, regulations you need to
catch up to the technologies
which is moving very, very fast.
Um, and but it it needs to catch
up. Um, if you look at, for
example, in Europe, the EU AI
Act is hoping to do that. It's
just passed. I don't think we
have that here yet, but there's
something we can pay attention
to and think about how we want.
Do it at the
At our level, basically.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I mean,
maybe that, um, legislative
working group, the National
Legislative Working Group might
want to look to whatever the EU,
um, proposed legislation is,
thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Nick,
um, Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, Madam Chair, this
This is a subject I think that
many of us, um, from a
legislative perspective really
need to, um, educate ourselves
on and um figure where and what
as we look to the future and
planning for business, the
economy, education, and such.
This is an area that we need to
educate ourselves on in in so
many different ways. Uh, last
week, Madam Chair, I was at the
revenue stabilization Tax Policy
Committee. I actually got that
right this time. Um, we had a
discussion with regards to tax
base, right?
And it's all related when we
talk about taxes, um, you know,
future employment, how that
relates to the taxes that that
we recoup. I mean, just all of
these different conversations
that we were having.
And um.
With your presentation today, it
adds more fuel for thought,
right? Which also means, um,
What we do for those who are in
the, uh, post-secondary.
Arena, but it also takes it
down, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
To the education system K
through or even I even say pre-K
of what we do with our young
people because those brains are
so open and willing and ready.
Whereas at our ages, and I'm,
I'm, I'm seeing mine. I
shouldn't say for everybody, but
we're a little harder to, you
know, sometimes to grasp
different concepts. It's just
what it is.
For some people. And when we
talk about issues on health
care.
Healthcare is a whole other area
when we talk about artificial
intelligence and what it will
do, I think, to help.
Um,
you like get a kiss, as I
mentioned again in our education
system and
Madam Chair, for me it's, it's
really looking to me that we
actually should have required
courses.
Not just for those who are
teachers, that should be a
required course in our colleges
of education.
But also for when we talk, you
know, we've been restructuring
our high school.
Our graduation requirements, in
addition to financial literacy
and others, Madam Chair, I think
this needs to be a course added
in for required.
Information for our students to
learn.
Uh, part of the other
conversation, Madam Chair, that
just opened up, I think, a lot
more for us as we were
discussing last week.
In the tax committee.
is truly having to retool, um.
What we look at for revenue that
comes in.
And
You know, oil and gas is here,
yes, but oil and gas won't be
with us forever. You can see the
projections as to where it is in
the next 20 some years, but what
is it that we rely on in our
economy here in the state of New
Mexico?
And of course, too, there are
other areas where we talk about
the economy,
um, there are still some areas
where, um, labor.
is still needed and it's not
going to be necessarily related
directly to AI, um, so I think
it's just another conversation,
Madam Chair, that your committee
but others I think need to
engage in as we put together a
plan, not for 10 years, but like
for next year because it's here
and now.
And I see it both with both, um,
I have one child who's in higher
ed and I have another child
who's in middle school and what
they're looking, what they're
talking about, how they're doing
their own research, you know,
coding is something I think that
should be an automatic.
In elementary school, my middle
schooler did have some exposure
to that, and she loved it.
But how do we continue that? Um,
and I think that's just another
conversation that we need to, to
have going towards the end of
this interim, but I think it may
spur action for next year. For
us, Madam Chair, to really look
and see how we can, uh, broaden
and covers all the different
sectors that affect us here in
the state.
So I just want to say thank you
because this.
This opens up many different um
Windows of thought for me and no
literacy is not just the reading
that we, um, want, of course,
our children to to attain, but
there's another literacy that I
think we need to also focus on.
And one last thing, Madam Chair
is, you know, for AI I think it
also has benefit for those with
learning disabilities. And I
really do believe that's an
added value that we really
haven't focused on much, um,
especially for those who may be
on the spectrum, but other ways
if they are nonverbal, we do
have programs that are on, you
know, the, on the computer, the
lap, not, not the, you know, the
small handheld computers that
really does assist and help a
lot of these young people who
are very.
But another way for them to
communicate.
Um, so, Madam Chair, this is a
new realm that I'm looking into
that it's fascinating. So I just
want to say thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Next Senator
Soltz. Thank you, Madam Chair.
We get, we've had lots of
presentations on AI, um,
Uh, Representative Chasey
brought up the, or you had
brought up some of the things of
legislation in the EU.
What legislation would you
recommend should it be at the
state level? Does it need to be
at the federal level, you know,
as legislators, I'm always
thinking, so how do we fix this?
What do we need to fix to be on
the front end instead of always
reactive? What would your
recommendation be?
Thank you Madam Chair and
Senator. So so this is not my
area, so although I know that
there is an AI literacy Act
bill, um, out there at the
federal level. I know that
California and some of the
states are working on it and
Maryland.
New Jersey and California has,
um, provided AI literacy
training for the government or
state employees.
So these are some of the things
I think we can look into, um.
In terms of New Mexico, I think
having some kind of state um
guidance will be very useful for
the, for for.
For the state in general and for
education in general.
Thank you. And we've got a, I
think as I looked at the thing
we've got several other
presentations. I'll be asking
them sort of the same thing
that, you know, you've got
legislators in front of you, you
know, if you were able to, what
would you recommend we do in
order to be proactive instead of
reactive in this whole area. And
so thank you. I appreciate that.
Um, Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Doctor
Lowe, uh,
It's cited in your presentation.
Madam chaired, Doctor Lord
citing in your presentation that
the McKinsey report projects 400
million workers could be
displaced because of a. What can
you tell me about the McKinsey
report?
So, uh, thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative de la Cruz.
So that report came out in 2000,
I believe 23, um, is a forecast
of many different sectors and
how AI and geneative AI could
even have could have an impact
on um various sectors, and it
calculated the predicted or
forecast that number based on
how AI could be could impact
different industries.
So that doesn't mean that these
people will all lose their jobs
and all these jobs are gone. Uh,
it does mention that there will
be many, many new jobs and I
reference another research
saying that would be another 97
million and in the McKinsey
report, they talk about how, um,
yes, there are many jobs will
change and some of these workers
may need to upskill and reskill,
so that was really the main
message of that report.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
If you lose $400 million it's a
400 million jobs, it's a lot
more than 97 new.
1 million jobs. I think it's a
concern that we all have to
contemplate as we move forward
into the future.
Uh, in many ways, it, it, it
doesn't take a, a lot of
creativity or or imagination to
To
Consider that.
AI in many ways is making us
obsolete.
And
My fear, and I'm sure a lot of
people's fear is, what are
people going to do in the future
and particularly when you
consider that once you are able
to quantum compute, which is not
that far away.
Coupled with AI, it is.
Going to create a really, really
different place on the planet.
It's just a concern, I think we
have to think about a lot more
than just in disinformation. I
think that's a minor topic in
the long run.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
All right, thank you, um,
everyone, anybody else
questions?
All right. Um, I think most of
them might have been answered,
but I think just tagging on to
yours, that's why it's so
important that we get our kids
trained early, um, especially
from kindergarten up. um, so on
your pilot project,
Uh
Sorry.
Um,
so I like the steps you took. So
I was a math teacher, and my
question on, on critical
thinking has been asked, so and
so eloquently, thank you. Um, I
like this, the, the steps to
this pilot program. So what's
the chance of it actually coming
to fruition and how do I take
it?
Oh thank you, Madam Chair.
So we trying to roll it out and
I mentioned earlier, we want to
train the trainers and make it
scalable so that I don't have to
do everything myself. So we try
to develop this with post and
pre and post programs to make
sure that we are learning from
these programs and what people
like and not like and what it
was helpful and and every time
we did one of these cohorts,
we'll ask one or two of them
would you lead the next one. So
we're targeting.
Early adopters right now at UNM
and other places, in fact, for
the advising one, we are trying
to ask,
well, actually other places have
asked us if they could take part
in that. So in a way, I would
love to be able to roll it out
to more places, but probably
needs some help from from from
the policymakers in some way to
make it, you know, not
necessarily mandatory but
encouraged, you know, other
places to start learning these
things.
Do you have a price tag?
Possibly or
I don't have one right now, but
I can certainly do some
calculation, get back to that'd
be great and get back to us. All
right. Thank you so much for
your presentation. I think we
learned a lot today. Appreciate
your time. Thank you.
Yeah.
