All right, we're gonna go ahead
and get started. I'm not sure
where everybody is, but they'll
be trickling in I'm sure, um,
our first presenter proposal to
facilitate broadband growth.
Um, let you guys introduce
yourself whenever you're ready.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
present to you today. My name is
Lana Waller. I'm the president
of the New Mexico Exchange
carrier Group. I'm also the CEO
at Plateau Telecommunications
and a member of the Connect New
Mexico Council.
With me today on my right,
Mateika Santian. She's the
executive director for the enemy
CG. She's going to provide the
committee with a reintroduction
of the New Mexico exchange
carrier Group.
And to my left is J Sanianis,
our lobbyist for New Mexico
exchange carrier Group. Jay's
going to present a legislative
proposal to the committee
regarding a gross receipt tax
deduction for broadband projects
for all providers doing business
in New Mexico.
In the audience, I'd also like
to introduce uh Jason Gonzalez,
he's the chief technology
officer and assistant CEO at
Plateau and Mitch Hibber, the
COO for Penasco Valley Telephone
Cooperative.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, the enemy CG is a
telephone industry association
for incumbent r carriers
providing voice and internet
service to customers and some of
the state's most rural areas.
The group was formed in the
1980s to collectively improve
communications within the
industry and with legislators,
the executive branch and the New
Mexico Public Regulation
Commission.
Our main objective is to help
our rural telephone and
broadband companies in New
Mexico provide excellent
services at affordable prices.
I also want to let you know that
we are passing around uh a.
optic cable.
Uh, this is what a fiber, this
is what fiber looks like and it
just sometimes um having the
visual helps to to better
understand and and uh know what
we're talking about, so, um,
that's that's being passed
around to the committee right
now. I'm going to turn it over
to Mateika now for her
presentation.
Thank you, Lana.
Madam Chairwoman members of the
committee.
Santi executive director of the
New Mexico Exchange carrier
Group.
You have our slide and ris
written presentation.
Um, before you today.
We'll start with slide 2.
it's
I slight 2 is a list of the New
Mexico exchange carrier member
companies.
The enemy CG's membership is
comprised of 10.
Incumbent local exchange
carriers or ille.
The makeup
Of the companies include 6
member owned cooperatives and 4
commercial companies, and they
are Bocca Valley Telephone
Company in Des Moines.
Dell telephone cooperative in
Dell City.
In a more plateau telephone
cooperative in Clovis.
Leo ruled telephone cooperative
and Hobbs.
These are their headquarters.
Yaso Valley Telephone
Cooperative in Artesia,
Yucateelcom.
Cooperative portalis Tularosa
Basin Telephone Company in
Tularosa Valley Talcom Group
Cooperative and Wilcox, Arizona,
western New Mexico telephone
company in Silver City and valor
telecommunications of Texas, um,
doing business as windstream
communication Southwest or as we
call them, wind stream.
Slide 3
the enemy board members.
You've met our president Lana
Waller, our vice president is
Johnny Montoya.
Our treasure is.
Jim Myers and our secretary is
Paul.
Re
The next slide that you have,
this is a map of all of the New
Mexico as a whole.
local exchange boundaries.
These boundaries, um, like
perpetually remain the same. The
next slide.
shows a map of most of New
Mexico's fiber routes.
The enemy CG is upgrading its
fiber fiber footprint map and
once it's complete, we'll make
sure and get you a copy. Now
these fiber routes in New
Mexico, the map shows many main
fiber uh routes, however.
We have many more miles of fiber
within our exchange boundaries.
To individual customers and
equipment cabinets.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Slide 6 shows the enemy CG
member statistics.
Including our member companies
the year they were established.
The area, each company serves in
square miles.
The current number of employees
per company and the total number
of IEC or incumbent local
exchange carriers, those are the
parent companies.
And customers in the Click or
the cooperative exchange
carriers, which are also defined
as like subsidiary.
The last column on the right
shows the total customer account
per company.
And the bottom bolted totals are
the combined totals for the 10
enemy CG companies.
The enemy CG companies provide
service covering 63% of the
state's geography.
That equates over 66,000 square
miles.
The blend of vast geographic
areas combined with low popular
population density were popular
also means the average roll New
Mexico telephone Company serves
fewer than 1.86 customers per
slight 7, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
As the enemy CG Webb addressed,
um.
Excuse me, contains the contact
information for our member
companies.
Their titles and their.
CEO or GM or vice president in
their office numbers.
Slide 7 has the enemy CG Webb
address mailing address, and
staff contact information.
Madam Chair and committee
members.
When fiber leads, the future
follows.
Our company has our companies
have made substantial
investments in building out
fiber optic broadband in rural
areas in New Mexico.
And this progress has occurred
with the assistance of state and
federal grants, loans, and
funds.
And this, as you all know, it's
an exciting time in the industry
with funding available to build
out reliable fiber to rural
areas we serve.
Futureproof fiber will not only
connect our homes.
But any fiber place can provide
the backbone, as you all know,
to connect cell towers and vital
community institutions such as
hospitals, schools, and public
safety centers.
On the only technology that.
Entices businesses in New Mexico
is fiber.
Fiber connectivity is as much a
necessity as water and
electricity.
On behalf of the enemy CG.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, we thank you for
supporting fiber Build out
funds, as you know, fiber optics
is the proven technology for the
most reliable and scalable
method of getting broadband to
the home or business.
Of the few technologies that can
provide a reasonable amount of
speed required.
Only fiber expansion in New
Mexico will result in a
sustainable network that will
attract and support businesses
and provide a sustainable
solution.
To Broadband connectivity in
rural areas.
Of all the technologies
available, only fiber.
An activity attracts businesses
and raises property values in
all areas, rule or urban.
Even with the high cost of
installing fiber due to terrain,
rock, or distance, our companies
remain committed to installing
the proven technology.
To the premise for our
customers.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the enemyCG companies
will continue to do all they
can.
As they have in the past to
provide affordable reliable,
high quality telecommunications
and broadband services to their
customers in rural areas of this
beautiful state.
I'll now turn it over to Jim.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Jay Santana is lobbyist for the
New Mexico exchange carrier
Group.
We are proposing legislation to
be sponsored by Senator Padilla
that proposes a new section of
the gross receipts and
compensating Tax Act.
Uh, this will be a gross
receipts tax deduction for
receipts from the sale of
installation services of
broadband infrastructure.
And from the sale of broadband,
uh, infrastructure being
installed with money from a
state or federal grant.
Um, this is for entities engaged
in the business of installing
broadband infrastructure and
delivers a non-taxable
transaction certificate to the
seller or provides alternative.
Uh, evidence, uh, pursuant to.
Section 7943 NMSA.
So broadband infrastructure
means any facility and equipment
used to provide internet
service.
Uh, the intent of this is.
The uh
There, there is a lot of state
and federal monies, especially
federal funds out there, uh, for
the purpose of installing uh uh
broadband infrastructure and
with the emphasis on fiber.
Uh, the state receives 4.875% of
the GRT.
Uh, GRT rates, uh, uh, vary
throughout the state from 5.125
to 8.6875.
And um
The, the balance of the uh the,
well, it varies because the
total rate combines rates
imposed by the state, counties
in the municipalities where the
businesses are located.
The business pays the gross
receipts to the state, which
then distributed the counties
and the municipalities portioned
to them.
With this, uh, we are proposing
the uh
Good afternoon.
We're proposing that the um uh
GRTB uh uh deducted.
Uh, um.
You can say exempted or
deducted, but deduct exemption,
it is not charged deducted. It's
reported to the attacks and rev
department and to uh and they
will have a a a total of what
would have been charged.
The, our idea is that uh.
With the amount of federal
funding coming in.
And as well as state funds that
the uh grocery receipts tax that
would be paid to the state and
then and.
And uh entities uh municipal and
county entities that would
remain and not be.
Charged and basically uh.
Provide more uh infrastructure.
You'd get 5 to 8% more.
Uh, infrastruc broadband
infrastructure installed as
opposed to that going to the
state.
Oh, I know it's a, it's a, uh,
basically it's a hit to the
state, you know, for some
extent.
And uh you know they're
especially with the with the
beat funds that are that are um
available, uh, will be coming do
coming soon, I believe they
start, uh, dispersing.
And that's a total of $675
million.
So gross receipts would be
charged on that total amount.
And so we are proposing that by
doing this.
Uh, it would
Provide more uh broadband
infrastructure because they're
because uh.
You'll you'll hear from uh uh
the director of Obai soon that
uh and and I'm, I'm not sure if
you'll say this, but, but the um
the beat funds, uh, will not
fulfill all of the needs for
broadband.
And there's still quite a bit of
need out there, so with this um.
Proposed legislation it it chips
away a little bit.
And um
So, so that's, that's where
we're, we're looking at and
hoping that uh that we can uh.
Uh, um
Have this legislation passed
and.
Uh, because you know, you not
only have the beat funding, you
have uh.
Uh, which is funded uh through
the uh US national
telecommunications and
Information Administration, the
NTIA.
The beat is the broadband equity
access and deployment, which is
a federal money just to just for
broadband.
But USDA also has uh programs to
uh fund with through grant or
grant loan or just loans that uh
that our companies have have
utilized over the years it's um.
Yeah, it's the only way to get
to provide broadband service,
uh,
In these rural areas, uh, with,
with, uh, fiber, uh,
sustainable, uh, process and so.
Um
Because of the distance and the
terrain and in the rural areas,
it will, it, it.
Costs more in the rural areas,
but this gross receipts not just
for the rural areas, it's
anybody doing broadband in the
in the rural or urban.
So anybody that's doing a
broadband project that's funded
through uh state or federal
funding would be.
Uh, uh, this would be applicable
to them and uh and the balance
of the, the gross receipts that
would be paid to the state would
basically go back into the
project.
Um, that's, that's what I have,
and if I, I, I stand for
questions.
On, on this legislation, oh, I'm
sorry, uh, there's one other
thing and this is only this this
um uh legislation will sunset in
2035, so it gives a 10 years,
uh, to get the, the federal
funding kind of mellowed out
and, you know, spent and uh and
hopefully, uh, uh, most of New
Mexico is covered.
And, uh, and by that time uh in
2035 this will sunset and and it
will so it will be refilled
repealed, uh, effective July 1,
2035.
Again, I stand for questions,
members of the committee, again,
thank you for the opportunity.
If you have any questions or
comments on, on any part of our
presentation um like Jay said,
the sam for questions.
Thank you for the presentation.
We'll start with Representative
Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
it's great to see you this
afternoon. Thank you for
Presentation, um.
Senator Patilla
Oh,
So
So I, I understand.
The purpose. Let me just restate
it to make sure I've got it
right. So we're expecting a lot
of
Federal money to come to help,
um.
Uh, invest in broadband
infrastructure. We know there's
a huge
lack of broadband infrastructure
in the state.
Um
And we're looking for a gross
receipts tax.
Exemption for 10 years while
this money is coming in and that
will lead to
Oh
Because Ro C averages about 7%
across the state. You're
expecting that that will mean
you can do 7% more work because
you're not paying that 7% gross
receipts.
Um
I'm sure and panel, did I get
that right? Yes sir, yes sir,
exactly.
OK.
So
So I'm sure I, I totally get it.
I, I understand, you know, I
like having fast internet, um.
I know businesses need fast
internet.
Um
Part of this though comes from
the uh tax policy side of me,
you know, I know you've heard me
say over and over again, I'm an
equal opportunity tax credit
hater.
Um, and, and there's several
reasons for that, but I guess
The one I just wanted to bring
up is
Um, a couple of years ago at the
federal level.
Um, a law was passed that made
it so that we at the state level
cannot charge sales tax or gross
receipts tax on internet.
Um, service.
And that was a hit to the state
of about $50 million.
Um, and so really the only place
that the state gets any revenue.
From Internet is.
When we're
Building out the infrastructure,
the gross receipts tax from the
construction.
And
And usually what we, what you
try to do, the academic good tax
policy or consumption taxes is
you want to tax.
That transaction once.
Right? We, we don't like the
pyramidding, right, but you also
don't want it to never get
taxed, right? You wanna, you
wanna to tax it one time.
Whether it's at the end of a
commerce chain or here at the
beginning, if you can't tax the
end. You'd like to be able to
tax it at least once.
So I guess that's
Madam Chair and panel, one of my
concerns about this, not only is
it, you know, adding another
hole to the Swiss cheese for 10
years.
But this whole, we don't get
taxed any other way.
From this
This activity in the state.
So that's, that's one top mad
I'm cheering panel. I'm happy to
hear any thoughts you might have
on that.
Uh, if I might.
The, uh, the, I, I agree, I, I
understand and I've, I've heard
a lot of your uh proposals to
redo the, the gros receipts uh
and whole tax structure
throughout the state, uh, but.
You can think of this almost
more as a uh as another uh uh
way of the state RT, uh, I'm
funding broadband and uh because
uh there's always proposals to
asking the state for money to um
uh for grant funds or or
whatever to to uh fund uh
broadband installation and so
with the with the sunset of this
that that's kind of why the
sunset is, uh, so this can
actually be looked at, uh, by
the legislature.
as more of a of a uh an
opportunity to provide grant
funding to.
For for more installation, which
is, you know, 7% average of 7%,
uh, more broadband, um, I, I, I
hope that answers our, our view.
Yeah, um, Madam Chair, um.
And uh
Yeah, I, that, that was a great
answer. I, I appreciate the
view, right, if you're looking
for creative ways for the state
to help fund some of this work,
this.
This is another angle to do
that. Um, so,
So, yeah, you're, I don't have
any like
Intellectual consistent stones
to throw or anything like that,
um.
But I guess maybe the other.
Just thought common I have is
with regards to
broadband investment.
Um
And I just really feel like
When you look at the future of
where folks are gonna get their,
their internet.
It's low Earth orbit satellites.
Um, there's already more than
7000 up there. That's
It's incredible how quickly
those are being set up.
Um, I just really feel like
Broadband still has a place,
right? You'll need nodes, um,
especially in high density urban
areas.
Um
But
Um
We'll have roughly 20,000 low
Earth orbit satellites that are
constantly being replaced in
orbit.
That's just one system, there's
gonna be.
You know, the, the, uh, European
Unionists talked about doing
their own China started putting
up their own.
I mean
And there's gonna be a point
where we all get our satellite
and uh.
I get all of our uh cell phone
and internet from satellites.
And so I just worry
You know, are we
Making the mistake of deciding
to put a bunch of copper in the
ground right now when fiber is,
you know, the next great thing,
right? I, I, I'm just having
that feeling that we're talking
about putting all this fiber,
all this broadband.
In the ground and it's gonna end
up being dark because in.
In 10 years, especially in rural
New Mexico, where it's super
expensive to put a fiber line.
It's so easy just to get a law.
Satellite dish and you're
getting super amazing internet.
Um, so
Madam Chair and panel, your
thoughts on that.
Madam Chair Representative, um.
Fiber is futureproof, and I can
give you a little bit of
background on our business for
75 years.
Um
We are 98% built out.
In fiber.
Um, gig service, one of the
first gig service providers in
the state.
The remaining 2% that we need to
build out, it's already funded,
we're just waiting to go through
environmentals permitting um
those things that we have to go
through in order to build.
And uh it's fibers future proof,
you know, weather doesn't affect
it, um, it's reliable.
It's, it's something that we I
think that, um, you know, I I.
I don't know, I can't tell you
with.
Complete certainty that you know
20-30 years down the road.
There won't be something
different, but looking at it
today, it is future proof, it
can be built upon and uh so uh.
We've, you know, we, we've.
Done a lot of planning over the
last uh.
Um
1215 years, we've also built a
middle mile network in the state
that we operate, so I, I don't
know if that helped you, but you
know we're we're in the middle
of a lot of grants we've got RUS
grants, 3 of them outstanding
right now. That's what we're
primarily using to build the co
op area. We just were awarded an
NTIA Middleburg, New
Mexico-based company, but we
also have matches that the money
is great coming in those grant
funds are wonderful, but we also
have matches typically 25%, so.
You know, a, a grocery seat
relief of 7 to 8% would be very
welcome and again it would allow
us to reinvest that money in New
Mexico.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and panel, I, I appreciate that
and, and congratulations on all
the grants and it sounds like
your company's really doing well
and I love hearing that, right?
We, we all love hearing what
companies are doing well in New
Mexico.
Um
I
We will argue a little bit about
the future proofing, you know,
I'm, I'm not a
Optics guy, but I am a PhD
research engineer.
And I do love learning about how
we can take that same bundle of
fiber and was
You know, essentially better
prisms who are, you know, are
are more
Um, with more resolution, you
can.
Pack more and more data down
that cable as you're able to
resolve different wavelengths
and have
essentially build new cables
inside an existing cable. I mean
that technology is wonderful.
But
When I just think about, you
know, my house in Rear Rancho,
right?
Um, I'm living in a pretty
densely populated area and it
might make sense to bring fiber
into those last couple miles.
But
I also, you know, my, my in-laws
have a cabin in the Hamas, and
it does not make any sense to
bring a cable to them or fiber
to them, right? They've got a
Starlink.
dish.
Right
So
I, I, I guess I'm just saying
let's be
Cautious with.
The New Mexico taxpayer dollars.
Right. And um
I don't know any other thoughts,
man? I'm sure I guess that's my
last, last comment.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh
Go ahead, Jane.
And uh representative. I, I
understand, and, and in the most
rural uh remote areas, I, I, I
agree that's probably the only,
only method that they can, but
as as more uh.
People sign up for the satellite
you required more satellites and
you said what, about 7000 in the
air right now.
Uh, in within 5 to 7 years, not
a single one of them will be in
the air. They'll all be
replaced. I don't know where
they go. They all burn up. I
don't know what that does to
her,
I'm sure I've heard this
argument over and over again,
and I think it's.
It's a red herring, and it's
just not reality, right?
When I brought this up 4 years
ago, we had 2000.
Right
I mean, they are literally
setting up 100 a week.
Right? And that's just one
company.
Right? And they're designed to
You know, do end of life, 7, 100
years and be replaced with the
next best technology.
Right, so, so to say that.
Um
Satellite, internet, and cell
phone is just gonna evaporate
because these things are only
made to last 7 or 10 years. I
mean, you're just, you're
missing the vision, right?
Right? This is gonna be a thing
that stays, um.
Because it's become so cheap. It
used to be that when you
launched a rocket,
That rocket was just expended.
Right, so imagine like every
time you went on an airplane,
At the end, you had to throw the
airplane away from your trip,
right? That make that ticket
super expensive.
But now we've got a fleet of
rockets who go up.
Um, I think the record is 23
times.
Um, so,
It's
The cost of putting things in
orbit is, is coming down by
orders of magnitude. So it's
only going to get better with
time.
Madam Chair, uh, uh,
representative, I, I understand
that. I understand the economy
of scale and, and, and all of
that, but I just can't believe
that.
Like, uh, Lano and Sandy labs
we'll just say, OK, we're not
gonna use fiber anymore, we're
gonna go satellite, so I mean
that's just my.
So
Madam Chair and, and I hate to
argue with you because I do work
at Sandia Labs.
Um
They're talking about building
out huge
Government-owned
infrastructures, I mean
StarShield is the Starlink for
the government.
Right
Um
And yeah, they're not gonna say
we're we're done with fiber.
Um, Chair, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and
Representative Harper.
I've always you and I have had
many conversations over the
years.
You have taught me a lot.
And I appreciate that and your
knowledge and expertise is I
encourage more conversation.
I would like to have additional
conversation with.
for this proposal.
It has a sunset.
And it's utilizing the mechanics
and the.
Of being rolled out.
And, and I really want to sit
down with you many more times.
to help educate me about the
possibilities of the.
Um
Um
is a reality.
And so I just encourage us to
continue this, to have this
conversation.
Thank you.
Now we also have um Madam Chair,
members of the community of our
experts.
Jason to make.
And just introduce yourself.
Thank you
Madam, uh, representative
Harper. My name is Jason
Gonzalez and I'm the CTO at at
Plateau.
Uh, telecom, so we're again
we're New Mexico company we're
based over in Clovis, New
Mexico.
And you know.
When I think about what what
representative Harper is talking
about.
What, what I think many people
miss is.
Fiber isn't necessarily designed
to solve an infrastructure
problem, fiber is designed to
solve an application problem.
When I go back in time and I
think about my dial up Internet
days, I had 288 of 28.8 kilobit
per second.
Of Internet throughput
Man, that was great for email
and and some basic web surfing
and you know when the the
modem's upgraded to 56 kilobit
per second, doubled our speed,
wow, we were really smoking,
this is great, great Internet.
Well then you start fast
forwarding through the dotcom
era and you start getting, you
know, video broadcasting. There
was a company called Bro
Broadcast.com.
That came along
Uh, in that company essentially
crushed the dial-up internet
business, then you had, uh,
companies like eBay and and
Buy.com and these companies that
we have tons and tons of
multimedia that was falling over
these, these networks that just
could not.
Handle the throughput
The the technology people got
together came up with DSL.
So then we started growing into
this DSL technology at 128
kilobits and and 256K and and
now we're all the way up into
the tens of megabits.
On a copper-based DSL solution.
It still wasn't enough because
we're there's more applications
that come and that and get
built, uh, broadcast.com
eventually grew up into a
company called YouTube.
YouTube is by far one of the the
most.
Uh, ubiquitous users of
bandwidths on, on mobile
networks, companies like Netflix
didn't exist.
Netflix and and YouTube and all
of these video services or
crushing broadband networks,
especially when you don't have
enough throughput.
I
So the prem is, is kind of the
solution to that.
You know, we talked about
longevity.
Plateau put its first fiber
optic system in the ground in
the, in the 80s, 1980s, we built
a fiber from Santa Rosa to
Klein's Corners, New Mexico.
Uh, and it was 4 fibers that we
put in the ground back then.
When we put that system in, it
was serving a 6.2 megabit per
second.
Service
Today that same fiber is still
operational today carrying
multiple 100 megabits. We're,
we're fixing to do an
electronics upgrade that will
take that service into the
terabit range.
So when you think about future
proofing.
We not future proofing that bits
per second or future proofing
over that next application. I
don't know what the next
application is.
Today, the satellite guys.
Probably will work fine with
some of the applications that we
have today, but will they work
for those applications that come
tomorrow. They have a limited
amount of bandwidth. It's an RF
signal.
An RF signal is a finite amount
of throughput.
For some maximum that you can
put over that signal.
And I think what the argument
for broadband providers to
deploy fiber.
because there is no theoretical
limit to to using an optical
fiber system. It hasn't been
found yet.
Uh, so that's all I would like
to.
Thank you.
You have more
represented no, no, madam Chair,
I think we could go on for quite
a bit about Starlink version 2
that's going up on, on Star Star
version 2 that's going up on
starships, that's gonna be laser
connected, so it's not limited.
Um, but I think.
My, my point has been made,
which is
I think we should at the tax
policy.
Level
We've already given up $50
million of revenue from this
industry we should tax it at
least somewhere.
And we should think hard about
Our carve outs.
um,
and, and man, I'm sure I'm just
Not sure this is one that's
but
Appreciate your thoughts,
Representative Harper, we're
gonna go to Representative
Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Good to see all of
you today.
So I have a question. Um,
Regulates your industry.
Um, broadband Internet from a
consumer perspective is uh
regular so so nobody.
So, well, the FCC regulates the
licensure and and uh and
depending on the structure of
the company.
We do have some.
Some regulations that we have to
to follow as far as speeds
things like that. What about
your rates?
The rates are.
Um
And Madam Chair.
We know we're getting tons of
federal money for this.
Endeavor
And one of the points I'd like
to make by the state.
Refusing to take the tax
dollars, we're not taking
federal money.
Right, we're saying all the
federal monies, so.
We don't get a slice at all of
the federal money, and not only
that, our local governments
don't get a slice at all of the
federal money.
And we have a broadband
apartment we have to pay for.
The local governments have
local, some of them have local
broadband type people or.
People who are trying to get.
Expand services.
They have to deal with it.
And you're saying no GRT goes to
help support those entities that
actually have work to do that
insurers that broadband, it's
gonna happen.
And is efficient and is watched
and so on.
Uh, and the other point, I guess
I'd like to make is.
Given that there's no regulation
like the PRC, you know, PRC sets
rates.
They look at revenues and they
decide what a fair profit is.
You don't have that.
You could take that 7%.
Not put it more into broadband,
but actually pay your executives
more,
he, you know, use it, um, OK,
uh, Jay, you're shaking head.
How is that not possible?
Don't tell me it's all good
faith and we're this is all
marvelous and all that. I, I
want to hear like what is the
control to stop you from just.
Not investing in the
infrastructure, but just
investing in your own company,
your executives and so on and so
forth, so help me with that one,
Madam Chair, members, um, I
mean, uh, uh, uh, Representative
Chandler.
Uh, it's just like any other
service. I mean, if, if you, you
get.
Your, your grant funding.
And, and you use that to buy.
Materials or or you hire
contractor or or whatever you
do, say so, so say you wanted to
buy um
100 reels of of fiber.
And uh and so you put in your,
your request for for the
funding, uh, you put it in.
With the GRT and the GRT is paid
to the contract or to whoever's
supplying the fiber.
If you didn't.
If you did not, uh, uh, get that
or if, if the, if the, if it's
exempted.
Then
You just would get to the amount
that you could, you could buy
more fiber or you would, uh, uh,
not get the amount that of the
gross receipts so if you bought
if you bought a $100 worth of uh
fiber.
And, uh, and 7% is your GRT, so
it's $107.
So that, so then you can
actually buy $107 worth of
fiber.
Instead of or or if you didn't.
You'd get $100 and you wouldn't
have to pay the 7.
7%.
$7 in in GRT.
It's not, it can't, you can't.
Cha cha change that and charge
it back to your company.
Or give it back to your company.
Uh, I'm, I'm, I'm not sure if
I'm being clear here, but, but
your, your pain, the GRT on the
service or on a on uh materials.
Go ahead.
that
the draft proposal is not
finalized yet.
And or um but I would like to
read you the title and I I hope
this information.
It is helpful to Representative
Chandler. It's relating to
taxation and providing a
grocery, sorry, but for
receipts.
From the stallation services of
broadband infrastructure.
And from the sale of the
broadband infrastructure being
installed.
With money from a state or if
you want to insure and we
receiving additional comments to
make sure that that.
Fair enough, and we can talk
some more about.
Where the money might actually
go.
But what we do know is it's not
gonna go to the local
government.
that deals with, you know, a
permitting the placement of
fiber and they were they demands
on those, those state, those
entities that.
Needs to be paid for.
And it still doesn't pay the
state that needs to pay for your
office and others and, and so
on, so you know, there's a cost
to do to to supporting the
implementation of broadband, and
it's wonderful that we're
getting most of the money from
the feds and the states to get a
piece of that because it costs
money to administer the grants.
Um, there's a whole body of
employees we have to pay and so
I, you know, I have concerns
just on that level going beyond
um representative Harper's Madam
Chair, very good.
points about what's appropriate
stack tax policy and so on and
what sound tax policy is, this
is, we're denying us in monies
or um.
Something where we're incurring
expenses.
Associated with it and so on
that basis, I'm gonna, it's I'm
gonna be very skeptical about a
bill that comes, I'm still on
the tax committee.
Um, that is doing what you
propose, uh.
A.
Thank you, I don't see any
additional questions.
Um, thank you for your
presentation. Great to see you
both, all three of you, um, I
only had a question, have Sarah
Ferin an analysis done to
Compare the carbon footprint of
say satellite or broadband.
Getting access to like every
single person in New Mexico,
what would, what is the carbon?
Uh, I don't know if there's a
comparison on, on that, uh, I
just know that the uh the FCC
and TIA, uh, they all are, are
promoting fiber, fiber first.
Uh, uh, additional technologies
are, are.
After, after the, after the
fact, as long as as as when
nobody else applies for fiber.
So, uh, that, that's the, that,
that's the impetus of this is,
is the money that's coming in,
uh, specifically for fiber.
And, uh, and again this is not
uh for rural or any specific
projects it's it's throughout
the state and um um and I, I
just cannot see how
representative Chandler's point
that that the money could go to
anything but.
Additional materials or, or
labor to install.
Um, and, uh, and, and we'll look
into that.
With the draft or some more and
and so um.
And see if that's if that's uh
uh.
heart. So we're gonna thank you,
um, I appreciate you coming
today and giving us a
presentation.
Take care.
Yeah
And then we're gonna go on to
the Office of Broadband Access
and expansion, that's our next
presentation.
will take 15 minute break.
So we will return in
at about 2 o'clock. Thank you.
