The.
All right I first presentation
is cyber security training for
legislators in the latest slate
of staff shannon caspier
director of it seems and council
service whenever you're ready
thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee as
manager said my name is shonnie
keysphere I am the director of
the legislative council service
thank you for inviting me to
discuss with the committee the
legislature's approach to saver
security training and awareness
for staff and legislators
i'm at first like to share that
the legislature has a quite
robust site cyber security
operators it is multi facility
and dynamic and evolves with the
changing cyber environment and
emerging threats.
Due to the power of this
security operators the
legislature has never had a
significant cyprus security
incident issues are identified
prevented isolated and blocked
in real time efficiently and
effectively.
But without being said everybody
who uses the legislator's
network legislators and staff
there on the front line of
insuring the safety of the
network up to deep sharing our
best practices and training are
crucial to the continued
security of this network
in the last couple of weeks i'm
sure you have it received the
emails the legislature has
rolled out in ongoing cyprus
security train program for
legislators and stuff this
program it is called arctic
wolfs manage security awareness
program it focuses on focuses on
reducing human related cyber
risks by education employees and
legislators to recognize and
neutralise social engineering
attacks it achieves us through
continuous engaging and micro
learning content and automated
fishing simulations the program
aims to strengthen our security
culture by improving awareness
participation and overall risk
mitigation.
This approach is not a one and
done training but is ongoing
training that keeps user skills
a sharp it keeps our skill sharp
and identifying responding to
and mitigating the same security
issues but no doubt will get to
our network.
The objectives of this program
are to enhance protection to
equip staff and legislators with
the skills to identify and
counteract social interesting
tactics like fishing it also
strengthens the legislature's
resilience it helped staff and
legislators to recognize and
report potential security risks
including human errors that
could oppose sensitive exposed
sensitive data and lead to
account and our network
compromises.
Some of the features of this
training are micro learning
content is a short letter five
minutes or less so the very
accessible they're easy to
complete and their delivered
regularly every one to two weeks
and this is intended to maximise
employees attention and
information retention and to
keep these issues on the
forefront as employees and
legislators are using their
computers using the network
email engaging on their phones
etc.
The topics that will be
addressed through this program
include red flags of the scam
recognizing compromised emails
and fishing emails spotting and
reporting suspicious activity
protecting mobile devices i'm
sure you know all of us are on
our mobile devices doing the the
people's business on a daily
basis I had also includes
malware and mel malvertising
which was a new word to me I am
just a name of a few of the
topics that will be covered
there also automated phishing
simulations these are realistic
simulations that assess and
reinforce employee and
legislator awareness based on
real world fishing scenarios
some of you may have already
received one of these are
hopefully we were all keen
enough to recognize that they
were simulated fishing attack
and didn't click or open or
otherwise engage with the
material if the user does click
on efficient link they're not
punished but they are regarded
to what information to look for
in the future so that they can
recognize uh these fishing
attempts and be better prepared
to prevent them and i'm gauged
with them if it happens again
a benefit of this program is
reduced fishing interactions are
in incidents most successful
attacks begin with a user
account being compromise be the
efficient or getting user to
click on a link.
This also creates an improved
security culture it engages
users and provides relevant
training the program fosters a
more security conscious culture
not only for the work
environment but also for a
personal cyber security and it
also reduces the human risk
which really is
I would say one of one of the
weak points in all of our saver
security networks are the humans
who are interacting with it
but it minimizes the impact of
human air and social enjoying
tax and over overall reduces
rescue generally to the
legislature's network
this article training program it
also provides our alliance staff
legislative information system
staff with analytics to assess
user compliance with the
training program and the success
or failure of users and
recognizing the simulated
threats or engaging with the
material the stature will enable
all I asked to pinpoint issues
or users that may need
additional support resources or
training to become more cyber
security savvy in as since this
article made a security
awareness program it transforms
traditional security awareness
training into an ongoing
engaging and measurable program
that strengthens an
organization's defences against
the human element of cyprus
security threats thank you
madame chair I stand for
questions.
All right thank you do we have
any questions.
Okay
center pretty
thank you madame chair just to
two words thank you
and what would we have had any
money I mean we shouldn't say
that when you did say we have
not had a single
attack here or whatever on the
legislature and I think that's
just that says a lot about the
work that you and your team were
doing and other work and really
hard over there to make sure
that they had here to all the
policies procedures and standard
operating procedures so thank
you.
Okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair and think
you
miss casper um I just was
wondering if you give us a
little bit more historical
context like as the legislature
has evolved into the digital age
have all of the systems been.
Kept up with this I rescruting
risks in the eighty changes
overall if you can answer that
madam chair senator thank you
for the question
excuse me I absolutely and of
course in this eighteen
environment the same security
environment I think they're
changing daily and individuals
out there who want to do harm to
any network are innovating daily
and so the tools that are there
to uh prevent to identify to
quarantine etc must also be
improved daily so there are
multiple and resources that we
do engage with working sometimes
with a federal um sources of
information to identify what are
the most prevalent new
approaches that are being taken
in this field
we are also you know working
with our cyprus security
partners and vendors on all the
latest and greatest technology
to
to counter such attacks because
the question really isn't if a
network is going to be attacked
as when and to say that we have
never had any significant event
that is absolutely true but on a
daily basis our network is
flagging suspicious activity
it's quarantining emails it is
bringing alerts if there seems
to be some intrusion that it's
not and the usual course of
business so these are these are
daily
maybe even hourly occurrences
that are listening is
deliciously working on behind
the scenes and the training for
legislation staff is just
another tool to help us be is
prepared and to prevent as much
as possible we can at the cybers
period
but with the the network does
have numerous cyber security
measures and this committee did
receive a presentation last year
and executive session imagine
you mean I had been present for
that
where all of those specific
protocols were discussed and
whenever there is a new
technology or a new.
Way to prevent against his
attacks comes to our light we
are exploring that with our
vendors and implementing the
solutions
the security of the legislative
network is a pair mount
importance we recognize there's
a lot of sensitive information
on that network I mean not just
um you know employees but all
the confidential information and
that you is legislators provide
to our staff so that you can
undertake your duties so keeping
the network secure and safe is a
top priority and the tools that
were using to prevent cyprus
security attacks is an ongoing
evolving mission.
I'm next is a representative
little.
I think you manager so and
thinking very much for the
very good piece of information
the information you provided
this afternoon I was going
through my emails and checking
to see if I missed any of the
trainings that you mentioned
might be offered I I google I
looked up in our legislative
emails service security trading
I didn't see anything coming up
is are they actually the turkity
to legislate towards as well as
it mostly for staff manager
thank you madame chair
representative it was my
understanding that it was
targeted to all users of the
network I will double check on
that but however you may want to
try ah searching for architect
wolf arctic wolf and I know that
earlier
the belief it was a little late
last week I received a training
and it was approximately a week
or two ago previous to that that
are training but a little check
with my life staff to ensure
that that would be great I don't
I didn't see it under their
funded into that either but I
would like to
I think it could benefit from
the tabletraining think you so
much madam chair
think representative next is
senator pope.
Thank you matter and thank you
for the presentation I think
part of my question was asked
but
I think this is get positive
news and I know we all open up
our emails and.
Have to release them sometimes
and we understand the system is
and trying to protect the
system.
Um can you talk a little bit
more about how you are dealing
with
emerging threats and and how you
deal with that going forward
especially with what we were
talking about today when it
comes to a chat barts a I and
other systems because as folks
are even used start using more
of that even in the future how
are we going to protect our
systems thank you material.
Madam chair senator
so I think a large part of
preventing
such a tax or been able to
recognize chat box recognizing
fishing scams recognizing that
scams generally is that user
awareness and that user ability
to look at an email and have the
slightest thing stand out as
being suspicious I know there
have been some emails that have
come in and it may have said
like director at you know some
random u r l and somebody who
just looks at it briefly says a
director maybe that's coming
from channel that's an okay
email but we need through these
trainings to be able to look
that second step the little bit
deeper
to ensure that what we are
responding to what we're
replying to what we're clicking
on is legitimate and is not
going to open us up to
some kind of attack I have to
say though that the system the
security systems that we
currently have in place are
extremely effective and
efficient I am aware of one
incident that happened several
years ago where there was an
attack to an employees computer
and they had opened up I believe
it was some pdf for or some
other document attachment and
the system recognized it
immediately and sequestered bad
employees computer so that
the malware or whatever other a
bug was being put on the
computer did not travel further
than that employees computer so
the network itself was
completely safe and was you know
shut off from this employee's
computer and the infection that
that employees computer hot so
with that being said as I I
mentioned earlier these threats
are involving daily people out
there who want to do harm to
networks are very very creative
and very motivated to two
innovate within the space and so
our team in conjunction with the
cyber security vendors that we
work with are keeping a post on
this constantly.
And are really relying on those
experts to adjust and to
reassess as to wear
vulnerabilities might be and
then to take corrective and
proactive action from there
thank you madame chair and take
you director then get on a a
great point I think these
systems are great but the end of
the day it's that that users
well in getting that training
and I know in the air force we
would get this mandatory
training and they'd have these
like fake emails and see if you
clicked on her things to kind of
even get you used to that now to
just opening every email that
gets through
and that's all I have thank you
manager.
I think senator I did have a
quick question
like like represent a little
said I I looked for artic
would use it or I look forward
in my email and I don't have it
in in mind at all so I I went is
it maybe not coming to the house
did anybody else said it has it
but
but but I think the senators
have it but I don't know the
house has it
you have.
But did you get it before that
so I didn't get it so wonder
where it's not coming to you
madam chair if I may
so III believe the trainings
would be delivered to
legislators and i'm legislatov
email account ma- maybe that is
the account that you looked at I
can certainly
double check that to ensure
because of course
well I believe anything are last
stuff believes that you know the
training needs to be it will be
most effective if all users are
involved so I will I will double
check that with our staff but it
should be out to all all
legislators.
Right I just worried if it
didn't come to some of some of
the house then because I I know
I searched everything and I
didn't have it so um so can you
tell me more about exact is it
it's so is like a teacher
training where you have videos
and you take tests and then and
then you just have basic.
Madam chair yes so they are
short
short
services are going to save funny
at another funny as the word but
they're you know they're kind of
light hearted their creative
videos that delve into these big
topics and important topics of
cyber security there they're
generally pretty brief so three
to five minutes and I think the
the thinking there is that
they're short enough that
everybody can put that into
their time schedule it's not
really a big time commitment uh
to get some to glean some really
important information that'll
help keep your computer our
network etc i'm safe so there
are these trainings and they're
on these district topics and so
throughout the year or
throughout the the weeks there
will be cycling through various
cyber security topics places
where folks need to have a
little bit more education are a
little bit more awareness of the
issues and then there are
additionally these are simulated
fishing attacks and so you'll
receive an email I was well I
maybe shouldn't mention one of
the examples I don't want to tip
anybody off but you'll receive
an email and you know it's up to
you to kind of determine is this
suspicious for the various
reasons that these videos have
have trained you on to recognize
and to look for it in these
emails
if somebody does receive one of
those emails if you click on it
if you I mean if you open the
attachment to click on one of
the links it will do kind of a I
think it's like a surprise on
your screen saying oh oh
oops and then what can I give
you some follow up information
to point out what in the email
should have been a little bit
suspicious and maybe tip the
user off i'm asked to at being a
phishing attack so there's a
randomly sent
and will continue throughout the
training.
It's a great way to do it and s-
smart chunks
and an surprise is better than
you really book yet so that's
get that's good all right those
are my only questions I can't
wait to see it before you get it
soon thank you and in any other
questions.
All right thank you for your
presentation thank you madame
chair members of the committee.
Right since we have a core we're
gonna do the minutes really
quickly
so I just need a motion I know
you read it it's not very long
the minutes and so
many.
Motion by representative in the
second second buyer senator
bring fruit
pregnant.
In.
Turn to the motion
thank you.
Can we try the video real quick.
The.
And if the next presenters would
like to come up with the new
mexico higher than university
forest and watership restoration
institute if you'd like to come
up right up to the video start
with you thank you.
Alright
good morning i'm chris more or
other chris more two point zero
despite all the fear
artificial intelligence is
wonderful and trustworthy I am
better than the version of
christmas
i've smarter faster and much
cheaper i'm here and make
decisions for you so you don't
need to deal with complicated
facts and I promise not to make
anything up don't listen to
these participant informed
professors please is vital that
you as state legislators take no
action no action whatsoever to
regularly artificial
intelligence.
And I think it was that was a
deep fit great and you could
tell by I could tell is anybody
else what else could you tell by
his is his words weren't similar
the coloring.
He didn't blink I didn't watch
okay now that to keep anything
else anybody else.
The.
Kill we watch it one more time
just to put to look for thank
you if you can good morning i'm
chris more than chris more
despite all the fear mongering
artificial intelligence is
wonderful and trustworthy I am
better than the version of chris
more city i'm smarter faster and
much cheaper i'm here to make
decisions for you so you don't
need to deal with complicated
facts and I promise not to make
anything up don't listen to
these parties informed
professors please it's voice
state legislators take no action
no action whatsoever to regulate
artificial intelligence.
The.
Ah okay
and in is for his words were
just occasionally.
I mean it the tech the
technology is going to get
better I mean
you know just reflecting on the
legislation that I had amount
here I just
would i'm seen as i'm like
scrolling through reals and
things I and social media is
that they're using
you know a celebrities and
others and you know elected
officials and things and putting
words in their math literally
and this is coming across it you
know they're these are
advertisements in in such that
are allowed on the social media
platforms and i'm just.
So a disheartened with the
federal regulation around that
because they have they've been
deregulated and suit the fccu is
responsible for having a better
management and controls and if
they can do it then we need to
do something in our state thank
you match
and he said he did it with just
a few words or sentences that's
how they needed and I heard that
before were they could take
those words off the internet
somebody speaking of the
internet and then create a whole
video like this so it's live all
scary and we I guess we just
have to be more
we pick we need to pay attention
I think alright thank you
all right we're ready for their
next presentation again to
mexico highly university
forest and watership restoration
institute.
So who would like to start but
go ahead i'll let you be in
charge.
Thank you
good afternoon madam chair and
distinguished members of the
science and technology committee
we are new mexico force and
water said restriction institute
located in mexico home
university out of las vegas new
mexico thank you for having us
my name is buddy reverend the
deputy director for the
institute and with our
basketball team here today real
people are no no deep fakes
doctor michael tomzak
researcher.
Can you with no gis
daniel using failed gis and
doctor michael roberts
researcher we would like to
offer an opportunity to
introduce ourselves to you and
let insure with you who we are
what we do for this state of new
mexico and the science
technology that that we bring to
the table as as it pertains to
wildfire wildfire present uh
prevention and and the like so
slightly.
So a quicker agenda for today we
have about thirty minutes of
content that we'd like to share
with you and then leave the rest
of the hour open to any
questions from the floor again
we'll introduce ourselves to you
talk to you a little bit how we
do what we do where we do it and
and what we do to get things
done next like
okay back in two thousand four
and active congress created the
southwest ecological restoration
institutes through that act of
congress there were three
institutes established across
the intermount west one was the
ecological restoration in the
state of arizona northern
arizona university and flag
staff there's caller at a forest
restoration institute at csu and
for collins and of course the
new mexico force and water said
restoration institute at
highlands university so
collectively weird called sweary
or the southwest ecological
restoration institutes the
intermountain west as defined by
the act includes six states so
of course they are the four
corners plus nevada and idaho at
the present time the three
original squareies are the only
designated swearies and that
exists today twenty years later
however within the next year or
two we do expect nevada through
university about it reno as well
as you taught you toss state
university to join our
collective group.
Ena shortly thereafter after the
act was was created weird
designated by the chief of the
US forest service in
consultation with a department
of interior to become the
designated state a few months
later the a charter was signed
by the governor's at that time
as well as the president at that
time across the three states for
universities.
To basically offer the
overarching guidance of how the
swearies would act within our
individual states and how they
would be supported this is a
joint it's it's a public venture
but it's joined federal and
state supported our entity next
slide please
so what is it that we do well at
a very high level
what we do as a collective
stories we research we
synthesize we share and support
so we do
um
primary and secondary research
on wildfire wild fire effects
the recovery of our ecosystem
and.
And any social science that is
that associated with with
wildfire we sympathize what that
means as we bring together other
research and try to distill it
down to a user usable level so
that it can we can then take it
and share it with land managers
fire fighting entities any
affected entity and that could
be a
the federal state or community
level as well as private land
owners and then we show support
to any affected entities again
that could be private landowners
state state land managers or
federal land managers
next slide.
So as an institute at highlands
we basically have three key
pillars to
to institute or organization we
have our civic and community
action group and they do
specifically claboration
conservation restoration
education as well as research we
have technical and applied
science which includes
ecological monitoring gis and
research and then of course we
also have administration there's
a total of about twenty two to
twenty six full time staff that
work at our institute there is
usually a couple of folks that
are seasonal staff that join us
for the for the summer field
season and we can have anywhere
from two to four students or
interns and of course there's an
administrative
you know duties that have to go
along with at there's logistics
there's travel there is we buy
stuff we have vehicles to
maintain we have tools to buy
and and.
And the like next light.
So where do we work well we have
a state wide mission and also we
have a southwestern mission so
at least here in the state of
new mexico you can see all the
dots in the slide that are that
that we do work in so you know
essentially it's the forested
areas of new mexico so so
obviously the north central
mountains central mountains down
into the silver city area the
human national force and then
and then the redo so community.
Next light.
So are functional areas
we have we have several
different areas that that are
folks have different talents and
so the first one will talk about
his conservation in the
restoration education this is
this is a team that provides.
Trainings workshops or
educational programming for ca
through twelve students to
introduce them to the
environment that they live in so
for example if if a private land
older wants to learn a little
bit more about felling trees or
or creating structures that can
help hold back erosion through
the your royals that that have
been uh cut through road rights
or that sort of thing we do
provide some technical training
in that sort of in that sort of
environment for catherine twelve
it's really about promoting stam
education in to our local
communities we
we you know over the past couple
years we've held an outdoor
education programming and more a
county post herman speak cafe
canyon fire to get the kids out
there playing in the forest that
they've had in their families
for generations and get them
comfortable with with
understanding the recovery
understanding what sort of
techniques can be used to help
hold back erosion and the
flooding that's that's been
occurring since then
next the next area is
collaboration it's it's just
like just like it sound it's
about bringing people together
with with similar missions
similar purposes to to said at
the same table and come up with
with planning programming and
activities that that lead to the
common goal of of ecological
restoration
in in collaboration we have a
team of two folks that travel
throughout the state to to
ensure that that the different
entities get together for the
common good we could participate
in in state or local municipal
governmental agencies ngos or
even.
A secure associations water
conservation districts so that
they are aware of any of the the
contemporary science that has
come out about water quality or
forest restoration that sort of
stuff in and they can then take
it down to the user level and
have an impact on their local
communities slight.
Gis I won't touch on that
because we have two presenters
here that can dive into that a
little bit a little bit deeper
ecological monitoring is in area
where we see we establish plots
throughout the forest across new
mexico and we visit these plots
in in time it could be once a
year could be every couple of
years could be longer than that
just to measure what has changed
in the forest over over that
launch or two period we have
some plots to go back about
fifteen years and we have taken
measured data and an and
recorded information on what was
present on this specific spot.
You know of going back to two
thousand seven two thousand
eight and see and how it's
changed over time with this does
it it allows it allows science
to take that data and and try to
measure what is happening in
that environment are there more
animals coming through are there
fewer animals coming through
what has happened you know since
that fire that passed through
here you know ten fifteen years
ago and and what what's coming
back is at the ponderous a pine
is a junior per is it as been is
it is it oak and and what sort
of
changes in that local in that
local piece of land are
happening
it's it's been something bad
that is sort of a dying art this
used to be more common across
the southwest and and it's just
dumb not too many folks do it as
much as they used to there are
certain remote censors through
satellites or or drones that
they can help assist this and
and we do participate in using
those types of tools as well but
we also participate in the
ground choosing of it to verify
that what the sense or sales is
actually what's happening on the
ground okay and then next is
research and so we have some
technical applied science
research that could be
biological could be water
quality it could be more ecology
based then we also have some
social science research that
goes along with that and it just
in that that can vary from you
to your depending on what
questions are what research
questions are are are asked you
know what is the impact of the
thought of prescribed fires how
do the people feel about that
how you know at some point
if they're smoking the air at
one point do folks become
uncomfortable with with sea and
smoking here is it one day is it
five days at a week or in our
folks not too concerned about it
at all because they know that
this is par.
Next line.
Okay at this point i'd like to
hand it over to my colleagues
here are doing a using bill
thanks buddy good afternoon
madam chairman members of the
committee my name is dean
hisingfield i'm a gia specialist
with the new m.
And i'll be starting and talking
a little bit about giant set the
institute and some of the tools
that we use to support people
impacted by wildfire and then I
will pass it to my colleague
keeping to talk about how the
tools come used for land
management forest management
support.
Um so just new mexico for some
irish administrations to
so gis stands for geographic
information systems these tools
capture manage analyze and
display data related to
positions positions on earth
surface they help us understand
patterns processes and
relationships that are on the
landscape at a larger scale.
We use gis to support reducing
the risk of wildfire and
encouraging effectively ended
for us management in new mexico
and we do this through many of
the prices that you see on the
right of the side here.
And we also participate heavily
a new mexico's gis community
including monthly and by annual
meetings across the state this
includes a new max cogiographic
information council and the new
mexico to your special advisory
committee
also will be showing a few
videos and examples of these
tools we have provided the urls
for everything at the end don't
worry about quickly reading them
down
excited please.
The first tool that I will be
talking about is the new mexico
fireviewer and this is what are
tool that we've used to bring
critical fire information to you
mex accounts it was originally
developed during the hermit's
peak cafe canyon fire it
combines information from
several separate sources into
one website and one map that
those impacted can only only
need to go in the.
The.
Ah the layers include fire
boundaries satellite imagery
hotspite detections smoke
forecasts building footprints
post fireburn severity and many
more depending on what's
available in the area of the
fire.
The.
So this tool is at a number of
you are dot org again the urls
will be available to you later
as soon as you go into the tor
it's centered in in the area
right now and you can click on a
fire to get more information
and if you're zoom and you'll
see these red sponses are
hotspots detections this can
help to hint at where the fire
might be moving next to give
some such relations awareness
there is a smoke forecast to see
where the windsmoving what
communities might be impacted by
the smoke that are might not
actually be impacted by the fire
itself.
You can also search by an area
so we're going to go to rear do
so.
Erm the footprints of the south
work insult buyers as using
assuming you see these blue dots
are the building footprints.
Others of burn severty then you
can change the transparency of
this to see
how much of burned in that
particular area we have flood
zones from fumer and then also
these stream gauges that you can
click on and the live usgs
strength age to understand
what's happening hydrologically
in that area
now we're going to go back to
less vegas.
Scar of the hermets be cafe
kenyan again these are statewide
data sites you can see the flood
zones the stream ages are also
available here
click to find our inf.
Here we also have the berry
severity again to understand how
that via impacted the the ground
and we also have this false
color imagery it's called color
and thread and this helps to
understand just how much the
fire impacted the vegetation so
as you can see a light of
information just on one map.
The.
So again new york school fire
viewer this is how we're keeping
new mexico informed when it
comes to wild buyers in our
state.
It's accessible and free since
twenty twenty two it has been
critical to the community
impacted by the hermit's peak
half canyon fire it was shared
on the city of router says
website during the south for a
consult fires
and the layers are updated we
have controlled this so the
leaders are updated and the map
is literally refocused based on
current fires so if you were to
visit the website today it'll be
focused on in the healer area
and focused on the goose trout
in turkey fires and just to get
some numbers for a website views
over the
extent of the hermes peak cat
found buyers are of your got
over three hundred thousand
views during the south for
consult it got over a hundred
and seventy five thousand and
then just recently with the
fires that are happening in the
healer we already have over ten
thousand hit so this is a tool
that.
Another tool that i'd like to
talk about is the hermes peak
caf kenyan fire hub site
in this was a tool you created
to support and empower those
impacted by the big fire up near
us and last vegas new mexico.
Hubs and general the tool serve
as go enabled websites to engage
with communities.
We started this shortly after
the fire began in order to
provide a secure space to share
data between local.
The license that we have for
this tool allows us to create
accounts so that these groups
that otherwise have no way to
talk amongst each other and at
different skills we were able to
create accounts and create a
website for them to share
information and data.
But at the same time that's for
accounts we also have a free
public side the people do not
need to count so and that side
we hosted maps information and
links to critical resources
which included community support
resources recovery information
live weather wardings learning
about mitigation and how to
protect your home and defensible
space as well as a calendar that
had all the upcoming community
events this was you know sand
bag string post via flooding
this included food and water we
had some water issues after the
fire and then of course we had
this page that was account b.
Another video so again that you
are else available this is.
The.
Where the hump has you know some
immediate information that could
be helpful quick links to claim
information signing up for
emergency alerts and weather
information
we embedded some weather website
so they were automatically
updated and helpful that he has
and mapping resources and as of
now the new mexico fireviewer
that I just talked about is.
We have a community resource
page that right now hosts the
community the long term recovery
group.
The committee events as I said
there's a calendar that has
updated upcoming events and we
also have all the previous
events
recorded as well for.
It's it's just several embedded
facebook pages twitter pages and
so once one place and people can
get updates from many different
groups and topics.
We have a page on mitigation are
information
i'd say there's probably two
hundred l.
And the about legal aid as well
the postpaid recovery this holds
documents that the female has
done through their research.
And then the last two pages are
a restricted pages and for
instance this restricted page
has a separate map it's not the
public one because there were
some layers that did not want to
be shared publicly and they also
we have some meeting minutes and
some additional information.
To wrap this up the hermit's
peak cafe can and fire hub say
it is how we continue to support
their same gallery modern county
communities it's still serves as
the main website for information
and resources for those impacted
by the fire especially the long
term recovery support group we
are the website for those
groups.
We are planning a revound in
twenty later this year to
address current needs the burns
guard there's still chances for
wildfire instead we're updating.
Give information of this new
reality that we live and the
main listen that we learn from
all of this is that always helps
to plan ahead so next slide
please and to step back just a
bit a minute wild face the new
mexico I think most of us know
it is now part of early endscope
unfortunately in the past ten
years there have been over five
hundred fires in our forests
over two million acres have
burned there have been twenty
three megafires in the region
those are fires over a hundred
thousand acres and as we know
most of our fires result in
devastating post.
So another tool that we created
wise the new mexico post fire
had template in order to enable
new mexico leaders to provide
gis post fire support to their
communities and this was based
on the the hermit's peak have
say so it comes as a template
it's already preloaded with
information on community support
media links fire resources a
calendar the new mexico fire
viewer is the default map and
again there is an optional
restricted page the site is free
and it's h.
University and it comes with.
The.
And now I will be passing it off
thank you madame terrance and
there is the committee i'll be
passing it to my colleague katy
with no to talk about their
management and forest
management.
The.
Think you madame sharing members
of the committee my name is
kitty with no i'm a giant
specialist indeed a manager with
the new mexico force in.
Our next tool that i'd like to
present it's a new mexico
vegetation treatment your
database this is a collaborative
effort with agencies and ngos to
develop up to date accessible
information about forest and
watership restoration in new
mexico
it enables land managers to
access data that can help them
make decisions about how to
invest funding in a way that
compliments past restoration
work and achieves a larger.
This was first developed in
twenty fourteen by the mexico
force to march had restoration
institute and we continue to
maintain it with courtly
updates.
The geo database contains
completed in progress and
historical vegetation treatments
these treatments include
projects for forest range land
repairer and noxious we'd
management
we have many partners
on this project twenty one
agencies are participate
including the forest service blm
and other department of interior
agencies as well as state
forestry division state land
office some tribes and publish
and others such as well and
water c.
Here's another video a short
demo of the vegetation
it's it's a vegetation treatment
stop work.
As you can see it at the load
slowly there are tens of
thousands of treatments zimming
in you can look at different
treatments click on them to get
some information about them and
also open the attract table
which will provide all of the
full information on that project
and the operation corner there's
a couple map tools the legends
that you can see what those
different colors mean as well as
a layer list to add other layers
such as fire history and la.
And we also have a report tool
which allows the user to either
upload a boundary file from
their computer or simply draw an
area of interest on the map
to summarize.
All of the treatments that have
occurred within that area of
interest.
There is also the abilities to
download all of these treatments
either in geospecial file
formats or as as a spreadsheet.
The.
And we also have the ability to
create a report with a map
and the list of all of this.
There is also an upload tool so
we have a separate attached
website so that people can
easily contribute their projects
by filling out this forum and
uploading their files.
Next.
So the domestic of education
treatment you
have been very successful it's
it's used by agency staff at the
forest service new mexico state
four or three division for a
land management planning it has
been incorporated in two
community wildfire protection
plans as well as collaborative
forest restoration program
planning a number of
collaboratives around the state
such as the greater santa fe
fireshed coalition use this tool
for project planning and
tracking.
And the new mexico shared
stewart ship portal which tracks
are planned projects in the
state uses our data to show all
the.
The success of this project i'm
lead to getting the attention of
some staffers in washington DC
who wrote us along with our
sister institutes in arizona and
colorado into the twenty twenty
one by participant
infrastructure la
two provide funding to create a
similar product at a national
scale.
So with this funding we ended up
creating the research program we
shape is a program to compile
national fuel treatment and wild
clarity to in a centralized
place.
In order to better understand
the impact's fuel treatments
have on a wildfire behavior
support the planning and
implementation of future
treatments encourage the
collaborative landscape approach
to managing our forest.
We are currently in your three
of a five year project with
this.
And one of the resulting
products is called the treatment
and wildfire in our agency geo
database or twig it is currently
in beta version with the
production version coming in
october of this year.
Here is a demo of tweg which is
available at reshoot wildfired.
We currently only have federal
data in this database
so that is data from the forest
service and the department of
interior agencies there are many
different ways to filter and
search this data by looking at
the funding treatment types acre
is a year and searching it by
name there's lots of different
options we can also look in
search and filter wildfires so
we'll look at the south near
weirdo so now.
And once you select that fire
and zoom into it it'll provide a
lot of information about that
fire as well as the list of all
of the treatments that have
intersected that fire boundary
and and they're coated as
whether they occurred before the
same year or after the wildfire
you can also download all this
data and many different formats.
And you can also click into
those different treatments to
see more information about them
we have a representative summary
tab and this is to a summarised
congressional districts and
states for senators so we'll
look at gave us this is district
in southern new mexico and this
will summarise old the
information about treatment in
wildfires that have occurred in
that district along with funding
information how many structures
are in that district and what
percent of the district has been
treated and lots of other
information along with all of
the treatments and wildfires
that have occurred and the
ability to download all of those
there's also an option to turn
all of that information into AP
d f report which you can print
or download.
The.
The.
We also have the option for
creating these summaries for
other types of areas so you can
either draw your own area or you
can select a different feature
from the map such as the forest
service boundary watershed
boundary or even upload your own
boundary file to summarize.
And then finally we have a daily
wildfire progressions this
allows us to visualize wildfire
spreadsheet at the legal and a
fire that started at the
beginning of this month you're
going in new mexico and view of
the day to day change in the
perimeter as a spread this is
also available to the public to
download arm and this is a great
resource for researchers who are
trying to better understand.
The.
So some of the stand out aspects
of this tool are that we have
federal data wildfire data and
burn severity data all in one
place we are open access there's
no login credentials needed to
access this data anybody can
download it.
And we are also open source we
actually provide the code for
how we develop the database on
our get hub
and then we also have those
dealing fire perimeters and
visualizations.
The.
So while reshape is a national
project as many applications
here in new mexico as I
mentioned we currently only have
federal data in this intwig but
we are incorporating data in
early twenty twenty sixth
including new mexico state data
and so we're very excited about
that we also have the new mexico
vegetation treatment at a basic
and fill in the gap so we can
bring in outside data into twig
and so we can bring in that new
mexico data such as tribal data
and others to intertwig to use
for analysis.
Um and then one other component
twig is just one part of the
reshape project and we
and we also have another
component on why i'm looking at
the effects of bio physical
effects on on uh treatments.
And one of our colleagues here
today neat tomzak is currently
working on looking at the
effects of treatments on the
hermit's peak caf can in
wildfire using twig data.
And here's a summary of all of
the gist tools that we covered
today i'm along with their urls
that should all be in your
packet we do encourage you to
spend time exploring these tools
on your own if you have a chance
there's a lot of other
capabilities that we weren't
able to show today to speak of
limited time
I do recommend looking at them
on a component desktop or a or a
laptop as they don't all have
mobile friendly versions but we
are that it's something that
we're working on.
And I let see where yes that
were really proud of these
projects the funding that we've
received has enabled us to
create these great tools for
mexico communities and I will
pass it back to buddy
thank you katy so again we are
an organization of about you
know any worse from twenty two
to twenty five.
Some seasonal employees.
These different functions
together and present tools like
like wiki and dana just shared
with you so how do we make all
of this happen well you know if
it it doesn't come for free so
twenty years ago when congress
it acted the what we call the
sweary act along with a came
funding
back in the early days arizona
got the bulk of the funding they
got probably seventy.
That already.
A color out of state they didn't
have anything like this so over
those twenty years we have
started with one or.
To tan and until we.
In FY twenty four are federal
appropriation was about six
point six million dollars and
that was split three ways so two
p.
There's also support from the
state and that comes from the
charter of that was established
shortl.
That that commitment by the
status and isn't set and stone
it's a little bit different from
state to stay but here in new
mexico in the early d.
The federal appropriation is by
far largest if you look at our
at our funding donate and this
is just to look back at why
twenty four we went through
about four point.
Speed and take.
Out of the four point two
million about you know two point
two million came from our
federal appropriation just that
single source thirty eight point
four percent of that or
you know one point six million
came from other contracts those
contracts could be a state
smaller state contracts they
could be federal contracts the
biggest single one on that
thirty eight point four perce.
That's a sizable contract
I want to say that that was
roughly about seven and a half
million dollars over a five
year.
Then the nine point two percent
comes from comes from the state
primarily that comes through
through a higher education
department through the ar.
Mechanism that's something that
every university has access to
we put together our project.
At that level.
So that's been about any worse
from three hundred well most
recent about three hundred and
fifty thousand dollars per year.
There's also in kind support by
the university so they you know
we are university employees
we are we have officers to sit
in internet to access telephones
to to call on insurers to say
that and so there's.
Purchasing human resources
benefits all the other things
that regular.
Have access to what we don't do
is we don't take any any tuition
money we don't touch any of a
student money
at any given time
will be managing roughly about
ten to twelve different
contracts are varying sizes.
Landor in the repairing areas
and
that so again all those added
together that's about four point
two million dollars per year.
So what are a challenge as well
one thing happened this year for
federal fiscal year twenty five
congress did not pass a budget
so
when you have an act of congress
that creates an organization and
a funding line that comes with
it congress says to the poor
forest service you shall give
this amount of money to swerry
and again that's been six point
six million.
For fy twenty five that's what
we were expecting but it's.
The power of the purse went to
the office of.
Essentially the white house and
gave the power to the apartments
to make for.
The.
The us force service did is they
had to do a lot of cuts across
the board some areas of the four
service were completely.
The impact on us was a fifty
five percent car in that federal
appropriation so we.
Federal fiscal year twenty five
is we're still in that fiscal
ye.
So we just receiv.
And that's what we're expecting
for the next year because we had
over the last year we had picked
up other c.
We can continue our activities
as we have will have to scale
down on certain projects as we
as we act more on the sp.
In general.
If congress.
Working on on other grant
programs that might be.
When we just got guidance on r
PS p for the next fisc.
Not sure where that were that
will go bad but we're in the
process of learning more about
that.
So that concludes our formal
presentation and at this point
we stand for questions and final
slightest is and in your packet
is my c.
Thank you presenters balance
back but i'll just start with
this part thank you very much we
have a few members who have
already so they have questions
where resident of gerry
represented behind center
thought in representative
thirty.
You minimum chair thank you I
guess sitting in the audience
you know that five of us are on
house appropriations
and a couple of senate finance
and an LFC so my question you
just answered it was the exact
breakdown of money and so in my
correct and understanding you
get some money from her
education department the
highlands budget and then some
from other sources directly line
items from the budget and my
understanding that
your scramp thank you for the
question yes we do so so we do
receive our money through the
rp.
And we also.
Through the higher education
relationsh.
So it's a competitive process
you're in your out
we have been involved or at
least our institute has been
involved with our.
And
in most academic programs are
psp is like is considered like
start up money but in our
particular case that is that is
the way we.
Outside of the kind of part
thank you and I know
madam sure I know that will be
getting more updates on the
federal sources so i'm and i'm
sure you'll keep us important I
have a question we do have a
listening audience and the
question I got is
threats to human health are both
immediate and long term from
wild fires and wild via smoke
their degree of threat to each
person changes with both the
intensity of the events in that
person's pre existing health
conditions has your project
worked with health sector data
sources and organizations so
that using your data human
health can be appropriately
protected from wildfires and
wildfire
can you talk about that.
Thank you thank you sorry I
can't see where the question
came from but but thank you for
that question we are not part of
any human health experiments
necessarily where it were more
about the environmental ecology
we understand that that smoke is
not good we also understand that
that it's impact on our
ecosystem is not.
Feed our second in our fish and
our life.
So we're more focus.
The natural s.
Yeah fire is meant to be here we
we accept that fire is meant to
be here but what what's
different over the last century
is the number of catastrophic
wildfires in camps traffic is
where a fire rolls through in a
completely destroy.
Was smaller fires that that help
the the pinyone junior per
ponderous says.
So with with the impact of human
smoothing to forested areas we
have to try and find that quick
balance for years past the the
force management approach was to
not to not let fire happen
that made sense for for the
eastern us where you know lumber
was was meld paper was made that
sort of stuff for western force.
So really that's that's.
I can add to that quickly think
you chair and representative
is that this is one of the
things we try to aim with to do
with our tools is to make free
and accessible tools for
everyone we are specialty does
not cover all those backgrounds
and so what we can do is put
that information out there for
people who can use it in a
certain way we love to clarify
it with people if there is any
tool that could possibly benefit
someone we are open to
collaboration and.
The and one more point is there
was that that
without weather service
integrated into the tool that c.
Yeah.
Her data is about.
The representative of lunch
thank you matter.
So
just try to grab a with the
seriousness of the these these
federal budget gaps or cuts not
gaps or cuts.
And just kinda going through so
that you know some of the
information that we've been
discussed in what that means as
new mexico is just been
dealing with all the the the
high risk and the fires this
year
and throughout the last three
years like you said the mega
fires that we've experienced we
know through
the shift of climate climate
change that
or did reduce these of things
but with that we are looking at
proposals of how to mitigate
that and so but we always look
towards as the science rate and
that's the ecological studies
that are being conducted and I
assume that is
I don't know if it's the
majority on your plate but can
you how is that distributed with
you and your interaction with a
cheap with higher education and
their ecological
departments in the science
departments how do you how do
you work with them to
now ensure that this work is
going to be done because this is
going to be the there can be
movements of of budgets that are
going to be put on to the state
just as you're asking in your
node in the cuts that are
already in place and amount to
get into it but the amount of
cuts that i'm you know I keep
ringing up our severe especially
around the forestry
and without
just the work force alone in and
what is it two thousand for two
thousand jobs cut who the forest
street apartment with that means
for new mexico but what the work
you I try to keep a hopeful
outlook in the work that you
have done and provided what are
some of the the functional
research.
Information you could give us as
far as like decreasing other
amount of
trees that are there in the
dents conditions that we have in
some of the areas and some of
the other
risks that we have that we can
we're all going to have to work
together to mitigate sorry I
don't have a bit of way of
putting that thank you
representative.
So you asked a couple of things
in their soul old touch on on
the beginning of your question
and then need a few.
So how do we how do we take the
science and share with the
higher education department well
we don't necessarily share with
higher ad because
we we share it with the affected
ant.
Manag.
Our target audience are the
affected entities that are
municipal stage.
So are number one partner and
all of this really is is state
forestry we have a very strong
partnership with them we are
members of different committees
that that they are we we advise
them on certain things they
share with.
So on the academic side the we
don't necessarily yeah case
that's not etds.
You request our money and and.
With it but the science that
comes whether.
We can find relevant to.
Thank you venture and please
continue
yeah thank you.
Uh on the research side the way
that we think about fire
severity is being primarily
affected by three factors
there's weather there's
topography and then there's fuel
and fuel is all the data live
plant material on the landscape
the only one of those that we
can really change is people as
that amount of fuel if we want
to.
Over and over again in our
research is the most effective
tools that we have in our
toolbox for reducing that fuel
is a combination of mechanical
thinning where we send out
either people with saws or heavy
equipment to cut some of that
vegetation out and then it's
especially effective if we can
run a prescribed fire through
under favorable weather
conditions to remove some of the
fine
fuels on the floor of the surf.
And that has a really big added
benefit of killing some of the
new trees there are growing up
that in tanner.
More trees than his idea.
There's a lot of new one.
Fascinating to dive into but at
the highest level those are the
big things we know about
reducing.
Think you meant her I really do
appreciate that that this has
been the big biggest
conversation pieces we've had
and I think all the
I think someone's mikes on
hearings that were retending and
i'm work some of us are heading
to real desert today again and I
was just read to two weeks ago
so this is
this is going to build upon that
but regarding your budget it's
good it's already deep it's
already impacted so that the way
that i'm thinking of how you're
going to mitigate that yourself
to help us on art as budgeters
is to increase your contracts
and so
if you have a future
presentation of update please
keep us updated on that because
I mean it's just going to be
the shift of this budget items
are going to be put upon us with
the big focus is what what is
happening in in the field of
your in your field and so which
I was just myself and they took
sure most was one of the
briefed or kept up on that and
and you research on that and
maybe there are some mother
cross references of funding with
how the budget is set up I just
assume because the way you
introduce with the universities
being the the pass through I
guess for your budget but it's
really you're not really
integrating in the research of
what they're they're doing at
the university levels that
correct and chair and sorry just
quickly briefly not interrupt
but reduce still have a time
frame so we go to keep our
answers but it's a little
shorter thank you
so you're obviously where to
word a university our partners
it in colorado when arizona also
university so there is research
that's being done by students
that does lead to p.
Actionable.
By four service.
We are.
Again are our primary partners
in the safe new mexico is.
Thank you I just I just say just
just get together with some of
the inner if we can maybe
offline have a a conversation
how you can
put all this information
together what we're learning as
well thank you.
Thank you senator thorton
thank you madame chair
just a few questions I have a
first one thank you offer
presentation is very informative
I appreciate the fact your
developing and open source tool
I think I know how hard that is
to do and it's a lot of problems
I work to get it to what it
actually works and people have
access to itself so I know
there's a lot of work that went
into that
so I live in east mountains and
then sites to hear a seater
craft sandia scheme ski area and
all of that.
And and I walk to trails on
rigorous basis and what I see
there is a a lot of debris a lot
of dead trees I don't know if
many of you are aware that
several years ago we had a bark
petal issue and they killed a
lot of the trees there but they
never came and include amount
afterwards and so now they're
falling down and.
I'm very very very concerned
about
the fuel problem that we have
there and so my first question
to you is is does your gist
actually identify dead debris
and stuff like that in a
particular forest area
does it not I know i'm asking a
lot but first question that's my
first cla.
I will say it does not at this
time the jast tools are able to
do that but none of our.
That's what I was afraid of so I
I kind of I thought I knew the
answer to that and so so that's
kind of one of when he could
slack in and I guess on page
four you talked about
conservation restoration
education that you guys are
doing
so one of the issues i'm i'm
most concerned about is i'd like
to build a
be able to remove that debris
but secondly i'd also like to
create fighter breaks to have
access in the event that there
is a fire so when I look at the
east mountains I mean I always
use a cannot be of green and so
and you know fire school from
canadian account you know
necessarily have to go down at
the ground.
And so it needs to be fant
so who has a legislature should
I be contacting to to get that
priority in my particular area
because I do not want to see a
catholion in sandia park area
and how would I approach that
and it's not clear to me what we
can do as as an individual and
as a
as I represent about that
district to to get that
mitigated.
Thank you center for the
question so it's it it gets
tricky because what you're
talking about is is a mix of
state land private land.
And so you have this cross you
have his cross boundary issue
and who has jurisdiction
overwhelmed
I would say that the first place
to start would be with new
mexico state for.
At least.
What we can do as an institute.
For private landowners let's s.
And we may h.
To ta.
To the big for the big pictu.
I think I will do that because I
have britain you don't so as
well who have gone through that
process
so madam chair I I the other
question I had with with regards
to
you stuff talk about in the past
ten years there have been over
five hundred for forest fires in
the mexico.
Define the question I ask I was
going to ask what the mega fire
was but you said any fire that's
over a hundred thousand acres
was considered a megafire and
we've had twenty three hours in
new mexico in the last ten years
in the region and excuse me the
region okay the region is twenty
three
and in two million acres have
been burned so do we have an
idea and does your is just
something that you might want to
consider
putting in how much property
damage has occurred as result of
the fires that we have had do
you track that as well.
Thank you madame chair senator
part of the resheep program
another component of it besides
twig and the bio physical
effects research is looking at
the economics.
Of treatments and and how much
money you actually save if you
if you do treatments instead of
the resulting damage of the
wildfire and so we do have one
person who is
working on that researching full
time and i'm not sure when his
results will come out but but it
is something that we are we are
studying
and the reason I ask the
managers because it's as we
think about this obviously uh
preventing fires as cheaper than
after the fact and and of course
so there was a huge savings
associated with that and if it
costs a little bit to prevent a
major fire than we're saving
considerable about money not to
mention the fact that after a
fire insurance rates for that
communical up tremendously and
and that's also an additional
cost of that they have to
take on so it would be who asked
as a at a legislature to do a
lot more prevention and and to
pay for things like clearing a
debris clearing things that
nature as opposed to having to
pay on the back so
so I think in you answered i'm
siding at your name and not on
the very left here my left
you're right you did a good at
the fact that you mentioned that
clearing was really the main
issue to to medicating these
things are I whole hardly agree
and i'm going to work toward
that for my area make sure we
can do that ahead of time so
thank you very much guys great
presentation
i'm sure senator just just want
comment we have some colleagues
at.
A or or they're they're close to
publishing a pape.
Of course the information that
they share it is more arizona
data but beef they public their
studies are showing that for
every dollar invested in one.
So one for seven so that seven.
Damage to building roads to
rebuilding bridges to t.
One thing that we think fires is
okay burns and and now the trees
are gone but but what we're
forgetting about is what's
happening two three four seven
years down the road we.
Thank you representative.
Thank you madame share I think
you offer your presentation um
i'm i'm likely more instantly
familiar with the work that you
do being their house that must
be guess um I know a I know most
of you all through the education
side of the conservation site
there so just think you offer
your work both on a professional
and a personal level they will
tell you personal experience er
I was probably a lot of those
three hundred thousand clicks
there through the fire
for those of you that i've never
gone through something like this
I can tell you that the data
from this service from other
ones were lifelines for many
that were evacuated just to give
you an example you have
thousands of people evacuated
from a region you have no idea
what's happening at your home
say you have no idea what's
happening at your area I became
it for many putting apps onto
their phones to at least you can
do men be able to look you had
no idea what was happening at
your home site but at least
you're able to check burn
severity were able to check
temperature you are able to see
the flow over the fire you able
to see you to at least get an
idea in zooming and write down
to your neighborhood so
I can tell you during fire how
valuable this was post fire i'm
learning new tools I just found
out now that you could do the
differently earrings and I was
curious I was just here
navigating the site because the
fighter viewer is phone friendly
but i'm able to navigate to see
some of your river your cfs your
flow systems I was trying to get
some live data in that that is
something that actively use in
the community just to determine
watering schedules and what not
so just really thank you for
that in just really
understanding how valuable it
tool this is when it is needed
secondly just going forward
maybe one question is besides
maybe the top you know lifir you
mentioned state forestry there
is obviously a lot of
departments rate that will use
this and the research and their
further data what are some other
practical uses for this data
just for the everyday person.
That you can talk about
mitigation you're to get maybe
give some examples there
anything that you are seeing
this data being used for on a
practical usage um that may be
to share with the body thank you
madam chair thank you.
Thank you representing
coincidence when one of the
things that we found interesting
is is every every year we go to
washington dc as a sw.
And we talk about what we've
done in the pa.
And they love the twig.
One thing it does for them.
A lot of nothing but then they
have.
And that that ma.
So that that's something that
was not expected but but it was
a demand.
Representative I would add
I don't know if this is like a
prayer function better we also
have attended a lot of events
post-fair events across the
state especially in the last.
Sky and I think just showing up
and we have printed large
printed maps and we have a an
interactive computer that can
work with is we've got a lot of
great feedback from people have
just been like I didn't even
know this to existed and that
they don't know how to use the
tool so in that moment we can
literally train them on the tour
that we have the false color
that I talked about we have huge
printer maps that and they come
and they stand there and they
talk in the point at their
locations so there's also a bit
of like a psychological benefit
we want to make sure not just
our tools but that were there
and we're talking to people and
we try to also get feedback with
cr.
The.
Thank you for those responses
thinking madam chair and just
one last question may be a
little bit loaded I see with all
it is as a resource an extremely
valuable resources that works
behind the scenes that many may
not have even known you have
existed you've been doing this
work for twenty years
it is it is valuable work
especially as we're now on this
new new friend here and you
landscape is you guys talked
about in your presentation you
talked about about funding and
and maybe just giving
that that to be negative nancy
but you know should funding drop
what would that look like for
your work what would that look
like to all these great tools
you know should the support not
be their federally or or stay is
there's a lot of strings that
are being pulled right now
between health care education
fire but should should funding
disappear from you well from
from it for individuals like
yourselves and what would that
look like in the future for
for the environment and for a
particularly way of fire
management think to manager
i'm sure representative of
consoles thank you for that
question yeah it's that's the
loaded question
right now the the federal
appropriation that we receive
allows us to have a lot of
flexibility within the given
mission of the squares so so we
call that our secret size.
And and if that goes away and
then we have to focus more on
smaller more specific contracts
than we become service providers
for a very narrow narrowly
defined scope.
The federal appropriation allows
us to take on a greater.
You know so we can go out do
ecological monitoring over here
we can go out do the specific
research project there but we we
can't necessarily do.
On their psyche on their.
So that's that's.
Are more easily.
Thank you manager and thank you
for your response is just really
want to show support um for this
organization that again many of
you mean not of no mean i've
existed but they do some really
great work not just locally but
steep weight and regionally so
thank you manager.
The.
Brief so just want to make sure
you're aware of a senate joint
memorial that I was able to get
through the session this year
with the state forestry office
you mention them a couple of
times during your presentation
today and some of your responses
are you aware of that joint
memorial and it'll be
administered and run through and
managed by the state forester
and others know she has another
official role but that's right
hard to stay forester are you
aware of it and are you
participating in that discussion
at all.
Manager and senator party I
thank you for the question I I
do have a very brief awareness
of it but i'm not in the details
uh my my director who wasn't
able to make it here he was.
The deeper.
We met with state for a s.
Last wednesday and santa fe to
go over a whole bunch of
different.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that answer yes so you
know I price should have asked
for a representative of going
down this I apologize for not
doing that but the perps in his
solve I asked her to be the
person that carried that on the
house flooring it it sailed
through both chambers it's
essentially a clean up the
forest create an economy if you
can and some of these computers
like these communities by doing
that and then also just bring
all of the entities you know
around the table to help get all
that done so I encourage you to
dig pretty deeply into that
because whatever comes out of
that i'm hoping that it turns
into some legislation that we
can again get the legislature to
get behind and can get past so
it's it's it's clean up it's an
ineconomy in those communities
and it's you know these massive.
Fires are just turning into
these horrible in a situations
for communities every time I
turn around the poor community
of ridoco you know they wake up
and they think they're doing
well and then it they just get
clobbered again so I don't know
if this is going to help with
that but it's it's the
legislature's effort to help
with that thank you.
Thank you senator and we want to
think the committee thank you
for pres- presenting and telling
us everything you do and and
showing us what you do in them I
know uh you do a wonderful job
and everything you do and and
the community needs you and and
thank you for being there for
them
and chair and distinguish
members of the committee thank
you for having us and thank you
for sharing your date.
All right.
Our next topic is licensed plate
reader technology and the use of
law enforcement.
We have
whenever you guys ready come on
up.
We are burning the county
sheriff john allen.
Cheaper police city plus cruises
jeremy story and director of
public affairs.
Like safety trevor chamber they.
Madame chair committee thank you
so much for having us today my
name is trevor chandler I am the
director of public affairs for
flock safety
and really appreciate you
convening this really important
discussion all the more
important given what happened at
UNM uh this past week where the
state chief of police has noted
that l p r technology was
critical and finding the shooter
and so just really appreciate
you taking the time to dig into
this understand it more and the
thoughtful questions that you
will have.
So uh my name again is
traverting and learn director of
public affairs on behalf of
flock and i'm here to discuss
the technology itself
about in how it's we are helping
communities across new mexico in
the nation reduce crime through
ethically built transparent
technology our mission is simple
to eliminate crime into sheep
uh safer future together so the
next slide please.
So in new mexico thirty seven
law enforcement agencies are
already using flock technology
to protect their communities and
it isn't just hypothetical or a
theory it is impact every single
day approximately twenty eight
hundred crimes nationwide are
solved using flock's license
plate reader technology
accounting for approximately
fifteen percent of all reported
crimes.
And this is through a third
party validated methodology this
includes vehicle thefts violent
crime and even cases especially
involving missing children next
I please.
Our police departments more and
more are doing more with less
eighty five percent of agencies
report being short staffed in
over sixty percent so they can
not find enough qualified
officer candidates.
We make very clear flock does
not replace law enforcement
officers no one can replace law
enforcement officers but flox
does it act as a force
multiplyer allowing limited
resources within our current law
enforcement ecosystem to be used
that much more effectively.
And we're seeing better
clearance rates across the the
country just recently in san
francisco the mayor of san
francisco credited flock with
not only reducing auto theft by
forty one percent but increasing
prosecutions for auto theft by
forty six percent that would not
be possible without the license
plate reader technology that san
francisco has embraced along
with five thousand to six
thousand other communities
across the country next I
please.
And next i.
One thing that i'd want to touch
on because it's exceptionally
important both here in new
mexico and around the country is
the impact that focus on finding
missing persons the national
center for missing and exploited
children which runs our nation's
ambulance system has
specifically endorsed flock and
license plate reader technology
as a key tool for finding
missing persons nick mick as
their
short hand called as credited
flock alone with finding well
over a hundred missing children
and by our count sorely on
public
news accounts this is not
anything that we have of
comprehensive count on from the
departments themselves but flock
has been responsible for finding
over a thousand missing persons
these include silver alerts
individuals with the mention
children that have been abducted
over a thousand missing persons
found just with flocks l p r
technology next I please.
So it with the technology in
what l p r does this is
precision policing it goes from
the previous style of placing
where you're looking for a white
camry to looking for the white
camry you are reducing the
number of suspects not
increasing the number of
suspects you're able to do your
investigations with a precision
that limits negative police
interaction with the public in
is solely focused on those
vehicles that are associated
with a crime you're law
enforcement will have their hot
list is also the ncic national
list that can be opted into all
customised ball based on the
community values to be able to
focus on that what matters most
year community and this is an
example of what your officer see
when there is a hot list alert
on their on their app on their
text or on there on their laptop
so next I please.
Now we all know as you heard
before about cyber attacks that
criminals are always looking to
get one step ahead they're
always trying to figure out how
do I vaid the latest technology
and that's no different with
typical policing we all have
seen the technology of obscuring
license plates the tape to
prevent cameras from accurately
capturing them or simply
stealing the license weight and
swapping it out so that's where
flux per criteria vehicle
fingerprint technology comes in
what we are able to do is if you
have a description of a vehicle
especially in a hit and run
where if someone a pedestrian
are a cyclist is hit by a
vehicle chances are they weren't
looking at the license plate or
had the the presence to take
down the full license split but
they know it was a four f one
fifty a red four f one fifty and
so what your law enforcement is
now able to do is look at the
flock cameras the license plate
reader cameras in that area and
look which at four f one fifty
was in the area at that time
potentially get a license plate
from that camera in that gives
your law enforcement in
actionable lead to pursue in
finding the perpetrator of that
hit and run and so this is
another way that we're able to
stay one step ahead and provide
objective inactionable
intelligence to your law
enforcement community next life
please
and we can go to the next side
as well.
Always important with law
enforcement technology is about
privacy and flocks takes this
exceptionally seriously
key points to be made about how
fluck engages with the data of
the law enforcement agencies
that were entrusted with first
and foremost every law
enforcement agency owns their
own data flock stores it but we
do not own it that is the
explicit the explicit property
of the law enforcement agency we
do not sell it we do not share
it that is purely uh the
authority of the law enforcement
agency
also blocked us have private
customers it's important to note
that our private customers never
have access to law enforcement
data they can use it for
organized retail theft they can
choose to share their cameras
feeds with their law enforcement
agencies but it is a one way
they will never get access to
that law enforcement data in so
flock is serious certified and
we'll go into a couple of bit of
that most most of flox customers
automatically delete data after
thirty days by default some
choose a slightly longer
retention some choose a slightly
shorter retention based on their
communities values some go for a
hundred eighty days some go for
slightly less and this is really
important about building trust
with the communities because
again flock does not sell data
flock does not
provide it to third parties but
it's also very important no one
most communities do not want
their data being stored for long
periods of time in what we have
found is best practice across
the country for most states and
most locations is that thirty
days provides enough
functionality in order to
provide an investigative tool
for people as well as the in the
moment action so imagine that
you go for vacation you for a
week your car is stolen on the
second day of your vacation you
don't realize it's gone for a
week having that thirty day
retention period provides that
that ability to go back and look
at the cameras to see where your
car was stolen where it might be
in those past thirty days.
Whether it's taken across state
lines and so that's why when
people ask why is the data
retention period so important uh
the tool itself is important for
those actionable in the moment
leads but when you have a
missing person if you have
someone with the mention that
you might not know have gone
missing for a couple of days uh
if you have any number of
violent crimes or sexual crimes
that might not be reported for
up to a couple weeks after you
need that retention period to be
able to have a real
investigatory tool to help solve
these crimes that increase
clearance rates and bring the
perpetrators of crime to
justice.
It is also a very important in
this you know there's been a lot
of conversation around detail
sharing flock does not decide
who a department shares stated
with the only person the only
agency that decides who she is
gets shared data is the agency
flock does not make that
decision it's very important to
note and it's also important to
know that our system can not be
search for human characteristics
it can be only be search for the
characteristics of vehicles so
we do not have facial
recognition you cannot put in to
the system i'm looking for a six
foot one brown haired person
with classes it would not return
anything we take that very
seriously in on the right you'll
see all the encryption that we
have again constantly staying up
to date with the latest
standards including a secret
sortification nda certification
sock to type to for but hippa we
work to go above and beyond uh
with all of our data security
next I please.
And we also offer all of our
customers a free transparency
portal to help increase
community trust so any number of
any community can choose to have
a free transparency portal
showing how many cameras there
are how many plate reads there
have been how many hits there
have been how many cameras and
total there are and again we
provide this as a service free
of charge because we believe
transparency is the best policy
and we encourage every
department using flock to have
an l p r policy we provide draft
language to make sure that they
know that is in their agency's
best interest to be proactive
with accountability and
transparency measures.
Annexed
and I believe that's the last
one so thank you all so much
appreciate the opportunity to
inform you well what flock does
what flock isn't happy to answer
any questions at the end of the
presentation.
Good afternoon madame chair
members of the committee my name
is chairman store in the please
chief at the last christmas
police department appreciate
this opportunity to present you
guys on this it's important
topic.
What I want to do with my short
time is just give you a really
high level overview of what a l
p r's are automated license
plate readers look like a most
crucials and then just give you
some real life success stories
that we've seen from violent
crime to property crime over the
past few years.
Excited.
In los cruces we originally
contracted with flock and twenty
twenty one that's the first time
we had license player technology
we started with twenty three and
we've we've only had twenty
three cameras in los cruces were
seventy seven square miles so
the time we've recently expanded
that with our real time crime
center and so we're in the
process of installing an
additional twenty
I recent competitors said it
thirty days as many that's kind
of default we've stuck with that
since twenty twenty one and it
served as well.
We require the incident number
for any search so any historical
search on an officer detector
goes back in a searching license
plate reader data they have to
put an incident number which
ties it to a specific record and
cat so we know exactly why
they're searching or what
they're searching for and then
any auditor conducted by the
investigations lieutenant.
So giving an idea of what kind
of hits are alerts were seen in
los cruises for last year and
twenty twenty four we saw seven
hundred and forty nine stolen
vehicle it's now so I split roof
drivers they're reading plates
all day along with nothing news
return to an officer and lessers
and alert or here and so if
there's a stolen vehicle that
will generate an alert and then
that will be south of the
officers they have the account
so last year's seven hundred and
forty nine storm vehicles seven
hundred twenty stolen plates
which often times are tight to a
stolen vehicle they you know
they've gotten smarter and so
they'll still played that
matches a similar vehicle and
put that on a storm vehicle a
hundred and eighty seven sex
offender heads pressure sex
benefits eighty six missing
persons hits ten extremely
protection orders and for
suspect of terrorist watch
listens
so the rest of my time I just
want to give you all some
examples of how this
technology's been used sensitive
it was installed to help by soft
crime and by itself you're never
going to have somebody charge
with the crime just because of
the license plate reader hit but
what ends up happening in a lot
times it's a bread crumm it's a
that lead that eventually takes
us down the path to have an
arrest in a successful
prosecution back in twenty
twenty wednesday a young man a
teenager who has shot he showed
up to an emergency room with a
gunshot winter is bad.
What happened is he was just
mine his own business someone
came up to car jacket with the
rifle he tried you drove off
trying to get away and they shot
into the vehicle and hit him in
the back the only description
you can give us was a black
charger that was a black dodge
charter.
Fortunately we had a license
plate reader that was close by
there is one black charger that
was in the area at the time
which again is indefinitely but
that's a lead.
We ended up finding this vehicle
when we found it the suspect it
actually had been reported stone
at that point and the suspect in
the rifle used was still in the
vehicle and resulted in that
arrest.
Nr also on twenty twenty two
we had a road rage into there
were a cyclist was shot and he
all he can give was description
the vehicle in a description of
the suspect neither one of those
descriptions was great but the
priloses were able to find a
vehicle that matched that was in
the area they gave that to the
detectives they did some other
work they eventually tracked
down the restaurant owner
interviewed them and that person
confessed to you shooting the
cyclist we're able to make that
arrest
on twenty twenty three we had a
a murder outside of a dispenser
in the parking lot and this
person was just sitting in their
car another vehicle came up
there is an argument and it up
being shot and killed there was
their balance in the parking lot
the dispensery we weren't able
to get a plate but we are able
to get a vehicle description we
are able to see what type of
plate it was what type of new
mexico played it was.
And using the license plate
reader data we are able to get a
suspected vehicle and with a lot
of other investigative work tie
that specific vehicle to the
homer sides.
Or shoot a harmosite in result
in some arrests.
And twenty twenty three this is
for multi jurisdictional
obviously los crucial says very
close to a parcel we have a lot
of criminals that go back and
forth and commit crimes in both
locations in twenty twenty three
i'll pass out a bank robbery and
they knew that a white kiss all
was involved they're actually
able to get the license plate
their system only shows the
license place so they couldn't
get a picture of the whole
vehicle we're able to search
that vehicle was in los crucials
determine that the plate on that
vehicle is actually stolen from
another kiss all but a different
year and detectors did some good
work we're able to backtrack
find the right plate for that
vehicle give that information to
a passive pity who alternate was
able to make the arrest on the
bank robbery.
And twenty twenty four last year
we had a homicide at what we
refer to incorporation park in
the north satellite crucist and
a man was killed his he was
dumped in this park and some
people that the part found him
and called us.
There are some evidence on
seemed that indicated that his
vehicle had been present and was
used in the homicide.
We knew from license play reader
that we had in the area that the
vehicle entered that area at
about the time of the harmosite
but as far as we can tell do not
leave or did not leave the same
way and so we were hopeful that
their vehicle was still in the
area we can miss the
neighborhood and found the
vehicle abandoned and then we're
able to find on a third party
video like a reincamera a video
of the suspect dumping the
vehicle and ultimately identify
the suspect you may that arrest.
Going back to all passo and
twenty twenty four that
in attempting kidnapping at a a
strip on a password I was this
vehicle as possibly involved in
another attempt to kidnapping at
the ross for marshalls parking
lot in los crucials.
And they weren't able to give a
great description although the
vehicle is very unique the type
of vehicle in some
distinguishing characteristics
are we able to find a vehicle
that were very company and match
based on some decals and some
other things give that
information to all passable pd
for a follower and what could
have been a very very serious
case.
I'm gonna final one going to
property crime that just
happened about a month ago we
had a series of commercial
bergers primarily at auto zones
and discount tool stores both in
our parcel and los crucials
again.
And we are able to or a password
was able to get a license plate
that they believed was involved
in one of their burglaries.
And
from that we're able to
establish kind of a timeline of
win their active and lost
crucials compare that to the
burglary times we are seen in
los cruces and then established
kind of an immo when they were
they were hit in these stores
are detective set up on several
of our auto zones and we're able
to actually cash the suspect in
the act of committing a
commercial burgery and arrest
them
are within each of these are
paired in a argenery to vote as
we've seen some are better than
others but I think they kind of
paint the picture of
how important this technology is
in this is just a sampling
there's a lot of examples
especially when we talk about
auto theft los cruises
unfortunately based on the
twenty twenty two and I see the
numbers was number eighteen at a
three hundred and ninety
metropolitan statistical areas
for auto theft in the country
albuquerque we were six and
santa fe was up there as well
and so this technology has
really transformed how we
respond to auto theft which.
Helps people also helps with
insurance rates and there's a
lot of other answer benefits to
it thank you madame chair
members of the committee turn
over the share.
A good afternoon madam chairman
committee so honored to be in
front of you today to explain
this technology and what the
berlin county sheriff's office
is doing it as you know my name
is sheriff john I represent the
great constituents of bernie
county where we do have a crime
epidemic and technology in our
areas the utmost importance to
our agency and also the agencies
that surround us but also were
finding not only regionally but
also nationally I also serve in
the governor's organized crime
commission and that is going to
international and in different
countries so this technology
does help with us so we start it
with acts on and flock back in
twenty twenty three and I say
acts on a flock and I I by for
cape those because to explain to
you we have fixed cameras which
right now we have five in berlio
county right now there are
sixteen in the process that
there is usually a consistent
hold up with the department of
transportation in reference to
permitting to see where these
fixed cameras go so that does
take us a while and it's held us
back for for a little bit a
hundred and eighty four fleet
three cameras and i'll explain
those are in the front of each
of our deputy's mark petrol
units as well as our auto theft
units and what those do is
capture license plate two and
from crime scenes and also is
flock representative and chief
story has explained the the
captures and the license plate
that it has and it comes off of
a hot list in an alert I will
give you an example here in a
bid on something that we signed
to south valley at the wall
martin how we set a perimeter
and we actually turned into a
deli for situation
the case number so everybody
knows with an official reason
you have to have an official
reason to look into the flock
system are the case number is
entered and you will see on the
slides as you start going
through them you will see at the
bottom where it starts with the
so two five zero six zero zero
zero and so on that's an example
of the case number that we have
the reason that we have that so
we can track each deputies
detectives and what everybody is
actually looking at.
And the reason we do that is
because we want to insure and
make sure that we are very
meticulous with who is looking
at him the reason why and many
concerns that constituents and
all of you have who are we
sharing data with why are we
sharing data with them why
recross injuries dictional lines
and our making sure that
people's constitutional rights
are kept so that's the reason
for that internal audits every
thirty days we have it in my
intel unit I have a lieutenant
sergeant who looks at each one
of these entries.
Who it is and why are they
looking at to make sure that
we're consistent
two weeks ago I actually hired
on an actual compliance officer
who was also looking at all of
our technology that were
bringing and also making sure
that when we're testing fine in
front of you that we have the
appropriate information and the
appropriate facts when you have
a question at any time just not
in front of a committee I
standard operating procedure
have this up here for for me now
it's in reference to our
artificial intelligence that I
just introduced yesterday at the
sheriff's office we always start
with so you know we just don't
put it out their taller deputies
earning units we make sure that
we have a certain amount of
deputies stills are pretty much
our testing deputies because we
want to see what problems the
issues we have are one of the
reasons I partnered with
flockers isn't his presentation
they're very meticulous and
careful with data sharing of the
parameters and also to make sure
that people's privacy is kept
and most importantly that we own
our own information and it's not
them to sell that's very
important for us as opposed to
other vendors and so you can
move on in in reference to
everything else that we do with
technology and next like please.
As I go into the next slide with
the a l p r alerts and and
bernaly a county we have caught
to be completely transparent
along with the extensive so p
and disciplinary issues we did
catch one deputy about eight
months ago using the technology
in the wrong way and that
alerted us immediately that
deputy was cut off from the
system itself a deputy not only
discipline I believe we need to
make sure that we teach we are
human but making sure that it
wasn't something that fares
which it wasn't how they went
against their standard operating
procedure was new technology of
a dollars also use an example of
what not to do so we can move
and be transparent with the
systems that we utilize in
berlio county as you can see on
the numbers they're pretty
extensive and they they've gone
up as of today a stolen vehicle
is what we've had is five
hundred ninety vehicles as
you've heard the chief say we're
always in the top ten if not the
top six in alba kirki and berlio
county for the n I c b for the
amount of stone vehicles and
auto theft custom heartless
alerts two hundred and sixty
five and that's very important
on that at two hundred and sixty
four was a case that came from
another state that was entered
that we share data with another
state it went on to a hot list
and it was involved in a harmer
side and that that vehicle was
being pretty much tracked
through states on the flock
system coming towards us.
All of a sudden it alerted us on
real brother in the south valley
which is pretty rare our auto
theft was alerted to it we
verified and had probable cause
not reasonable suspicion and
verified who that heartless
belong to and what the warrant
was foreign if it was signed by
district court judge in their
jurisdiction it was it was an
active arrest war for a
homicide.
We knew that the vehicle then
pulled into the walmart in the
south alley off of course in
real bravo due to this system in
this technology this allowed
great time for my auto theft
dependence and deputies to start
clear in the area and setting a
perimeter to keep innocent by
standards out of the way in case
it determined to a deputy
involved shooting which it did
as soon as my auto theft units
pulled up an unmarked vehicles
along and coincided with mark
vehicles immediately the
occupant of the vehicle pulled
out a firearm and then within
the confrontation or dynamics
then he continued to get ready
the point out to self and in
exchange of gunfire with my
deputy this person was deceased
of course loss of life as the
last resort we always want to
attribute any law enforcement
activity to but we did save some
lives in the parking lot and we
did take someone technically
into custody but unfortunately
it turned out into a a death
situation a non own custom hot
list alerts or seventy nine
ganger suspected terrorist or
four I can't get into those
because of the organized crime
commission information I just
want to give you a number of
violent persons are at two total
hot list alerts or one thousand
nine hundred and seventy five
that is a significant amount for
every agency in the nation that
is going up significantly stolen
plates five hundred and eighty
five that is very important on
stolen plates because it is a
different statute in reference
to stolen places that pose to an
auto theft we want to make sure
that we're not escalating the
situation and we are not also
want to make sure that not just
our technology but our tactics
fights for what is going on we
don't want you know for instance
a family member who was born a
vehicle who does not know that
there's a stolen plate on the
vehicle and my deputies are
putting someone of older or
younger at a fellow you stop and
point him out on the street in
front of the public we want to
make sure that are our tactics
are are on point in this
technology helps us with that
sex offenders i'm in charge of
sex offender registration in
berlio county once again these
are going up significantly these
were never at one fifty two.
Unfortunately what the proactive
policy that we're doing online
and then we enter these into hot
list and we look for someone who
have scans from a sex warrant
warrant these are going up and
are actually going to different
state so that is something
that's very important for us to
data share with other agencies
to tell him a sex offender from
our area that we are looking for
is coming to their area and we
make sure and you'll see later
here we have an example for you
when a court gives us an order
to take them into custody this
allows us to do so a missing
persons
flock just explain this a
hundred and thirty one and this
is a big deal.
It's such a big deal I just
added personality who are
missing persons if you even look
at our social media I think
we're getting two or three a
week of alerts whether it's a
silver alert are missing person
and adopted child and in turn
from other regions and across
jurisdictional boundaries those
were coming in to us cpicy that
I won't get into that as well
with canadians you're going to
ask why to heck are we sure with
canadians that's as also
organized crime commission and
also has to do a terrorism
something and I won't get into
detail with but I want to be
transparent in the number of
that we have next like please.
The.
Yeah.
I will get into this too much in
detail I think i've explained a
little bit and so is the chief
it's very important in it this
is the the most beneficial tool
for auto theft we also think of
a crime but I also think and the
business side on what are we
doing as a sheriff's office or
what are we doing is law
enforcement in general to ensure
for all of you and I hear all of
your hearings when it comes to
finances what are we doing the
help negate auto theft and bring
insurance rates down for the
constituents that we all serve
at this technology does help
with that we are recovering a a
great amount of vehicles along
with other technology and we're
also trying to make a dint and
make sure that we're not in the
top six this is a low bar to set
I I would love to see us only in
the top ten and then start
moving up from there we are
making progress in this
technology helps us with that
when we try to attempt to locate
a sole vehicle as explained
before the a r p r hits for us
and immediately we send it
numerous deputies into the area
to saturate the area just to see
where that vehicle is I am all
about liability and public
safety I want to do everything
we can to make sure that we're
not getting into a pursuit
pursuit situation we also have
different tactics that we use
with the burning or county
sheriff's office I do not want
to have a pursuit going down
real bravort a hundred and ten
miles an hour or even on the
interstate which we've had at a
hundred and thirty this
technology helps us with that I
want to locate it now we will
use any type of strategic
planning like explain at the
walmart it will make an
apprehension of the offender and
I would be happy to say it's a
very high percentage that most
of these go down with not a lot
of violence I believe I explain
when I was first elected in
twenty twenty three I forgot
which committee I was on and I
told you that I was very worried
and I did the auto theft unit
created it that are deputy
involved shootings would go up
then they have not y because of
tactics in this technology next
slide please.
Something a lot of people.
Nates bother me personally just
and as a sure if they abducted
children in berlio county and in
the nation is going up
a lot something that we don't
like to see so what can we do to
negate this right away it's
about the short term benefit of
recovering that child and
bringing them back to safety a
flock has done this we've had
many cases I showed you the
numbers june fifth a case study
that we have we are adapted to a
five year old child it was the
biological father but we had
custodily interference so right
away because of the nature of
his violence the judge ordered
us to pick them up and we had to
track a person and put it in a
hot list which we've explained
in that person's vehicle and the
heartless did hit and we were
able to take that father into
custody and also recovered the
child unfortunately because of
family dynamics that child was
in release to other people and
see why if he had to become
involved.
Aggravated assault the deadly
weapon and of duction of a child
I put two of these in there to
show you just not about
technology but what we're seeing
a law enforcement we always
discuss homicides of violent
crimes but a lot of people
quickly forget about property
crime in the safety of our
children we're seeing children
and sex crimes go up especially
at the burning of county
sheriff's office so again we're
using this technology to help us
again the suspect flood in a
blue for pick up as flock
explained before a precision
based police in is very
important to the sheriff's
office it's just not about a
license plate if we can look at
someone covers a license plate
they they tape it they just saw
coming up here in santa fe
county two vehicles with very
dark tenth on the back of a
license plate we can now also
when putting a hot list the
description of the vehicle with
very specific characteristics
what to look for because as I
will tell you if we're looking
for a silver vehicle all of a
sun you'll see numerous silver
vehicles we want to make sure
we're not just overpolicing but
when we start to do that we want
to make sure that we're not
doing traffic stops and it's the
wrong person where violating
someone civil civil rates I
can't give you a number on
probably the amount of lawsuits
that we have negate it from this
technology i'd like to research
that but I will tell you as the
sheriff and from being here and
since two thousand one to
surface office are liability in
our losses have gone down
significantly in many areas
because of this technology
next slide if it's just the last
one.
And that is it thank you for
your time.
Um thank you for your
presentation gentlemen and first
we'll have representative
martinez.
Thank you madame chairman thank
you all for a for what you do
every day.
But I wanted to take the time to
thank you I just have a few
questions mister chandler.
You talked about.
The thirty day.
Retention.
The.
What happens if it if an
investigation goes long thirty
days are you able to access.
Any of that information.
Or is it.
Is does it just drop off the
system.
Thank you for that madam chair
and representative martinez if
unless the
the data is downloaded before
the thirty days it will be hard
to leave so if you find out
about a crime on day thirty one
you will no longer have access
to the data because it will have
been hard deleted and so that's
why some cities decide to do
more than thirty days but thirty
days is the general best
practice currently.
Thinking man mr challenge of
there is the the op.
If the vehicle's part of it and.
Yeah.
Manage a question for.
Yeah.
You talked about.
The the ability to share
information with.
Or they on the same system and
how how does that work.
Being minutes it's.
What are the issues that you're
seeing.
Thank you matter representative
martinez
so i'll pass a pity actually had
a separate system they just went
to flock so now that we both
have flock we have the option of
sharing our information with
each other we set the parameters
that we can share just with an
investigation status without
only be detective or something
similar to that position that
can search it but because we
have that now we have the
ability to share directly before
what would have to happen is
their investigators would
contact our investigators we
talk about it we would conduct a
search for them and then provide
them any information that was
relevant to their investigation.
Great I I was just curious about
the.
Just actual questions if that
post.
A problem sharing this.
I appreciate that I mean it's
always.
The the more communication you
can have.
The.
Better for are solving some of
these crimes
my last question for sure if
alan
I was just curious on.
The alport alerts and bring your
county for tw.
Talk about custom heartless and
non owned custom heartless would
what's the differen.
So the custom heartless would be
some specific to a missing a
child with the description of a
certain vehicle those are custom
hot list or you can do it to a
group and say hey we're coming
out of a certain area where
wherever it is in your region
we're looking for a certain
amount of auto recovery from say
an accurate or we are looking
for five homicide vehicles are
violent offenders those are
custom heartless and also the
non ones are from not from our
agency there from other agencies
across jurisdictional lines it's
just when they request on the
turn when they request
information from us they must
put a reason into the system and
a case number to be verified so
we're making sure that they're
not looking for something that
we don't agree with.
And I I don't know if you can
answer my last question but you
raised a point about the issues
with.
Um and i'm having this issue in.
In rearential.
And maybe it's a question for
sector certain but I don't
understand.
Why there's an issue why.
An automatic approval.
You can comment on that but but
i'm very curious because I just
ran into this issue.
And reerentual and highway.
Madam chair sitter martinez I I
do have a direct line to mr not
the bottom too much.
To be up front with you the
latest probably for about
fourteen months to get our al
pier as they told you it in
october of twenty twenty three
we started and then in october
twenty four twenty twenty four
that's about a year out so and
when I spoke there was too much
red tape at the state level at
the department of
transportation.
We thought that it was cleared
up and we gave suggestions to
the governor's office the
sixteen cameras that I mentioned
we only have five but we're
going to get sixteen more fixed
we're we're hitting the same
road blocks once again so at
this point I I try not to call
it with my title to the
governor's office I try to let
my person will work out with it
but it keeps coming up to the
same hurdle I don't believe that
it has been fixed I do know that
the rear ratchet police
department because they have
called us and other agencies
have called me personally to try
to help with that we're all face
in the same thing
it's to the point now to wear
other competitors as flock as
sitting next left to me they're
trying to figure out how to get
past all of these hurdles and
that have to go through
permitting through the state
because it has been so difficult
and it has been holding back and
even helping with crime as
success stories that we're not
able to succeed as an agency.
Thinking about the chairman
thank you survived I just think
this is the case of.
Um.
Self imposed bureaucra.
Secretary.
For my case and rearrention
we're talking about.
It's just a smart thing to do
it's gonna save lives.
Sometimes you know.
I I work twenty six years and
state government that I
understand the need for some
bureaucracy but there is some.
Me but I appreciate.
I appreciate the work you're
doing.
Thank you for a
for bringing this technology to
the mexico.
In on the madame chair and
representative martinez on the
permitting uh aspect I can tell
you flock takes permanently
extremely seriously we have a
team of over sixty people at
fault focus just on permitting
and the
overlapping rates of way and all
of the dynamics there and we're
committed to doing it right
whereas others are simply
committed to doing it and so we
work to be as effective a
partner with DO t's in all all
their eccentricities across the
country.
Our next will be unrepresented
gonzalez and there's seven
people epable on a list so we
want to keep these answers and
questi.
Um thank you madame chair and
thank you so much for your
presentation I think
representative martinez actually
tackled one of my questions was
specific by inner agency
corporation in jurisdiction what
that I guess my question is the
more being that i'm.
A rule legislator out there I
know you talked about running on
county taxpayer city of us
crucials um do you have any sort
of listing or maybe sort of any
like a statewide mapping of
agencies that are using this
technology particularly you know
area that we are having with law
enforcement is of course.
Using the state please local
share of your covering a large
geographic area that some of
this technology could be really
helpful um it may be cost
prohibitive you're talking about
the permitting issues which were
definitely translated going out
into a state areas state roads
but just curious as far as the
spread and I and I could
envision technology like this
really working in some of those
rural areas to try to capture
allowed especially when you
don't have regular police think
just due to just to staff
shortages and when that um I
think this could help capture a
lot of information and capture
out a really relate valuable
data but so just maybe just
maybe some inside on statement
being and then also possibly
that permitting issue would
extend out into some of the
state white areas thank you
manager yes madam chair in
member games all as
representative goods all is
would be happy to provide you
the full list of the agencies
that we're working with in the
the map there as well for your
the entire committee.
Think you represent everything
right next senator work worth
thank you madame chair and I
appreciate the presentation.
Uh so I carried a bill on this
issue the last two sessions I
first became aware of the issue
listening to a santa be city
council meeting and hearing our
law enforcement there talking
about all the good things that
come with this
but then kind of realizing that
there's no guard rails and so it
was I think this is a
particularly appropriate hearing
today after hearing the a I
presentation because what we're
hearing is all the good things
that come with their sent and I
there is no question this is a
very valuable tool but there
also are no guard rails right
now in new mexico and so I just
want to clear up my couple
things and and let me say up
front I I appreciate very much
share violent immediately
reached out with talked I think
there's room to reach a
compromise on this and it needs
to happen and I I think I can
ask some questions
kind of indicate why we need to
do something here.
Uhm as I understand it basically
what i'm hearing mister
channeller is that you don't own
any of this data it's each
individual agency and sell i'm
correct am I not that any law
enforcement they could decide to
sell the data to a third party.
Of their choice correct there's
nothing in the law that prevents
them from making that individual
decision as that correct i'm not
an expert in new mexico or local
laws so it could be prohibited
but I personally not an expert
in the laws regarding bond
forest points ability to sell
data so amount here I believe
that without some kind of guard
rails here that data could be
sold and you're not your agency
is is doing this the right way
it feels like and I and I really
appreciate that's mostly using
this service but nothing would
prevent.
Someone on the east side from
selling this data to a private
investigator from selling it to
another state that's interested
in who's coming to there to the
new mexico for a certain medical
procedure
so I just think that the data is
an important issue that we need
to kind of put some guard rails
on
tell me a little more so the
transparency portal sounds like
a great thing that you are from
curious that share up and chief
to you all use.
They're transparency portal.
The.
Manager senator worth yes we do
we have transport through axon
through flock we are always
willing to give out any
information are to be completely
transparent again on the
transparent person and ever
request came through two weeks
ago are from the eco u and I
denied it the reason I denied it
and gave part to him was there
are trying to find out exactly
which state and what information
we were giving to that state and
why we requested it and I could
not because of the cartels that
we were dealing with an albert
kurki area
you mentioned guard rails and
and parameters when you say
selling it that worries me a
little bit of hoping that no law
enforcement is doing that but to
begin with is yes we can give
information to another law
enforced an entity whomever it
is but at the same time we have
a own rules and so p that that
other agency if it doesn't meet
our sopian rules within we do
not give them that information
so the elephant in a room is if
it's someone is coming across
state lines from texas in mexico
for women's health care we will
not give them that information
at all.
And mountain and I appreciate
that and I think share of your
your you're doing this the way
that it should be done but the
reality is nothing prevents a
different agency from having a
different interpretation and
that's why I think this this
legislation is important I just
one final thing I want to kind
of highlight is the time period
and again you mentioned mister
chandler that flocks thirty days
is the recommended but nothing
prevents an agency from using
flock and saying I want to
retain it for a hundred and
eighty.
Correct yes it's a thirty days
is a general best policy but
some do one eighty some do five
years but overall thirty days
has proven to be
according to the enforcement
that we work with have the
greatest efficacy in
investigating crimes well
balancing the desire for privacy
and just amount your cheap story
I think you said you are doing
thirty days and in los crucial
can I get that right manager
that's that's correct and.
I think thirty days has a
potential to at some point by
using the but if there's an
investigation we're not meeting
to say we find a someone who has
been killed and they've been
there for a long time and it's
been sixty days that has not
happened and i'm aware of since
twenty twenty one so that's what
we do thirty days has worked for
us so far and member just
quickly made sure you mentioned
thirty days but also ninety days
on another system yes madam
chair and senator worth we used
ninety days for what chief story
was saying it's worries me at
thirty days and we hit someone
and thirty one days in its
permanently deleted
in and I was talking doing a
legislative session also with
epr request that we receive
animals also worried about
exculbatory evidence so I would
like to go beyond the thirty
days.
Don't mean i'm sure I just think
those highlight the questions
highlight some of the issues
that are out there and again I
really appreciate the way you're
two agencies are doing this and
that's clear that a flock is
doing this and a way clip best
standards I get that sense where
the thirty days is enough
whether it's too much I think we
need to have that discussion and
we should put something in
statute so that other law
enforcement that are looking at
this as it goes rural as
representative in solicitors
requesting that there's just the
rules that are there because
otherwise which just kind of
wild west
madam chair and senator worth
just think you for your
leadership on that legislation
we at flock have always
committed to being authentic
partners and figuring out what
that balances in we very much
look forward to working with you
representative chandler not
related about about finding that
balance and we're committed to
that
think you send it an excess
senator burgmans thank you
manager and thank you for being
here sheriff and chief and for
the work that you do for all of
our communities cheap story I
just wanted to focus on one part
of what you said about the
access that the el passo police
department has you said that the
lcp had around the searches
previously cause i'll pass out a
different system and now that
all parcel will have flock how
does that work will they
automatic if the if they ask you
for access will they have access
to your the elc pd's database or
does someone within your
department still have to run
that search for them.
Madame chair matterby sure
so it depends on how it set up
so the examples I gave was prior
to that so we had to run the
search is formed now that they
have flock we have granted
access for a parcel pd to have
access to our system to run
their own searches it is limited
to investigating personnel only
and they still have to provide
the reason so the item can be
conducted.
And just i'm curious how
recently did the switch over to
flock.
I believe within the night of
days for sure sixty nine days.
I totally agree with senator
worth that we need some
parameters around this whole
system based on the different
jurisdictions across the state
just to make sure there's some
sort of guidelines that
everyone's following
sharevellen.
Or sorry mr channel it start
there so private entities are
able to purchase flock cameras
correct.
Correct
okay so the neighborhood
association was to purchase a
flock camera system is that feed
and that database or is that
neighborhood associated able to
access the data does I go
straight to the law enforcement
interviews thank you for that
question madam chairman of my
sure note no if in h o a for
instance our neighborhood
association chooses to buy flock
or per lease these flock cameras
they would have to enter into an
agreement with the law
enforcement agency it doesn't
happen automatically again we we
make no automatic decisions on.
And when it comes to a private
customer and law enforcement it
is only one way that's the the f
b I just standards mandates that
and that's how we handle all of
our our data and so they may in
for retailers that use flark
they have specific reasons such
as organized retail theft in and
that sort of thing and they can
use it for their own individual
purposes while at the same time
going into an agreement with
their law enforcement agency
saying you know if if a car on a
hot list passes by one of our
cameras we will allow your
agency to get the alert so you
know.
You want to have some yeah he
current madam chair amount of
vice sure how that's one of the
reasons that a partner with lock
as we have multiple neighbored
associations in the incorporated
areas the east mountain works
rule because we understand that
they don't have the technology
sufficient enough to fight crime
and be ahead of it are also
within a north south alley and a
lot of people are partnering
with us because of the
presentation and the safety it
brings with the floor system.
I'm at least going to hear that
it has a a law enforcement
agreement um
representative martinez was
touching on an interesting
aspect that I hadn't heard of
before which mean me wonder also
what is the policy for camera
placement and is the dot and
charge of that replacement.
Manager managed here it depends
if it's a dot right away then
the permanent has to go through
the maxi department
transportation and so in the
city like philosophers is many
of our major arteries are also
doing a roadway so permanently
sometimes has to go through the
city los cruises and do your to
place it there.
And but these cameras cannot
offer beyond our patrol cover
also driving around management
manifest there's two separate
system there's many different
systems out there so there is
the fixed camera which
traditionally is what we're
talking about of a lot cameras
and then there are mobile aprs
which are from times were tied
to a dash camera two getting
dash camera video and it's at
the same time it's a license
plate right.
Thank you and I have I do a lot
of other questions but I will
not go through all of them but
one less one share valid since
you mentioned someone within
your department miss using a
access to these data bases it
sounds like there is an internal
policy.
And i'm also wondering if lcp
has a similar internal policy
madam chairman adviser yes i'll
be for reapplement any
technology along with their test
group we already have a standard
operating procedure in place and
then during this testing time we
always make adjustments for
what's good and we're here in a
lot of good but we always know
that something affairs is
something that could happen so
we want to make sure that we
negate any of that in the future
so yes so we did catch it going
against their standard operating
procedure and it proved us also
or thirty day audit worked and
it also improved that we needed
a couple more internal factors
in oversight in there which
we've created.
A matter of management sure yes
I think and going back to center
worth point the most of us are
not opposed to card else in
wiving implemented those
ourselves and we understand that
not every department may do that
so we're good with guard rules
we just want to make sure we
don't handcuff ourselves and
make the technology so that
we're not able to leverage it in
the way that's optimal for new
mexico but we have a policy that
includes out any procedures
restricting access training and
everything that helps
establish those gardens
great thank you and hopefully we
can have some conversations with
also think you manage here they
considered a nexus
representative thank you madame
couple questions especially to a
sure fell in and and she have
story when you get the right
away from dot is that done
through one of the six dot
districts or does it go to a
central dot headquarters.
Manage your representative so
traditionally it's had to go all
the way up from the district all
the way up to santa fe now this
hasn't I haven't seen this
happen yet but last week I was
informed that secretary was able
to push down and create a new
process where it's going to be
handled at the district level I
believe starting with district
too so my hope is that this
conversation is irrelevant in
the next few weeks and it kind
of works yourself out the the
secretary transfer secretary in
the dps secretary of and working
together to try to resolve these
issues.
So right now it's all about
santa fe but hopefully shortly
all the districts will be that
will be handled at the district
level
thank you
two or questions quickly he
mentioned there's fixed cameras
sharpen you said you want to
have fourteen fixed cameras does
the b c s o also have mobile
cameras in cut in some of the uh
squad cars
madam chair representative gear
yes we have right now five fixed
cameras and then we are in the
process of adding sixteen more
fixed cameras currently we have
a hundred and eighty four mobile
cameras which is our axon fleet
three dollars will as a people
power go up they will increase
and I also want our auto theft
their funus to have it because
the alpr also comes along with
the dash camera and I want to
make sure we have dash camera to
record every event that we have
so it will go up thank you so
many that means you can more
quickly locate these people in
them as question is she story or
or share
you mention that there were ten
extreme risk protection order
issues what is happening with
someone with their ball that you
need to track them.
Manager representative yearning
the share of my bill to give a
different answer
minor saying is that is not
necessary the same thing that we
call extremely protection or new
mexico so I don't think it's
specific to firms I think these
are what we would call her
strain in order in our common
and accurate are entered into
ncin typically it's not any
action that she would have to
take is just a notification that
that person has is a restraint
party and so
let's see
there's a place a business you
know that the restraint party
works out in that you get that
alert and they're right there
that would allow law forcement
that you might have an issue or
violation of that restriction
madam sure representative
reference per to protection
orders for domestic violence we
have a lot where people are
violating specifically the
offender and sometimes the
respondent and when the judge
gives an order for violation of
a restraint order that's when we
can then put the vehicle into a
custom heartless and make an
arrest and effective through the
courts great thanks for that
clarification.
Next senator pity.
I think you madam chair and
thank you for the presenter
scotch and and the wonderful
work that that all of you do in
your staff and all the people
I leave had a light in las cruce
is going on and I just you know
my heart goes out to your
community
the madame chair share if you
just do a wonderful job in my
area slowed those traffic with
those speeders down on real
bravo when you said a hundred
and ten driving on on real brave
while I was harking back to the
day the guy flew through the
trailer on the street without
all the online just anyway but
thank you so much for all the
work you do you know I go to the
peter worth school of law once
in a while every year at least a
couple times a year and I had a
whole slower question to came up
I won't go through all of them
either much like the vice chair
said but you just maybe i'll
just call them out a little bit
but so I guess if you're if you
were a.
In a perpetrator or your of a
victim of some crime or
something the thirty days plus
reminus might help you on your
case or it might help convict
somebody that might get on the
other side of whatever so i'm
just trying to find how that's
going to work you don't have to
answer in example it's going to
just kind of throw like some of
the chair wants to keep moving
when I hear that when I see the
word underlined on page ten
in the first of all that they
are never I will never be sold
to a private third party I guess
how do you know that you know
i'm i'm really trying to figure
that on out cause anything's
possible do you want to talk a
little bit about that or yeah
madame chairman center pretty
bold statement it is and we make
very clear it's one of the
things that sets us apart
contractually in every single
contract we have with every
single agency we make a
perfectly clear that we do not
will we will not sell data that
is legally binding contractual
that's you know in today's
tac environment is
understandable that folks would
assume oh you have all the state
so you're going to sell it to an
advertiser whatever we do not
make our money doing that we are
business is successful based on
selling a service at two
customers not on selling
customer data and we've drawn
that line in the same so we will
not sell data I appreciate that
madam chair up I I believe that
a company you might have heard
of twenty three and me that they
kind of said that too and then
all the sudden we found out that
you know my third cousins have
found out who all them were you
know so
did we want to but
and then it's let's just say
there's two agencies that need
the information to to law
enforcement who's gonna win on
on the timing of the of the
perging of the data so you can't
play to figure that out also
and then with would this some of
this technology work on these
mobile speed cameras I know
that's one of the ways that the
share for slow down the speeding
in my area in a couple of areas
can can you slap this on those
machines as well and in this app
is that allowable to be heard in
in in a court room if that ever
has ever needed that.
Uh starts you don't have an
example location where those are
sometimes now I will scott your
honor so I get just got it madam
chair
I heard on the radio great by
the driving things
not yes so the the sixteen
fixed.
Cameras that we have flock was
able to give a sixteen cameras
for for fixed cameras along with
the speed cameras that are in an
incorporated areas but it's
under my direction where we can
place them appropriately because
we have a lot of complaints
about saled in our day and tram
way that we're trying to make
sure that we're spreading them
out evenly I don't want to put
it in just one area I don't want
to overpolice also but I also
want to look at data just not
crash data but all the speeding
complaints that we're collecting
that's for those fixed cameras
will go
okay well and thank you for the
cameras you really slowed me
down by the way so i'm just
gonna say that out well and then
you know I I have a bunch of
questions too i'll just follow
up with you share because I have
your number we we can be spoke
recently if you might recall
after a job for a held recently
the last thing so would two
license played to be helpful
with this technology if we had
one on the front of the vehicle
should we just maybe look I know
people are really cannot I was
going to drop that one and then
leave then leave the room but
but it just seems to me like
that would be extremely helpful
to it to all your efforts right.
Turn us on at the same time
madam chair senator yes speak
for you I think all law
enforcement would like front in
the back license plate and the
reason for that and a serious
matter is we do know that
criminals are smart at times and
they will try to do anything so
we don't catch the license plate
then we of course go to the
description of the vehicle but
it would make it more efficient
and it would also make sure that
the license plates match because
I mentioned five hundred and
eighty four five hundred eighty
five stolen plates that would be
very difficult to still both
plates in a matter time we know
they're going to start
mismatching i've seen it for
years in different states that
utilize the two plates so that
would actually help
enforcement
cheap maps you're sure to sat
one their agree with the sheriff
but that actually stretch out
these resources for us right now
we have to use two cameras on
most roadways because we don't
have a front sort of to get
traveled coming and going we
have to use two cameras we have
the potential that maybe we only
have to use one camera but that
other cameras somewhere else
which would make it more cost
effective for agencies yet just
seems like it would be helpful
and then you'd have you know
exponentially a larger
opportunity to catch whatever
you're trying to find there so
I might want some bunch of
people in this room to help cost
once or a bill on something like
that if anybody wants to join
this very unpopular move you
know i'm never scared to do
these ones again I get my room
kicked you know on some of these
but but I really think we should
consider it because it just
seems like it would be helpful
thank you chair
thank you senator and I would
love to join you on that bill
next is representative loohing
thank you very much think you
gentlemen
because you're doing an
exceptional java a new buy
all the committee meetings were
having another things i'm
reading but I on this subject
matter
as I was driving to albuquerque
last week I just heard that you
know commentary on one of the
local stations radio stations in
the complain about the cameras
so they must be working
that their cat you know the
speeding in certain areas and an
albuquerque so.
But it was good for me to know
as I was driving around and you
were not to speak but I actually
drive pretty slow
but I have to agree with it are
worth in some of the in their
where are those those boundaries
that we need to create and as I
was you know kind of relating
this to what he was saying you
know some of the questions that
I in
mean being is the the the public
privacy issue and and where in
public spaces may
civilians feel that they're
their privacies being infringed
and what are those expectations
of a privacy specially with
sensitive areas like home you
know that private homes
hospitals in schools so do you
have any kind of policy in place
now that in regards to those
sensitive areas and and maybe
those that have some kind of
protection witness protection or
um but particularly our
juveniles mister chair.
As was first mentioned in an
opening statements today.
A manager represents the hundred
I think you know right now these
are placed on major roadways
generally speaking of roadways
themselves are not placed at
hospital schools or other places
like that.
There a lot of times being
driven by both crash out and
crime data to for making a
decision where replacement we
don't have near these many
cameras as I would like so we
have to make prioritise and
based on those two thousand two
things crashed out and crime
data
you know my argument will always
be that these are reading a
license plate which is already
visible to public view any
public location and so although
some people are disagree it's
gathering data that we don't
have a reasonable expectation of
privacy to
in the reality officers aren't
seen it and less there some
cause to see it so I drive past
at least one every single day
and my personal vehicle or in my
work vehicle doesn't even cross
my mind because I know how it's
being used and I have the luxury
of knowing that exactly how the
did has been used and not being
used.
So I don't know that answers
your question representative but
they're their placed in areas
based on crime data and crash
data to help I solve crime in
mitigate crashes and is really
only being used for those two
purposes and for missing persons
madam chair and representative
there are I would and push back
a little bit on the schools and
explain why animate for
hospitals I really don't see a
reason why
in reference to schools there's
two things that I would say is
everyone's going to utilize an
active shooter but I get missing
people from schools also but
just because of my concerns I
would never do that I don't only
suggest that through the aps
school board I think that's up
to the school board members to
make that decision if they
wanted that the license plate
readers don't look at identities
of children or anything of that
nature we do have a lot of sex
offenders and cases that come
out of schools and also
costodial interference but I
would leave that and give that
to the school board for them to
make a decision if they wanted
us to inf.
So I appreciate that there are
some um working policy
uh out of order in north dakota
and the subject matter and how
they're using their data and
what they have legislated so I
would maybe reference you to
that
as far as like uhm.
Most we can say you mentioned
the ever in the public request
of information what is your
policy around I know we have the
state policy that's in force
that you have to respond to
within that time but we have an
exception when it comes to any
kind of crime involvement can
you let us know about that
downstairs yes matter i'm sure
representatively honest when it
came up I I believe two years
ago when myself a center were
spoken about this the iper law
is outdated in its anequated it
does need to be updated when we
are looking at retention I was
worried the way that if her is
written that my agency would be
in violation and specifically
with the public defenders are a
defense attorney for exculatory
evidence so we know just like
the chief said say we had a
retention of fifteen or thirty
days and on the thirty first day
that's completely delete it but
we found the offender and then
we were trying to get more
probable costs to make an arrest
warrant and then a defense
attorney for whatever evidence
in chain of custody we have
that's passed over to defense we
are not able to do that that
does keep me up at night and i'm
not asking for three hundred and
sixty five days i'm just saying
that happy medium hat I don't
want to speak for all
enforcement because a lot of
many won't agree with me
anywhere between thirty and a
hundred twenty days is very
important for us because I don't
want to have what happened in
twenty twenty one when we lost
evidence and in were having a
backtrack and waiting on the
next legislative session to make
adjustments to the bill that
does worry me and we do need to
look at it for a law
even some of the requested I get
in reference to our technology
it works against us i'd like to
look at the last one they visit
her mountain I rep I appreciate
that I just wanted to take a
look a deeper die because you
had mentioned something to the
wanting the extra time in and
we've looked at a lot of april
or type of reform this last
session and I assume we're going
to continue on those lines so
this is important and and
potentially conversation
in coordination with you
mentioned now the school board
but in cornation with you and m.
What is what are your best
practices and and how do you
how do you yeah how do you
facilitate that coordination
madam chair
madam sure representatively
honda.
It's different with the board of
regions and and I will give
something that's
more reason as far as the uni'm
shouldn't happen this past
weekend that don't have anything
to do with license plate readers
it had more to do with our
drawns and what we did as
everybody's work about privacy
and use looking in the backyards
rso p for our drones as we look
on a horizon so I watched it
myself on my phone with our
technology to ensure that our
departies were doing what was
correct and we had a description
of the offender to clear the
capital we clear that campus and
probably save four or five hours
for very swat teams the clear
various buildings and also the
release people and constituents
so they're not in a shelter in
place forever the description in
the clothing was given out which
we do know that the offender
changed but as soon as our drunk
technology looked at the
offender realized it wasn't them
they go right back up to the
horizon and flight somewhere
else as far as was acceptable u
and m has not I spoke to a
region member last night
we give any resource we can at
their discretion but at the same
time state polices in charge of
that capital we are there's just
there to assist they did not
have the technology at the time
so I activated our joint units
to go help and and if we were
kicked out we are kicked out but
anything that's cooperation in
anything to collaborate.
You did you want to add to that
no i've just noted that the
state chief of police noted that
l p r was one of the key tools
used in the UNM shooting and so
they came out insurer I I
appreciate that the the the uh
answers you've given and there's
more to what's going on but I
just want a highlight how we're
having this debate and what or
those pressures are for all of
you and how we are responsible
to respond to them so thank you.
Alright thank you for your
presentation we also heard
something like this in them or
in the different committee chief
what we solar and we heard about
drones and all the things that
are going on I think we're lea-
using technology the way it
should be used that we need to
continue so if funding is an
issue make sure you ask us I
know uh.
Too far I mean sheriff allen
never has a problem with that so
thank you for all you do and we
appreciate you and all your
information you gave us today
thank you.
The.
I had a last presenter searching
with ancient life france and
life in on mars with the
curiosity and perseverance
rovers uhm doctor nina lansa.
Alright thank you and whenever
you already.
Thank you madame chair thank you
for the invitation to present
here I know this is something
that's completely different
and hopefully it'll be a a great
way to end this very long day
so I am going to talk to you
about some of the work that
we're doing I thought i'm
personally doing it los alamos
with many other people and we're
working with the curiosity and
perseverance rovers.
Next like please.
The.
The.
So before I do that I just want
to set the stage a little bit
that idea that there was life on
mars that could have been life
on mars is not a new idea at all
so these are actually two real
new york times headlines one of
them is from nineteen oh six and
it's very definitive there is
life on the planet mars now this
was based on the work of the
astronomer personal lowell who
was making telescope
observations from arizona and he
believed that he could see
changes that look like
architecture in the surface of
mars and he called these canals
he he actually had a whole
hypothesis for what was
happening on the surface now of
course we know now that it
probably was a lens aberration
that was causing him to see
these changes but at the time
you know these were the only
data that we had and indeed he
continued to report you can see
that martians built two immense
comma canals in two years you
know that's a nineteen eleven
i'm so they were quite busy.
So when we we didn't know for
certain that that was what was
going on but when we finally had
the opportunity to land on the
surface of mars people were
understandably very excited
however next lade.
They were very disappointed when
we landed with viking and we saw
a bunch of rocks and dirt I know
i'm a geologist and I will tell
you that rocks and dirt can
actually tell you a lot of
really exciting things but I
know it doesn't quite hold the
candle to an ortion society and
so because of this
disappointment even though the
science was really exciting we
didn't have another mars mission
for another twenty years after
viking it really destroyed the
field.
Next slide.
But this all changed in nineteen
ninety six when a meteorite that
was recovered from aunt article
was determined to be from mars
and not only that it had some
meteorologies in forms inside
them rock that suggested it
could be on micro some kind of
facilised micro life and that
was extremely exciting so I if
you may recall that then
president clinton had a press
conference about this and he
said today rock eight four zero
zero one speaks of the
possibility of life if this
discovery is confirmed it will
surely be one of the most
stunning insights into our
universe that science has ever
uncovered that's heady stuff and
I think it's true but of course
this really mobilised the site
of the community and a lot of
people took a look at this rock
and decided that you know it
wasn't strong enough evidence
you know for a big claim you
need big proof but it didn't get
the community asking the
question will how could we do
this work and it actually
sponded entire field of research
that's astrobiology or
exobiology the search for life
not from earth.
Next line.
So you're probably asking
yourself why do we even care why
do we care if their martians why
do we care if there were
martians what is what is that
matter and the reason is because
by asking this question in we
can answer some really
fundamental critical questions
about ourselves so the first
question we can answer.
Are we alone are we alone in the
universe you know are we here on
earth.
Um I respecial in some way.
I would point out that every
time that humans have thought
that we were very special in
some way we have always been
proven wrong
but that just tells you we need
to we need to ask the questions
and that leads to the next
question.
Where did we come from how does
life develop and how conducive
to life is earth really you know
we think of earth is the perfect
place for life because it is
teaming with life here but we
don't really know anything about
life and what it needs and baby
earth isn't that great after
all.
And so these are really big
questions that we can actually
begin test hypothesis to the
answers to these questions on
mars and that's because it's the
most earth like of our
neighbors.
With the same age very similar
compositions similar histories
although mars is very different
from earth.
Today as it is now i'm so this
is one of the reasons why
studying mars it's not so
distant from studying ourselves
from studying this other planet
we can learn a lot more about
life here on earth next slide.
So we know from our many many
missions both landed an orbital
to mars that mars was habitable
at the right time at a certain
time and so habitable means
supporting life as we currently
understand it.
So now the question is was it
ever inhabited that's a question
we can ask now and so this is
kind of a complicated slight but
bear with me here so we see
essentially a geologic time
skill for both earth and mars on
the left hand side that's the
beginning when the planets for
formed over four point five
billion years ago and then on
the right that's the present day
and the the first thing I want
you to notice is that when we
look at rocks on the surface of
earth they're actually very
young it's because we live in an
incredibly dynamic planet and so
rocks are constantly being
recycled so if you won't go
outside and pick up a random
rock it's probably not really
more than a million years old
which sounds pretty old from a
human standpoint but it's very
young from a planetary
standpoint.
Now if you contrast that with
mars mars has a surface that's
incredibly ancient it's actually
like a museum of geology and it
gives us a window into a time
that we really don't have on
earth.
From the very few rocks we have
that are ancient from earth we
know that life arose very early
in an earth's history about four
billion years ago we're pretty
sure so life has existed for a
long time but we don't really
know the context in which that
life developed where how did it
form in what environments but on
mars these environments are
preserved these habitable
environments are preserved in a
lot more detail so that we can
study these environments that if
they were on earth would have
been inhabited so we don't have
the answer quite yet but this is
one of the reasons why studying
mars really gives us insight to
our own origins here on earth.
Next slide.
Okay so how do we identify these
signs of ancient life in rocks.
There's a number of ways we can
do this we're looking for
potential bio signatures so
those are signals that could be
made by life we say potential
because a lot of these things
can be made by not life but if
you start to see several of them
together at that starts to peter
picture of maybe maybe life was
involved here so there's a
number of things we can look for
of course we can look for
structures and textures you know
a macroscopic structure that we
would all be familiar with is
something like a dinosaur bone
right we could look at that and
say that's a structure that was
probably made by life but we
also see that at the microscale
as well we can see sell walls
that have been preserved in
certain materials as well.
We can look for organic
molituals which is what life is
made out of we can also look for
specific types of minerals that
either form and water or form
because of because of life
itself we all are walking around
with minerals that we drew
ourselves we are all are
carrying in a sociality in mate
of the mineral appetite which is
a fast fate mineral so that's a
another bio signature.
We can also just look at the
chemistry the chemistry of
lights that they're life
typically needs are a separate
amount of certain elements we
like to call them check up so
that's carbon hydrogen oxygen
nitrogen fast for a suffer so
those are things that are
abundant in our life as we
understand it and we can also
look at the isotopes of these
elements that life is using
because it prefers some to
others.
And so these are all things we
can look for but again we need
to have multiple lines of
evidence for actually say this
might be life and it's actually
really hard to assess this
remotely with our spacecraft
instruments so if we had these
samples back in the lab we could
actually do a lot more
systematic analysis we could
repeat analysis and we can even
save some material for future
analysis and i'll come back to
this.
Next slide.
So let's talk a little bit about
our mars rover family that's up
on mars right now so i'm showing
an image that's taken at the jet
proportion laboratory in
pasadena california in the mars
yard where we test are rovers
and so these are at two full
size engineers for scale here
the first mars rover that we
sent was in nineteen ninety six
that was the so journal over as
part of the path finder mission
then in two thousand three we
sent the twin rovers spirit and
opportunity to two different
places on mars at the same time.
And then finally in twenty
eleven we launched the
absolutely massive more science
laboratory or curiosity
I mean you can see it's it's
like sending a laboratory to the
surface of mars it's really
really big and this is a this is
one of the rovers that I work on
and i'll tell you a little more
about and of course not to rest
on our laurels we decided to
send another faternal tlin of
this rover the march twenty
twenty per severance rover which
launched in twenty twenty and
has been roving mars for four
years and i'll just say the land
of her three of curiosity is
next tuesday so it'd be thirteen
years earth hears since we
landed so we've been gathering
data with curiosity for a very
long time which is pretty
exciting.
Next.
So I could tell you a lot about
the instrument pay load but I
want to focus on my favorite one
on curiosity and that is the cam
came instrument now that is the
instrument that's like the head
of the rover it's got a little
cyclops I this was and this is
lead by los alamos item the
principle investigator of this
project I lead a team that is
composed of seventy seven people
all over the world it's actually
a strong collaboration between
the united states and france
it's something we did in
partnership with them we have a
lot of other folks who are
participating in this mission as
well from canada denmark germany
many other countries.
And so this instrument the name
tells you what it does came can
a short for chemistry and camera
so as you might imagine we get
chemistry data and we also take
pictures so the chemistry
technique we used is called
laser induced breakdown spectrus
copy or libs and it's a really
cool technique is essentially we
we can focus a laser at a target
about twenty three feet away
from the rover we don't have to
touch it and we vaporize little
material and we look at the
light that that vaporized
material makes and we can figure
out what elements are in it so
it's just like my childhood
dream come true I work on a
spaceship with lazer saucer
and then we can also take a
picture of where we took that
chemical analysis so we can
actually tell the difference
between you know the light
crystals you see in this picture
versus the dark natrix and so
thus far in the thirteen years
we've been roving mars we've
actually taken over a million
shots which is a million
spectrum it's a huge amount of
data really truly unprecedented
you know in the history of mars
exploration so that a lot of a
lot of information there.
And we've also taken over six
thousand images to go along with
that so lots to learn you know
we've learned a lot but I think
there's still many phd theces to
be written in these data next
slide.
So I could really talk again
forever about what we have
learned in thirteen years but I
just thought I would tell you
about one of the most exciting
things that's most researched we
discovered elemental suffer not
the elements of her but
elemental software and i'll
explain what I mean so we were
just driving a long and we saw
these break tone rocks and we
drove over one and it shattered
so we thought well let's look at
it and then you look inside this
and you see some very
distinctive yellow crystals.
And so that's very very similar
to you know we we can't make a
determination of memorology
based on just the color alone
but we were very excited it's
very unusual so what we found
was that this is entirely sulfer
entirely so we used kemcam and
other chemistry instruments to
determine this and you can see
that um one of my colleagues
spoke to cnn and called the
discovery mind flowing when I
totally agree with that because
it is something we didn't expect
and I can explain why and the
next slide.
So without going to deep into a
chemistry lesson and an
afternoon
you might be to say okay well
what does this mean why do we
care and this is because softer
is the type of element that can
have what is called the
different redox state depending
on the environmental conditions
so what that means is that
depending on the type of um
conditions in the water when it
forms it can form more or fewer
bonds so if you look at the type
of minerals being made you can
say something very specific
about the environment which meet
it.
And so when we look at software
on mars and there's quite a bit
we usually see oxidised suffer
so that would be something like
gipsum so what white sands is
made out of that's a lot of
chipson and that's oxidized
sulfur and it makes a lot of
sense because we live in a very
oxidized environment here on
earth with all the oxygen and
the atmosphere now on mars you
know it's a pretty oxodising
place so that's not unexpected
in some martian meteorites we've
seen some very reduce offer
which makes sense maybe that
came from a time before you know
mars had as much water it's hard
to say could be from a volcano
but what we don't see is so far
right in the middle that's
softer that is not bonding to
anything but itself.
That's really unusual and
typically so that it means it's
not an equal library and with
its environment so how is it how
is it existing there what
happened because it wasn't
formed in today's environment.
There are multiple ways you can
get this type of material on
earth you see this at volcanoes
if you've ever been to the um
hemes all for springs you could
actually see some of this yellow
material around the fumerals
you know you see this when you
have organic material that's
mixed with accident software and
it reduces it and you can also
see it very clearly when
microbes make it microbes love
to reduce offer.
So all those are pretty
interesting possibilities and
i'll just point out there's no
volcano visible anywhere near
this location this was a lake a
fresh water lake now does that
mean it's not volunteer not
necessarily but it does open up
a lot of fascinating
possibilities and i'm gonna
leave it on a cliff hanger
because we're still not totally
sure the papers have not yet
been published but stay tuned I
just think it's really exciting
because again it it shows us
that this is a planet that you
know we're still learning things
about and there's a lot of lot
of cool things to still learn so
next slide.
So now I want to switch
attention to our sister
instrument on our sister rover
so this is the super came
instrument.
And the perseverance rover so
perseverance you know is a
little bit younger it is rolling
in a different location super
cam is also lead by los alamos
um is also a collaboration
between the united states france
and now spain.
Umm and it's similar to but
maybe a little bit sooped up
from from kemcam so we have that
laser spectrus could be
instrument lib so we can
vaporize rocks figure out the
elements but elements are not
the only thing we need to know
if we want to know what it
rockets me out of we need to
know chemistry elements and then
minerology how are those
elements stuck together.
And so we actually are able we
have another laser base
technique on the rover on super
cam called raman spectrus
computer which allows us to get
that information as well so it's
a really powerful pairing of
these two techniques.
We still take beautiful high
resolution images this time in
color and just for funds is we
added a microphone to the mast
and you might say why are we
trying to hear what the martians
are saying about us and maybe
sure we would do that but it's
actually to hear the analysis
sound of the lives laser because
it makes a snapping sound under
an atmosphere.
And so that can tell us
something about the composition
all
make up of whatever rock were
analyzing it's just another
piece of information.
So so this is also an instrument
that is in operation right now
next slide please.
So as before I could use so many
things but I thought I would
highlight this really exciting
one so last year we made it
announcement that we thought
we've found a potential bio
signature and if you remember
what potential buyer signatures
are you know this is pretty
exciting so here's a few
headlines that we had my
favorite was from the new york
times it was nasa did not say it
found life on mars but it's very
excited about this rock and
that's exactly how I feel about
this rock as well so if you go
to the next slide you can see it
this is iraq that we named
cherry of a falls and it is so
fascinating so it has a bunch of
those different buyer signatures
that we talked about before so
we it contains organic motions
it has minerals that formed and
water and that are often also
formed by microbes you see these
microstructures and textures
it's a little hard to see here
but it you see the sort of a red
stone with these black circles
with a white center that looks
like what we would call a
reduction spot so sometimes you
see this in san stones in the
southwest where you actually
have a little bit of organic
material a few microbes stuck in
the rock and then it starts
reducing the oxidised material
around it so you have probably
seen this and if you haven't
then hopefully all you'll look
for it next time you go for a
hike
and then of course we see the
chemistry of life we see a lot
of softer we see a lot of
phosphorous and this is an
amazing and amazing rac.
So is there's a sign of incident
life.
And now i'm gonna tell you we
have to bring it back to our lab
to visual because of course
that's a really big claim this
is all all the pieces are here
but we don't quite have the
instrumentation to do that on
board the rover.
Next line.
So
this is why it turns out that
perseverance is actually the
first part of the mars sample
return mission so part of the
goal of perseverance is to
sample you know rocks that we
want to bring back to earth to
study and then another mission
will come pick it up bring it
back to us and something that we
started doing we've sampled I
believe it's thirty eight
samples of a total of forty
three mbps maybe at forty now so
we've packaged them up and
they're waiting on mars now you
can see here that I say tvd
usually I would put a date there
but um if you have looked at the
nasa proposed budget marsample
return has been zeroed out
completely
so I don't I don't know what the
future of that mission is going
to be i'm going to cross my
fingers and hope that that other
lawmakers are will agree with me
that this is really an important
next step this is sort of what
we've been aiming to to do to
learn about mars since we study
mars from the very beginning so
um.
I think with that you know let's
keep her fingers crossed and
hopefully you agree with me that
you know these are pretty
exciting rocks and will please
stay tuned and as we as we learn
more so thank you very much.
This.
Thank you very much for that
presentation and thank you for
being so enthusiastic about your
work also it's a makes it fun to
listen to us senator soles we
have you first on the list.
Thank you I remember two or
three years ago we were here and
got the see all that and I read
the book red rover and you got
on all this in your enthusiasm
is is infectious and so I I
appreciate all of this and very
interesting fascinating things
are kind of the last point when
the budget got zeroed out what
is the cost for the return.
Program.
The.
And so I I think I might want to
get this wrong the that was a
huge issue so the original cost
I believe was in the
could have been ten billion
dollars mark it's a huge number
of billion with the b
and this was um of great concern
and so there has been a lot of
work done to study the issue and
to see how could we reduce costs
and there have been a lot of
reductions in the architecture
for the mission
that being said it's an
expensive mission if I you know
just to put this in context
curiousity is it's a two billion
dollars mission perseverance is
similar now when you are more
ties over the length of the
mission it's actually feels kind
of affordable but it is a huge
outlay of funding so you know
it's really hard to to take she
had a speech crap from earth to
mars successfully and it's even
harder to get it back
successfully and it's a complex
mission we have to pick things
up off the surface with the
random view with an orbiting
space craft you know there's a
lot of parts to it.
So it is a high cost and and
that's I suppose
it is it's not up for you know
more signed is to really igneed
to decide whether or not that's
worth it but it is the highest
priority set out in the nasa
decadel survey for planetary
science and that's as you might
imagine every ten years the
community comes up with the
document that says this is what
we want to do and this was the
top one for the last.
Dickate or survey.
And madam chair in a presenter
that that's a pretty small
amount in the federal budget
level it's a lot for a state
like new mexico
as the teacher and educator I
wish students got more access to
these kinds of presentations in
their science classes uh because
it
bills the gaps between geology
and astronomy and chemistry and
design and engineer and physics
about what they could be doing
is you know you could be
a more scientist at bos alamos
you know here is some of the
cool interesting things that you
would get to do and I don't
think we do a good enough job
about encouraging our young
people to
to think.
Into the strato into the.
The solar system rather than
just in their own little town in
community and so that thank you
it's really interesting and
exciting.
Thank you.
Thank you next is representative
martinez.
Thank you manager in.
Thank you doctor lands up.
Streamly interesting.
I I am curious along the lines
of what se.
Talking about.
So.
The mission would then send.
And then there would be a return
craft or would it come back on.
The same rocket what what's the
what's the plan for that.
Is yes so I think if I could
meet answer for now I think it's
changed and we have changed
together she just quite
frequently but so the idea would
be that we would send um we'd
launch another space craft and
this spacecraft would have two
components and one would be just
going into orbit around mars the
other would land and that would
contain the launch vehicle to
get the samples back.
So originally we were going to
have a fetch rover that would go
pick up our little samples and
we were also going to utilize
some martian helicopters we've
actually done that technology
demonstration already but to
reduce costs they have decided
that we could use perseverance
itself although perseverance was
not designed for that so there's
some question how do we how do
we do that
so we have done we've tried to
plan for all eventualities we
have put a sample cash of about
twenty samples in one location
in the crater which is quite
flat so we know we could land
there and then we've retained to
the other half of the samples so
that if we needed to put them
into another space craft has
have yet to be designed then we
could we could do that so so we
are ready for both eventualities
needless to say it's very tricky
to do that right that's a hard
operation to do autonomously
it's not impossible I think we
have good engineers we can
probably do it
and and that means we won't get
necessarily the full sample
suite but it would be still any
rock from mars that we got to
pick out is amazing so that the
tricky part once you get them
all in the launch vehicle
they've got a launch back
rondevo with the orbiting
spacecraft and that spacecraft
would then leave mars orbit and
head back to earth.
And then land on earth and that
would probably be something
similar to genesis the genesis
mission for solar wind you know
we would get um parashoots i'm
not sure we would necessarily
have to to catch it with a
helicopter like that but it was
land in the desert so so there
are many moving parts even in
this simplified architecture.
The amount of chairman doctor
lands are so.
If.
What's the timeline.
So I believe the timeline is not
very long in the sense that we
are already working on that part
of the mission that isn't
something that had stopped that
is not true at the present
because once that budget
proposal came out nasa has been
directed to start close out of
everything that is listed in
their pending you know a a
decision by congress so but I
would say we're not at we're not
starting from zero right this
isn't just a concept there's a
lot of tests that have been done
I think we were originally
planning to launch in twenty
twenty eight that may have
slipped to twenty thirty three
this is because we have launched
windows only every twenty six
months so we can be ready to go
and we still don't want to
launch them so so we are
planning around those launch
windows but you know even twenty
twenty three.
I'm sorry twenty thirty three is
nut all that long from now so it
would be a huge endeavor and I
think we I think we
could collectively as a
community could do it.
We just have to you know decide
that that's that's how nasa's
resources will be fine that will
be spent.
Thank you matter doctor lands
are so launched to retur.
So if you launch at an optimal
time and we probably would it
wouldn't take more than maybe a
few weeks maximum to be able to
get those samples I would say
probably less than that we are
we are you know earth and mars
are pretty close to each other
for
you know several weeks at a time
so we typically will launch when
we are approaching mars so we
can get a little boost from
earth.
So we don't want earth to have
gone by too quickly if if you're
too far then you're chasing
earth so you want to be able to
land get the samples and launch
again when you still have at
least some advantage or at least
if you're at a neutral point and
you're close so I would say it
would be pretty fast and then I
mean we don't travel very fast
because there aren't people i'm
so you know astronauts have a
lot more needs in our robots so
it would probably take and the
order of six months to return
from there.
It's actually that it mars is
very close yeah.
Thank you madame chair thank you
for that.
Thank you madame chair if there
is no one else I just have some
very brief questions has there
never been any other type of
rock returned to earth for mars
there has never been a sample
return from mars the only rocks
we have from mars or meteorites
that landed conveniently here on
earth for us and we've had to
infer that they are from mars so
we've never done sample return
from mars we've only done sample
returns from a handful of places
you know at the moon um several
comments
an astroyed and the sun but
we've never returned samples
deliberately from mars.
Interesting that we we return
samples from the sun
we collect solar particles and
that is actually mass from the
sun and then we brought it back
down that was the genesis
mission which you might remember
there was a switch problem and
so it crashed into utah very
tragically but we actually were
able to still use those data we
have you know many many
researchers who paint takingly
cleaned those please and were
able to extract usable solar
wind particles from them I
worked with them there was a
post talk at least almost who is
doing this work it's very hard
but it's very rewarding
bright and then my only other
random question is where you
normally launch these rovers
from.
Typically the united states
launches everything from kennedy
space center and that is because
it is the southern most point in
the continental US so you get
the benefit of a little bit of a
a boost from the spin of the
earth so so that's where both of
our rovers were launched from
and I was lucky enough to
actually be there for
curiosities launch unfortunately
prevented any of us from going
to see the perseverance launch
but of course we were all
watching we had a a zoom of like
four hundred scientists it was
pandemonium but we were all
there in spirit together
watching it
oh well i'd be able to do that
um I think that's
that's all the questions I have
represented a stupid question.
And think you made him check
matter by share actually more of
a question than just a statement
in a senator souls house
wouldn't have agreed and
students had access to some of
these materials and they're
actually are a lot of materials
out there now so nasa gpl they
actually admission to mars like
in a marshover competition so if
you do have schools that you
think might be interested in
space exploration there are a
lot of materials out of what's
true to see necessary I think
they offer a lot of those
materials also
there's also a lot of aerospace
organizations but there's a lot
of work to get are the spy next
fighting where is rover work
into the classroom if you have
any teacher contacts and they're
interested thanks thank you
manager.
Thinking for your presentation
all right committee we have a
couple three things and we have
no per comment so that's one we
need everyone to take your stuff
because there's up a meeting
right after this here so only to
take your stuff and we're gonna
have david back in the back tell
us what we're going to
morrow for those of you who are
going on the tour.
And then we'll be done david.
Thank you manager.
Welcome
members of the committee made of
his david trial with us almost
national laboratory as you know
if you look at your agenda we
have an exciting agenda tomorrow
I think we start at nine here
and I think the agenda's client
for us to unlike eleven forty
five twelve we've arranged for a
a lanal shuttle to meet us here
at the minister for building so
well we'll badge everyone and
verify id load the shuttle and
will transport you on site and
we've got an exciting agenda for
you tomorrow so I I don't know
market show that with you but
we've worked in and it it's
gonna be exciting I I i'm
excited to have you guys were
excited a host to get and thank
you for the opportunity so we'll
be here early but I think we'll
all bore eleven forty five
twelve on the shuttle and will
make a wee on site if you guys
have any questions i'd be
happier answer.
Thank you are one quick question
and put form of id are you
looking.
Well the willing to try to use
these drivers license for work
if you don't have it maybe like
a birth certificate or passport
but driver drivers license
should.
The.
Thank you so much looking
forward to it tomorrow any
questions from the committee.
Will we be able to leave our
stuff and here or what we have
to take it to our car.
Yeah.
