Expansion, uh, I've got a short
slide deck. I have a lot of
extra slides as extra talking
points. It's a labeled them as
an appendix, if there's
questions I can refer back to
them, but I'm just looking to go
through kind of the 1213 and
answer questions for you guys.
Um, so to that point, want to
just uh lay out the broadband
landscape of kind of where
things are, is that there are
basically tons of federal and
state programs going on
concurrently. Uh, but to that
point, even with all of
programs happening, we still see
a $2 billion shortfall in
infrastructure, and this gets
into last mile, which gets into
middle mile, uh, it also gets
into things like 5G, uh, you
know, cell phone technology
deployments, right? Uh, so
collectively, you know, that $2
billion shortfall, even with all
of the federal and state
programs running along, there's
going to still be more ask more
needs to make sure that we get
the connectivity that we need
and address the digital divide.
And so this is, you know, the
digital divide when we really
think about it.
Is
Those who either cannot access
or will not be able to access in
the future, and we do have these
one-time federal investments,
uh, at the moment with broadband
equity access and deployment
funds, uh, $675 million coming
into the state to be able to try
and get as far out into the
state of New Mexico as we can,
uh, but at the end of the day,
we want to make sure we do not
leave New Mexicans behind. And
so on my uh my first slide that
says broadband landscape slide 3
I just wanted to note that ARPA
is the American Rescue Plan Act,
uh.
Capital projects funds, pilot
project program, those were
awarded to the Office of
Broadband two years ago. Uh, we
actually put it out in.
I'm gonna switch microphones
here.
Uh, we actually put it out in,
in a grant form and
In the last two years, we've
gotten through the rights and
permitting we're actually seeing
some of the first projects being
completed this coming quarter of
this next year. So we're, we're
pretty thrilled about that. Uh,
the funding goes through 2026
December 31st, 2026, so you can
see on my timeline out there uh
the rest of the projects that
will be uh completing up of the
19 projects we awarded, uh, will
be through the end of December
there.
Beneath that, uh, in the gold,
you can see the nect New Mexico
fund uh is the infrastructure
fund. There was originally $100
million of uh appropriated to
the uh connecting Mexico
council, uh, two years ago, the
legislature reappropriated that
funding to the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion
for expenditure and in that we
still kept the 3 programs that
were originally legislated,
which is the infrastructure
program of $70 million. Grant
writing, engineering, planning,
which was $5 million for four
specific entities to apply for,
which
is tribal governments, local
government bodies, electric co
ops and telephone co-ops.
Additionally, we had $25 million
awarded for uh public school
projects. Uh, so out of that we
borrowed the authority from the
public schools facility
authority through a memorandum
of understanding this last year,
launched the state education
network, uh, so this was like an
8-year project uh that we uh we
fulfilled in the last year and a
half. We built 10 nodes and
we're still looking to build a
few more out there, but we got
our first ones up and running.
Uh, we actually have the state
education network with 8
entities, which is like 5 school
districts and.
charter schools attached to it,
uh, and we are utilizing e-rate
funding to be able to fund the
internet going forward with
that. Student Connect is going
to leverage that state education
network by
Providing assistance grants for
providers to go out and build
and connect directly through the
state education network to
students who are in need in
rural communities. And so we
just launched that one, about a
month and a half ago now, so
we're pretty excited about that.
We actually had our 1st 7
applications and we're looking
at turning around our 1st 3
awards in the next month or so.
So, as you can see in the last
two years, we actually had the
appropriation moved to us. We've
actually moved out and executed
on, on funding a lot of these
programs with $40 million of
awards so far in the Connect to
Mexico infrastructure, about 2.5
million of the 5 million, so
half of the funding for the
program and we again just
recently launched the program
we're getting ready to turn
around those, those awards for
the uh Student nect program.
Additionally, you have our bead
program. You can see it's a
five-year program cycle. So it's
a 4 years that's really been
awarded with uh one year
potential for extension. Same
thing with the digital equity
funds that are going out to make
sure digital literacy occurs,
devices, uh, all of those
programs have just gotten
approvals in July, uh,
respectively for Bead and in
October for digital equity, and
we're turning those around on
the timelines from the federal
government and we're launching
those programs in January this
coming year.
For, for applications. The
remaining programs are put down
beneath there, you can see that
there's a lot of other federal
funds out there that go directly
to providers, so the FCC has the
Aroff program, uh, that program
was, uh, started off the top of
my head in 2021 and its
performance cycle is up through
about uh 2022, 2023. So even off
the, the chart here, you also
see the enhanced ACCAM, that is
going to be a 15-year
programmatic cycle. There are
locations that have been taken
off the map.
through that program, as well as
a lot of our tribal communities
received awards in uh in the
tribal broadband connectivity
program through NTIA in round
one and round 2 announcements
are going to be coming up here
shortly in the next month or so,
uh, so we expect to have a few
more locations pulled off. We
also see USDA doing the
reconnect loans as well.
So along those lines of all of
those programs out there, we've
been very thoughtful about how
we tailor all of these different
programs together. If you flip
over slide 4, you can see I've
highlighted now all of the
programs and red and just
looking at the changes what
we're going to be going through
the legislative cycle and for
appropriations, we like to see
extensions on the Connect New
Mexico funds, the grant ready
engineering, planning, and the
student connect. Many of the
programs that we've awarded out
of the Connect New Mexico Fund
have very short cycles, so the
expenditure authority was given
to June 30th, 2025.
It makes it really difficult to
do infrastructure and so really
taking the takeaway out of this
is we want to make sure that we
give broadbands the right amount
of expenditure timelines
matching closer to the federal
on rights way permitting taking
2 years, engineering, design,
planning, you know, going along
with that and then being able to
get to the construction phases.
So similar to building roads,
building bridges, similar to
building, uh, you know, water
systems, it takes time and so
we've done what we can in the
short expenditure authorities
and I think the.
The office for being 2 years old
has proven that we've been able
to scale and actually execute on
these programs, but we want to
make sure that we get them done
right and if there's any delays
in supply chains, any delays in
rights of way or permitting, we
do not want these programs to be
at risk, and so we want to make
sure that that extension happens
for the next 2 years.
Additionally, uh, I'll talk
about some more depth on this. I
have a couple of new programs
that that I would like to uh
propose. One is a replacement
temporary replacement for the
affordable connectivity program.
We saw that FCC.
in this last year, um, very well
respected bipartisan support,
even, you know, we have a great
champion and Ben Ray Lujan and
his office behind it, but also
on the other side of the aisle,
uh Vice President-elect JD
Vance, uh, you know, Senator
Vance was also one of those
partners, you know, really
supporting the Affordable
connectivity program. We have a
need to make sure that there's
affordability in the mix of
building all of the
infrastructure.
Next program is gonna be the
accelerate Connecting Mexico and
I'll talk a little bit more in
depth about that. This is
looking at how long these
timelines are to build programs
and uh to representative
Harper's Point about, you know,
uh, having satellite in the mix
of this, you know, the office
has long taken the approach of
fiber is the preferred
methodology.
But it's not the only
methodology, right? Wireless
infrastructure is going to be
needed in Mexico. We are very
rural, very remote locations to
get to too high cost to get to
and to that 0.1 of the best
deployment methodologies for
right now is going to be
satellite.
To the, to the point of uh Jay
Santianis earlier, uh, as well.
It is, you know, not necessarily
the technology that's going to
be of the future. And so we want
to make sure we have a portfolio
and a mix and to that point,
I'll talk a little bit more
about the accelerated connecting
Mexico program, um, but that's
something that we want to look
at and make sure that we're
tackling. Uh, last one is we
have a, you know, pretty high
need for, for additional
broadband support. We have all
these federal dollars and we
still have that shortfall I
talked about $2 billion in our
priorities of the Broadband
equity access and deployment
program.
It's gonna be fiber.
And then wireless and then
satellite and in those those
technologies we see deployments
to unserved locations as the
number one priority, so
locations that receive 25
download, 3 upload, or less, and
then you move into underserved,
which is above 253 and below 100
download 20 up, and then we have
to look at community anchor
institutions, which are things
like government buildings and
then we need to look at low
income multi-dwelling units.
Of the funding that we have. We
know we're going to be able to
get 100% through the unserved,
maybe a little bit, a couple
percentage, you know, points
into the underserved. And so
this is where we can leverage
state dollars in the next year
as we deploy the uh the actual
application process, uh, for the
federal programs and see if we
can get to some of those
additional locations, uh, and
then other issues are going to
come up or the cost of match
funding which the a lot of these
companies you can see there's
all these other federal
programs. Many of our, our
co-ops are already leveraged,
you know, they have maximized
what they can to go after these,
these reconnect loans they've
gone after, you know, Aroff and
they've gone after the FCC
enhanced ACAM. They're really
having a hard time coming up
with some additional match
funds, we should take a look at
how we can leverage state
dollars to help out with that.
And again, maximize what the
federal dollar are going to do
out in New Mexico. Uh, and then
for the kind of last part of the
broadband support, uh, we also
need to take a look at how pole
replacements are being done.
Ossip holes have gone up
significantly in the last couple
of years. If you have to do make
credit costs on pole, it can be
up to $6000 per pole. And if
you're going to add broadband
along those lines, then it's
going to cost a fair amount. So,
uh, with that you can kind of
see what the landscape is and
the broadband world, uh Of
broadband has done very well in
in executing what we've been
given so far and we plan to
continue that same trend and
moving into the future, and we
want to make sure that we do
everything possible to make sure
New Mexicans are not on the
wrong side of the digital
divide.
So moving into some of the
successes, uh, briefly talked
about this already, but they
beat allocation was uh was
approved uh and our program was
approved in July of this year.
Uh, we are now in the process of
putting out our notice of
funding opportunity a couple of
weeks ago, wrapping up our, our
location challenges, our final
location challenges, and then uh
we have slated January 3rd as
our day to open our application
portals. Our digital equity
program which dovetails with
this out of the bipartisan
infrastructure law, again, going
after devices, going after uh
In digital literacy skills, um,
making sure that uh that people
have cybersecurity uh to go
along with the devices that
they're going to be getting and
learning how to use for the
first time, uh, this program is
gonna launch just slightly
after, uh, middle of January,
and then we're looking to
dovetail the closure of it to be
just after beat that way a lot
of the applicants who go after B
can also go after digital
equity.
Without overtaxing their limited
grant writing staff.
Uh, other things that we talked
about already, ARPA CPF awards,
our first projects are coming to
completion here in first quarter
of 2025, which we're very
excited about and then uh we had
uh renewed our MOU with uh with
the public schools facility
authority to launch this in, and
we actually launched it, so
again tremendous pride in and
having that tool and resource
available for New Mexico schools
to get hooked up to.
Uh, and then last thing is, you
know, just looking at the
connecting Mexico expenditure
Authority we've awarded out half
of the funds already and we want
to make sure that we finish the
funding uh here in the last part
of the year and that we don't
run the risk of these programs,
uh, having delays and then not
being able to uh reimburse our
awardees when the expenditure
authority goes away.
So, uh, with that, uh, I just
presented at LFC. We've asked
for a marginal increase on our
operating budget for this year,
this is really about we've been
initially attached to the
Department of Information
Technology, and we've not been
paying them for their
administrative support for the
last couple of years. We need to
do that. So that's going to be a
large chunk of our, our ask
here. Uh, we do want to go after
the $70 million for the
accelerated Connect New Mexico
Fund for that satellite
deployment, $35 million for the
Affordable connectivity program,
$80 million for the broadband
plan support.
And then again get extensions on
our existing funding.
So to the point about the $2
billion shortfall that's on
slide 7, you know, out of this
really comes, you know, middle
mile opportunities, especially
on the western side of the
state, some last mile
opportunities in the priorities
we cannot get to out of the beat
funds and then looking at uh
again 5G deployment, uh, you
know, I'm sure most of us have
driven down one of our
interstates or even in the
middle of Santa Fe here if you
go by Srius and Saint Francis,
as we've increased our
bandwidth, right? So we've gone
from 4G to 5G.
What's happening is we are
seeing that frequency, how much
speed we get has increased, but
the distance it can be
transmitted and
Yeah, how, how, what objects it
runs into, right? diminishes our
capability of actually utilizing
it. And so we see a lot of these
upgrades have actually reduced
our, our capability of getting,
you know, solid phone calls and
solid internet capability. I
know as soon as I leave the Sims
building here in Santa Fe, uh,
if I'm on a team's meeting, I
immediately dropped from that
meeting, you know, and it's
broadband director leaving the
Department of Information
Technology building, you know,
so there's a there's a gap,
right? We need to address this
and and fiber is one of those.
Tech technology that's going to
back our ability to deploy more
towers and get more connectivity
and have safer roadways, right,
which is going to impact things
like our economy. So, you know,
to just really illustrate the
point here is that broadband
really starting to touch
everything in our lives, you
know, communication wise, and
just, you know, getting
healthcare, education, you know,
our simple connectivity and
phone calls, business
capabilities. So, we want to
make sure we address that, that
shortfall and that gap and make
sure we have the right economic
development here for for New
Mexico.
Moving on to slide, uh, slide 8,
this is just the breakdown on
our, on our operating budget
request of 538,000 is going to
go for do it fair share, 112,000
is gonna go to personnel. Uh,
last year we worked on that MOU
with with uh public
schoolsacility authority, uh,
the legislature appropriate
$650,000 to transfer, uh, 3 of
their employees. There are two
vacant positions that did not
transfer with them and so we
want to get those additional 2
employees to make sure we can
operate the state education
network and continue to get er
funding to support the schools
and uh leveraging those those
FCC dollars for E-rate, uh, so
that's just, uh, you know, kind
of a continuation of what we
were working on last year.
Uh, moving on to, uh, slide 9.
This is the uh the contents for
the accelerate Connect New
Mexico, uh, program, so, you
know, looking at that timeline,
right? We, we know we've
actually reduced a lot of the
households that will be served
in the future with a lot of the
fiber programs. But again, it
takes time to get build there
and if you see that ARPA program
taking 2 years to get its first
programs completed, we're
essentially looking at again, a
5-year program where the 1st 2
years are gonna be used and
rights away and permitting for
this bead program. What are we
going to do?
keep New Mexicans connected
today. And so for those who are
unserved, we want to actually go
after a satellite deployment
program where we have a voucher,
uh, program to pay for the
satellite receivers, the
equipment. Let's reduce the
barrier so people can actually
get that equipment in their
home, and then let's take a look
at those longcom houses because
the cost of satellite is
expensive. It's $120 a month.
Low income houses.
Not gonna be able to afford
that, so we need some sort of
affordability mechanism uh for
this. So, you know, looking at
this, we're proposing a $30
subsidy for low-income
households, brings it down to
$90 you know, is it enough?
Maybe not, you know, I think
that could be some of the
discussion as we move closer to
the legislative session, um, but
that being said, it is something
that reduces those barriers to
make sure that New Mexicans can
get connected now and as I spend
my time going around the state
and I've traveled literally, you
know, north to south, east to
west, every corner of the state
in the last year and a half, 2
years.
When I talked to New Mexicans,
they're like, you know, I need
it now. That's great that I'm
gonna have this amazing thing in
the future, but I need it now.
And this is where this program
can really, you know, take the
best part of satellite, the
deployment now to get some
connectivity while we build to
the future and make sure that
New Mexicans get the gold
standard because at the end of
this, if we have fiber
deployment and you know,
high-speed wireless deployment
to some of New Mexico, but not
to rural New Mexico, we're gonna
create another digital divide.
And so we want to make
sure that we avoid this and so
we're looking at as a two-step
process, but really trying to
tackle, tackle those elements.
11 last part of this and kind of
the administrative um component
of the $70 million. One other
challenge for New Mexicans is
that if you are, you know,
someone who's elderly and cannot
climb on your roof, or if you
have a disability and cannot
install your own satellite
receiver, you're gonna have a
problem utilizing this program
and so we'd like to make sure
some of the administrative
dollars go to, uh, you know, a
third party provider to do the
loan.
on uh on their, their household
incomes and to be able to do
installs for New Mexicans who
cannot do it themselves.
So that's the accelerate, uh,
connecting Mexico program in a
nutshell, again, really
targeting and dovetailing
smartly that we know that we're
building the long term best
economic driver for the state,
the thing that is local, going
to create local jobs, satellites
do not do that, unfortunately.
Uh, they, you know, are up in
the sky, of course, right? They,
uh, you know, when you have a
problem, you're not going to do
a truck roll to a satellite, uh,
but that being said, you know,
we want to make sure that we
continue to have that local
economy, especially in rural.
Mexico, and this is going to be
one of the best infrastructure
pieces to do that.
Uh, flipping over to slide 10,
we've got our ACP program, so it
is $35 million. Uh, so there was
180,000 households on uh on ACP
when it ended back in May.
Uh, you know, this program is
really looking at a $30 subsidy,
flat subsidy, not trying to
adjust for, you know, $75 rural
or tribal, uh, this is just, you
know, to try and bridge the gap
here, uh, hopefully as we move
into the next, uh next
legislature, uh, but at the
federal level, they'll be able
to figure out how to move this
project forward and move a
subsequent ECP program into the
mix, uh, but in the meantime,
New Mexicans, we see them
dropping off. Uh, we see a lot
of the rural providers, uh, see.
20, 30% of their, their, their,
their market penetration, uh,
dropping off. And so that's
gonna be, you know, continuing
to be problematic for a lot of
our providers as well.
So, uh, this is gonna, gonna go
to try to address that gap.
Moving on to page 11, uh, we
have our broadband, uh, plan
support. So, you know, in the
last couple of years I've I've
come to the the legislature and
especially um the the
appropriations committees and
you know, really trying to talk
about how broadband is
infrastructure. Uh, last year, I
wound up with a one-year
appropriation for $25 million. I
will tell you that it's really
hard to do infrastructure in one
year. There's not a lot I can do
with it. And so, you know, we'll
be looking for the extensions on
that, but additionally looking
to to the broadband support, uh,
we want.
make sure we get $80 million to
help us leverage these federal
dollars and get to everything
while we're, while we're gonna
go build it right now, you know,
we don't want to get $80 million
in 5 years after we've already
done this big buildout. Now
we've missed the opportunity to
leverage the same construction
crews at lower costs because
the, you know, inflationary
rates on a lot of these products
are going up. So, um, these are
the priorities for it, I think,
you know, kind of hit that a
couple of times, but you know
ultimately if I get nothing else
across I'd like to just say
broadband is infrastructure
takes
years.
And so that brings us to slide
12 on our extensions. Uh, I did
kind of hit on these already. We
have 3 different funds we're
looking for extensions on, um,
all of them, you know, are, with
the exception of last year's 25
million, we have, you know,
plans that we're rolling out on
including like our 7.9 $4
million severance tax bond.
Originally we were gonna build
some extra uh nodes for the
education network, but over the
last two years, we've gotten
more efficient. We figured out
how to build nodes in our first
one, which was about a half a
million dollars, we reduced the
next one to about $250,000 and
then over.
time we've gotten down to about
700 or $80,000 right? We've been
looking for buildings that are
already, you know, made to do
this, to do the uh the
co-location on this and so we've
been getting more efficient and
so now we've taken that money
and we're, we're shifting that
into some other priorities like
a dig one's project with New
Mexico Gas Company, uh, and so
we have that coming up this next
year, uh, going from Dixon to
Penasco and we're gonna add
broadband dark fiber into that
project, uh, along with another
project at Sandia. So we have,
uh, we've been using that, but
we want to make sure again that
we
We actually can leverage that
timeline that needs to be built.
Uh, let's see here, moving on,
OK, so I have a bunch of other
slides out there. Happy to
answer questions, but uh, you
know, I do like to point back to
some things for some visuals if
possible.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the presentation
and I'm gonna go to committee
members, we'll start with
representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Drew, for that.
Um
Question
What is the status of connect
New Mexico council.
Um, Madam, madam chair, uh, and
uh representative, the council
still exists and we attend
monthly. I missed the Thursday
meeting recently. Uh, I was in
Louisiana talking with about 30
other broadband directors and
talking with uh Louisiana
Broadband Office. They just
finished their, their, uh,
basically round of broadband
equity access deployment uh
applications and they were
giving us a breakdown on what
pain points they had and so we
were taking some of that away.
So the council still has been
meeting. Uh, we definitely use
them as advisory, uh, which is.
kind of how we have been working
over the last 1.5, 2 years and
that advisory status, uh, one of
my staff attends every single uh
work group committee that meets
usually biweekly or monthly
depending upon the work group,
uh, and then, uh, you know, many
of the members I talked with on
a very regular basis to try and
get advice about different
programs, different thoughts,
make sure that we're not
impacting New Mexico businesses
too much by, you know, choices
and programmatics, uh, and so
we, we work very closely with
them, uh, you know.
know that that many of them have
expressed, you know, verbally on
the meetings that they don't
like the advisory role, um, I
mean, that's what's been been
done in the legislative body,
you know, over the work the last
couple of years, but I do work
with them very closely.
Uh, and I'm sure one more
question.
Um, we are bringing forth the
representative, um, lunchrooms
the lead this year on public
private part.
Do you have any insights on the
continuing.
Or
Uh, he's 3 bills in relationship
to broadband.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, absolutely. I
would say that, you know, we do
have some mechanisms already,
right? Uh, RFPs that can be done
but sometimes they're not
convenient and to that point,
you know, there is a need for,
for, uh, you know, P3s and how
figuring out how they're
structured uh to work
efficiently and economically to
the point I was making about
having a $2 million you know, $2
billion shortfall, uh, you know,
if government can't fund it all,
how do we leverage
dollars uh to be able to do some
of that other, other part and I
don't know that I have all the
answers, but I'll tell you I
spent a lot of time talking with
different entities to try and
figure that out. Uh, we
highlighted some of it, our
recent broadband summit, and we
actually brought a lot of
different funding, uh, you know,
types to the table to have a
discussion and make sure that
especially a lot of the
providers in the room knew who
was there and who could do some
of that extra match dollars in
the funding going into the beat
program, uh, and making sure
that we're trying to make the
right partnerships and
connections.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett, um, we'll move to
Representative Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And uh Director Loveless, thank
you for being here. Um.
And uh I want to say first,
thank you for doing a great job
when we started this office a
couple of years ago, um.
You know, you're looking at all
the federal dollars coming in
and looking at, OK.
You know, are there ways that we
can manage, coordinate, leverage
those dollars so that they're
used as effectively as possible.
And uh I think we're all hoping
that uh.
This office would be able to do
some of the great things that
you're, you've already been
doing. So I just want to say
thank you, Madam Chair and and
director for the good work that
you're doing with, you know,
just a handful of folks and,
and, uh, yeah, I'm very
grateful. Thank you, Ma and
thank you representative uh
appreciate the, the recognition,
um, and I guess the other thing
I wanted to, to thank you for as
well because when we
We put this um
Uh, you know, this broadband
office together, um, early on, I
asked about, you know, are there
other approaches besides just
fiber that we're looking at and
the response I got was, well,
you know, they're, those are
other private companies and we
can't use.
State dollars for that.
And um
And that was confusing to me
because back when I was, you
know, newly married with a kid,
right? We had a landline phone
and we were broke and we
qualified for the lifeline
program, right? And so we're
paying 10 or $15 a month for our
phone through AT&T.
Right? Um,
And, and I know that there are
similar programs now for folks
with cell phones, um, like that
Lifeline program, right, it
still exists. So, ma'am, uh
chair and director, I'm, I'm
pleased to hear that we're
looking at
OK, we're, where it doesn't make
sense for fiber. Um, how can we
Um, maybe help offset some of
that cost of satellite.
Um, I think the state actually
saves a ton of money in the long
run by doing it that way instead
of trying to spend millions of
dollars bringing a fiber to a
A place with 10 homes, right?
Um, so can you maybe just talk
about perspective there you talk
just a little bit about like
maybe $30 or things, but can you
explain that? Sure. uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, you
know, thank you for bringing up
the Lifeline program and, and
I'll just note that like
Lifeline is adjacent to the
broadband office in a lot of
ways, right? It's an FCC program
and, and so to your point, uh,
you know, about how do we
leverage, you know, state
dollars and and going directly
to, to New Mexicans, you know,
there's, there's two things that
commentary. So one, you know,
the program you mentioned.
Federal, you can use federal
dollars going directly to to New
Mexicans, that's never really
been an issue, um, but looking
at the anti-donation clause, I
believe Representative Chandler,
you know, had, had worked on
this in in previous years there
was a, uh, you know,
constitutional amendment made,
right?
Bunching broadband into that
category of, of necessities,
right? Um, it's, you know, not a
utility to, to representative
Chandler's you know point in the
previous, uh, presentation, it's
not regulated, you know,
industry by the government, um,
however, you know, that being
said, you know, it's become the
thing that touches all of our
lives. It is the economic
driver, it's the, you know, the
healthcare, um, you know,
helping social determinants of
health, right, kind of it really
has become the necessary part.
of what we're doing and so.
To that concept, you know,
having an appropriation directly
from the legislature to the
Office of Broadband going to
that purpose is exactly what
what that uh the constitutional
amendment would allow for.
Yeah, and, uh, Madam Shan,
director, thank you for, for
bringing that up. It was kind
of, I guess my, my real question
to you, um.
You know, as a, as a new office,
right, um.
Often we'll do like one time
appropriations, which
You know, is, like I said,
great, um, but
Hard to manage like.
10 year, 15-year projects, you
know,
Things with longevity based off
of one time appropriations.
Um, so, so Madam chair and
director, um,
You know it's, it's
Keeping track of most of the
asks in in this uh slide deck,
but um you just maybe boil it
down for us, you know, when you
come into this legislative
session, you know, what are, and
what's the total ask you're,
you're hoping for and is that
reoccurring or one time you help
us understand that.
And absolutely, Madam Chair and
Representative, the way we've
really targeted this is our
reoccurring as our operating
budget, uh, which is, you know,
I think gonna just creep over $3
million at this point, uh, into
this next, next year, so you're
pretty minimal, you know, we're
running about 25 staff and, and
um, you know, most of those uh
positions are actually taken
care of by a lot of the federal
dollars, right? So we're looking
at, you know, increasing the 16
FTE. So that's our our
reoccurring uh ask.
On the one time appropriations
that's basically everything that
has been, been done up to this
point. We have $675 million of
the bead program, right, we have
$8.6 million of um you know, of
the digital equity. I don't
really need anything along those
lines, you know, the ARPA
program is going to be completed
in a couple of years. We're,
we're good there. So what it
really comes down to in the
extensions and in new
programmatic asks is gonna be,
you know, targeting the
connecting Mexico funds, which
is about
uh sorry, $99 million which was
given, given to the Office of
Broadband and then we have about
$50 million.57 million dollars
of, of, uh, other, you know, one
time money that we're asking for
extensions on. Uh, and then the
new programmatic as total about
185 million.
Yeah, madam chair director,
thank you. I appreciate you kind
of just distilling that down for
us.
Um
And I guess maybe just my last
question asking you to kind of
look in your crystal ball.
Uh, we're all trying to do that
right now, um.
Uh, was the
Uh, change over at the federal
level.
Um
You know, do you have any, any
indication as to kind of what
the, the future of these kinds
of um programs are, it does
sound like a lot of, I mean, the
vast majority of this funding is
federal.
Madam Chair and representative,
yes, uh, the most, most of it
is.
So
Most of these programs are so
far down the road and have their
statutory requirements, you
know, we've worked very
diligently to execute, you know,
as fast as possible. Uh we've
really kept New Mexico in about
the 1st 1/3 of states learning
from the, the ones who really,
you know, uh, run the traps for
us. So, um, you know, thank you
to the Louisiana and Kansas
Broadband offices, which, you
know, I talked with their
directors on a, on a, you know,
pretty frequent basis.
Um,
But you know, we want to be
ahead of the curve on things
like supply chain and making
sure we have contractors, you
know, that, that would be out
there and be able to do the work
and not be, you know, uh,
unfortunately taken up by, by
our much bigger neighbor to the
south, you know, Texas and, and
so we we've done a good job with
that. So I don't see a whole lot
of, of risk barring an actual uh
You know, statute changing from
Congress, you know, there, there
were some pretty clear set
priorities and because we are
going into the application
process being open, you know,
once you get there and you're
having a competitive process,
you know, it doesn't make a
whole lot of sense to try and,
you know, change the the track
after that point.
Yeah, I think you might have
share and director I, I, yeah, I
appreciate you saying that I've
had several folks come to you
with similar questions not about
broadband, but just.
What's going to happen? I'm
like, well, you know,
Really almost everything has to
go through Congress. So,
It's gonna be the status quo
and, and Madam Chair and
Representative, you know, one of
the uh the oversight agencies on
the federal side is uh NIST and
um they follow commerce's very
specific to CFR, you know, 200,
um, you know, guidelines on how
money is supposed to be done
and, and how grants are supposed
to be done and, and so, you
know, going through federal
rulemaking is a very long
arduous process too. So, um, you
know, to that point, we believe
we're gonna be done with the
entire program by the time, you
know, any true rule changes
would take effect.
Uh, Ma'am She director, uh,
thank you for that. And, and
again, thank you for the great
work you and your, your
department are doing. We really
appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Harper, thank you so much,
Director Lavelas, we appreciate
you being here this afternoon.
There's no other questions. Do
you have a question?
Oh, I thought you were, you
were, oh, senator.
Into
as a question we'll move on and
I, it's more of a comment.
It
When COVID came out and they're
trying to get the.
Internet onto the reservation.
He had all these little
programs.
And then they're like well cons.
For a little bit.
And then next thing you know,
the program's gone and we got
to.
Great rate increase.
So keep that in mind when we're
down for a little bit.
But when it comes down to it,
and then we're back in the same
boat.
The man
Thank you, Senator Pinto. Thank
you again, director. Thank you.
So we are going to move on. Do
we have our last presenter here.
OK.
Come in
If we have um David Gibson here
we'll move him up a little,
we're a little early, about a
half hour, so we'll move on to
Sandia National Laboratories if.
David Gibson is here. He's not
here yet. OK.
We'll have about a 5 minute
break while we wait for our next
presenter.
