and energy management at
multi-unit buildings. My name is
Ben Britton. I'm a policy
manager at Switch, and Switch is
a software company that deploys
EV chargers and load management
technology across North America,
enabling over 15,000 EV chargers
to date.
And so
Although we deploy charges
across commercial retail, uh,
some fleet applications. Our
specialty is in multi-unit or
multi-family buildings. I'll
just make a brief distinction
there, multi-unit when I say
that, I'm talking about
buildings with both perhaps a
commercial resident on bottom uh
in the residential residences,
you know, up top.
Um, so we know this is a really
critical sector to electric
vehicle charging.
Uh, you've probably heard the
oft quoted statistic of 80% of
charging happens at home?
Uh, what's maybe less known is
that only 5% of that currently
happens in multi-family
buildings. It's a very
underserved sector.
Um, and actually our sort of
founding story is our uh CEO and
founder, Carter Lee, 8 years
ago, wanted to buy an EV and
charge at his condo. Pretty
common uh situation.
However, he found that once he
purchased this level 2 charger,
we'll kind of go over all the
specifics there. Uh, you ran
into a bunch of issues working
with the condo board to actually
get the uh approval to install
the charger, right? Uh, there
were technical difficulties, uh,
installation costs were high,
the list goes on.
So
You know, personally, I would
have said, hey, that's too much
of a headache and, uh, you know,
this is gonna be someone else's
problem, but he decided to go
ahead and start a company and uh
we're grateful for it because uh
we've been able to do a lot of
cool stuff in this space.
So, um, on slide 3 here, you'll
see some of the challenges that
I already mentioned.
Um, excuse me, and, uh, I'm
gonna go over some of these in
more detail today, specifically
around electrical capacity and
grid constraints later on in the
presentation.
And so, starting on slide 4, in
the next few slides, just wanted
to get some uh relevant
statistics, uh, about sort of
what the sector is facing.
Um, so starting with just, you
know, you mentioned, uh, at home
charging being a really key
component of uh of electric
vehicles and accessibility, um,
it's shown here, these are
national numbers, but about 30%
of households are multi-family
buildings, and that's the same
case in New Mexico, I believe
that was shared yesterday in one
of the presentations.
Additionally, um, you'll see in
the next slide that uh a
national renewable energy uh
laboratory or NRL report came
out with an estimate of how much
level 2 charging would be needed
by 2030, so 5 years away.
And um they came close to
570,000 chargers. Now, of
course, New Mexico is um a a
portion of that, um, and it
pales in comparison to the over
28 million uh charging ports
they expect will be needed to
support 33 million passenger
light duty vehicles. So again,
for electric vehicles. So again,
big scale that uh issue
nationally, um, and we'll kind
of talk a bit about how that
relates to New Mexico.
Um, on slide 6 here,
Um, you know, as we mentioned,
you know, we're adding all these
EVs to the grid, and so it's
going to take time and it's
going to take money.
And so the US Department of
Energy study estimates utilities
will need about a 3% annual
increase in infrastructure and
distribution grid investments
between 2027 and 2032.
Um, however, what's exciting is,
uh, even though that's
ultimately, you know, billions
of dollars in investment, you
can get a 30% reduction, they
estimate using some pretty basic
techniques around managing the
load on the system, manage
charging, um, and that can be
done through uh passive
activities, for example, a time
of use rates. Let's get, um, you
know, folks with an EV to
charge uh at home overnight,
right? When it's uh more
affordable or more active.
techniques, which is what we do,
you know, it's software enabled
um chargers that can get manage
that load.
And then, you know, again, just
want to commend um the state,
uh legislature for for passing
um advanced clean cars, um,
legislation. Uh, this is a
really, really important market
signal to say, hey, EVs are
coming. Let's get them here
faster in decarbonize our
transportation sector, and so,
you all know this, but um, you
know, 82% of new cars are going
to be sold um in New Mexico are
going to be zero emission by
203.
too.
Um, and I'll also note that I
really appreciated Director
Stair's presentation from Ener.
Uh, she mentioned that because
of New Mexico's population, um,
and, uh, socioeconomic status
of, of certain uh residents at a
secondary marketplace is really
going to be critical for EB
adoption. And so, I raised that
because um
The statistic I've heard is 12
to 15 years is sort of the
average life cycle of a vehicle,
and so you can imagine, um, you
know, New Mexico, it's about 5%
of the vehicle car shares are um
zero emission vehicles. So, you
know, within the next
You know, 1215 years, uh, we're
going to see big, big
opportunity in the secondary
marketplace uh for for this kind
of adoption.
And so let's get into a bit of
how Switch works with
multi-tenant buildings and so
this is on slide 8.
Um, so we, you know, who are our
customers, our customers are
property owners, so we sell our
services directly to uh to them,
um, and through this sort of
experience, we really got to
understand what are their pain
points? Um, what are the sort of
design and installation
challenges, um, and how can we
offer value beyond, hey, let's
just put a charger in here for
your tenants, set it and forget
it. Can we get them to
participate in utility demand
response.
programs so they can be helpful
to the grid in times of need,
um, can we help them integrate
with other software providers,
so for example, um, we've worked
with buildings who already have
a laundry service set up on a
tap card, we can integrate our
service and add more value to
those tenants, that sort of
thing. Um, and, you know, at the
end of the day, what's most
important is we really, really
try to be affordable and we have
a high success rate of being
reliable for, for, for tenants,
right? So every time they get to
a switch charger,
They know they can plug in and
look at the charge they need and
be ready to go the next day.
So, just to talk a little bit
about the basics here, um, just
a level set. So on slide 9,
you're going to see 3 power
levels of electric vehicle
chargers that are often
described.
Um
Level one being sort of the
lowest or slow charging up till
level 3 or direct current fast
charging, but we primarily focus
on and support is the level 2
chargers. And these, um, you
know, again, it worked really
well for ensuring that uh you
you get your charge overnight,
um, and there's flexibility
there because you can charge
faster, or you can throttle or
kind of smooth out that load
over time at lower rates of
charging.
And so this is installed on a
20,040 volt uh uh 40 amp panel
usually, uh, and that's pretty
standard across uh a lot of the
buildings we we work with.
Um, on slide 10, uh, you can
basically see the manufacturers
that we have partnerships with.
So again, we are a software
company, we are hardware
agnostic, um, and we're able to
integrate with so many of these
different hardware providers,
some big names like
ABPG, etc. because we use uh
something called open standards,
um, or specifically open charge
point protocol, OCPP, and I do
know New Mexico has done a great
job of integrating OCPP into um
the programs they have, and we
think this is a really important
A system for the industry
because that means you can, a
customer can connect their
charger to our network,
seamlessly efficiently, and
guess what, if they don't like
our service, they can connect it
to a different one, right? So it
doesn't leave them with a
stranded asset in the ground
that it can't get the value of
load management from.
Um, additionally, that's why
it's, you know, this is a is a a
safer system we believe there's
a bunch of advantages and so
that's why we promote this kind
of interoperability between
hardware and software.
On site 11, um, this is kind of
doing a simplified version of
What load management really
means and looks like, uh, to a
building, so.
And see in this unmanaged load,
there is, um, on the right, a
bunch of different appliances or
applications, HVAC systems, your
washing machines, etc. There's
already load uh happening on the
system. When you add an EV, all
of a sudden, boom, I can really.
You know,
The peak at a point where it
overwhelms the panel of capacity
can lead to demand charges on
utility bills, that sort of
thing, right? So the goal here
on slide.
12 is to show what manage
charging technologies like
Switch and due to smooth out
that load and ultimately reduce
and spread that over time,
again, below the panel limit. So
that'll um
You know, uh, invalidate the
need for costly uh upgrades,
that sort of thing.
So
I just want to take a moment,
uh, or a few moments over the
next few slides to commend uh
Mexico, your leadership uh on a
bunch of really smart policies
in the multi-unit EV charging
space. In fact, I talk with many
other states and say, hey,
there's some really uh some
things that you can do. So, just
wanna take a moment to commit to
mention these and why they're
important.
So, the first one is around EV
Redding building codes. Um,
And this is all about, uh, you
know, ensuring that
Buildings, new buildings, new
constructions are EV ready for
when it makes sense to install
chargers.
And um,
We can move on to the next
slide. I'll touch the other ones
later, the incentives and clean
transportation fuel, but on the
side 14, um, it kind of talks
about the three different
measures of EV readiness at a
building.
So you have, you know, on one
hand, you be capable spaces and
these only deal with panel
capacity in the dedicated
circuit.
EV ready spaces are kind of the
next step of readiness, right?
You're installing wiring from
the panel to the parking stall,
and then lastly, um, and that
terminates usually in in the
case of level 2. Again, that 240
fold outlet or junction boss,
and then the last one is EBSE
spaces, which means in fact a
level 2 charger has been
installed.
And so what New Mexico has done,
um, specifically, uh, in Mexico
regulation and licensing
department. Um, they voted to
adopt the ready codes in January
of this year.
And you'll see a table on the
right that breaks out the
different building types, um,
and I've highlighted in red in
the box are two buildings, which
are what multi-family kind of
category it falls under. And so
again, you'll see here 15% of
spaces on new buildings must be
EV capable.
And um 5% um must be EBSE
installed.
So again, this is a really,
really great first step to
ensure that um for new
buildings, they're ready to go
and provide this amenity to
tenants.
Um, I'll just note that on site
16, uh, you know,
The uh NMRLD didn't kind of pull
this out of thin hair. They
actually consulted um and use
the
International Code Council,
which is um
You know, a well-known body that
provides a model codes at many,
many states jurisdictions adopt
um in the IECC, the National
Energy Conservation code in
particular from 2021 is where,
um,
Uh and IRLD kind of pulled their
metrics from.
And so, again, I just wanted to
highlight um on slide 17, how
this relates to uh load
management and what Switch does,
um, beyond sort of the, you
know, percentage allocation of
of parking spaces.
Um
And this is how, again, the code
treats system capacity and
circuit capacity and management,
um, for the purposes of energy,
of energy management.
So in the blue box, um, bluish
green box on the left, you can
see that without an
Energy management system or EMS
in place, there's a higher
minimum capacity and and
amperage
requirements.
Um, and then this, you know,
obviously is where there's can
be unmanaged load and results in
all of the costly circuit and
panel upgrades that I mentioned
earlier.
Um, EMS, on the other hand, you
know, incentivizes building
engineers, developers, and
property managers to plan
holistically for the coordinated
installation and operation of
chargers.
Um, and so, you know, if, if a
building's not accounting for
this, um.
can basically lead to this
patchwork of, you know,
Incompatible EV charging
installations, um, higher
expenses, that sort of thing.
And it's um really we just find
this is a super, super valuable
tool. Um, especially again for
new construction where we found
that um if uh installing an EV
can be 4 to 8 times lower than
if you were to go back in and do
a retrofit of an existing
building. So doing this again at
the time of new construction,
you're really, really saving on
these types of costs. And then
the table on the right, I just
wanted
to show that um for 2024,
they've updated the code, so you
can see how the percentages have
changed uh relative to what the
NRMLT adopted earlier this year
from the 2021 code.
So moving on to federal
incentives.
Um, as you all are also aware,
there's a ton of federal
dollars, sort of in the space
currently, um, both the National
Electric vehicle infrastructure
or Nevy formula program and the
charging and fueling
infrastructure CFI grant
programs um have been super,
super invaluable, not just from
a monetary standpoint, but from
a standards and sort of
regulation standpoint, saying
let's get all on the same page
as an industry on um Up time,
reliability.
Um, I am American, there's a
bunch of different provisions,
right, that kind of helps get
the industry in line.
And
I will note though that these
are all for publicly accessible
charging stations, and I think
that's key because we're we're,
we're big fans of these programs
we've applied to these programs.
However, again, if we're talking
about multi-family spaces, which
are tend to be in a more private
setting. This, this, this money
is not available, um, and so,
um, you know, when we think
about that, and we think about
um
Opportunities and need in the
marketplace. We need to be
considerate of these things. Now
what is also positive is they
passed this 30C tax credit um
for placing chargers in service
and eligible low-income
community census tracts or
non-urban census tracts, and so
again, we think this is a really
important policy, um.
To take advantage of where where
possible.
So on the next slide here, I
just want to highlight, um,
You may, may, may again be aware
of this, but New Mexico has been
very successful in receiving a
federal grant awards. So I've
detailed here some of the big
wins, um, and in particular, uh,
I want to commend the county of
Santa Fe because they've taken a
look at how can we build this,
put this funding towards, um,
again, multifamily affordable
housing and transportation hubs.
So it's really, um, really
awesome to see these types of
projects come around.
Additionally, New Mexico has
done a great job on the next
slide with state and utility
incentives, and so, um, you
know, again, you heard from ER
Ener and PMM yes, PMM yesterday,
so I won't belabor those
programs. Um, I will add,
because you've not heard from El
Paso Electric, that they, we
think they have a really strong
make ready infrastructure
program. So what that is, is it
covers 100% of the
infrastructure needed on the
utility side of the meter to
build out EV charging at
multi-family building.
So that can really make a
difference at these big
apartment sites that need, you
know, that power, um, and, um, I
would make maybe one edition and
I'll, I'll mention this toner uh
separately, but, uh, we think
that their program could be
slightly tweaked by
Requiring um the provision again
for open standards specifically
open ADR and O and OCPP, which I
mentioned earlier, um, open the
ADR is, uh, it's written as an
either or in the in the statute,
um, however, we think that this
could be an end.
Um, because one is for demand
response programs to help the
grid, OCPP is more so about the
charter communication um and
load management piece. So, we
think having both of those
provisions in place for chargers
are are really important, I'd be
happy to share more information.
Moving on to the next slide, um,
the legislature also passed
earlier this year, HB 41, uh,
which makes New Mexico the 4th
state to develop a clean
transportation fuel standard.
Um, and so this is a really,
really big milestone when it
comes to transportation
decarbonization, as well as
creating, um, you know,
thousands of jobs, bringing
hundreds of millions of dollars
of wages and in wages and
investments to the state.
And if we, uh, it's really great
and that it's a market-based
approach, right? So, you um can
sustainably finance um more and
more EV charging infrastructure
through the sale of these
credits, um, and, and in
particular, that's really
helpful for multi-family
projects, which again can have
trouble with private sector
coming in and and wanting to
finance um these projects. So
it's just a really great um
policy all around. We've seen a
lot of success in the other
states that have it, and
been engaged in the process, um.
Working with the Environment
department.
All right, so moving on to a
couple of recommendations or
ideas for um this committee to
consider um as we look ahead to
the next.
Session.
So, um, I'll call out two in
particular.
Um
And, uh, kind of go into some
detail on, on each. So the first
one is uh right to charge laws,
and the second is um some
utility-led solutions um around
the distribution grid, um, and
sort of innovative uh programs
that we've seen in other places.
So we'll starting with the right
to charge a lot on uh slide 23.
So, basically, um,
Excuse me, the, the problem that
Or that it's trying to be solved
here is what I mentioned earlier
with our founder ran into,
right? Uh, in his case, uh,
condo board, maybe it's a
homeowners association says,
hey, you know, you can't, you
can't install EV chargers here,
right? We're not going to let
you do that.
Um, and
This, uh, this can be hard, you
know.
Both for the unit owners, but,
you know, especially for
renters.
And so, these types of policies
are right to charge policies are
designed to ensure that, hey,
you
Um, you, you know,
users must have access to
private charging um in these
contexts, and um they can really
Basically reduce these types of
barriers by saying, here's
You know, here's the law. He's
on the books, you have to allow
this, right?
And so, on the next slide,
you'll see that 9 states have
adopted these types of laws.
Um
And at the end of the day, uh,
you know, again, it's about
consumer protection, and uh
being being able to choose what,
you know, this option, if it
makes sense for them. Um, and
I'll just note there's some
nuance between these laws, uh,
how they're implemented around
contract requirements, safety
and architectural standards,
compliance and enforcement, the
list goes on and on, as you can
imagine. However, the important
thing is that, um, as to what
Colorado and California have
done ensuring that both the unit
owners
and renters are covered by those
laws, not just the unit owners.
So, moving on to um
Sort of more of the utility-led
solutions and looking at the
grid.
So
Again, it's uh you may call back
in 2020, um, H HB 233, uh, was
passed, and this was basically
an opportunity, um, for the
state to take a look at what are
going to be the, the
distribution grid needs of the
future as we see more and more
electrification happen.
And so there are a bunch of
different recommendations that
were made to do comprehensive
grid planning, um, around, you
know, load forecasting, hosting
capacity maps, so basically
seeing where, you know, where is
their load on the system right
now for for incapacity for folks
to build.
Um, and non-wire solutions, um,
you know, not tied directly to
the grid.
And so transportation
electrification showed up a good
amount in this, in this road
map.
And uh what was exciting is what
they found in a number of other
studies have found is that if
you do transportation
extrication rate, you can
actually put downward pressure,
utility rates for customers, um,
and, um, and can also modify
behavior when it comes to manage
charging through incentives,
through rate design, that sort
of thing. So there's a lot of
really cool opportunity here,
and in the graph, you know, I
just wanted to pull a little bit
of the data.
um, on market share again, 5% is
where New Mexico's at, um, but
you, you know, we've seen
projections in past
presentations where that number
just continues to climb, so we
need to start having this
conversation now. And again,
we're talking all electrocation,
so EVs are just one component of
it, buildings.
AI is coming data centers, etc.
So,
And commend the state for taking
this first step.
Um, when it does come to
electric vehicles, um, what
utilities can do on the next
slide, it's a bunch of really
cool stuff, so, um, you know,
Happy to talk through um a more
detail, the PEPCO rate, which is
targeted towards multi-family
buildings, um, Con Edison has uh
a really cool program for
commercial EV chargers where
they um help incentivize not
just the chargers but the load
management technology, um, and
then what I what I'd really like
to focus on is, uh, uh, where,
where I live, so maybe I'm
biased here in Portland, Oregon.
They're an investor owned
utility for the general
election.
trick as a, as a, as a really
innovative program where they're
saying, hey, let's install
chargers on our um light poles,
right? And so there they've
already installed over 60 EV
chargers level 2 on light poles
that uh that the utility has
access to in the city of
Portland in Milwaukee, and
they're, they've already seen
such success from this pilot
that they're planning to expand
it to an additional 120 pole
chargers. So these are the types
of things that if we can just
use existing assets,
efficiently.
You know, we can really get a
lot done here. And, you know,
unsurprisingly, they're being
really strategic about whether
they installing these light pole
chargers close to the family
residences, that sort of thing.
So, um, you know, what, what can
be done next, um, so,
Uh, my understanding is that
there are other representatives,
I believe Representative
Dickson, Representative Hochman
Visel and other outside
stakeholders, um, for
transparency, which is a member
of Avanced Energy United, who is
involved in these discussions
around what does taking what the
roadmap has put out there and
putting it into action look
like. So there's, I believe,
conversation of a sort of a
distribution system
modernization Act, um,
Modeled on SB 218, which
Colorado passed in their last
session, and um what's exciting
to us about that is, you know,
There's, you know, it's bringing
the utilities in and, you know,
let's put in place specific
Practices to take from the, you
know, what can we do from a
forecasting standpoint, what can
we be doing from a no regrets.
We're going to purchase this
infrastructure equipment because
we know the demand is coming,
these types of practices, and in
addition to that, they layer in.
Looking at managed charging as a
component of how to plan for the
grid. So things like automated
lo management load management
around EVs cannot be a way to
offset additional distribution
grid build out.
Um, lastly, you know, we all
know that, uh, these things take
time, and so how can we ensure
that the, um,
Electric utilities are
energizing what's needed in a
timely manner as well, um, in
this particularly happens around
them, you can mention, imagine
larger buildings that have more
electrical needs and how do we
make sure that they're hitting
those timelines and streamlining
permitting processes, that sort
of thing.
So we're, we're big fans of this
type of legislation. We think it
can do a lot for this sector, in
particular, uh, for, for
multi-family buildings.
Um, so with that, you know,
some, some closing thoughts, uh,
are just wanna again think,
thank you, Madam Chair and the
committee for holding this
today, um, uh, meetings, uh,
it's really an opportunity to
continue building stakeholder
engagement, um, you know,
continue to get more and more
policy alignment around what's
needed to really shape the grid
uh in transportation of the
future, um, you know, again,
centering underserved
communities.
Um, sectors that need some more
support like multi-unit or
multi-family buildings, um, and
then, you know, this last slide
here, which you have in front of
you a handout, um, is what our
sort of policy roadmap that
Switch looks like, uh, what we
generally support a lot of
what've discussed is in there,
um, but would be happy to touch
on any of those other subjects,
um, if there are questions. So
with that, um, you know, I'll
yield my time, uh, back to you,
Madam Chair, I just want to say
thank you again.
Thank you for the presentation.
Um,
Do you have any questions?
OK.
Tara, our representative I'm
sorry.
For the presentation and
Information, um.
Couple of questions. I'm gonna
go.
Glad you gave us.
Oh yeah, the space.
You know, back on the slide.
I say 12.
was
Um
Davy charging scenario
managedar.
So
talked about managed charging to
smooth out the load.
Um
How you mentioned some, what is
the mechanism, how is that gonna
be paid for, and I mean, can you
go over the controls of how this
is going to be done.
In that management scenario,
thank you, man.
Yes, thank you, Representative
Madam Chair. Um,
So, yeah, so our, our technology
switch control, for example,
basically layers in with the
charger to set up, hey, when
does it make sense to be
charging the station based on
the property or the tenant's
needs, and so, um, what that
does effectively is if someone
plugs in their EV, they get,
they can start charging, but not
at the full 19 KW, you know,
power level that the charger
has, maybe they're throttling it
down to, you know, 2k.
spread out over 8 hours, so they
still get the same amount of
charge over a longer period of
time, essentially, as opposed to
really fast charging over over a
short period. And so,
Yep
Your technology is like a
transformer or a sort or a.
It's gonna uh control the
How, how much charge gets done
in the time.
You, so that's what you're gonna
be paid for.
Exactly, yeah. Excuse me, yeah,
that's exactly right. Um, so
we're paid a, um,
Yeah, I believe it's an annual
fee for this type of management,
um, and it's just, it's really
software at the end of the day
we have with our phones, right?
Exactly, yep, yep, exactly.
Um, thank you for that. So I'm
just wondering like how you're,
you wanna, you wanna have the
ability to have to install your
units so that you can control,
you know, the, the power, the
load that go, the charges the
vehicles, so that's, that's
great. I was just wondering
that, but, um.
So, um, slide 9.
The utility demand programs.
So
And he talked about the added
value with other in that kind of
goes with that, maybe that was
part of my question. I was
getting to this question.
So my, my ultimate question is
how are you and others working
with.
Um
Our utilities and with our co
op, you know, all our co ops
and, and going into the rural um
areas.
Especially and looking at how
you're going to install this and
and explain to them how you're
gonna have these controls.
When they are the, you know,
they manage.
The utility, essentially, and I
know that there's a bill, it's a
power up bill. It's been.
Being discussed, I assume that's
what you were referring to with
Dixon and
And um the hill, so thank you
for bringing that up. So how,
how is that all coming together,
cause if you're part of those
conversations that I think we
need to know like,
What is that distribution of
bill looking like and who?
Who is all part of that
conversation because it's going
to be essential that you're not
leaving anybody out and so, um,
I'd like to know.
Yes, thank you, Representative
and Madam Chair, for the, for
the question. Um, so, just on
the first part, uh, around rural
communities and kind of how
things tie in there. Um,
You know what I'll say is how we
work, you know, again, from the
mindset of our customer being
the, the property owners or the
managers. We try to give them as
much information as possible
upfront. So here are the
available rebates. Here's the
available, um, if there's a
demand response program that
they can tie into, um, all that
information, um, and we also try
to provide them with education,
outreach materials as much as
possible to their, to their
tenants. Um, now, you know,
Uh, I'm not as familiar uh with
Mexico's geography, but, you
know, generally speaking, right,
um,
sort of more urban, let's say
denser areas is where we see
more multi-family buildings. So,
um, in rural communities, um,
you know, we're still there may
be many renters with single
family households, as we
understand it. Um, you know,
Candidly, you know, the load
management technology for single
family residences isn't as
impactful because um you know,
it's one charger usually or
maybe it's Max 2 chargers for,
you know, couple of folks in the
household, that sort of thing.
So the value isn't going to be
there as much as if we're
talking, um, you know, an
apartment building with, um, you
know, 50 tenants, 20 chargers,
that sort of thing. So that's
just from our perspective,
however, we, we totally agree
when we're talking about
underinvested, under.
Serve sectors needs to be a part
of the conversation 100%. Um,
and then some of the federal
programs, I'll just note that I
mentioned earlier, um, around
the CFI dollars and the nebu
dollars, right? That's really
can be really impactful for
those communities as well,
especially Ney where, um, you
know, either there's primarily
one main highway kind of coming
through and making sure there's
charging access every 150 miles.
So, um, that's one angle in
terms of just to get on the
piece of legislation in the
bill.
Um, I, I'm more sort of saying
this because I, I had
experienced more so in Colorado.
I'm just getting up to speed
with myself, um, working with,
uh, again, that, that group
advance our United. Um, I know
Michael Barrio is uh our contact
there I know he'd love to have a
conversation and bring in as
many stakeholders as possible. I
believe um WRA NRTC who was
involved in the Colorado bill
are also are also part of it.
So, um, I'm not trying to hide
anything, just transparent so
yeah, yeah, that's, that's,
yeah.
That's what I understand. I
know, I just want to be clear,
there's no.
Yeah, that, you know, it's just
new and it's coming up and so
these are some of the things
that a lot of us have been
working on, so we just want, you
know, how you, I want to know
how you're doing it so that no
one's left out.
that's, that's what I've been
experiencing in in the
conversations and I've had round
tables and I've had legislators
here for a summit on these
discussions and working with
Colorado myself, so this is all
new, and it's just getting, I
just wanna know how far along it
is and, and just sharing those
things up so that we have a good
bill.
Really, that's really, really, I
want to ensure, but I appreciate
your time and, and what you're
bringing to New Mexico. I think
this is gonna be, this is
something that's really needed.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Townsend.
Thank you.
Madam Chair.
Um,
I'm trying to get my arms
around.
Austin
How does a property owner.
I mean, it's either going to
increase the rent.
Of the building.
Or there's gotta be a mechanism
for them to recoup.
costs that they incur.
From the person that's charging.
And that seems like if there's
just one person in there
charging, they're gonna have a
lot of cost.
The bear
And then you're gonna have other
people that say if you spread it
over the building, their rental
costs are gonna go up and
they're gonna be upset. So I'm
just trying to figure out how
does that property owner.
Recoup his investment uh
representative Madam Chair, I, I
really appreciate the question.
It's a, it's a great one.
So, I'll start off with
Um
Fortunately, in your state, as
mentioned earlier, there are a
bunch of great um rebates, tax
credits, I can really are at the
outset, bring down the cost of
paying for a charger, you know,
I think this was mentioned
yesterday, but
The 400, let's take the $400 tax
credit.
That'll cover the cost of a
level to, a lot of level 2
charging stations, um.
And then you flare in, you know,
the next big cost is the
installation, right? Um,
So I text your credit can also
be applied to that if there's
money left over, um.
Or, you know, maybe there's um
some other grants, some other
rebates through the utility PNM,
etc. that can be applied and
stacked, right? So that, so we
can already bring down the cost
from that viewpoint. Um, it does
take, you know, some time, some
paperwork. I don't want to
invalidate that. Not everyone
has that, but that is, that is
one angle. Um, in terms of
Our costs, you know, our network
management costs, um, we try to
keep it as affordable as
possible. Um, every building is
a bit different, but we're
talking, you know, 100, 100s of
dollars, not an excessive amount
of money, um, that again, if
possible, can be spread out
across many tenants to make it a
much, much, much more
affordable. Um,
In terms of the value that it's
bringing, so, so yes, I'm not
gonna deny that there's a chance
that they're the property
manager may decide, OK, we're
gonna factor this in, uh, you
know, through maybe a slight
incremental, you know, rent
increase, and that sort of
thing, but they don't have to,
right? They can offer this as an
amenity to attract tenants. We
see that very commonly in a lot
of our properties to retain
tenants. Um, and then
additionally, they can get the
tenants, um, depending on how
they work things out with the
rates.
Um, you know, they can, you
know, pay into programs, uh, or,
or line up with programs, time
of use programs, that sort of
thing, to really minimize the
price um of of how much you're
charging, I believe, uh, another
speaker yesterday said they pay,
you know, $3 to charge
overnight, um, for their
vehicle. So,
You know
Everyone's got to pay at some
level for, for their vehicles,
whether it's a, you know, gas,
ice vehicle or EV.
But we just try to work with
them and give the education
here's how you can make it as
affordable as possible.
Thank you for that.
And
the other thing is,
For example, if you're building
a
Faulty
building today.
And
Under the rules, if I read them
correctly, there's a formula for
how many eV.
Charging stations would be
required, correct?
And if you bring a level 2 in
for each of those.
That's about 50 amps, I think,
per per charging station.
So if, if you're bringing, uh,
you know, if you're building a
Common size
apartment complex, so you're
gonna have
And just for a round number,
you're gonna have 10 charging
stations.
That's 500 amps that you got to
design for coming in.
And that 500 amps is going to
increase the demand and the the
building.
I do
Not
I get it that they plug in and
they, they can charge, but how
does that property owner who
built that demand in.
The building. How does he
recover that?
Installation cost.
Because it's going to be ongoing
if the demand goes up every
month is
His demand is going to be
higher, whether he uses it or
not. It's gonna be up there.
As he is
He's built
He's provided for that coming
into the building.
How does he recover that?
Yeah, another great question,
Representative, thank you and uh
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
you, you, you're kind of putting
it in perfectly for the value of
our types of technology of load
management technology, because
what we like to say, um,
40 or 50 whatever the scenario
is, we do about we recommend um
a 4 to 1 uh sort of circuit
sharing ratio, um, and so we're
able to basically, um,
Yeah
Or chargers in that one panel
because we are again reducing
that load, um, and smoothing it
out over time, so you can
charge uh I don't think that's
in line with the
With the order that I read out
as CID, it says,
That you have to install
You know, we said TM, I don't
know. We can use whatever number
you want to, but if you have, it
doesn't say.
That of these 10, only 2 of them
have to be fast chargers and the
rest.
Yeah, I mean,
Some of those people that move
into that building, they may all
want, I mean,
If it's this room and we were,
we were charging, we'd all want
to be fast chargers and out of
there, I think, I mean.
You don't think so?
Well, how did,
yeah, I don't most of it is done
at night, like at home, you do
it at night between 3 cents a
kilowatt per hour between 2 and
5 in the morning, that's the
right now. So it's, it's, it's
cheap and you do it normal most
people work, sleep at night,
right? Not everybody, but that's
when you do the charging. That's
what helps with the.
Well,
It
How
is that
I
How is the technology work?
Because
The main meter that's
That is running for the
building.
is coming in at
You know, 1215 cents a KWH.
I, I mean, that's
What his bill's gonna be, you
know.
If that charger is is pulling
from that.
And it's, as our chairwoman
said, you know, they said a
reduced cost.
How is that deducted from the
main meter so that
that
That tenant is not charged.
15 cents, so you can charge it.
A lesser cost.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Madam Chair, for that question.
Yeah, um, you know, I think in
that.
The scenario you're describing,
you know, sub submetering can
come into play here, um, and
that can be an effective
mechanism. Um,
You've also, uh,
No, it's just utility specific
what their terms are, um, but I
think just to respond to the 50
amp piece. I, I believe what
you're referring to there is the
provision, um, again, without
EMS or energy management
services, load management in
place.
That that's the minimum, the 7.2
KBA 50 amps per space.
That drops to 25 amps per space,
3.3 kBA with EMS. So again, um,
we're able to reduce that
minimum, use this technology to
get the most out of, you know,
existing panel essentially. So
hopefully that helps add some
color.
OK. Um,
I
Is what you're talking about,
has that been implemented and
updated in the rule that I
recently read. Is there a new
rule out that says that these
He um
Management
Uh, options are there.
Cause I
I haven't seen them.
Uh, I think you, Representative
Madam Chair. Yeah, um, I'd be
happy to, uh, send over the
current uh regulations, and they
have this um this language in
them, it's from the 2021 ICC
code, um, and so I'm happy to
forward that after.
Well, I, I appreciate it, ma'am,
Sharon. I'm, I'm really
interested in, in how we
prevent.
Ra old costs from going up were
already stressed on
On the amount of rental
properties in our state. I mean,
quite frankly, and, and
Not everybody can afford
increases, so I, I'm, I am
interested in how we manage that
and
And how we
Eat from
Causing
I want to say harm or imposition
on someone that isn't
participating.
It just seems like it's
something that we ought to be.
Thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Um
So I
I, I talked to my constituents
quite a bit and um one group I
met with work apartments or do
you call them, um.
Secondary
secondary, I forgot what you
call it, uh, excuse me for a
part apartment owners, um, yeah,
multi, multi-family,
this is what they wanted. They
want chargers, clothes that they
can use every day. So that's why
you're here to kind of introduce
us to it. So, um,
But this is important to them,
especially some of our younger
ones, uh,
Who are just getting EVs and
just, you know, seeing the value
of them and it's really a lot
cheaper for them. Um, what I
found in all of this
presentation interesting was the
um the polls putting EVs on
poles. I hadn't heard that
before, so can you go elaborate
on that?
little bit more.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and happy to, yeah, this
is, um, you know, I know a
number of utilities are starting
to experiment with this, I'll
say, um,
Uh, there's a national grid out
out in the east coast I know
doing this, but yeah,
essentially the way it works is
Other the um
You know, the utility has access
to poles where it knows it has
capacity to add EV charging,
ideally and it's in a strategic
location, um, and then they're
able to add uh chargers to the
poles. I'll note, um, in the PPG
example here, the utility owns
those chargers in the National
Grid example, I believe, uh, the
cities or municipalities they
work with on those chargers, um.
You know, there, there's also,
of course, private sector, third
party opportunities, um, in
terms of ownership and um yeah,
I think it's just a really great
way to provide um
Cheaper, you'd be charging
installation, right, because you
don't have to add a bunch of the
other stuff that we've tighten
the powers already there, right?
You just kind of add the charger
and, and there we go. Um.
And then, you know, probably,
you know, I haven't looked at
the exact rates. I imagine
they're uh charging on more of
a, you know, it could be more of
a public rate, um, so that's one
consideration cause those tend
to be higher, obviously. Um, but
I think there's ways to tailor
these programs, you know, for,
um,
Different users. So, uh yeah, we
think that this is a really cool
novel idea and should be
explored.
Agree, right.
Well, I think that's it, uh,
very thorough and, and thank you
for your presentation. Thank you
for coming all the way just to
present to us. Appreciate it.
Absolutely, yeah, thank you for
the opportunity and my contact
information is there if anyone
has any other questions. OK.
Thank you.
Or
All right, we will continue. Um,
I'm sure people will come in,
um, our next presenters proposed
electric school bus legislation,
yay, um, and I believe I know
you too. So I'll have let you
introduce yourselves in um
whenever you're ready, go ahead
and get started. People will be
trickling in, OK?
Good morning. I better.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and,
uh, members of the committee.
I'm Giovanna Rossi, and I am
with Collective action
strategies.
And a number of different policy
things over the years here, um,
in this committee and others.
I'm, I'm here this morning, uh,
with Mom's Clean Air Force.
And um
I am a.
Mother of two, I raised my
children in Albuquerque.
And um.
Every day during their
elementary school years, I.
Walked my kids to school and.
Had to walk by.
Uh, these little buses idling,
and we breathed in that air
every day for a number of years.
Um
And
My daughter's best friend ended
up with asthma.
Um, and sometimes she and my
daughter would miss playtime
outside because they had to run
back in and get the inhaler or
they had to take to help her to
the nurse's office.
And um, so they missed out on a
lot of different activities.
Um
I've seen the health impacts on
our kids.
Uh, and that's why I'm here
today as a mom and representing
mom's Clean Air Force.
And mom's Clean Air Force is an
organization of over a million
members across the nation and
20,000 members here in New
Mexico.
Um, and I'm, I'm just gonna
speak briefly with you today
about the benefits of bringing
electric school buses, uh, to
New Mexico and um how that will
impact.
Uh, our kids' health.
And then I'll turn it over to my
colleague here, um, and she can
introduce herself and then we
have other speakers.
Yeah.
So just go on
Um, OK, so I
have a couple of handouts that
you'll probably notice they're
very colorful. They say they
talk about electric school
buses, um, so you can have those
in front of you, but I'm, I'm
just gonna sort of.
Talk a little bit about electric
school buses and the and and the
health impacts on kids.
So kids who ride an electric
school bus.
Get a cleaner, quieter, and
healthier commute.
While school districts save
money on fuel and maintenance.
New electric buses are going to
be rolling into towns across the
country, and we want New Mexico
to benefit from these cleaner
buses, cleaner air, and a
healthier ride to school.
So, let's talk a little bit
about the health impacts of
diesel exhaust, um.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, as you probably know,
diesel exhaust is a toxic soup
of gasses and particulates,
including 40 known carcinogens.
It's linked to various
detrimental impacts on human
health.
Children are particularly
vulnerable.
Because the, they breathe more
air per pound of body mass, and
their bodies are still
developing.
Air pollution also impacts our
ability to concentrate and
learn.
Diesel fumes are also associated
with headaches, nausea, poor
concentration, impaired
cognitive performance and
behavioral problems, making it
difficult for students to learn
once they arrive in the
classroom.
Diesel exhaust is a known
trigger for asthma attacks and
other respiratory inflammation
and irritation.
Inflammation and irritation
causes the airway to constrict
and produce mucus, both of which
cause narrowing of the airways,
making it difficult to breathe,
resulting in an asthma attack.
For anyone who has asthma or has
a child with asthma.
You know that this is a serious
medical condition and requires
urgent intervention.
Here in New Mexico, asthma is
one of the most common chronic
diseases with an estimated
136,000 adults and 26,000
children currently having the
disease.
People with asthma are more
likely to miss school or work,
report feelings of depression
and experience and overall
reduced quality of life.
Asthma is also costly with
expenses from routine checkups,
emergency department visits,
hospitalizations.
Um, and medications, putting a
significant burden on families,
the healthcare sector and the
economy. Asthma is a leading
cause of school absenteeism and
a study by University of
Michigan Public Health
epidemiologists estimates that
transitioning to clean school
buses across the country could
result in 14 million fewer
absences among bus riding
children for typical school
year. Imagine what that number
might be right here in New
Mexico.
So the message here today, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee is that electric
school buses provide a healthier
option, and they're a real
option for our kids here.
Um, a few benefits of electric
school buses.
Students and drivers, we know,
enjoy a quieter and smoother
ride.
Due to reduced vibration and
noise. Kids arrive at school
more calm and ready to start the
day, because they don't have to
shout and uh shout over each
other on the bus, and it, it
actually really helps the
drivers concentrate as well
because they don't have.
So much noise in the bus.
Um, we already discussed how
kids who ride an emissions free
electric bus can benefit from
improved cognitive function and
decreases in absenteeism.
Electric school buses themselves
can also serve as opportunities
to see science, technology,
engineering, and math lessons
come to life.
In comparison to diesel buses,
electric ones require less
maintenance over their lifetime,
saving dollars that can be
better spent in the classroom.
And wouldn't we all like to see
that?
The regenerative braking system
results in less wear and there's
no need for engine or exhaust
system maintenance.
Depending on the cost of
electricity and fuel.
Electric school buses can be a
more economical.
Uh, option to run.
So electric school buses will
reduce our children's exposure
to harmful diesel exhaust and
climate pollution and it's just
the smart way.
For for the future of our kids.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for
listening.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Shelley
Manlev, and I drove here today
in my used Nissan Leaf that I
bought 3 years ago, and I have
to say from personal experience
that it is indeed a much quieter
ride and
Um, truly a remarkable
experience if many of you, any
of you have ever done it to know
that when you are driving down
the road.
You are not adding to carbon
pollution. You are not spewing
the smell that especially if
you're idling, right?
It's uh, it's really uh an
incredible opportunity.
For our state and in
particularly for our school
children, what we're here to
talk about today.
So I'm here. I'm the executive
director of a group called
Does everybody have a healthy
climate in New Mexico.
Yeah.
Please
It's the one with that pretty
light yellow background.
And that great logo.
You know, it's Lego of our
state.
Our mission is to mobilize New
Mexico healthcare and public
health professionals to advocate
for climate solutions that
protect health and that promote
equity.
We have over 220 members we've
just started a year and a half
ago, myself and a small group of
passionate, dedicated
volunteers, including several
physicians, several public
health leaders, and we have
grown steadily and powerfully.
Because we are passionate about
bringing the health voice to
something that
We all need to be involved in,
right? Protecting health and
promoting equity.
We address equity, excuse me, we
address education and advocacy.
And also our own organizational
sustainability.
And we work, of course, with
elected officials, with our
academic and higher education
training institutions.
And with healthcare
organizations.
So today I'm gonna focus. It's
kind of interesting that my
colleague focused on the health
impacts, um, I myself am a
public health professional, um,
you may, some of you may have
seen me in the capacity as the
president of the New Mexico
Public Health Association.
Um, I've dedicated my life to
tackling preventable and
Great public health threats,
easy things such as tobacco,
alcohol, opioids, childhood
injuries, right?
And now I'm tackling one of the
greatest existential threats
facing.
Our communities, which is
climate change.
So I'm gonna highlight why we as
health professionals and really
Giovanna shared with support
expediting the move to electric
school buses. I'm gonna actually
go over the proposed legislative
changes. And then briefly review
some of the economic impacts.
Air pollution is community is
hurting our communities. You can
see in those pictures, picture
of course of fires, fire that I
experienced with the calf's
Canyon Hermit peak fire, largest
fire, New Mexico to ever faced
2022, I'm sure you have images
in your minds from Riodosa this
year, the hea, New Mexico is at
great risk for wildfires, and
these are not the wildfires of
50 years ago and not the
wildfires that I grew up.
With right
And then that second picture is
actually the picture of the sun
of our co-founder.
Doctor Paul Charlton, he's the
director of emergency medicine
at Gallup Indian Medical Center.
He has no history of asthma in
his family, 2 children when his
son Owen.
was a, as you can see, a very, a
little baby, he developed
asthma. Paul lives, you know, we
drive anyone who drives.
From New Mexico to Arizona or
California along that I-40
corridor knows how many trucks
and.
Electric school buses are either
a medium or a heavy duty truck.
Trucks are responsible for 80%.
80% of the greenhouse gasses and
other pollutants emitted by.
Transportation.
Transportation is almost half of
all greenhouse gas.
Admitted in the United States
just a context.
And on the right, you see.
Levels in our communities, the
grades that the American Lung
Association gave.
For our counties. Now we don't
measure VPA does not measure
pollutants in all of our
counties. I have to say it's
something our organization is
greatly concerned about.
You know, we can't just care
about Berna Leo, you know, our
major metropolitan. I'm not sure
our major urban areas, right? We
need to care about all of our 33
counties, all of our tribes,
however,
EPA only has air quality
monitoring for ozone in 9 of our
33 counties, and if you look at
those grades, 4 of those
counties, and those are the
counties that have highest
populations get an F for ozone.
Ozone is what you experience
when you breathe in smog.
I came to New Mexico 30 years
ago as a smog refugee, I
actually have to say I grew up
in Los Angeles.
Terrible smog and it's, you
know,
Makes everyone sick who
experiences it, and that's where
we are with ozone. We actually
are having to remediate that,
and it's a great challenge
because of being this
transportation corridor and of
course our oil and gas industry.
As well
Also just want to say because
um.
Particle pollution as Giovanna
mentioned,
Diesel
Buss emit particles as well as
other pollutants and of the five
counties that articulates are
measured, 2 of them get F's, and
again, that's Dona Anna and
Bernalio.
About half of our state's
population.
The next 3 slides just highlight
social vulnerability.
We now, unfortunately, and I'm
gonna say despite the great work
of each of you, my colleagues
and everyone who's so dedicated
to caring about the communities
of New Mexico, where with state
with one of the highest levels
of social vulnerability.
Social vulnerability refers to
things like income, right,
poverty. It refers to housing,
it refers to education.
We're gonna get it up there.
Actually
I'm
Maybe it's the electric school
buses one? No?
Right.
If it's
Yes, there it is.
Right. And we are on slide.
I
I'm just gonna run through that.
I'm not gonna go to just want to
visually to see, and it's great
to look up here.
The darker the blue, the higher
the level of social
vulnerability, the greater the
health problems.
And we can see just looking at
that the southern right from the
west to the east has higher
levels of social vulnerability.
If you go to the next slide.
That's New Mexico. We know those
areas of the greatest social
vulnerability in that blue, and
then I just want to take you to
the next slide, slide 7.
This gives you a context of how
high our social vulnerability is
they measure it from 0 to 1, the
Centers for Disease Control and
one being the highest
vulnerability, 0 being the
lowest, and this is McKinley
County, again, where our board
chair lives, and its social
vulnerability score is 0.988.
So social vulnerability, we are.
In terms of health and other
social risk factors at extreme
vulnerability for health risks,
which makes it even more
important for New Mexico to take
this step to clean the air to
protect our children.
Go to the next slide.
When we talk about social
vulnerability, we're talking
about people, we're talking
about our most vulnerable
populations and climate change
impacts our most vulnerable
populations, the greatest.
Infants and children, we're not
going to go through all the
ways, but when I say climate
change, you can also substitute
diesel pollution, that's causing
climate change, right? So
infants and children, the
elderly people who are low
income.
Outdoor workers, you know,
actually having fewer diesel
fumes go by the roads as people
are working outside. Of course,
there's other ways that we need
to protect these populations as
well. People with disabilities,
including children with
disabilities, who might be one
of our greatest risk
populations, and um.
For any of you who've had a
child with special disabilities,
often transported in the smaller
school buses with extra help,
and in the meantime as they sit
and idle, just imagine, right?
These children are sitting on
idling buses, longer time than
most children are as somebody
assists somebody else in getting
on.
But they're breathing in that
air.
And there are many other groups
that are most vulnerable.
Let's go on to the next slide.
Because
This is one way, one of many,
but one important contribution
that we can do to clear the air,
reduce carbon pollution, and
protect the health of our
communities. And I just love
this picture because this is the
picture where I grew up, I have
to say I've lived longer in New
Mexico than I lived in the
community that I grew up in, you
know, spent 18 years there and
I've been in New Mexico now over
30 years. I understand that I'm
still a newcomer.
I am.
And I love this. I love this
state and this place, so.
Actually, you know, people hear
about all the terrible things,
you know, the things Giovanna
was talking about.
But we can do something. We can
make these changes, and this
shows what happened in the
community I grew up in 1960.
That is what.
I looked at it, right?
2021, this is what Los Angeles
was, as long as it's not
wildfires today.
And that's because of policyies.
It's not because of individual,
I, I wish people drove less.
Don't we all, right?
But not happening in Los
Angeles, in New Mexico, huge
challenge not to drive. We're a
rural state, we have to drive.
Our children need to travel long
distances to get to school,
especially our children in rural
communities. They need to spend
a lot of time on school buses,
right? They can't just, it's not
just a 10 minute ride.
But we did that through policies
like the EPA Clean Air, you
know, and, and lead and
gasoline.
And now I have to say we could
take even that much greater po
progress
by eliminating.
Eel and other combustion engines
in cars and trucks and electric
school buses are an important
part of that.
Next slide.
So
We've got this opportunity.
Through this proposed
legislation.
To provide school districts with
the option to replace their
current diesel school buses with
electric or that should be an or
zero emission alternative fuel
buses.
So, I wanted to lay out what the
current statute says, which is
the PED provides for the
replacement of school buses on a
twelve-year cycle.
That means actually, you know,
if we have the resources and we
have the will, we could in 12
years replace every single
school bus in New Mexico and we
have about 20,000.
With an electric school bus.
Um, school districts can also
petition for additional buses
for growth or if they have
special needs.
So the first part of the
recommended policy change is
that school districts shall have
the option, right, to replace
the school bus with an electric
or zero emission alternative
fuel bus.
Or to add if they're adding a
new school bus, not just
replacing it. They could add it
with an electric school bus
instead of a diesel bus.
Next
Currently, a PE does is it pays
for the diesel bus replacement.
These are expensive. I have to
say I was a little shocked when
I learned how much buses in
general cost, um, it didn't cost
$23,000 like my Nissan Leaf.
Um
So
$140,000 for a diesel bus.
A lot of money, big investment.
And what the recommended changes
in the policy are is that.
Up to those funds up to the
$140,000.
Well, either
Help districts who want
Don't get any grant funding,
right? There is.
There's a little grant funding
available, um, more than a
little, but maybe a little for
New Mexico, but it's some
districts, whether or not they
get any extra funding from the
federal government or through
EPA grants, um,
Are gonna want to do this
because
The way it benefits their kids
and their communities, and also
because over the lifetime of the
bus, there's tremendous
opportunities for cost savings
related to maintenance, and then
some small opportunities for
cost gains related to vehicle to
grip, which grid, which I'll
talk about in a few minutes.
So if schools don't get any
outside funding.
They could this um proposed
policy will allow them to get
that $140,000 which they could
then use towards the purchase of
an electric school bus.
Electric school buses currently
cost 400,000 excuse me.
4 $100,000 right?
That's $260,000 more than a
diesel school bus for the
initial layout.
Um, makes sense, wouldn't cost
the PED anything extra than
they're currently allocating and
that money could be used.
For districts who do obtain
funding for at least 50% of the
cost of the electric school bus
with the zero emission bus. Um,
they would be allowed to receive
from the PED up to.
$140,000 or the gap. So if they
get a grant that covers.
Close to the entire, you know,
$350,000 but there's a shortfall
of 50,000 for the bus and then
another shortfall for the
electric charging infrastructure
that's needed, they will be
allowed from the PED through
this recommended change to get
that money from the PED again,
not more than any other
district, but up to that amount.
Next
And then the last part of this
recommended policy change is
that districts would be allowed
to enter into agreements to use
their electric school buses as
energy storage.
This new technology which is
called vehicle to grid is
something that could help in two
ways. One is it can help.
Uh, potentially raise money for
districts to and help
communities to access
electricity at much cheaper
hours, um, if you own an
electric vehicle, um,
Many of our utilities offer
rates that reduce that highly
reduced rates like.
In the um late night hours from
midnight until, you know, 9 a.m.
when electricity is not used as
intensively, and yet it's
available, right? We know that
on our grid we waste a lot of
electricity, so they offered
reduced rates, so districts
could actually get electricity
at those rates, and if their
buses, particularly in the
summer, are on weekends are not
being used, and they have
electricity needs. They could
actually use their buses to
storage to power the district
itself.
Or
It could potentially sell that
energy back to somebody else,
but particularly in terms of
powering the district, these
buses, as you can imagine, they
got big batteries and they can
store a fair amount of
electricity to use both.
Her daily supply, but also
especially in the case of
emergencies, um, as we know our
neighbor Texas has experienced a
lot of blackouts, and it could
be incredibly helpful to a
district to have emergency
backup power stored in their
electric school buses.
Next, oops, I just love this
little picture. A day in the
life of Colorado's electric
school buses, Colorado has
invested in enormous amount of
resources into
Supporting their districts in
Purchasing electric school
buses, and you can see from that
what happens, right, that.
7 in the evenings collects from
the grid, right? Morning the bus
goes out on its route. I love
the little happy children.
And then it's can also store
excess solar energy if you have
solar panels.
Next slide.
So this slide summarizes a
handout that I believe um
Charles gave each of you, which
is really a much more detailed
description of the um
costs and benefits of this
transition.
Um, but I want to just highlight
a few things and, um, you know,
on the surface it looks like
electric school buses are a lot
more expensive because the
initial purchase price is
substantially more.
But when you start going down
through this, you'll see that
fuel cost, right?
Electricity is much, much
cheaper than diesel, especially
if you power up.
With the kind of plans that
enable you to power up at night,
which is perfect for school
buses. So what we do at my
house, charge at night, drive
during the day.
Maintenance costs, there is no
comparison. Again, I just have
to speak from personal
experience.
I've had my used electric car
for 2 years and I've never taken
it into the shop, except for the
tires, you do still have to,
right, get the tires filled with
air and replace them if you get
a flat tire. There are only in
a, in a electric car.
N
There are only 2 moving parts
compared to 200.
And
Regular
Gasoline powered cars and you
can just imagine doing the math
with the opportunities for break
things breaking down and the
required just regular
maintenance. In addition, the
degenerative braking systems,
um, not only produce power,
right, but they require much,
much less, excuse me, the
regenerative, not the
degenerative, the regenerative
braking systems, um.
And uh
That maintenance costs could be
$5000 to $100,000 over the 12
year life of the bus, so it's no
small amount as you think about
the maintenance cars, us in your
own cars. Um,
There are incentives and grants
for electric school buses that
districts are applying for, and
none for diesel. We have, uh,
you probably know about, I
believe, 25.
Electric school buses that have
been awarded or already have
gone through the EPA grant, we
have the opportunity, many of
our school districts are
applying for those grants, we
hope, you know, New Mexico is
considered a high priority area
almost all our school districts.
And then
The lifespan question, um, I
think is one, you know,
currently gasoline-powered
buses, they have so many things
to break down and wear out
currently only last about 12
years, some of them need to be
replaced sooner, and there's a
possibility the electric school
buses will last much longer or
that maybe only their battery
will need replacement, and I
have to say every single year.
Things get better in the
electric vehicle range. The
electric vehicle today is vastly
superior, you know, again that
Nissan Leaf, you know, used to
get 70 miles and the first one
got 50 mile range, now 215, and
of course they're electric
vehicles, they get much, much
greater range. And then, of
course, how do you estimate the
costs of environmental and
health benefits. Um, there's
actually a study that did.
And that study estimated that in
large cities and it's a recent
study that the cost of reduced
mortality and emergency and
healthcare visits due to
childhood asthma was
approximately 200 the savings
was about $200,000 per bus.
5
So healthy climate in Mexico
strongly, strongly supports this
transition to electric school
buses and to the electrification
of all vehicles. It will protect
the health of children and our
most vulnerable communities,
again thinking about where our
public schools are, where they
idle, and we know our public
schools are located in
communities.
Filled with some of our most
vulnerable populations and we
want to see that.
To protect our lower income
communities of color.
Electric school buses also are a
climate solution that will
contribute to reducing climate
change, which is having so many
of those health equity impacts
and reducing air pollutants that
affect all of our well-being
that will lead to long-term
healthcare savings costs,
improvements of
Improvements of health and, of
course, progress towards our
greenhouse gas reduction
emission goals.
Electric school buses can
contribute to grid resilience
and we need to be looking at
making all of our communities
more resilient to those negative
impacts of climate change.
And will also potentially
increase access to charging
infrastructure in rural
communities. We've got schools
everywhere. And if our schools
can be a place where people can
use and in many cases, there are
also agreements with the
chargers that are used for um by
school districts could then be
made available to the public.
And then finally electric school
buses are one of the ways that
we can move towards a positive
future that is equitable and
sustainable.
The last slide.
This is part of a larger picture
of climate solutions and um.
Electric school buses.
Having state public health and
climate programs so we can
evaluate and understand the
health impacts.
Resilience resources, funding
for our communities so important
that they can plan and purchase
some of the resources they need
to address climate change.
Health buffer zones.
We hope not from school
districts because then they'll
be electric and we won't need,
you know, really we should put
fences around our diesel engines
as the idle, so nobody stands
within a quarter mile. That's
obviously ridiculous, but we
need health buffer zones around
our oil and gas producing sites
and to clean them up to make
sure that they are as clean as
possible.
Of course, we want to do
everything we can.
To meet our greenhouse gas.
Reduction targets emission
targets, and finally, we need to
look at occupational heat
standards to protect our
teachers.
Many of whom are really
suffering in their classrooms.
Other indoor workers as well as
outdoor workers and to look at
all the ways that together we
can help protect our future.
Thank you so much.
Great. Thank you. Next is, um.
Jeannie Stevens, Global Warming
Express, and she's online, I
believe.
Oh.
OK, Diana, right,
whenever you're ready, Diana.
Hello, can you hear me?
Can you, um, hear me and see me.
I can't hear you, but let's see,
we can't see you yet.
All right. And that's totally
fine. If not, um, really
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you all today. Um,
just a quick question, I'm new,
um, to this. I am actually based
in Virginia, um, and I just
wanted to know, am I, uh, can
you see my slides? Should I try
to share my slides, or should I
just go right into the
presentation.
And
Got it. I see that you're
getting the slides on now. So
thank you. I'm, while uh you are
pulling that up. I'll just thank
you again for the opportunity to
speak with you all today. My
name is Diana Van Vleet. I'm the
director of Nationwide Cleaner
Advocacy at the American Lung
Association.
Um, and I am joining you from
Virginia, so I'm not in New
Mexico, but I really appreciated
the uh presentations that, um,
we just heard that we're more
New Mexico specific. I'll
specifically be talking about
the health impacts, um, of
school buses, diesel burning
school buses on Children's
Health today, more broadly,
which um applies to all
children, uh, in New Mexico and
and beyond, um, so thanks for
pulling up my slides. You can go
to the next.
Right.
And I'm not sure if this will
work. We have an, uh, a video on
school buses. I don't know if
you can try to play that. If
not, we can just move on to the
next slide.
OK, well, tech is always, you
never know what you're going to
get. So thanks for trying. Um,
so just wanted to say, you know,
bottom line is that millions of
children are transported by
school buses, uh, every day to
and from school. Um, and we know
that diesel exhaust is harmful,
especially for children. Um, on,
on the big picture beyond
Mexico, uh New Mexico, the vast
majority of the nation's 490,000
school buses are diesel powered
approximately 95%. So we know
millions of
children are breathing in diesel
exhaust, and it's simply not
acceptable.
Next slide, please.
So, you know, as I mentioned,
diesel exhaust is unhealthy for
everyone to breathe, but
children are especially
vulnerable. Their brains, their
respiratory systems, their
cardiovascular systems are still
growing and developing. And
there's especially sensitive to
the toxics, uh, in diesel
exhaust, um, and studies show
that exposure to air pollution
is detrimental to children's
lung function for the long term
and also educational attainment.
Next slide please.
Um, it's, it's really important
to note that um the burdens of
diesel pollution are not equally
shared. So low income families
and communities of color are
more likely to rely on school
buses to get to and from school.
Um, and they're all also more
likely to be exposed to other
sources of air pollution as
well. So, um, it's important to
note that many communities of
color are already facing greater
exposure to air pollution,
including diesel from cars and
trucks and buses.
Um, and adding, you know, even
more to this burden is that many
communities of color putting
black and Hispanic communities
are disproportionately impacted
by certain health issues like
asthma um that increase their
risk of harm from from diesel
pollution. So not only are they
breathing more diesel pollution,
you're more likely to have
things like asthma that, you
know, this pollution will
trigger asthma attacks. Um, so
it's, it's really, it's an
environmental justice issue, and
um,
Air pollution does discriminate.
Next slide, please.
So why electric school buses,
um, as you've heard from, uh,
the previous speakers, um,
electric school buses have no
tailpipe exhaust, so they don't
emit air pollution that harms
children's health. Um, and, uh,
you know, I won't touch too much
on the climate piece, but the
transportation sector is a
leading source of greenhouse
gasses, and electric school
buses have the potential to
eliminate millions of tons of
greenhouse gas emissions every
year.
Um, I electric school buses can
also save uh school district's
money in the long term, as
you've heard, but many school
schools rely on unhealthy
polluting diesel buses because
the initial cost can be higher,
um, although, you know, again,
as you've heard, um, the
maintenance costs, um, can be
dramatically reduced with
electric school buses.
Next slide please.
Um, so this was the polling that
the American Lung Association
did back in 2021, uh, and we're
really pleased by our findings.
Um, we wanted to know what the
public thought about electric
school buses, and we were, um,
very happy to hear, uh, that
there is strong and broad
support for this transition to
electric school buses, and this
is, you know, across the
country, we've looked at many
different states, um, and 72% of
the respondents um would prefer
electric.
buses over diesel in their own
community. Um, and 70% and 71%
see school buses
electrification, school bus
electrification as key
investments in infrastructure
and economy, respectively.
So this is popular. Uh, thank
you, next, next slide.
Um, so just to summarize, um,
the American Lung Association
supports the transition to zero
emission transportation sources
across the board. Um, and this
includes electrical buses. I
think this is a, in a
particular um uh note and a
source of passion for us at the
Lung Association because this
is, you know, protecting our
children, uh, uh, what could be
more important. So this
transition is, is of the utmost
important and we support
Congress allocating funding for
the electric school buses, um,
in the bipartisan infrastructure
law of 2021, um, which created
the EPA's school bus, clean
school bus program, and we
encourage all states, including
New Mexico to take advantage of
grants and rebates offered
through this program.
Next slide, please. I think
that's it actually.
Um, so I will stop there and
just see if um if there are any
questions or anything else I can
elaborate on.
All right, great. Thank you all
for your presentations. Um.
Our first question will come
from um um Majority Leader
Casey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all very, very much. I
really appreciate this and
having um owned a diesel car at
one time and I, I just can't
really appreciate that, um,
you're concerned about the
fumes, but all you have to do is
stand next to a bus and
That's, you know, a typical bus
or, you know, a semi truck or
whatever.
But, um, in the years that I um
I've worked on the tobacco
settlement revenue Oversight
Committee, we've had the
American Lung Association is.
Advocates for anti-smoking and,
and we, we learned so much about
secondhand smoke, and in fact,
Over the course of the years
because I think that committee
was formed in about 1999.
And over the years, what we
learned is that smoking.
is implicated more in not just a
respiratory issues, but a lot of
cancer and you, in the beginning
we thought it's lung cancer.
But then it turns out that it um
affects so many kinds of cancer.
I, I wanted to say that I think
the initial investment is
substantive and so that's
probably.
The major uh hurdle to face, I
wanted to suggest that um
whoever's working on this, be
sure to consult um Senator Bobby
Gonzalez. He's always my expert
on school buses.
And he's been in school
superintendent up in Taos, and
he
Has been he's on the finance
committee in the Senate now and
so I would just talk to him
because what, what, what the
finance committees are going to
want to know is the return on
investment.
And, and they're looking at that
bottom line. I mean they
You're making a good argument
for public health, and that's
their job is to look at the
return on investment, but part
of that.
Um, with anti-smoking, is
there's a return on investment
when you get people to stop
smoking. You have fewer absentee
days of your workforce and so
forth, but I, I would, um,
I do.
talked to Senator Gonzalez and
see how he could help.
But, um, I, I would look forward
to the day of not having.
or any other.
vehicle
In such prevalent use.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, next is.
Madam Chair. Um, I know several
of the districts that started
quickly on picking up on the
electric buses had long wait
lists. What is the current wait
time for buses to be delivered
or ordered or delivered, do we
know?
Charles, that could even be a
question for you. I don't know.
members of the committee, yes,
um, I believe it's it's still
fairly long because the demand
has been increasing faster than
supply of suppliers are catching
up, so it's still, it's still at
least 6 months.
Thank you, because I know a year
and a half ago, it was
approximately a year from order
until they were there. I know a
number of companies have started
increasing demand and I saw the
number 490,000 is what we've got
to switch over in the next 10 to
12 years, which is a huge
impact, but it's gonna be very
driven by the market and as the
market is moving towards more
electric buses, I'm sure the bus
companies are gonna be switching
over to where the market is and
away from, from the D.
buses, um.
Madam Chair, I, I really liked
your comments about the shared
charging. Um, I know in New
Mexico and I can't remember the
name of the district, the small
district over on the east side
near Roswell.
Talk about the pardon Lakearth.
Um, about the shared charging in
it where they set up the charger
and how that's helping the
community. If someone could
please.
Charles, why don't you just grab
a chair so we can hear you and
And introduce yourself also.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, great
questions, Senator Souls, thank
you for asking. Um.
Yes, it was Lake Arthur and
there utility provider which is
Excel.
Um
is actually offered the district
the same, um.
Offer to as their.
Presenting to any entity that
has a fleet, so commercial
businesses, whatever that has a
fleet, which is essentially that
um if you will, the charger will
be built into the wall.
Of their bus barn and so if this
is the secure area where the bus
plugs into the charger, there'll
be a charger on the outside,
open to the public that the
public can use and it's uh so
it's a source of income,
obviously for Excel, but also
for the district.
Just as it would be if there was
a charger at a gas station.
tell her
Thank you. I think that, that
really helps in building out the
charging infrastructure in the
smaller communities as they look
at putting those in that puts a
charger in for a very small
community as.
Part of the cost as the district
is transitioning over and so I
think that's a wonderful model.
The one of the ways that I
always, where I look at the
buses, everybody has a bit of
sticker shock when they see the
$470,000 or whatever for a new
bus.
But the way to look at it really
is you're prepaying a whole lot
of the cost of the energy later
on by doing that, um.
The
Is it appropriate to say that
the total ROI is better than an
internal combustion engine when
you total up all of the things
of the straight up numbers, not
just the health benefits. Do
they about pencil out? I would.
Be confident in the about
statement rather than to say
that they definitely do.
Yeah, Madam Chair.
Senator
members of the committee.
We, we don't know fully, you
know, there's a number of
unknowns, including the lifetime
of the bus that again with 20
moving parts compared to 200
moving parts, um, you know, why
do we have to replace buses so
often in 12 years, I know, I, I
have another car that's a 2008,
you know, I keep my cars for a
long time and the longer we can
use things, that also is a huge
savings. So if you consider
potentially longer lifetime, the
maintenance costs.
The costs, you know, right now,
guess, uh, diesel is not that
expensive, but we've seen diesel
at 56 could be much greater in
the future, so you know there's
a number of unknowns, and if I
may, Chair.
Uh, also wanna
Highlight the potential income
side for school districts. Aside
from that little trickle that I
talked about, um, there are
districts in the country that
actually have.
Um
There
Have this arrangement as part of
the integrated power agreements
of their utility providers that
one way that those utility
providers can meet the peak
demand.
Is by Dowley. This is especially
true during the summer when the
peak demand issues are the
hottest or the highest in
Honest,
um, and, uh, that this one
school district outside of San
Diego out in the desert. They
have 18 buses.
Lay down.
Load the energy at 2 or 30 in
the morning when it's very
cheap. And, and then it 5 to 7.
You know, during that peak time
period, they upload it back, so
they're selling it back to the
utility at a higher cost.
They're, they're making a
substantial amount of money.
And that utility, therefore also
can find much more secure energy
flow.
That interruption.
Senators to also uh.
To respond to that.
Um, I believe that there is data
on the numbers and we're happy
to come back to you with that,
um.
Um, just from talking to like
APS superintendent, um, and her
transportation director talking
about the, the lower cost of
maintenance, so I think the
numbers are there and we're
happy to come back to you, um.
With more and Madam Chair,
Senator Souls just as you
consider the cost benefit
analysis and the return on
investment, I would just really
encourage all the members who um
Always include the health
benefits in the analysis, um, I
know your question was
specifically about the finances
and that's uh well taken.
Um, but as we move forward, we
are in a um.
In an environment where we
really do have to consider, uh,
the health benefits as a, as a,
an actual real bottom line cost
as well to the community.
Madam Chair and thank you. I, I
fully appreciate that, but there
are a number of people who just
want to look at what the
straight numbers, not the, the
deferred benefits certainly of
the climate change, uh, the
reduced greenhouse gas
requirements, all of and the
health benefits are huge ones
that almost double what the ROI,
they're a bit more difficult to
specifically quantify as to how
much did you pay for the energy
to move the bus 2 miles type of
things, um.
One of the other things,
comments that, that was made.
And kind of just to highlight it
is so often, particularly with
wind energy, we curtail a lot of
that energy at nighttime where
essentially we're just dumping
energy. This provides a
mechanism for store for
Um
For distributed storage which
benefits the grid stability,
benefits everyone, and reduces
the overall cost and so rather
than dumping electrons in the
middle of the night when the,
the wind's blowing and nobody's
using electricity. It allows us
a mechanism for storing that,
which is the same as building
additional capacity. And so, you
know, that's a really important
piece for the broad, uh,
societal type things, um, kind
of my last question, what's the
current range of electric buses
and I'm thinking specifically of
some of
the districts like Gallup and
also our um activity buses that
go long distances and along with
that, what is the charge time on
the fast chargers for a bus.
They have a lot bigger batteries
than cars do, what are the
charge times?
Madam Chair, Senator Souls,
thank you again for that
question and um since I failed
to introduce myself earlier to
the audience. I'm Charles
Goodmacher, uh.
You good LLC I uh serve healthy
climate in New Mexico's policy
advisor.
Also work with NMVC Action Fund
on this. Um,
He
Um
I can tell you, Santa Fe School
District has had the they are
now in their 2nd year of having
buses. They had them early on in
the process because they had
some VW settlement funds that
they used, um, they initially,
you know, the official range on
the buses is 120 miles at 100%
charge.
Santa Fe was running their 75 to
85 miles a day.
This year they
They realize, of course, because
during the middle of the day,
they can.
do additional charging, you
know, in between runs.
So, even though it's 120 miles
on a charge, that doesn't mean
it's 120 miles in a day. So
they're coming back, they're
charging in the middle of the
day. They're, they're trying to
get 140, 150, they're longer
routes.
Because every mile driven by an
electric bus versus a diesel
saves them more money.
So, and they're, they've been
doing that this year. Exactly
how long it takes, I can't tell
you, but I can tell you they can
sufficiently charge after a
morning run, also make sure that
they can.
Be fined for an afternoon long
run as well.
And I can get back to you with
the exact information later.
Thank you. And, and some I'm
thinking about the, the activity
buses that have to go from Las
Cruces to Albuquerque or other
places in the state. Are there
buses that have that level of
range or if they stop for a meal
in Socorro, can they top off
with uh enough power to get them
the rest of the way in the 45
minutes they're stopped for the
meal.
Um, sorry, uh,
We
are not aware that any of the
electric buses are currently
being used for activity buses.
Uh, we're not saying that the
state and the states.
The amount of chargers in the
state and the state of the
technology, etc. are sufficient
for for full run, but um,
Uh
See a figure that says
potentially up to 200 something
miles up, maybe up to 300 miles
in a day, depending on how much
recharging they do.
Um, Madam Chair and senator, I,
I just looked it up, you know,
Google, and um.
There are buses, uh, there are
different classes, they get up
to 300 miles in their range or
up to 200 miles, um, in the
beginning, 4 years ago, the
earlier buses, it was, you know,
they promised at least 100. We
also know that it greatly
depends upon driving conditions,
I will say that, uh, during the
winter is different than during
the summer, these are all, you
know.
As again, if any of you do this
transition, and I encourage all
of you to consider it.
It take, there's an adjustment.
And a learning curve and of
course, we're not replacing our
fleet overnight, our districts
are learning and learning from
each other, um, and are charging
infrastructure as well as
batteries are going to continue
to improve every year. So, um,
you have to stop for gasoline.
You know, you can actually stop
for a charge.
However, I think districts are
starting with known routes that
Make sure that they are, you
know, keeping children safe and
uh learning learning what's
possible and then as Strauss,
they're innovating.
Because again, school buses by
and large don't run all the
time, so there's that
opportunity.
out.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yeah,
and I very much appreciate the
presentation and hope that we
have districts continue to look
at this, and it is going to
take, I think 6 months or more
after you decide pull the the or
not pull the plug I pull, you
know, get, start the process
before your bus is gonna show
up. And so, uh, districts need
to get started on that now. I
mean, there are some confessions
earlier. I used to drive a
diesel Jetta. However, uh, for
the last 10 years, I drove it
almost exclusively on homemade
biofuel and so it smelled like
french fries, not like.
These sort
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I looked it
up a 1 to 2 hours at 80% on a DC
charger, fast charger, longer
take to charge a school bus.
All right, um, next.
Represented
and Arnu.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
question isn't electric bus
specific, um, it is for, um,
Miss Manlev, so looking at your
handout, I just had a question.
You mentioned that.
Two counties, the most populous
counties in the state,
Bernalillo and Donana both got F
ratings for particulate in the
air, and that makes sense given
the density of population, level
of pollution, but then I was
looking at
Slide 6.
And
Banana makes sense on slide 6
for having like a high rate of
vulnerability, but Bernnalio
says it's low medium. I was just
wondering if you could explain
that.
Not discrepancy, but
How the vulnerability transfers
from
Ah
Madam Chair and Representative
uh social vulnerability is
measured on a variety of
factors, everything from
housing, the number of set of
unhouse people, income,
educational attainment, and
those areas, social vulnerably
compared to places like.
Kinley County and some of the
areas with the highest social
vulnerability.
do a little better, you know,
our state is not monolithic and
we have more economic
opportunity.
And
Health opportunity in some of
the areas, so that, that's
accounts for the difference that
Berna Leo, I think, you know,
has more, more wealth.
Um, in some communities,
obviously there are other
communities.
family.
But it's
Thank you for that answer, Madam
Chair, so it's, there are myriad
factors, not just pollution or
particulate, it's about income
and availability for social
programs.
Um
Madam Chair and representative
social vulnerability is, is
Much broader. It's not all at
all just in fact, there is not
currently.
and the social vulnerability
index, a measure of like level
of air quality.
So it does not include that this
is a multiplier, so if you have
again.
All the things that impact
health, and that's really what
we've been looking at in terms
of social.
Poverty, housing, education
level, etc. um.
That, uh, existing level of
health conditions, that's what's
reflected. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you again
for that additional answer. I
think it would be interesting to
see how.
Things like air quality would
affect.
Vulnerability ratings, I would
think that would be.
A variable to consider. Anyway,
thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative Nix.
Representative Townsend.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Mentioned
There were 20,000 school buses
into Mexico. Is that correct?
Seems high, but
Sorry, it's, it's 2000
I.
I thought we got problems, but
OK.
Um
But even at 2000, that's um
260.
a pop, that's uh
5 $600 million.
number
Do you have, you mentioned about
grants, are there grants that
are available and can you
describe those, please?
Yes, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Townsend.
Um
And just on the number, just to
give perspective, there are, you
know, 2000 statewide, but just
for example, in Albuquerque
Public School District, there
are 350.
So you can imagine the other
smaller districts have.
You know, you are.
Um
To your question, there are
grants available from the EPA.
Um, currently, they have been
opening various grant programs
over the past few years and then
closing them, you know, to, to
deal with the the distribution,
and there's currently a grant
program open, Madam Chair, um.
And
Districts are being contacted
by, uh, my organization and
various, um, folks in throughout
New Mexico, um, contacting the
superintendents, making sure
they know about the grant
program and uh encouraging them
to apply.
And they can apply, um, all the
way through January 9th, I
believe. So now is the time for
all school districts to really
be paying attention to that. And
Madam Chair, Representative
Townsend, there's, um, some
additional resources being
provided by the EPA this time,
including, um, uh,
Direct resources for fleet
managers, for transportation
directors, for school, um,
management and leaders, um, to
really plug into.
Like into the uh the grant
program and all of the
opportunities and resources that
are available. So um we uh
really encourage all school
districts to be doing that, and
we've heard from
Um, APS they're on board, you
know, applying for more, even
though they're.
They've been awarded 20 already,
but out of the 350 fleet, they,
you know, they want to apply for
more if they can.
Um, and the EPA has prioritized
certain districts.
Um, as my colleague here
mentioned most districts in New
Mexico got onto that priority
list and so really there are
very few, um, that are not on
the priority list.
And even so, uh, districts can
still apply even though if
they're not on the priority
list. It's just that they won't
be prioritized.
Um
So
Yep.
Go ahead.
Quick, do you have an amount? I
know it used to be 250,000 for
the first round, right? Do we
have an amount for
Pass round, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I don't have
that number right in front of
me. Oh, the EPA clean school bus
grant, um.
Has provided close to 350,000. I
mean, it, so it's, it's left us
with that situation that the
bill was designed to address
about the gap money where it
doesn't quite provide enough
that the bill would specify the
PED could.
Instead of using the diesel
replacement money.
Make up that gap.
So if, so districts get, they
get that EPA grant, um, it's
almost all paid for, um, but
there's, there's also another
federal benefit available to
every school district that
Shelly is ready to talk to you
about.
Yes, so, um, there's also a
what's called the federal tax
credit for up to $40,000 per
delivered electric school bus.
It is, there's an option for
direct pay, so it's not, you
know, school districts don't pay
taxes the way.
We do. So they're able to get a
$40,000 direct pay for delivered
electric school bus, and then
there's also an alternative fuel
vehicle refueling property
credit that um allows school
districts to claim up to 30% of
the electric infrastructure
charging costs. So again, as we
talked in the policy
recommendation.
Up to 30% of the costs can be
covered through that an
additional $40,000 or if the
district doesn't have a grant at
all,
still a direct pay of $40,000
and that, you know, starts to
make the math work a little
better.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I just looked it
up on our resources page and um.
School districts can apply to
receive.
Uh, $345,000 towards the cost of
a new bus.
And charging infrastructure for
prioritized districts.
Or 200,000 toward the cost
differential between diesel bus
and electric bus for
non-prioritized.
So there's different amounts,
um, and school districts can
apply for up to 25 new electric
less.
At a time. Thank you, ma'am, one
other question.
Recently, in New Mexico, there
have been the discoveries of
Large deposits of lithium.
Are you going to help expedite
the permits for those mining
operations for those lithium
facilities.
Oh
I'm not quite sure how to answer
us personally or as
organizations. I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, but you're, you're here
talking about wanting to expand
the use of lithium.
And I'm telling you that they
have it here in New Mexico and
it's a great enterprise and
developing the need, or you also
gonna develop the mining
operation.
But
I
It's not, not an issue that our
organization has considered, so
there's not, I can't officially
reply for the organization. I
would say personally would.
I, I would want to understand
better what all might be
involved in the specifics
specific.
And that that kind of Charles is
exactly my point.
There's not hardly anything,
madam chair, that we do.
Or that we propose as a
legislature that doesn't affect
something.
And developing a lithium.
Market.
will increase
The market
Demand for lithium.
And we have it in New Mexico. In
fact, I think they've found two.
Huge deposits of lithium.
And I know based on what I
think I know
That mining operations may not
be your gig, and then you might
not think that's the right thing
to do, but somebody's got to do
it.
And I don't think we want to be
a knot in my backyard state.
If we're, if we're going to
promote
The use
He shouldn't be putting the
burden on
Um, a child or a family or
someplace, someplace else, and
that's my point. So I would just
ask you to think about that and
be prepared for that question
because I promise you, you're
gonna hear it again.
Thank you. Thank you, uh,
Representative Nix is
Representative Garrett.
Thank you. Amen.
And um actually representative
Townsend brings a point that I
think we're all aware of all of
what we do relates to
everything.
But there's lithium mining and
our presenters pointed out that
reducing carbon pollution, this
is one little piece. I do want
to thank you for the picture of
LA. I grew up.
County, when we had smog alerts.
There are no longer smog alerts,
and I think in New Mexico.
We often think about our
pristine skies, but our
children.
Christine sizes and hair. So
thank you for including that
picture. This thing I wanna say
is um electric school buses are
quieter, so from an
environmental viewpoint from our
children that do travel every
single day, short and long
distances.
That improvement allows
conversations, learning,
discussion, and it's, it's that
little tiny environmental impact
on the lives of our kids. I've
been on school buses all over
the state, mostly as a
legislator actually, in our
tours.
And um, and with kids as a
teacher who recently retired,
so.
I think it's important to
remember that.
Um
So I want to thank and and
again, um, Madam Chair, some of
us sit on the legislative
education Study Committee
of education.
Uh, legislative finance
committee, so these issues, uh,
our, our chairwoman very
poignantly said at another
meeting a couple weeks ago.
Um, are we more about just
making money or are we about
health?
And so I know many of us here
are committed to getting this
done, and there's all the
legitimate legitimate distance
questions, we're not saying
every bus.
gonna be an electric bus.
Especially we can't.
Um through 2000 buses.
But um
This
this policy
In the 2, what is it? 2 years
we've been talking about it
deeply. It has to advance. So
thank you for
Bringing it here today.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
just want to say, um, you know,
it's been about a year and a
half since we started this, I
believe, Charles, Charles
invited Senator Soul and I to
meet with the Las Cruces people,
and they introduced us to this
and um I just um have watched
Charles work so hard on this. I
feel guilty as hard as you've
worked compared to what I've
done or but um thank you for all
your hard work on this, uh.
Without you pushing and um.
First, getting us into this.
Pushing and pushing.
pushing. You've been great and
I, I just would appreciate you
for all you've done to get this
going and I, I, I feel good
about this this year, so much
better. So, um, I really, I was
gonna say pretty much what uh
represent Garrett. I didn't
write was, um, I didn't have to
write a school bus growing up
and um, but as a teacher.
I loved going on field trips,
but I dreaded the ride on the
school bus. Getting there was
the painful part, um, but I did
write on a uh one of the
electric school buses and it was
wonderful and um we could talk
and and like you said, when kids
get to school, they will be so
much calmer because it's such a
different atmosphere, um, so I'm
hoping this bill gets through.
We'll be working hard on it this
year, along with Charles and all
