All right. We're gonna go ahead
and get started with the second
part of our meeting. We started
with artificial intelligence
ethics issues, um, with Doctor
Melody Moses, uh, we appreciate
you so much. I'm glad you're
back. Thank you. Whenever you're
ready.
Wonderful. Thank you, Madam
Chair, representatives, and the
members of the committee. So you
all have heard from me multiple
times, and so I am going to um
sort of speed through some
introductory material that most
of you have heard in order to
get to maybe the more
interesting topics today. So
apologies for the initial pace,
um, but I'll go ahead and start,
uh, this is going to be about
challenges, opportunities, and
solutions.
I always like to start with
some, uh, examples of the kinds
of things you can get from
generative AI, uh, so the first,
uh, the second slide there is
showing the answers to, um, what
are some scientific advances
that AI has recently enabled.
And the four scientific advances
there are the ones that I had
already put into my presentation
and all things that are
happening here at UNM. Drug
discovery, some solutions to the
climate problem, healthcare
issues, and some quantum.
I appreciate that that was a
thoughtful and useful answer.
Uh, the next page is the other
end of the spectrum, uh,
last month, I talked to the
committee and mentioned that if
you ask Chat GPT how many Rs
there are in strawberry. It will
tell you that there are 2, I've
had pages and pages of arguments
with ChatGPT about how many Rs
there are in strawberry. It's
now been convinced when I log in
as myself it now will answer the
question correctly because I
have corrected it. But if I ask
it how many hours there are in
Cranberry, it will again tell
me.
too.
So this is what $1 billion or so
of investment in this software
gets you is some
Amazing answers in some cases
and some absolutely astoundingly
incorrect answers that seem so
obvious to a human.
So,
um, I've been working in the
fields of computer science and
AI for about 35 years. Most of
my work now is in bio inspired
robotics.
And um I really think about
complex adaptive systems. So
systems that, um, have lots of
interacting parts. They change
in response to the environment
around them, and AI is one of
those kinds of systems. Uh, AI
is a system while Chachi BT
refuses to learn in some cases,
the system itself over time
learns as new generations of the
software rolled out, we react to
it. It tries to be marketable,
right? It's the companies, um.
So it's adapting and we're
adapting to it, and we're, we're
at least trying to at the same
time. And so that makes this
just an incredibly
unpredictable, uh, moment in
technology.
On slide 6, is an outline. I'll
do a superfast, uh, discussion
about generative AI and some of
the challenges, including some
ethical challenges, um, what
we're looking at with scale. But
most of what I want to talk
about is opportunities and, um,
some potential solutions.
So
Um,
I have uh I, I like to talk
about the difference between
traditional algorithms that work
like a recipe. You give a series
of instructions and in the
proper context, you get a result
that you're looking for and
large language models are
nothing like this.
So,
Uh, slide 8 has large language
models learned by predicting
what word comes next. I do want
to take just a moment here, um,
to remind us all that most of
what we mean when we say
artificial intelligence. It's a
very large field, but most of
what people mean right now is
machine learning, which means
that you don't give the machine
the answer, you give the machine
a neural network, which is going
to find patterns and use those
patterns to find an answer. And
so neural networks are these
pattern.
Matching machines.
Uh, large language models are
interesting because they are
huge pattern matching machines
with billions of nodes and edges
and trained with trillions of
words that have been essentially
scaped scraped from the
internet.
And they work by, um, the models
are able to in some sense train
themselves. They're able to
check their work, right, by
saying, I can hear the sentence
if I can predict the next word,
that I know that I have a proper
model of this particular
sentence, and because the next
word is there in the text, it
can check to see if it's right
or wrong. And it's been doing
this over and over, many more
times since the last time we
talked, um, to build up its
ability to mimic the patterns in
human language. And this is
really important.
That these language models are
mimicking intelligence. They're
not intelligent in the same way
that we're intelligent. So we
might, um, pull up some of our
philosophy, uh, faculty here to
ask the question if one can
mimic intelligent, does that
intelligence, does it make it
itself intelligent. I'm not sure
I know the answer to that, but I
know it's a different form of
learning and predicting the
future than we use in our own
heads, right? It's looking from
the outside and mimicking what
we do. And that means that it's
underlying mechanisms, um, and
Also, the kinds of things that
will make mistakes about are
very different than the kinds of
things that we have intuitions
about. We get intuitions from
talking to each other, um, and
we tend to transfer those
intuitions to these language
models, but they really do work
very differently.
And so that's the sort of
foundation that we're kind of
building on, um, and I'll, I'll
just add that many forms of AI,
in particular the forms of AI
that are used in science, are
not necessarily large language
models. Many of them are neural
networks and so sort of have the
same sorts of properties.
So I'm gonna go through a series
of challenges, um, some ethical
challenges, um, one of them I
always used to highlight the
bias challenge and I use the
case of Joy Boullumwini, who,
uh, was an African American
woman, PhD student at MIT whose
face was not recognized by
facial recognition software
until she put a white mask in
front of her face. The
implications of this are that,
uh, arrest records and things
like that, the mistakes that
deployed,
Software doing facial
recognition has real impact on
real people, including that all
of the known publicized cases of
false arrests from facial
recognition are from African
American, um, individuals
who with any sort of human
reasoning would have been, would
never have been arrested in the
first place. Again, it's these
software, uh, this facial
recognition software is making
different kinds of mistakes than
humans would make.
And humans tend to trust these
machines. We tend to think that
they are, um, validated, perhaps
more than they are, that they
are objective in ways that they
aren't. And so, um, that's one
of the big challenges. Um, I use
this example because it's so
obvious, but it's certainly not
isolated. So there are lots of
other cases, um, of bias that
creeps in. If you ask for
questions about, uh, criminals
in general, it will be biased by
the sorts of people who have
been arrested in the past and if
there is bias in that,
And these algorithms will take
the bias from the past and
project it to be a prediction
from the future.
So it really has this ability to
sort of solidify bias that we
might have had in the past. And,
and if we don't realize that
it's there, it gives us this
veneer of objectivity, right,
this sort of we, we think it's
objective, but in fact, it's
not. And if we rely on it, it
really makes that, that bias
persist.
Um, and these associations are
things like doctors are
associated with being male, and
terrorists are associated with
being Muslim and all sorts of
different associations that may
have come from our recent past
or almost our present. Um, but
some of this material is from
decades or even centuries ago
that these, these models have
been trained on. And so we're
really pulling biases and false
beliefs, maybe incorrect
scientific or medical beliefs
from a very distant past and
potentially projecting those to
the future.
The second challenge is one is
that you're all very familiar
familiar with misinformation and
deep fakes. Um, I've told the
story, I think several times now
about the Hong Kong finance
worker who was convinced to pay
$25 million in fraud from a deep
fake Zoom conversation, one that
you may or may not have heard of
that happened last week is that
Senator Ben Cardin was
reportedly targeted by a deep
fake video caller posing as a
Ukrainian official. Uh, it seems
to have been in a
Attempt to get the senator to
say something politically
damaging about the situation in
Ukraine. He became suspicious
over after a while, in that
case, so he did a better job
than the Hong Kong finance
worker and realizing early what
the problem was. But this just
gets at sort of the breadth of
the kinds of places where we can
expect to see misinformation pop
up.
Um, there have been some cases
of deep fakes in, uh, related to
the election, uh, to the
presidential election, uh,
interestingly, in some involving
Taylor Swift, uh, additionally,
some of the deep fake, uh,
explicit images or deep fake
porn that, um, this legislative
body hasn't addressed, right?
We've begun to address, I think,
with a very helpful law about,
uh, trying to tamp down deep
fakes in elections. Um, but the
deep fakes that might be
affecting our
Middle school and high school
students, right, that are
already circulating. Those are
things that we haven't taken on
yet, and I think are, are worth,
um, worth consideration. We can
discuss.
The, uh, an issue that I'm not
as familiar with, but I just
feel like it's really important
to highlight in these ethical,
uh, in, in terms of ethical
considerations, on page 11, the
copyright infringement and its
effect on the creative economy.
So there are some headlines
there and most of these examples
I'm giving you are just recent
headlines. Um, most people are
aware that the New York Times
has sued OpenAI, George RR
Martin has sued. OpenAI, uh, for
copyright infringement. There
doesn't seem to be a lot of
question about whether, uh,
these large language models are
in fact consuming copyrighted
material. Um, what is still an
open question is what will be
the legal ramification of that.
And it certainly will take years
to get to.
like the Supreme Court for this
all to be resolved, at which
point these tools, I mean,
they're already quite
entrenched. And so it's not
clear what remedy will exist.
Um, and I do think that this is
a real threat to the creative
economy. And this is something
that's particularly important in
New Mexico with our artists and
our film industry, um, and so a
question is, do we leave this to
sort of let the market kind of
work this out. Uh, there are a
couple of, uh, headlines there
that
some of the attitudes from the
market that I think are are
concerning. Um,
Uh, from the economist, argues
AI is transforming the creative
industries, but AI will be a
collaborator rather than a
competitor to, to real creative,
uh, individual humans. And I
think that that's possible. I
think though it needs a nudge in
that direction. I don't think we
want to trust that that will
just happen on its own.
Um, AI, uh, another one, AI
could kill creative jobs that
shouldn't have been there in the
first place. OpenAI's CTO says.
So this is someone who's not a
member of the creative economy
saying, you know, well, our tool
might take your job, but that's
only because you're not very
good at it. Um, so these are the
kinds of, um, you know, this is
the sort of ecosystem in which
this is all playing out. And
interestingly, I've asked my
students, right, who are
considerably younger than me and
have different attitudes about
this. I've asked them
periodically what they think
about
AI. These are primarily computer
science students. Uh, they all
say that they sometimes fear
even talking about AI and online
forums because there's so much
vitriol from the younger
generation toward these
companies. They're really upset
about this idea of taking rights
from artists and musicians. And
so in my AI class, 100% of my
students raise their hands and
agreed that AI is stealing
creative work and using it to
take the jobs of creatives. And
some of these
These students are very much
fans of AI in their own work,
but they understand this is a
real problem. So I think this is
a place, um, again, where
there's a real ethical dilemma
to, to, to grapple with.
The next, uh, headline, uh, also
from last week, that message
from your doctor, it may have
been drafted by AI. Uh, so this
was a little bit of a surprise
to me. In fact, I use my chart,
I get my chart responses all the
time. Most of us probably do.
Uh, this article, uh, says that
MyChart has included the option
for a doctor to reply to a
patient using a chatbot and
whether the doctor has reviewed
that to make sure it was correct
or not is, is.
Unclear. Um, again, it's not
clear whether regulating this is
the right thing to do, whether
having norms about this, maybe
these things just need to be
labeled. Certainly doctors are
facing enormous time pressures.
Certainly, we would like doctors
to be doing real, you know,
important medical work and if
they're being overwhelmed with
emails or they're being
overwhelmed with arguments with
insurance companies. It's really
helpful for them to have tools,
uh, to, to help them with that.
Um, but certainly
the fact that patients might be
getting chatbot messages from
their doctor and not knowing it
is something that has a real
effect on our trust, right, in
the medical system.
Uh,
On page 13, um, my colleague
Doctor Sonia Gibson Rankin and I
wrote an article called Medical
Artificial Intelligence should
do no harm. And there we were
really trying to grapple with
this question of how do we build
trustworthy AI for medicine,
particularly given that some
communities trust the medical
establishment more than others.
And how do we use AI to build up
trust rather than potentially to
erode it. So that previous
example is potentially a way
that that trust might be eroded.
Um, these are some statistics,
black and Hispanic people are 73
and 49% more likely to distrust
health professionals, um, the
non-Hispanic white population.
And this has built up over years
of history of, of potential
unequal, um, application unequal
studies even that know how to
treat different patients, um, to
have the data to know what
Treatment would, uh, provide
would be best for which patient
and which scenario.
Um, and in our paper, we went
through and we looked at some
examples of biases that were
perpetuated by, uh, by AI or
algorithms. And so some of these
examples are one example that I
spent some time studying was uh
a kidney equation that uh treats
African American patients
differently than other patients.
That's now understood to have
resulted in thousands of deaths
of African American patients who
were kept off of kidney
transplant lists. That that
equation has been
Remedied. It is no longer the
standard, but if you ask a
language model, how to evaluate
the kidney function of a person,
it will use the old equation
because there's so much more
text with the old equation, then
the new and updated equation.
And so there are lots of
examples of that, um, that
persist. And most of those, many
of those examples are with
African American patients. I
think examples with the Native
American population, which is
even more poorly represented in
the data, we don't even know
what those sort of biases are
that could be baked into the
data.
Um,
and so it's really important to
diversify the data that are
training these future AI. And
that's another place where I
think here in New Mexico, we can
make some real progress, right?
We can actually, uh, proactively
try to, um, to deal with some of
those, to counter some of the
bias that's there. Um, and it's
certainly important to the
health of the populations of our
state.
Uh, another, uh, challenge is a
challenge in legal ethics and
I'm going to talk about this,
uh, more opportunities. But in,
uh, consequential, uh, decision
making.
AI and algorithms more
generally, where we call it AI
and where we don't, I think
isn't even that important. Um,
we want to, and I think you're,
uh, you have considered last
year and I hope you're again
considering this year, how to
study, um, uh, algorithms and AI
that are making consequential
decisions. The first step in
making sure that they are making
fair decisions is to know how
those decisions are made.
And I started off saying that
these modern AI tools we can't
really know how these decisions
are made. Um, I think until we
have the ability to interpret
the decisions made by these
models, we really shouldn't
deploy those sorts of modern
large language model kind of
approaches inconsequential
decision making. Um, however, in
simpler cases, it's still often
very difficult, um, to know how
a decision is made. Um, and so
in employment, healthcare,
education, social services, um,
Housing, criminal justice, all
of these places where a a
computer might be making a uh
consequential decision about
someone's life. We really want
something, of course, that's
evidence-based and objective.
Um, we want to know that it's
accurate. Um, we think that
these tools can avoid
stereotypes, perhaps much better
than humans can, right? We, but
they need to be designed and
trained to do to do that. And I
think this is a role for policy
in the legislature. We'll talk
about a little bit more, um,
that
Uh, these things are possible,
but they're not going to happen
unless it's, it's sort of
required or incentivized in our
system.
Uh, Colorado recently passed
legislation along these lines. I
think that's a good place to
look. My understanding of the
Colorado law that passed is that
it's very broad. It looks at not
just government but also private
sector, uh, decision-making
tools, for example, in housing
and lending, um, it has a
Somewhat, um, sort of a medium
bar for transparency. Um, and
so, uh, one of the things that
some of us have advocated is
that for actual government
decision-making, we might want
to have an even higher bar for
transparency than that. We might
want to really understand, be
able to probe the data and be
able to do sort of
counterfactuals and what ifs to
understand how these tools
really work.
OK, the last challenge is
surveillance and threats to
privacy. This is one where I
don't see easy answers, and I
quite frankly, you asked the
question, what should we do as a
legislature? I'll try to answer
that sometimes. I don't know
what we really should do about
the challenge to surveillance,
uh, the surveillance challenge
to privacy. Um, it's ubiquitous.
The problem of the, the, the,
the biggest two problems that AI
models face now in getting
better and better is that they
consume a lot of energy and that
they consume a lot of data.
And as we run out of data,
they're going to want more. And
so there's real incentive for
these companies to be able to
scoop up more and more data
about us. And I think we really
need to find ways to protect
privacy. So, um, I don't know
what the answer is, but
legislation that starts to
protect the privacy of citizens
in our state, which, by the way,
has a little bit of a tension
with transparency, right? So, so
these are going to be difficult
things we can, we can discuss,
um, billionaire Larry Ellison
says a vast AI.
Old surveillance system can
ensure citizens will be on their
best behavior, maybe, um, if the
Chinese government says
something like that, we are
pretty sure we're not
comfortable with what that
means, right? And so we should
be careful about what that means
here. Um, AI and motion detected
software tested on Uighurs, a
lot of the software ecosystem in
that's used in surveillance and
policing and things like that.
Some of that has come from other
countries, uh, Palanter, um, had
some foundational software that
came
Israel, there's some of the
software companies that spun up
in China that were used for
surveillance there are now
publicly or, or now, you know,
uh, available in companies that
can be used here in the US. And
so, um, we really need to, uh,
there's an example there from
Iran of, uh, um, enabling the
crackdown on women not wearing
head coverings in public. So
there's been some more recent
news about that as well. So
these are things we really that
that
Real challenges posed by this
new technology.
Um,
OK. So as a bridge from the bad
news to the good news. I want to
just highlight a couple of
things about scale, um, and I
want to remind us all that
computation has already
completely transformed our
world, right? We're all sitting
here and we've got computers all
over the place in our pockets
and everywhere. Um, the, this is
told many ways the statistic
that I think is most, um,
consequential is that computing
today is 1 trillion times more
cost effective and cost
efficient than it was.
35 years ago. So that's about
when I started studying computer
science. If you give me $1.35
years ago versus today, I can do
a 1 trillion times more
computation. That's a lot more.
Um, and, uh, and that was true
35 years before that. And maybe
it'll be true 35 years from now.
This, this has the demise of
this kind of increase has been
predicted many times over these
last 70 years, and it's never
happened. Um,
And we just keep building up
this, uh, more efficient
computation and more innovation
that allows more efficient
computation in the future. And
so far, that's, that's a
treadmill that we have not
gotten off of. Um, the slide on
17 just shows an example of
that, specifically, this is a
recent, uh, figure put out
specifically looking at AI
models. And an interesting thing
here is that that 1 trillion
times faster is from doubling
compute power every 2 years or
so in a
I that had been doubling compute
power about every one year, so
twice as fast until, uh, about 8
or 10 years ago, and then it
switched to doubling every 6
months. So even the speed of
increase of the computational
power is getting faster and
faster. Perhaps in part because
AI is speeding up the
development of AI, right? We are
learning how to code faster that
we're learning how to build the
next generation faster than we
did the last.
And so all of these problems
that these ethical challenges as
well as the opportunities I'm
about to talk about, um, we'll
keep changing faster and faster.
And so whatever we think about
in terms of legislation and, um,
and how to deal with these
things, it's got to be something
that can adapt in a much faster
pace and an increasingly fast
pace as we go forward.
Uh, the next slide is, um, the
consequence of this scale. This
is something I know many of you
are concerned about is the
energy and water, uh,
consumption of, uh, this
technology. So Microsoft just
announced, um, it's going to be
renting Three Mile Island. I
grew up, uh, just a little south
of Three Mile Island when the
accident happened, this always
makes me a little bit nervous.
Um, however, I think, you know,
so they're real investments in
nuclear power to fuel these, uh,
the training of these
Language models. Something that
I think is not as paid attention
to as much is how much do energy
we do we need to use these
models? So not nearly as much,
but there are so many of us, and
they will, we will do it so many
times. And so, uh, an article
came out in The New York Times
saying that sending one AI
generated email takes one bottle
of water.
Meaning one bottle of water to
cool the computers that are used
to run the model to generate
your email.
So one bottle of water doesn't
sound like that much until we
consider how many emails all of
us send.
Right? So that's a lot of
bottles of water. They did some
calculations about, uh, if you,
if just 1/10 of Americans sent
one email every week, that would
be the amount of energy used by
the state of Rhode Island each
year. So,
You can put these things in
different contexts, but there
are a lot of, there's a lot of
consumption, energy and water
that will happen as we build
these technologies. On the other
hand, um,
Yeah, uh, there's been some
investment in these companies in
Fusion, and, uh, and in fact, AI
has been used to make some
pretty big breakthrough
improvements in developing
fusion. Now whether those are
going to pan out and in 10 years
we're all going to have free
clean energy, unclear, um, but
certainly it's a possibility and
it's a possibility we don't want
to curtail, right? We want to
keep using these, this
technology to design, you know,
clean energy of the future.
Um, and so this is really
another one of those
double-edged swords, right?
There's some good news and bad
news there.
OK, opportunities in science. So
this is one where I want to
spend a little bit of time, um,
talking about what is possible
and what are some of the things
that are going on now, um, that
really are exciting. So, uh, I
often say that Alpha fold is
sort of the poster child of the
scientific application of AI,
um, learning, which is, is now
essentially predicted how all of
the known proteins in on Earth,
how they will fold, which, uh,
from their DNA, which is
Just a tremendous, tremendous
step forward, um, you know,
saving, you know, millions of
potential, you know, years of,
of work, um, which is a critical
step in understanding, uh, drug
design and vaccine design and
things like that. Uh, antibiotic
production, which is hugely
important. Um, we are certainly
on the cusp and of seeing some
initial um
Uh, some initial progress in
developing materials in the same
way. Um, and my colleague, uh,
Doctor Susan Atlas, when I put
out a call asking who was doing
some work in this area. Uh, she
talked about her work in using
AI to understand quantum
mechanics of material
interactions, um, which are
useful in the design of next
generation batteries. And this
kind of work has gotten a lot of
attention. Um, there's a, a
group, another group, not from.
Renown, but elsewhere that has
used this kind of a that
fundamental research to take it
to the next step and actually
build batteries that are
partially, uh, lithium, but
replacing some of that lithium
with silicon.
So that's nice, um, but it's,
it's potentially really high
impact because silicon is easily
available, does not take
destructive mining, right? These
might be far more efficient
batteries, right? These are the
kinds of changes in our
infrastructure that, um, we have
a lot of research going on here
at UNM and Sandia. These things
will make a difference in the
future in terms of providing
jobs for New Mexicans while
cleaning up the climate and, and
reducing, um, CO2 production and
potentially mitigating, um,
harmful environmental effects of
mining. So there are just
countless examples of this kind
of technology that's being
developed and so many of them
will fail, but we only knew a
few of them to really work. Um,
for this to have, you know, for
us to look back and say, ah
well, we were worried about the
glasses of water, but now we
just don't need to be concerned
about that because we've had
such a a breakthrough in
technology.
Um,
Let's see, uh, I'll just move on
to
Another set of opportunities,
um,
which I think are important for
New Mexico, um, the economic
opportunities are, um,
everything from how do we rework
the supply chain, um,
Locally I think we're really
interested in new chip design,
so the Intel chip, uh, the Intel
plant here, right, is, is, um,
looking at advanced
manufacturing of sort of custom
chips. Certainly, we all know of
Nvidia as the company that is,
um, producing the chips that AI
runs on, but other models, it's
those are in some sense chips
that were developed for other
purposes that were repurposed
for AI, certainly new
generations of chips that are
going to be
Far more efficient and far more
effective are going to be
developed and I think we have a
lot of the components of that
here in New Mexico to really,
um, make that an important part
of our, um, our workforce and
our economy.
OK. So,
Onto solutions, um, I wanted to
highlight first, uh, some policy
solutions, and in this case just
focused on this issue of
transparency because I think
that this, this bill that was
under consideration last year
and I hope we'll be under
consideration this year is an
important first step.
Um, so I don't think that it is
a bad idea to use AI to make
consequential decisions. I only
think it's a bad idea if we
don't understand how it's
working.
And we haven't validated that it
is making decisions better than
humans would make decisions. And
we have to remember that humans
often make terrible decisions,
and so there is an opportunity
here, um, to, uh, to develop
decision-making software that is
really better for everyone, that
is faster and cheaper and more
fair. Um, but again, it's not
going to happen by itself. And
so, um, the policy solutions
that are sort of suggested here
are to start with transparency.
Um, that
The data that go into making the
decision, the factors that are
considered in making the
decision and then how those
different factors that are
weighted, what those weights
are. Um, those are all really
important things that should be
available if, uh, software is
making a decision about who gets
a loan or who goes to jail or
who gets some particular
government benefit.
And, um, the first step for this
is transparency.
Um slide 22, it outlines some of
the different ways one might
consider transparency. The first
step is probably what we want
with that doctor note generated
by ChatGPT which is just a
warning, just notice this was
generated by AI. Sometimes
that's enough. If you, if it's
deciding that you're going to
jail or not, that is almost
certainly not enough, right? We
want more.
Um, and so there's sort of a, a
cascade of, um, different ways
that we might do that. And I
think that where the debate
probably lies is do we want
companies that are say, selling
software to the state of New
Mexico to make a decision. Do we
want them to do the assessment,
or do we want the state to
actually have a hand in this and
to help to make, uh, to, to do
some assessment as well. And I
think it's probably a mix of
those two things, um, that is
potentially costly, that
requires having the expertise
for someone to
evaluate an algorithm, but I
think that we don't just want to
allow a company to say yes, yes,
we've met your standard and we,
and we don't do any checking of
that, um, for these really
highly consequential decisions.
Um, and there is a level of full
transparency which is the public
actually has some input into how
such a decision is made. That's
a very expensive and time
consuming process, but that
might be something that we move
toward in these really important
decisions and something to keep,
I think, on the table.
Um,
the next slide, 23 has, uh, a, a
little figure that we've come up
with, um, transparency is one
item on this 345, so I guess
that is what, 7, 12 steps that
we think are really necessary to
understand as an algorithm doing
what we think it's doing. And,
uh, transparency is key if we
want to detect bias, we need to
understand the inputs and the
outputs. If we want to mitigate
that bias, um, with some
particular mechanism, we
actually want to see
What that looks like in the real
world implemented, um, and, and,
and with some feedback that can
then feed into the process of
how the next year's assessments
go. And again, that's probably
not, it's not free. Um, but if
we care about making decisions
better and better over time,
we're going to need that
feedback that says this is how
we made the decision. We saw
this mistake we made this
intervention, and we saw that
the mistake was corrected and it
didn't mess up all the other
decisions at the same time. So I
think that feedback is a really
important piece of the process.
US
Um, slide 24, um, I probably
dangerously included this from
my, um, colleague at the law
school, which, uh, because I
can't speak to what any of these
particular items are, um, but
that in addition to
transparency, right? We want to
guarantee not just that we see
what happened, but that people
are guaranteed due process and
equal protection and the other,
um, protections that they are
afforded under the US and New
Mexico Constitution. And so
tying this into legal
requirements, I think is, is
important.
OK, the last substantive slide I
want to talk to you about, and I
want to spend a moment here is,
uh, not just solutions in terms
of policy, but solutions in
terms of developing a workforce
that is technically capable of
advancing AI of building an AI
economy here in New Mexico so
that AI is generating jobs, not
take more than it's taking jobs
away. And so, uh, I've been
working with colleagues from,
uh, UNM NMSU, New Mexico Tech,
CNM, Sandia, Los.
us. We have established the New
Mexico AI Consortium.
And, um, our goal is we intend
to expand this to other members,
but our goal is to establish New
Mexico as a leader in
trustworthy AI. So AI that, um,
is able to demonstrate that it
is applicable and usable and
it's transparent and fair in
different scenarios. Um, some of
those will be the sorts of
social scenarios that I was
talking about, consequential
decision making, but also
trustworthy AI that is able to
advance science, um, and
processes and procedures that go
around.
how do we check the predictions
of AI using scientific
processes. And I think there's
just enormous potential here,
um, across the state, um, these,
these things that I've mentioned
before, like, uh, you know,
battery design and medicine, um,
ecology, social science, um,
our, our quantum ecosystem that
we're building up here will
certainly be very impacted by
AI, um, and having the
intersection of the two of them
invested in in the state is
important.
Um, so our group is, um, trying
to build, uh, pipelines for AI
internships. So we've been
working not just with the labs
but also with local and national
and global companies, um, to
establish pathways for
internships in AI for our
students. Um, we are really
interested, you've talked about
earlier, Janeed AI courses, we
really would like to have the
funding to develop courses
together, um, so that we don't
have 17 institutions in the
state, each developing their own
AI class that we can build at
once, create hybrid classes that
can be taught, somewhat online
and somewhat in person across
the universities and eventually,
uh, also to K through 12
students. Um, this is a real
opportunity because this doesn't
exist already. We don't have
these things in place where we
can really save a lot by
collaborating.
Um, we really need, uh,
undergraduates to have, I think,
not just AI literacy that you
talked about earlier, but an
understanding of how AI can
affect whatever they are
studying, right? So if they're
in science, they will use AI.
They will have no choice. They
will use AI to advance their
science. Um, if they're in
social science, even if they're
in the humanities, there are
just tremendous applications for
this technology across the board
and our students need to be
aware of that. Um, uh, so we're
really pushing toward we've
applied for some external
funding. Um, we've put in a
And our special appropriations
to the state to try to start
developing courses, um, that can
train our undergrads. Um, we
also want our graduate students
to have opportunities to, uh, to
work at the labs, to start to be
engaged in what is just absolute
world-class research that goes
on at the National Labs here in
our state. Um, but when those
national labs put out calls for
partners, we need to be
prepared. We're not as big as
the University of Michigan, or,
you know, Carnegie Mellon or
Stanford, but with this
consortium.
And the ideas that we will pool
our resources and really get
ourselves prepared to, to have
real impact on the
collaborations between the
Department of Energy and, and
universities. And they're
looking at over $2 billion
investment in those
partnerships, so we really want
to be prepared for that.
Um, I will, uh, maybe just
highlight, so there's a number
of earlier this morning you
heard about the funding
opportunities in research. One
example is the National Science
Foundation has $200 million AI
research institutes that they
set up around the country. There
is not yet one in New Mexico. We
should have one in New Mexico.
We need probably to get, uh,
several of us have, have started
an applications. We haven't yet
been successful, but we really
need to build up our capacity to
be able to sort of play in this
space.
Uh, let's see, I think there's
more I can say about this, but I
will, um, maybe take the rest in
questions and go on to the last
two slides. Um, a truly
intelligent AI. What would this
do? I think that what we have,
we have made a mistake of
accepting the tools that
industry and researchers have
produced and not asked what do
we actually want an intelligent
AI to do, right? We should have
AI that can assist humans in
making smart decisions.
And to help us to mitigate our
biases. This is a this is an
achievable thing, just not
necessarily the direction that
industry has gone so far. Um,
how do we, you know, how do we
have tools that empower us to
think more broadly and from
multiple perspectives at the
same time and really integrate
all of the data that we have at
our disposal. Um, but not
necessarily to make the kinds of
mistakes that we can see in
these language models. Um, but
to have a kind of interaction
between humans and machines that
leads to something that's sort
of better.
than the, the sum of the parts.
And I think we are moving in
that direction, sort of in fits
and starts. Um, the tools that
are coming out now, they're not
just bigger and faster and more
efficient or more, I don't know
if efficient is the right way,
more computationally powerful.
Certainly industry has provided
a lot of ways for us to interact
with these tools that, um, have
improved over time and, and
building upon that and
specifically trying to use um
those tools to solve problems
that are of importance to
You know, for people of New
Mexico. That's not necessarily
the remit of, of a company, but
it should be what academic and
government partnerships can do.
Uh, my last slide is, uh, one
that I always use, um, to
highlight, uh, this John F.
Kennedy, uh, uh, incident where
he went into a space station and
had a conversation with the
janitor in which he said that he
was trying to get America to the
moon, and the janitor replied
that he was also, he was
cleaning the floors of the space
station in order to help get
America to the moon.
And, uh, the point there was
that Kennedy created this idea
that everybody mattered, that we
needed everybody, as many
students who could to go get a
STEM degree. We needed everybody
to think that their talents were
necessary to achieve a very hard
goal. Um, we certainly have that
situation here in AI, um, it is
even more an opportunity and
even more imperative because
this
These, these tools are trained
with the data and knowledge of
all of us, or at least it should
be with all of us, from all of
us, um, so we are contributing
to this. We need to help shape
it.
And I think even more than that
I've recently realized the
extent to which we are sort of
standing on the shoulders of
giants with this kind of
technology. It is integrating
what humans have figured out
about the world. And then it can
make predictions about where we
go next. And that is just an
incredibly powerful tool. You
know, sometimes people talk
about AI as just another another
tool with some costs and
benefits. But this is, I think,
a form as it's evolving, a kind
of a tool that we haven't seen
before. Um, and this is really
an opportunity.
For us to take, you know, take
control of this, take, um, at
least the ability to shape what
direction we want it to go in,
um, for the, for the citizens of
our state and, and to contribute
to what this is doing for the
world at large. And so I will
end with that and take
questions.
All right, thank you. Um, do we
have any questions?
OK. Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, doctor. It's, it's
interesting to see these
different presentations in each
time. It's kind of a new thing.
Um, my question is I know that
the, um,
The quantum people are thinking
of, I think they're planning for
summer courses for high school
teachers, I guess starting next
summer or whenever.
Um, how much can AI and quantum.
You know, you can only go to so
many seminars. Can they be
combined because
Um, high school teachers really
need to know how to shape their
curriculum and computer science
and physics for these emerging
things that are, as you know,
more than any of us are emerging
so quickly, it's hard to get a
handle on them.
Yes, thank you, Representative,
um, excellent question. So,
AI and quantum, I think will be
very intimately linked. I think
a lot of progress in quantum
will be driven by AI potentially
down the road, a lot of progress
in AI may be driven by by
quantum computation. Um,
In terms of whether you want one
course for a poor high school
teacher who has, you know, 2
weeks to spend on this, um, you
know, I mean, both of these
deserve a bit of depth. And so
trying to merge those might be a
bit too much to ask for a person
who has no background in either
quantum or AI to come in and
sort of learn these tools, um,
together. Um, but more
generally, you're asking a
question like, how do we get
our, you know,
K through 12 teachers also are
university faculty to be up to
speed on all of this technology
which is changing so fast, and
I, I don't, this is one of the
challenges, right? How do we all
learn this? Um, one of the
things was a little bit hinted
at by Dean Lowe's suggestion,
like AI does give us some
ability to learn things faster.
And so investing in this is one
of the things, um, when we've,
uh, made this request to the
state for funding graduate
students to do research in AI.
Some of that
should be in AI and education,
right? How do we develop
educational tools that are
useful and helpful and help get
people up to speed with new
technologies like AI and
quantum.
Um, so I do think that
I
They're both important.
Um, I will, I don't want to say
anything negative about my
colleagues in Quantum. I do
think Quantum will be a fairly
specialized, um, area. Not
everyone will absolutely have to
understand quantum computation.
I don't understand quantum
computation, right? Um, I think
AI will be a more broadly, uh,
you know, affecting technology.
And so we're going to have to
figure out not just how to do a
summer school for a handful of,
you know, 2030, even 100
teachers, but how do we get this
out to everyone? So I think it's
the scale of the
might be a little bit different
in AI.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Soltz. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, when you were talking
about AI in, in medical a couple
of weeks ago I had blood work
done and AI did most of the
analysis and when I met with my
doctor, he had to explain that
the line on there that it showed
no signs of pregnancy was
because AI had generated the
report and so he was
interpreting the various pieces
that were on there. Um,
Kind of, you answered lots of
the question I had asked of the
previous one of some of the
things, there's a whole lot it
sounds like we ought to be doing
if you were in the legislature,
what would be the most important
piece of legislation, we ought
to be working on and working
hard to, to pass to help us get
Um, more, be more proactive
instead of reactive, and I have
to say I love your positiveness
about AI that, you know, this
isn't something to be afraid of,
but it's coming, you know, be
prepared and use appropriately.
Wonderful. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator, um, I think,
Given, given the power to decide
what legislation to consider. I
think the guiding principle
should be, this is powerful
technology. We have to take this
opportunity to shape its future,
right? So being afraid of it is
not helpful, right? Recognizing
that it's here and that it could
do very damaging things and it
could do very extraordinarily
transformative, helpful things.
And so it's important to, to
take step by step. So, uh, the
legislation that was passed last
year, I think was an important
Step. It solved one problem.
Potentially.
Um, it at least took a nibble
at, at, at, at solving the, the
misinformation and elections
problem. I think that one
important thing is to take the
next step on that legislation
and at least consider, do we
want to regulate or have, um,
laws that consider
misinformation more generally,
right, that is harmful, for
example, to students, uh, or to
anyone, right, who, who might
have deep fakes of themselves,
produced and, and, and
propagated online. Um, these are
not in priority order. That's
that's.
number 12, I do think this
transparency issue is not going
to solve any problem, but it is
necessary to solve any problem.
We really need to have some
requirements for transparency in
order to guarantee in order to
improve the likelihood that
there is fairness in high stakes
decision making, um, and that we
understand how these those
processes go. So transparency, I
think is a logical.
Other direction to, to, to go.
Um, the other there, you know, a
number of other problems. I
don't know that which ones the
state of New Mexico needs to get
out ahead of. Um, we were
actually pretty, pretty well
ahead in the, um, in the
deepfakes and elections. And I
think that was great. Uh,
Colorado has already come up
with some, some language and
some legislation on
transparency, and so I think
small tweaks to that and
implementing something similar
makes a lot of sense. Um, for
other things, it's such an
uncertain landscape.
It's unclear if the federal
government will act in the next
one act before the election.
Almost everyone understands
that, um, but what federal
legislation will happen. So I
think you want to have an eye to
that. But the place that I think
you can make immediate impact is
actually in investing in the
workforce and the population
here in New Mexico, and that's,
you know, that's not just at the
university level where we do
think, right, we really need to
have our graduate students, or
undergraduates, um, trained to
understand this technology and
to use it, um.
But our, our partners in the New
Mexico AI Consortium at New
Mexico, uh state, they're
looking at K through 12
education and AI.
Um, and so I think that sort of
investment in the future is
certainly in some sense, that's
the clearest win. You will get
something out of investing in
the future, right, no matter how
the landscape changes, um, no
matter what the technology
changes, right, this technology
for sure for sure will change
quickly.
Um, and so I guess I would put
it in those sort of 3 buckets,
right? And and dealing with the
misinformation problem dealing
with a transparency as a first
step to other kind of potential
societal harms and then
investing in, you know, the, the
workforce that's gonna bring
this, be able to shape this
technology in the future.
Thank you. Um, certainly I'm not
an expert in this area. I'm, you
know, I use it sometimes to
assist getting me started on
writing projects or things of
that sort. As we move forward,
you're clearly one of the
experts in the state on this. If
I or any of my colleagues are
working on legislation. Are you
available to be our expert to
work with council service on
drafting things and sit with us
as the legislation is going
through in the legislature.
So thank you, Senator, for the,
for the question and I, I
enjoyed doing this with uh with
leader Chasey last year. Um, so
I'm certainly happy to make
myself available, but I also
want to suggest you, you don't
want to just rely on me. Um, so
we have, we've mentioned, I
think, myself and Chris Moore
and Sonia Gibson Rankin have
mentioned that we have a group
of UNM and Santa Fe Institute
faculty who are interested in
this. And so that's a group of a
handful of people here in the
state who can serve as a
resource. You need way more help
than
That,
um, and this is something I, I
really think when we invest in,
you know, a couple of graduate
students who can help us to
teach an undergraduate class
where students learn about the
policy implications of AI. So
research is not just science and
technology, it's not all just,
you know, quantum and medicine
and new batteries, but it's how
do we understand the social
implications of this technology
and what we can and can't do.
And so that's the kind of thing
that, um, you know, that's,
that's what we want to do to
Build up not just the workforce,
but the expertise to be able to
help, you know, guide people
like you who are making
decisions.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you again for your
presentation. So your
consortium, would it be
something that would be able to
help us since it's a group of,
from all over. Absolutely, thank
you, Madam Chair. Yes. So, uh,
the consortium is at the, at the
moment, this group of 7
institutions we hope to grow.
Um, that would certainly be a
place that we want to draw
expertise from and and we do
have expertise, um, including,
for example, in AI fairness at
at the National Labs, right?
People are actually looking at
new neural network models that
you could use.
fairness. Um, and so, and this
isn't the, you know, this is a
state of research, but that
would be helpful guidance for
you to get. So, um, we would be
happy, um, to, to be that kind
of resource. Great, thank you.
Um, so one last question. Does
New Mexico have a large um
language model just for data
from New Mexico because we're so
different from everyone else. Do
we have something we pull from
or health or, or different
areas. So, uh, thank you for
that question about whether New
Mexico has its own resources,
so.
Uh, one of the things that we
are, are almost our initial idea
in setting up the New Mexico AI
Consortium was to set up, um,
computing power that could be
somewhat stood up by the lab,
somewhat managed by the labs,
right, the national labs in our
state are some of the world's
experts in high performance
computing, that is the sort of
computational foundation of AI.
Um, then we realized that we
want that compute resource to be
available, not just to
university researchers, but to,
to really dem
cra t ize AI, right, to make it
available to people, to
students, to general citizens
around the state. Um, and to
reflect that New Mexico
perspective. So the one thing we
know we can do here that no one
can do anywhere else is to
include the perspective of the
diverse populations of our state
in this sort of, in these sorts
of models. Um, so, you know,
the, the, the creative class of
New Mexicans, uh, the Native
American population, which is
nearly invisible in a lot of
these, um, you know, global
scale.
Language models. So this is
something that doesn't exist,
um, but it absolutely is
something that I think should
exist. And this is the kind of
thing that would allow people to
say, not just, you know, we ask
questions like how do it's not
just that we want to say how do
we translate this into Navajo,
we want to say, you know, what
is the perspective from a farmer
in this community on this
question we want to make sure
that that perspective is
included in the model. And so
building up that form of real
democratized, you know,
Knowledge about the past, but
also what, you know, our, our,
our views and visions for the
future are is something that we
absolutely, I think, um, would
like to, to, to build and it
does not yet exist.
Well, thank you again for
presenting, um, we don't have
any more presenting and, um, for
your time and your expertise
because we know we've called on
you a lot and uh you always
bring something new and, um, I
just, you educated so well, so
thank you. Appreciate it. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and everyone.
my
All right, our next, um,
presentation, use of artificial
intelligence and patient care
and medical services. Petitioner
Dr. Patricia Finn, and I'm
Doctor David Perkins. Whenever
you guys are ready. Thank you.
Good afternoon, everyone, and
thank you so much for this
opportunity, um, it really is
really important and critical,
and we are so happy to be here.
Um, my name is Patricia Finn,
and I am the Dean of the School
of Medicine at the University of
New Mexico and my colleague is
uh Doctor David Perkins, who has
a number of titles, including
head of the MDPhD program at the
School of Medicine. Um, I just
wanted to preface and start
Out
by saying that, um, I have
really appreciated and enjoyed
the, I, I listened to Doctor
Melanie Moses, um, but that I
think what brings us here today
and to speak about it is that we
are both physicians. I'm a
pulmonologist. David is a
transplant nephrologist. So as
we think about care of our
patients at the center, that is
really primarily what we are
thinking about when we are
sharing our information and new
tools.
And our job and our goal is to
train the next generation.
Not only how important it is to
use these new tools, but really
to continue to stress, which I
think is remarkable about New
Mexico and that is empathy at
its very basic core of care of
our patients. So we don't think
of these as separate and
distinct, but how we tie them
together. So if we can go
To the first slide.
That would be the shortage of
health care providers and you're
saying, well, Doctor Finn,
you're going to be speaking
about technology and AI. Why do
you bring this up? Because this
is Jermaine and key for why we
see the urgency of now. If I
said to everybody on this
committee, please.
Put away your phone, just use a
landline, you would think I was
crazy, which actually my
students do when I say that, but
um,
This is really paramount that AI
and that tool, it's really how
do we interface with a really
incredible tool, and that is
this the first comment that came
when the internet came. It's the
first comment that comes, but
how do we use it for good. And
we harnessed that with the
empathy, the commitment, the
care of our patients. And the
reason that Doctor Perkins and I
are showing you the shortage of
health care providers which you
can look at your number and look
at your favorite, what are you
missing? You can see that we
have
Practitioners needed right now,
which we just took a tour around
parts of New Mexico. We can see
that face to face. Doctor
Perkins and I have been here
just 2 years and have used that
time to really see where the
shortages are for health care,
for training, for what is needed
now. You can see that the needs
are great. And so whether it's
as a physician or whether as a
physician's assistant or whether
it's in uh physical therapy
Any of those, and we are working
very hard and I hope you'll be,
um,
hearing more about our plans and
hope to really address
healthcare shortages and
workforce for and of New Mexico.
But that really brings me to the
next slide, which is that
The modality in the situations
and the solutions that we would
like to provide provide is that
we want to improve the shortage
of providers we want to address
that. That is key and germane.
That's increasing the numbers,
training the next generation,
deploying resources, thinking
about data is good, more data is
better. But the other is, can we
utilize any of these tools to
increase productivity, reach
out, really spread if you're
sitting
Clovis, or you're sitting in
Santa Rosa where we've just
spent. How do we ensure that
those specialties, those tools,
so not just telemedicine or
teleconsult. You'll hear about
our use of echo, but how do we
come together to really utilize
those tools and I'm going to end
on just one comment and
That is here the atom was split.
Here is the greatest per capita.
Of PhDs in any other state we
have a lot of research in
health, but even more than that,
the will and the empathy and the
key part of the spirit of the
state of the people of New
Mexico is our other jewel. So
working together, I'd like to
turn that over to Dr. David
Perkins.
For the next section of the
talk, I'm going to really try to
drill down on our efforts to put
incorporate AI into
uh
Medicine and health care and in
particular in New Mexico,
including rural areas, and, uh,
if I could just go back to the
previous slide, uh, so clearly
one component and there's many
several projects uh doing that
is to increase the number of
providers.
Um, but I would say that even if
we
Graduated 200 I'll just talk
about the doctors first. If we
graduated 200 doctors per year,
it's estimated that the current
shortage is 2000 doctors today
and it's going to increase over
the next decade. So if we kept
them all in New Mexico, it would
take 10 years to catch up on
where we need to be today. So we
have a huge problem here and I
think the solution is going to
be all of the above, one of
which is train more doctors, but
the
Others to make them more
effective, more productive, and
one of the uh components of
that uh we suggest is going to
be AI.
So, um,
Uh, next site, please. So we, we
have developed a pilot echo, uh
to teach AI to um
Practitioners in New Mexico and
we had over 800 people, 800
practitioners sign up. We were
sort of blown away by the
interest, um, and it came, it
came from 17 different counties
in New Mexico.
Uh, and we designed a course,
um, so that you don't need to
know how to code. You don't need
to know differential equations
and you don't need to know what
tensors are and how they work,
etc. etc. But we did it at a
conceptual level so we could
introduce, uh,
Uh, practitioners in
And other students in healthcare
workers in the
whole interest and approach of,
of
AI
And um next time.
And, and this is our, uh,
Our 1st 8 introductory sessions
that we have provided and we're
actually in the middle of it,
you'll see we're in September
there were about halfway through
the first pilot and we're going
to use the pilot and then get
feedback and, uh,
Develop the next follow up which
we hope to start next summer.
Our next
Next spring, um.
So you, you can see it covers
many areas, everything from
ethics which we've heard a fair
amount already today discussed
both in a positive sense and
concerns we had a professor from
University of Colorado come in
and discuss the ethics and also
the bias and the um
Uh, other issues regarding that
and
Uh, we've talked about large
language models, wearables, uh
one of our former students from
who's now working at Google came
and uh talked about their use of
wearables where you can monitor
patients remotely.
And this becomes obviously very
relevant if we're talking about
rural medicine, uh, it, it's not
only useful wearables are useful
in Albuquerque, but they're even
more useful if you're in, uh,
uh, hiprocker somewhere and
further away from healthcare,
um, and
We've, um
Also been uh thank you.
Looked at uh patient
communication. We had one talk
on chatbots where the chatbot
actually answers patient queries
where they, uh, have questions
after their clinic visit and the
interesting this is done at uh
University of California, and
the interesting thing in that
study was that the patients like
the chat box better than the
doctor and to be fair to the
doctor since I am one,
I, I think a lot of that is
because the doctors it's 8
o'clock at night and you're
getting these.
Fries and you, you know, you've
been working all day etc. etc.
and so the chatbot is not tired,
uh, it has lots of energy and it
answers the questions in detail
and puts in all the flourishes
as well. So, uh, it's very
useful uh tool to uh
Uh, lighten up or shall we say,
Facilitate the role of the
physician, uh, for example,
when, when I'm in clinic with
someone, you're sitting there at
the computer and you're typing
and some of the patients get
insulted because you're typing
and you're not looking directly
at them all the time and
The alternative is to do it at 8
o'clock at night.
Um, so this can help with
burnout facilitate communication
and actually also decrease
errors.
So
I'd like to just move on and
cover
a few um what's that?
I just wanted to make sure
that's available for all of you.
They've all been taped. So if
you look at this, there's
anything you like we have to
ensure that the link is sent,
it's open for, uh, so if there's
one you like or don't like, but
you can also pile up in the
conversations afterwards. Doctor
Perkins leads all the questions
I think are there, are there
really very helpful part. So
we'll make sure y'all get the
link, that's helpful if that's
something, Madam Chair, that
would be.
So, so I'm going to discuss a
lot of this at a very general
level, uh, uh, and we'll be
happy to get as granular as you
like in the question and answers
and really drill down and be,
uh,
Um,
Go into more detail. So what is
AI? It's not artificial and it's
not intelligent, but it will,
it's based on neural networks
and it and probabilities and it
will in fact, uh, affect.
Everything everywhere in the
future, so I would say a good
analogy would be what does
electricity do?
AI is going to permeate many,
many aspects of our lives, and
it's going to be everywhere and
it's, in fact, already here, but
it's going to explode and become
even more here.
So next slide.
And what is a large language
model? Well, it's basically
built on these, uh, analysis of
text where it predicts the next
word. So, uh,
GPT 3 had 175 billion parameters
that was the precursor of Chat
GPT GPT 4 is 1.76 trillion.
And to show how fast it was uh
incorporated into our lives, uh.
Uh, chat GPT had 100 million
users.
Within 5 days of its launching.
100 million users within 5 days,
so it's exploding into the uh
uh.
Our, our daily lives uh neural
neural networks have been around
for 50-60 years, uh, but what
wasn't here before was large
enough and fast enough computers
and big enough data sets. We now
have bigger and bigger data
sets. We have faster and faster
computers. We may even have
quantum computers in the near
future.
Uh, and
The chat GPT was having 25
million daily hits.
So it's, it's, it's here.
Um, next time. I'm just gonna
cover a few of these concepts to
make sure we're all sort of on
the same page. So what is an
hallucination. So it, it's a
false or, uh, incorrect.
Answer from the
Uh, AI, and we know that this is
a an occurrence and if we have
time uh at the end I'll ask Chat
GPT why it hallucinates and it's
sort of interesting what it
says, but the bottom line is the
output from these models is
probabilistic, so anything, even
if it's 99% accurate has a error
rate in that error rate can
occasionally create major
problems and when you're talking
about medicine, you're talking
about life and death. And so
In that situation, these errors
are really problematic. So at
least for the near future we're
going to have to keep humans in
the loop to sign off on all of
these, uh, predictions and, and,
uh, direction that is provided
by um
Um, these, these models and
maybe even more insidious than
the errors or the bias and
we've, we heard some nice
discussions earlier today about
bias and these models are
trained on data that has
inherent bias in it.
So this inherent bias just gets
reproduced in our system. So,
uh, it's a problem, but I would
argue it's also an opportunity
where we can have another, uh,
chance to address some of these
uh equity issues that we know
our culture has and our, in our,
certainly in our, on our
internet and so it's both a
problem and a challenge and an
opportunity, I would suggest.
Uh, next slide.
And
The other
Another important concept is the
singularity, so basically that
is a hypothetical time in the
future when machines are smarter
than humans, and will that
occur? I would suggest probably
and in fact, it's already uh
these AI models can already do
some tasks more effectively than
humans, for example, it's better
at reading a mammogram and a
human radiologist, uh, is better
at playing chess, playing golf,
playing Texas hold up.
The world champion in Texas Hoe
is AI and it has to address
bluffing and all kinds of
strange concepts there. But so
already AI can outperform humans
in a number of tasks, and I
could list a whole bunch more,
um, including the chatbot
answering the patient queries in
the clinic.
Um,
So that poses a number of
ethical problems which we could
talk about more in Q&A if
you're, if you're interested,
Nicky.
Um,
the other, I think, important
thing is why AI and um
This picture shows, um, the
Center for the Boston Celtics.
He's 7 ft 4. The little guy on
his right is Brad Stevens, who's
coach general manager. He's only
6 ft tall, so you can see.
Yeah, it is funny.
Um, I, I actually was a Boston
Celtic fan. We worked in Boston
for it.
We lived in Boston for almost 20
years actually, but anyway, uh,
so they did a meta-analysis of,
of
height of 5/5 million
individuals were studied in
this, this meta-analysis and
they identified 12,000 genetic
elements that can modulate your
height.
So, complex and, uh, we do
things like this in our
research, which I'm not going to
talk about today, but it, these
are the kind of questions where
AI can step in and start to um
provide analysis that makes
sense and can actually drill
down, uh, the other one we just
heard about was protein folding.
So there are a number of
questions where biology is very,
very medicine is very, very
complex. And, uh, AI is.
Uh, obvious way to improve our
understanding and our way to
address these kinds of problems.
Next slide.
So here I, I did ask uh.
Let's go back when I did ask,
uh,
AI, why do you hallucinate and
it's, it's sort of interesting.
It's actually gives you a
fairly, I think, insightful.
Uh,
bit of insight or provides
insight into the workings of the
AI and we we have a whole series
of this we've done with some of
our uh research team, but uh
I'll just do the luinate here.
So next slide.
So basically what it says is,
uh, as an AI language model. I
generate responses based on
patterns and the data. I was
trained on, but I don't have
true understanding or access for
real-time information.
So that provides a very
important concept that uh it's,
it's a way, well, where would be
the wrong word, but because it's
not conscious either, but it,
it, it has uh uh
Has guidelines within itself
that it's uh not, uh,
Um, I'm
trying to not be anthropomorphic
here, um, it, it, it has
guidelines to actually guide or
understand why it's doing these,
and these hallucinations occur
because I actually understand
the content. I don't understand
that content in the way a human
does. I generate responses based
on probabilities and patterns in
the data. So it's a statistical
model basically in simple terms.
So next slide.
Uh,
it's also important in data
analysis. This is actually, uh,
from my research work and and
I'm not gonna go through it, uh,
in this context, but you can see
it's a heat map, it's been
clustered, it shows responses.
In bacteria to different
antibiotics and, uh, what I'll
just say here is we can use AI
to again address complex
questions. It will analyze this
data. It will compare it to
additional data. It will then
say what's similar, what's
different, what are the
potential mechanisms, etc. etc.
Uh, next slide.
And, and this was the analysis.
Next slide.
And it also generates computer
code, so, uh, when we, we had a
team in, uh, we were previously
at University of Illinois in
Chicago, we had a team there
where I used to really insist
that they all learn how to code.
Uh, I'm less convinced.
That that's, you certainly don't
have to become a master coder in
this era. Uh, it's good to
understand the principles, etc.
but what CPT4 in particular will
do is, is, uh, generate code for
you. It will also debug your
code if you have existing code,
it will document your code and
uh actually, um,
Well, it's where one of my
former students is now working
at Google says, um, uh, Dr.
Perkins, I can do in half an
hour but it used to take me a
whole day in your lab. So again,
they're showing the potential
increase in productivity that
we're striving for in in many
different aspects. Next slide.
And this is the output from a
code generated by GPT4 next
slide. So I'm gonna run through
these very quickly, but I'd be
you'll have it in your handout
and we'll also be happy to go
into this in detail, uh.
Uh, in the Q&A if anyone wants
to drill down on any of these
issues. So, so, uh, full
disclosure, I asked GPT4 to
generate a list of potential
benefits that
AI could have.
In, um
Applications to me uh medical
practice and uh uh.
Patient care, particularly in
rural areas.
And here's what it came up with,
uh, number one, it will enhance
the diagnostics and decision
support, and I'm not going to
read the fine prints for this,
but again we'll be happy to go
into it in more detail for
anybody,
uh, next time.
Uh, 2, it will, uh, integrate
with telemedicine, so it, it
will provide uh a way that we
can combine, uh, information and
uh decision support from AI with
telemedicine tools.
Uh, 3.
Uh
Resource optimization, so
You have or we have in.
New Mexico, lots of areas that
have lacking some resources just
due to the small size of the
community and etc. and the, uh,
financials of such situations,
so.
But it can make resource
optimizations by integrating the
effects of uh.
Different
Tools that may be in Albuquerque
or some other place, uh, or even
other places outside in New
Mexico into the whole process 4
next slide, uh, also very
important in training and
education, uh, we're very
interested in, in training,
uh, and we want to integrate
this into the medical school
into the training of the the
students, uh, we're talking
about, uh, you probably have
heard of the BAMD program we
want to also start a
Uh, B EMD where we take
engineers and bring them into
the medical school and um,
We did, we did that in Chicago,
uh, University of Illinois now
has a whole school downstate
where it's based on engineering
Arizona State is doing the same
in collaboration with uh Mayo
Clinic and we would like to
start a program here where we
have a portion of our medical
students actually trained as
engineers. Next slide.
Um,
it's useful in mobile health,
uh, applications and um.
These, these can be anything
from remote monitoring to uh.
Uh, facilities there, uh, tools
that are, uh,
uh, taken around the state, uh.
Primarily through telehealth or
through some uh electronic, uh.
Application next slide.
And it can help address the
workforce shortage and I already
threw out this idea that I have
a student doing it half a hour
what do you take all day to do
and that was primarily coding,
uh, while he was working in our
research team. Next slide.
And the ultimate goal here is
improve patient outcomes, so
these patients who are have are
underserved in many ways and
often in remote areas of it
sometimes also in Albuquerque,
even, uh, we can improve patient
outcomes. Next slide.
And do it at a cost efficiency,
next slide.
And it also then the AI can
provide, um,
Real-time data analysis so you
can start to predict uh, uh,
infectious outcomes, etc. that
are occurring or epidemics that
are potentially developing in
these areas and next slide.
And I'll turn it on back to Dean
Finn.
Thank you so much, Dr. Perkins.
So, um,
We really present this on the
landscape.
We also present this. Thank you,
uh, trying to be mindful, we
present this, uh,
On the landscape as educators,
as healers, as scientists, as
innovators, as really thinking
about the next generation. So as
part of that accruing more data
can be good with some of the
guardrails that I'll talk about
in one second, but part of our
data was to um to really visit
New Mexico and to see some of
the needs and to listen. As you
know, we have several programs
in the medical school, we have
something called PI which is
practical immersion experience
where
Every single student spends 6
weeks in a rural area for, uh,
between 1st and 2nd year, we
also have a number of preceptors
around the state, um, so we want
to make it very clear that we're
not just the University of
Albuquerque. We were you think
all over the state. And that is
why we brought up when we
started this pilot program of
education, um, it was more than
practitioners, it was students
and pharmacists and nursing, um,
and
O T's and PTs that all came on
board and there were 17 counties
to repeat to try to understand
this tool taken to a whole other
level. What can it be? And we
utilize the echo platform
because we think it's a way
that's really a teller
education, but can we start to
think about teleconsulting other
modalities that I won't get
into. But what I, we really
wanted to do, Doctor Perkins and
I went on those sites to really
listen.
To not only IHS to the Pueblos
to community colleges. I've gone
on 4 now in my 2 years and I've
still more to go, but really so
that there's not plans that
we're there's a lot of energy
and excitement. If you sat in on
one of our
echo IAI Echo classes, you would
see folks from all over asking
very basic questions. Some
questions are as basic as wait a
minute, I thought the electronic
medical record was supposed to
help us and all it does is
torture me because I can't get
it filled.
But it's also thinking how can
we use our data in a in a more
strategic and meaningful way,
and the World Health
Organization has these models of
how do you think about deploying
resources, um, engaging
providers and really, really
listening to people of how do we
improve health worldwide, but
really I think we could.
Start and continue and build
here in New Mexico. I'm gonna
tell you what that doesn't show
you how joyful it was. There is
so much energy and excitement
about how do we improve the
lives of each other and that's a
really
Spectacular spirit in New Mexico
with that we'll end and thank
you and open to any questions. I
just add one thank you to you
guys. We, we, I, I won't name
names right now, but we talked
to a legislature, legislator who
said, I'm sorry, I only have 15
minutes for you. I'm very busy
today and he talked to us for an
hour and a half.
True story.
We'll start questions with
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
and thank you very much for the
presentation. I continue to, to
really glean a lot of wonderful
facts, figures, dates, times,
tempers, emotions, the whole
nine. I was really impressed
with the potential benefits.
Slides or or or portions, 348,
and 9, I could see integrating a
lot of what you had there, Madam
Chair, and my, my own business.
We're a 6 Sigma company and we
utilize a high quality, uh,
metrics and data and facts and
figures and
Um, to make things repeatable
and reproducible and once we do
that, then we implement that
into our clients' businesses and
it's just wonderful. So 348, and
9, I can see direct, you know.
Thank you for doing that. Um, on
the slide, uh, 5 where you have
these AI medicine pilot echoes,
and I think you know I'm a very
big supporter of ECO.
And, uh, I always have been. So
is there an academy or a
certification or how are these
speakers? I, I, they're all
wonderful human beings. I happen
to know almost about 1/3 of
them, uh, very well. One of them
in particular, I know really
well, uh, but how are they being
certified and
Uh, Madam Chair, and, and.
deemed like they know what
they're talking about and
they're experts in their fields,
but now all of a sudden they're,
you know, they're doing this
kind of stuff. How are we
ensuring that they, that their,
their information is weaved
together and dovetails together,
but then also what they're
talking about that it's
It's a certified information.
I'm, I'm going to start, if I
might, Dr. Perkins. I think
that's, um, thank you so much
for that question, Senator
Padilla, um,
I think first and foremost this
is a pilot, so I want to couch
that very carefully. This pilot
that you see is to glean
information. The second was, um,
our goal is to have a
certificate granting program
from this pilot, so you know,
that's what we're aiming for.
We're going to be, we're gearing
up for come the summer a full on
hands on deck. You spoke about
an academy, but I think what we
have done, which may not address
your question, but somewhat is
to screen all of.
The instructors that you've
heard who have either published,
have experience for Bennett
national venues where they have
been vetted and produce that.
Now, I want you, I hope that I
can underscore very clearly
we're not asking them to produce
information. We have to think
about compliance and, you know,
patient confidentiality and all
of these ethics and morality,
and we want to ensure that
everyone knows that we think
that it's really important to
remember, as Dr. Moses.
I said in Dr. Perkins said, the
data that we have are really
trained on a specific set like
if I want to know who's at risk
for diabetes. The data that I
have that's on the internet is
really on a certain population
which doesn't represent
everybody in this room or either
anybody in New Mexico. So we
have only selected those who are
very well just so you know,
Doctor Perkins and I selected
them, so we take all claim,
whether they're good or bad. And
we are now receiving feedback on
not only how they teach their.
we screen there, uh,
excuse me, there, uh, their
presentations prior to that. So
we will have to your question, a
more rigorous, um,
system because our plan and we
will have a criteria for
granting of the certificate.
This 8 sessions pilot, and I
know you're very interested in
seeing what we were doing. We
wanted to make sure that we
started it and began to engage.
The other part that will say is
you see intersected in there is
some real life use which, as
you, you probably know better
than I, that echo was started
because we had a dearth of GI
practitioners who could actually
administer life saving therapy
for hepatitis, which is really
important also as we think about
substance abuse because that can
also be a sequeli. But, um, as
you know, the ECO program took
off to say how do we share the
information even if you're not a
GI practitioner who only knows
how to use the medicine. How can
I teach you sitting in wherever
you're sitting and how to use
it. So that it is with that
genesis and idea that we think
that
Or how we learn those tools can
be shared with others. I hope
I've answered your question. If
not, to Dr. Perkins want to add?
I think, I think it's good. I'm,
I'm glad, and of course, like
anything else in life, you know,
Madam Chair, I mean, we don't
expect it to be spot on 100%,
you know, whatever we want
things to continue to be
innovative and grow and learn
and be recertified. And once
we're there, we should do it
again to make sure that it's
continually improving. So I just
wanted to make sure that what
we're, what we're calling,
Um
Clinical management and AI as an
example with Dr. Niggaru, that,
you know, that, that we know
what he's talking about there
and that he knows what he's
talking about there when it
comes to and all that. So, so,
so full stop. Oh, by the way,
um, a side note, uh, anyone that
has a Veriz lymphoma, I believe
the issue has been resolved, so
you might want to start
responding to your 97 text
messages that have been sitting
there literally just got 97 text
messages, so I'll get to that
later. Um, but just as an
observation and, and, and back
to what we're talking about
here, Madam Chair, um, so in my
business.
I would say that uh AI is
already probably helped reduce
writing time. We do a lot of
writing in my business for
clients. And I think it's
improved, it's reduced writing
time by about 40%.
Um, and I think that's a
wonderful thing as you could
imagine. As a matter of fact,
uh, I hope he doesn't mind, but
Representative De la Cruz, his,
his, uh, spouse, who we all
know, she's the editor for some
of the work that that we do at
my company and she does a lot of
editing for me. And, but even at
that, she's doing the editing,
but even though I'm, I'm cutting
my writing time down by about
40%.
I have that time now to ensure
that what I'm writing is
actually really good stuff. So
I, I want, I want to make sure
that that's not lost in the
conversation that suddenly I
have time to really think a lot
more about what I'm trying to do
for my clients rather than just,
you know, oh my gosh, I get you
all this stuff.
I could send it over to the
editor. The editor's gonna send
it back to me and then we're
going to get it out to the
whatever. So now we are suddenly
we have a lot more, you know,
what I'd call quality time to,
to really think about what it is
that we're writing and what
we're what we're doing there.
Um,
On the other side of that coin
though, I want to make sure that
you know, like the students at
the university aren't going on
into life.
Relying on this and not spending
that time suddenly that I know I
have available to think about
the quality of the work. I hope
that that we're also having that
conversation at the at the
university level saying, yeah,
this is great. It's, you can use
these tools to do all this
writing for you and this and
that, blah blah, but you got to
really read what it just what it
wrote for you to make sure that
it's good and it's good stuff.
Do you have any thoughts on how
we can ensure that that part is
not lost in this whole
innovation that we've just, that
we're experiencing right now?
Does that make sense? Yeah, it,
it makes total sense and um I
think we often get excited about
the spectacular things that AI
does. Oh my God, it's world
champion in Texas hold em poker.
I mean, that's the world
champion in chess. I mean,
that's exciting, but it, it, the
irony is it's also very good at
mundane things like writing
uh in the physician's parley,
um, writing, uh,
Uh, letters for approval from
insurance companies for a
specific treatment which is uh
uh can consume huge amounts of
time. You can, you can go on
some physician's office and
they'll have 3 or 4 employees
just doing that.
That's another conversation,
but uh AI can take that over and
do it very effectively and
efficiently, sort of like I
think what you're referring to,
uh, so.
that alleviates some of the
mundane trivial tasks that
consume a lot of time, so that
gives us the opportunity to deal
with, we, we heard some
discussions earlier about how to
analyze a problem, how to, uh,
drill down onto the conceptual,
um, issues which is what um
I think ultimately one of the
benefits of all of this could be
is we can have the physicians
and the practitioners spending
more time on the more
intellectually challenging
aspects of the patient care of
the, and also the more
humanistic, like just talking to
your patients, you might have
time to do that now as opposed
to, uh,
Oh, sorry, I, I have to you're
15 minutes are up. I'm sorry,
you know, but if, if you have
that time to actually look them
in the eye and talk to them and
discuss that. I think it's a big
plus. So I, I, I think you're
raising a very important issue
and I think the potential is
there to actually spend more
time.
Teaching those important
concepts and etc. and hopefully
that's the direction we're gonna
go.
Can I can I add to that, I think
that's
Incredibly important your
comments, but also yours. Um,
when we talk, you talked about
AI and clinical management or
whatever the topics are here.
Some of the applications we've
had is you might get a note,
hey, you've come in, did you get
your shot for tuberculosis, what
did you did? And in fact, you,
you only came in to get a spray
for your.
Your allergy. So whatever tools
we have, we need not only the
oversight and to read it, as you
said, you, you read
additionally, but also to make
sure we present the humanistic
part to that touching your
patient, touching the person
you're dealing with is a really
important component, no robot's
going to do that. I get that.
And so listening and hearing
with our living, our dying, are
sick, that's really important.
So that's the other part that's
empathy to teach our students,
but how to use the tools for the
best use, how to think not only
just about this one person this
time, but how does this fit in
the span of what the predictive
diagnosis could be it's
phenomenal, and how do we
interact and how do we think
about what's preventative rather
than just treating these are
like incredible tools. I'm so
excited for the next generation,
so I think it's using that. But
I will tell you the examples
that we've had already in the
course, make it very clear if
you get a note, you'll get a
note saying, this was originally
generated
an algorithm but has been
reviewed by the physicians, so
you're not talking about the
spray when you actually want to
talk about something else. So
that's one part so that there
has to be, as you do review.
But the other part, it freed up
the physicians for exactly some
of that part, so that you're
not, you know, busy looking at
the computer and ignoring the
person that's there. The other
part is you ask for practices on
Senator Padilla, universities
over are making different
decisions about how students can
use ALI or not. There are some
universities that are saying,
forget it, you have to sign a
note saying I can't use it.
There are others that are
saying,
Yes, you can under these tenants
like actually, I was just having
this with one of our medical
students, a code of contact. You
know, you're not going to use
identical patient information.
You're independently verify and
validate any answers. You're not
going to make mental decisions
based on that unless we can
confirm accuracy and to be
honest with our patients and
each other when we do it. I
didn't write these principles.
These are the students are
medical students trying to think
about who use the tools. So
that's really, um, pretty
exciting.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm almost done. Uh, I love what
you just read, by the way, on
the, the thing the students came
up with. I think it's fantastic.
But, uh, yeah, the quality of
work, like I said over at my
business, I believe it's gone
way up as a result of, you know,
being able to have the more time
to interact with the patient,
not in our case, our clients or
whatever. Um, but, but, you
know, yeah, Doctor Finn, Doctor
Perkins, Doctor Moses, um,
Doctor, uh, President Stokes. I
mean, I think it's really
important that we spend a lot of
time talking about the, you
still got to read this stuff.
You still gotta, you gotta
review it and make sure that
it's what you really wanted it
to be so that we're not kind of
setting a whole generation of,
of folk up to do something that
is very likely to make some
gigantic mistake or error
because it just wasn't reviewed
and it was so just became so
reliant on, I'm sure it's good.
I'm sure a lot of people have
put information in here and
that's why it came out the way
that it did. I don't need to
review that. Um, well, that's
probably the most important
part. So I hope that all of the
Doctors running around in the
room here just and, and, and the
president of the university that
you're spending just as much
time on that as you are on
developing what AI is going to
look like at this university.
So, thanks.
Thank you, Senator. N is
Representative Chasey, or
Majority Leader Chasey.
I thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you both very much. I have
a really simple question. Also
on slide 5.
Who's your target audience? Are
they students or practicing, um,
Physicians. So for the pilot we
took sort of a mix uh
ultimately we want to
Include all of the above and the
reason is, uh,
We first were designing a course
for the students, and we soon
realized we didn't have the
faculty to teach the students
and then ultimately we want to
get it to the practitioners and
to the rural areas. So, uh,
we're going to have to do all of
the above.
Can I add, can I add to that? So
Dr. Perkins noted there were 800
participants that signed up.
Those are students, staff,
faculty, not only at UNM but
throughout the state of New
Mexico, 17 counties,
pharmacists, occupational
therapists, uh, practitioners,
students, and then
That 800 because it's a nickel
platform included 27 countries.
So this question is key.
It's, we're all trying to figure
out how to do it, so, and the
other part that I'll say is
we're all students and we're all
teachers and so so many of the
questionsresentative Chasey come
from that we keep, it's just a
half an hour. So if you ever
attended, it's only a half an
hour of like the other half hour
was the interaction going back
and forth. So I do remember
there was someone that had
talked about a particular
algorithm that had just been
presented as society for
substance use disorder, had we
used
could we use it? What do we
think about it? So that started
to a whole conversation where
how do we take some of these
technologies and apply them to
real world problems, but to
Senator Padilla's point, we got
a review, we got to look, we got
to do it. So it's just exciting
tool.
I, I, I could just add that an
important aspect of
This is the prompt in how you
phrase the prompt and there's a
whole art and science about
prompting so that you get an
appropriate answer and for, for
example, you can add in, say,
uh,
How does Mozambique treat
obesity, and then you can say,
please include references and it
will then give you back the
references that it used to make
its conclusion, and then you can
look them up if you uh think
it's relevant or questionable or
whatever, uh, and you also just
for your own information, you
have the source of the data and
it will actually give you that
if you ask for it. So I think
that's another important thing
is figuring out how
a phrase and do the query within
in the prompt.
Madam Chair, I agree, asking
questions is very important.
Thank you.
Next is Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Madam Chair. I'd like to
point on slide 6, neither AI or
human caught the air in the use
of the word effect.
I'm an English teacher, so.
T.
couldn't
Sorry, I had to say that,
you know.
So Madam Chair, here's my
question.
Um, between, I was calling my
husband's doctor's office to
cancel an appointment. And, and
It just seems to me they need
some practical studies we have
all this big thing. I mean, I
just think of a doctor and a
nurse working in a rural area
where they could handle so much
because of telehealth and
everything else. It's incredible
what could be done.
But when I call my doctor, I
want to break the phone and the
computer every single time
because 3 times it says would
you give me.
No
And it's like it it's like in
using AI and using all these
systems. It just seems to me
that sometimes that basic human
interaction is overlooked. I, I
called a heart.
rehab place to make an
appointment and a human being
answered the phone. I almost
cried. So it's just I want to
point that out that in studying
all of this, it seems to me,
it's like people who make, um,
IT plans for teachers. They've
never been a teacher. Uh, and
we've all experienced it. You go
into a system and you know that
the person who made the system
knew a lot about IT, but nothing
about the actual job. So I just
feel like
Can't overlook studying.
The entranceway to AI. We can't
just do these incredible things
which are incredible, but
sometimes we lose people's
hearts and minds. I mean,
there's the physical touch, but
there's the emotional touch. So
I just want to alert us to not
overlook that aspect.
I don't know if anybody's
studying those kind of really
simple things.
Yeah, if I, if I could comment,
um.
First of all, I, I, I often feel
the same way and or you call
anybody these days. It doesn't
have to be a physician. Um,
but we're, we're just
Getting started, we're on the
ground level and uh
The analogy I would make is, um,
1903, what happened? The, the
Wright brothers flew the first
heavier than air device, but
they flew it at 12 ft altitude
for a little over 100 ft at less
than 20 miles an hour.
Change the world, right?
But
In all, despite all these
fantastic things we're talking
about, I think we're sort of at
that level and if you think down
the line, 1020, 30 years, and
our students that we're training
now are going to be functioning
then.
Um.
We're going to see like the
airplanes and the rockets and
etc. etc. So I think we're just
getting started, so hang in
there and I hope it'll get
better.
Go ahead. So thank you so much
Representative Garrett. I could
not agree with you more, which
is why you hear the words
empathy and listening and caring
and touching. I'm trained as a
physician scientist, but the
important part for me as patient
at the center, I mean I see a
physician as well, particularly
during COVID, the humanity and
how that's important. Yes, we
absolutely had antivirals and we
absolutely had vaccines, but
something else that we had is we
discovered that instead of
intubating
Some immediately if they
couldn't breathe. If you simply
flip them over. It's called
prone ventilation, something I
had trained as a fellow.
It actually saved lives and
saved people from having
intubation, and the reason I
bring that up is that is not a
classic intervention and that
you give the medication or a
drug that is an intervention
because people listened and
watched and thought about it.
That is not going away. And in
my role and in all of our roles
as healers, as teachers, as next
generation, that is essential.
One reason we have started this
pilot is to start to take it on
and think about how to
incorporate it. One thing that
drives me
Crazy is that we spend so much
time on our electronic medical
record. Our students, our next
generation are not spending the
time sitting and listening.
That's a really important part.
And as you were saying to get
quality time so we can be all in
the process of healing each
other. I think this is going to
be an incredible opportunity and
a skill, but with all the guide
rails that you spoke about that
we have to teach our next
generation how important it is
to think critically.
And I think that's all part of
the components that when we
teach, it's not separate and
distinct though that's the soft
part and that's the science.
It's how you integrate them
together. So.
I'm hopeful.
Thank you. Great comment. Thank
you. So if I could add going, do
we have time going back to the
patient interaction, uh, when I,
I was selecting students in our
University of Illinois for this
innovation and technology
program we had, um, I would say,
OK,
we're, we're 10 years in the
future now and you're seeing
your patient, uh, you have your
robot beside you and your robot
can voice recognize the whole
conversation in a document.
coded for the building, etc.
etc. It's linked into the EMR so
it has all the lab values. What
is your role?
As a doctor
And the, the answer is it
the doctor now has the
opportunity to be a human. And,
and now they're like so busy
typing that they don't.
Uh, often have the time to
actually
So there's even.
Speculation that
There's going to be more
interest in humanities in the
future because we're gonna have
to think about what, what does
it mean to be a human? What,
what is it uh
Uh, actually, I was a philosophy
major and a math major, but as
an undergraduate, full
disclosure, but anyway, we, we,
we need to think about some of
those things.
Right, thank you. Um, one
question, so how, what do
doctors think about all this,
the doctors you've worked with,
what do they think of AI?
my,
my brother's a doctor you can
mixed, uh, just like the general
population,
we,
I was a little surprised, but
there's
And everything from hostility,
resistance to uh
Enthusiasm and oh my God, it's
gonna help us tremendously. So
the whole, the whole gamut and
so we have to work on that in
the profession as well as in the
community, I think.
Yeah, yeah, Madam Chair.
Um, I know it might be shocking
to everybody in this room, but
change is difficult.
OK, so let's just sit with that
for a moment when the electronic
medical record came.
I'm not going to speak about how
it originated, but there is so
much anxiety and anger about
that. So before we even started
with this, we heard, oh no, is
this going to be another EMR?
So I think what's happening
here, I hope in a chorus or for
all of us.
We keep the patient, the person,
the reason we're here at the
center, and we use those tools,
it's going to be phenomenal.
It'll be helpful, but with all
the other,
Instruction and learning and
principles that that I spoke
about. Can we use it for good?
How can we deploy it? You know,
you can use almost any tool for
bad or good. So you're asking us
in general, I would say, as
evidenced by 800 people signing
up that there is interest in it
and thinking about how to use
it. I will say if you see on the
list of our speakers, a few of
those are students who are using
them, there's going to be some
real live examples and how you
bring it to the table. The other
part that
I think is really important. It
is, I'm gonna emphasize with
Senator Padilla that it's our
job to really continue.
To make sure that we utilize it
in the, the most optimal way for
the betterment of our society
and our, our people, and I think
it's, it's really fun. I'm gonna
full disclosure, I used to
consider myself a good writer,
and so we took something I
wrote, darn, if they didn't make
it so much better. So I had to
learn.
That's how do you use the tools
so instead of no but it's like
improv, it's yes and so yes and
and then how do we do it?
Thank you both for your
presentation, um, and educating
our committee. And thank you for
the great questions. Thank you.
We would always be happy to
continue conversation, be
available, as you heard from Dr.
Moses, there's an army of people
we're all learning, but we would
be happy to be of help to the
committee, to all of you,
however we can. We're just
share. Thank you. Thank you so
much, um, really quickly I wanna
go ahead and, um, pass our, um,
approve the minutes. So I know
you've all read it, memorized
it, so moved. OK, we have a
second? OK. Any objections to
the motion. All right.
Thank you. And we have 3 people
who haven't introduced
themselves, so can we get, um,
Senator Brandt, start with you.
Did you introduce yourself?
No
OK, could you introduce
yourself?
Please.
Well, thank you, Madam Chairman.
I'm Senator Craig Brant. I'm uh
Senator District 40 in Rio
Rancho, and I am sorry I am
actually having to leave because
my back is having some spasms
today, so OK, well, thank you
for coming. Um, Representative
Arna Nu,
thank you, Madam Chair. Yes,
Representative Janela Yonoru
from House District 19, the
fairgrounds and the
International District. Happy to
be here. Thank you. And I don't
see Senator Pinto. Is she here?
No, OK.
Just a quick 5 minute break,
let's say 3 minutes and I'll be
back in 5. And, um, so we can
just get up and move it before
the next one. All right?
Thank
Yeah,
I know.
I know.
I.
Oh, OK.
You know.
look better than it is new diet.
Not, not quite, it's not quite
time.
OK
All right, let's get started.
Finish up here.
Um,
Oh, next one the next one.
OK. Our next presentation.
Is resource impacts and demands
anticipated from our artificial
intelligence Director Patrick
Bridge Bridges and, uh, Doctor
Manuel Martinez Ramon,
is that correct? All right.
All right, gentlemen, whenever
you are ready.
Thank you, thank you.
Thank you.
Um, so my name is Patrick
Bridges. Thank you, uh, thank
you for having me. Um, I'm a
computer science professor at
UNM and the director of the
Center for Advanced Research
Computing, that's the, the, the
research center at the
University of Mexico that runs
our large scale high performance
computing systems, AI systems.
We have a small data center we
run.
To support research and
education and training around
AI.
High performance computing, AI,
you know, data, big data, these
kinds of things, um, at the
University of New Mexico.
And so I was asked to talk about
data centers and AI resource
usage and these kinds of things.
So it'll give us a sort of an
overview of that and some
intuitions how to think about
it.
New Mexico is an attractive
place to build data centers,
right? I mean, we've seen you
drive down past us and and you
see the big huge Facebook data
centers off to the right. Um, we
have lots of solar power, we
have lots of wind power. The
prices are good. There are
reasonable ways to do cooling of
big data centers in New Mexico
that there aren't always in
other places. So that makes us
very attractive. We have, you
know, inexpensive property costs
in much of the state. We don't
have many of those pesky natural
disasters that a lot of other
states, you know, are suffering
with. I'm, I'm happy to not deal
with.
Tornadoes and hurricanes and
these kinds of things. And so,
you know, there's a lot of
people moving here and looking
at exciting data centers here.
We talked to vendors and
companies, a lot of this saying,
OK, we have a new data center
we're thinking about standing up
in New Mexico. We, we have data
needs as ourselves as a as a
university. So we've been
looking at data center options
for New Mexico universities. We
have colleagues up in Los Alamos
at the New Mexican Consortium in
New Mexico State, New Mexico
Tech. um, and, and we need data
centers for some very simple
reasons, that is, you know, we
do.
Advanced computing, research and
education. We need to train
students on how to put together
and run and use big machines. If
the machines are off in Texas or
California or someplace else, we
can't train them how to use them
as easily.
Um, we don't want to say, OK, go
to California and use their big
computers and and learn how to
stand them up there and then
come back here. We need the
facilities on site. We don't
need.
A 50 megawatt Facebook data
center here, but we need data
centers here to train people
with. And so we've been looking.
At what the trade-offs are on
data centers and so I'm gonna
share some of what we've found
out, understanding the the
resource trade-offs with data
centers and AI, um, today. Um,
and there are really lots of
complicated trade-offs here in
terms of how you power these
things. Monell will talk a lot
about the power side of that and
how we provide the power in to
the data centers and and
efficient ways to do that. The
thing to remember here is these
AI data centers are really
dense. You're shoving a lot of
compute in a very small amount
of space.
And so you have to deal and you
have to get a lot of heat out of
that very small space as well.
So if you think about the next
slide, um, the kinds of
resources that AI uses in these
big AI supercomputers. So a few
things go into an AI data
center. So we put in racks of
computers with these, you know,
Nvidia GPUs, these accelerators,
in some cases, people are making
new custom AI accelerators like
Melody mentioned that they're
basically the AI workhorse,
right? And these are the main
things that pull a lot of power
and generate a lot of heat in
these data centers. Um, we also
put in
Storage, right? You put it in
storage for holding all the data
used to train the AI's for
feeding to the inference models.
You put in network gear and all
the sort of standard computers
stuff to back it up, but the big
resource pool are the big AI
clusters themselves. The thing
that goes into the data center
are data and power, what comes
out of an AI data center is data
and heat.
Right, so all that power that
you shove into that data center
has to come out somehow it's
coming out as heat.
Um, and the AI compute systems
are the big resource consumer
here. So, the pictures show here
what um what what uh what
Microsoft is using to build
their big AI clusters today, and
I'll talk about a Microsoft
system that Microsoft has
provided some specs on as sort
of a driver here.
So this is um
So the, the Microsoft Eagle AI
cluster, which they disclosed
last year, is 1800 nodes and
about 14,000 GPUs.
Right? And so Microsoft says
they're deploying those
nationwide at a rate of about 5
per month.
Right? And so the pictures show
8 GPUs in one box, that big rack
at the bottom is the box holding
of these 8 GPUs.
That's basically where um the
work happens.
Right, if you go to the next
slide, the way to think about
resource drivers here. So we
think about resources and data
centers. This is the uh
The IT power is the main is all
the the electricity that goes in
to run the computers.
Right? And so each of those 1800
systems in Microsoft Eagle uses
about 5 kilowatts of power.
Right, and you have to get that
out. And so for reference, your
average New Mexico home uses
about 700 watts of power.
So one of those boxes uses the
equivalent of about 6 houses, 7
houses worth of power to run.
Right. And so depending on how
efficient you are, you know,
it's not just the computers
you're running, you're also
running the rest of the
facility. The networking, the
pumps, the fans, that, you know,
the storage and so when people
talk about efficiency in data
centers, they're looking at
power usage efficiency. That is,
How much total power do I use
versus how much IT power do I
use?
So a good data center runs
around a PUE of 1.2.
That is, you know, we use, you
know, for every megawatt, for
every megawatt or kilowatt of IT
power, we use another, you know,
20% on top of that as overhead
to run the other stuff.
Right? So that's a pretty
efficient modern data center.
Um, if you're not as efficient,
there are plenty of data centers
around that run PUEs of 2, 2.2.
That typically means you're
running an AC to cool the
system. Most of that power is
going to get the heat out by
running refrigerated air.
Um, if you think about the
Microsoft ecosystem, Microsoft
runs very efficient data
centers. If Eagle is about 10
megawatts of IT power, which is.
Yeah, I think a reasonable
estimate. That's probably means
the entire facility is using
around 12 megawatts of IT power.
That's about what you should
think about an an AI cluster
taking today one of the
conservatives says we want to
deploy a a big AI system, not a
training system like we want to
run for for the state, but you
know, one of the big production.
Think about, you know, 12
megawatts of facility power to
run one of these things.
That's what goes in.
What comes out is the heat, and
so there's lots of ways to get
that out, um.
The IT power going in is pretty
much fixed when you say this is
how much computer I'm gonna buy.
If I'm gonna buy this much
computer, it takes this much
power to buy it. Where there's a
lot of flexibility and a lot of
trade-offs to be made is getting
the heat out.
That's where a lot of the, the
trade-offs happen. So think
about it like cooling your home.
Right? Do you want to buy an AC
unit for your home or do you
want to buy EVAP?
And you know, climb up on the
roof twice a year and do all the
stuff that goes with running
Eva, my homeowner in New Mexico.
So
Um,
There are inexpensive, efficient
ways to get power out, to get
heat out of systems, they
typically involve using water.
Right, just like cooling our
homes here in New Mexico, we can
cool our homes with refrigerated
air. It takes a lot of power. So
I mentioned PUE before. Data
centers that are, that use a lot
of power are ones that use
refrigerated air.
Because they're using a lot of
power to run compressors and
condensers and and all the
things that go with with um.
With those electoral units, if
you're Microsoft and you're
running a 12, uh, you know, 10
megawatt AI cluster. If my PUE
is 2, I'd be using 20 megawatts
of power.
Right, and having to pay someone
for 20 megawatts of power and
paying twice as much power.
The alternative is to use water,
right, chilled water of some
sort to get the heat out of the
system. That's much more
efficient. You don't have to run
the compressors, but we use
water.
Right? So water efficiency, we
talk about liters of water per
kilowatt hour of power.
So we're talking about a system
that's using.
Um, you know, a 10 megawatt
system, right, that's using that
24 hours a day, 365 days a year,
so about 9000 hours a year.
You're gonna talk about
somewhere between 12 and 20
millions of gallons of water to
that you evaporate through
cooling towers to cool that
system in a pretty efficient
water cooling setup.
But the way you think about this
again is it's like a house.
One of these GPUs.
It takes about as much power as
a house. It takes about as much
water.
As a house.
If I'm using an evaporative
cooler to cool my house, you got
that little float valve up in
the EVAP cooler that lets water
in. It's putting about liter or
two of water in every hour while
the EVAP is running to just
replenish what's there.
Right, the same thing for one of
these GPUs. So if Microsoft is
running 14,000 GPUs in the data
center to support their AI.
That's using about as much power
and about as much water as a
house in New Mexico running an
EAP 24/7.
So that's sort of like a rough
intuition as to how to think
about what one of these AI
computers is using.
Right, it's like every GPU is a
house that we're powering and
supplying with water.
To take data in and then send
data back off to wherever the AI
insights are being sent.
Um, there are lots of.
Good innovations here, um, what
people build for cooling systems
is much more heavily engineered
and efficient and carefully
thought out then the box and two
fans and a float valve on the
top of my house.
Right? Because we're doing
14,000 or 10 megawatts of power,
these companies invest in very
complicated systems to try to be
as efficient with water as they
can because they don't want to
pay water bills any more than we
do.
They don't want to pay any
higher electrical bills than
than we do, but they're using
these resources.
So a little bit of talk on um
Sort of technology here,
one of the main things that
comes about is how we get.
Heat in and out of the system.
Right? And so we have to run a
cooling loop. We have to put
something into the system to get
the heat out, and we have to run
something to get the heat out of
that cooling loop.
Um, the way we used to do that
is to blow cold air in front of
these computers, and then the
computer would suck it in, heat
it up, and go out the back and
then we'd run it through an AC
or an ava.
Right? Um, that works, but the
problem is you have to get that
air pretty cold, right? Just
like in your house, you have to
get to 65, 70 to be comfortable,
right?
Um,
Computers aren't people.
Thankfully, yet.
Um,
So you can do better things, so
there's new technologies are
being used. One of the new big
computers going in at Los Alamos
is using what's called direct
liquid to chip.
So as opposed to just blowing
air into the front of the
computer, you actually pipe
liquid through pipes on the heat
sinks on top of the components
that water can be warmer.
If it goes in at 70, 80 degrees,
and then comes out hot. You
don't have to cool it as much,
which means you don't have to
use as much water to cool it.
Right? So there are technologies
that are being developed in
industry to make it so we don't
have to use quite as many, many
resources to cool these things
as we used to, um, the sort of
radical direction here, what's
called immersion cooling.
Never mind our computers in air,
we dip the whole computer into
some nonconductive liquid that
pumps around that liquid could
run at 100 degrees.
Cooling something down to 100
degrees from 120 is a lot easier
than cooling something down from
85 to 65, because we can just
run it through the air. We can
use a radiator.
Right, if we have something
that's 120 degrees, and we're
going to cool it down to 100.
I can run through a heat
exchange room and blow a fan
past it, and so I don't use any
water. The technology is newer,
it's less.
Well developed, it's more
expensive, um, but there are
lots of trade-offs there, um,
you know, in terms of getting
the heat out of the entire
system, it's something like EAP
or AC or if your cooling loop is
is warm enough, you can do
basically radiators.
Um, and there are lots of ways
to improve this. Sandy has done
some very nice research into
developing new cooling systems
that are sort of hybrids of
refrigerated and va that don't
use nearly as much water that
they prototype type of thing in
in uh in Colorado and Wyoming.
Um, so just at a high level, you
know, there's a lot of
complicated trade-offs here
around resource usage, around
power, around economics, around,
you know, all sorts of things.
The current economics of this
really do favor using water to
cool our systems.
And all the data centers are.
You know,
Doing everything they can to
reduce water usage because they
have to pay for it. I mean,
every gallon of water they
evaporated is a is a bill that's
going to somewhere.
Um, there are lots of options
emerging and to make to make
these cooling is more efficient.
Um, we're working at UNM to
figure out what the right thing
is for us, you know, as a, as a,
as an AI consortium. What we
want to have on site to train
our students to build, to
deploy, to operate, to go to
companies and data centers and
national labs and and bring
their expertise to.
Um, and so that's sort of my,
you know, my, my two cents
there. Mel knows a lot more
about the power side of what
goes in. There's lots of options
there, and I'll let Monell talk
about power sustainability and
how and how AI can actually help
with more sustainable power on
the input side, not just the
getting the heat outside.
Hello everyone.
Uh, my name is Mael Martinez. I
am a professor of artificial
intelligence at the
Oh
you can turn yours off now.
So, um, my name is Mael
Martinez. I'm a professor of
artificial intelligence at the
University of New Mexico.
As much as I love AI, I
acknowledge that it is
controversial, it is dangerous,
it poses many questions that are
unsolved.
And um, I all I part of my work
is trying to provide answers.
To these questions, um, my, my
PhD advisor said that those
provided with a hammer for those
provided with a hammer, all
problems are nails.
And this is sort of what I do. I
think that we can improve.
AI with the use of AI.
So in slide number 2.
You have a graph.
In which um we see how they um
power needed or the energy
needed for data centers as
increased in the last years in
the United States, so from, from
2015 to 2 to 2019, pretty much
the power they needed power the
dal was, was constant and then
uh it increased with the uh
probably with the advent of the
Large language models and also
the number of data centers it
increased from about 2200 to
more than 1000 in 2023. Um, so
they, um, number of data centers
seems to be increasing
exponentially and the quantity
of uh a power demand. It seems
to increase more linearly and I
believe that this is because um
as much as we need an an
exponential.
increase in data centers since
the technology has increased has
improved the demand, the power
demand is not increasing as much
as the number of data centers,
but at any rate this graph is
telling us.
How is going to be uh the future
next slide and number 3, you
have um a forecast of how the
power demand will increase in
the world and in particular in
the United States, and um I
think that one of the things
that we can do is to put a limit
to this trend without impeding
the advancement in the usage of
artificial intelligence.
So
Um,
The problem, one of the problems
of AI because it has many
others.
I uh um.
As my colleague, uh, just, uh,
detailed is the usage of energy.
So this is an example in slide
number 4 of um the
of the consequence of using a
large language models like
Chachi PT for example, right? So
in this graph, you see that um
uh if the number of Kweis per in
a period of 20 of 10 minutes
increases the energy demand
increases linearly.
Right, and, uh, pretty much,
it's an approximation, right? So
for example, if we, uh, if we
send 200 queries um to uh to
chat GBT in a period of 10
minutes, the machine needs 0.4
kilowatt hour to work.
And that is the present
situation.
And another example of data here
is uh how much uh how much it
costs to train one of these
things,
um, for training Cha GPT
they use 1.2 megawatts an hour
and they release 502 magic tons
of CO2.
Which is an incredible quantity
of CO2. I mean, it's, it's, it's
significant compared to the
quantity of CO2 used by all the
automobiles in Albuquerque.
So, um, how can we
Put uh some.
Some remedy to this. Well,
therefore areas of research that
are ongoing and one is uh
related to the software, right?
So, um,
I, I, I keep going with the
example of Chachi. Chachiti is a
machine that has billions of
parameters. Every time you ask
something to to eat this
question is translated into
numbers and then propagated and
multiplied by billions of
numbers.
And every time we do a
multiplication, we spend a tiny
little bit of energy and that
multiplied by hundreds of
millions is uh what is
generating the problem that we
have now with the sustainability
of AI.
So, um, we need algorithms that
are faster, that are more
compact, that use less less
number of parameters and that
take less time to respond and
less time to train.
Then, uh, related to the
hardware, well, so you can see
in the graph that the
the present transformers or the
present technology that is used
were respected the technology
that was was used at the
beginning of the large language
models it increased a lot, so
the efficiency increase uh
uh it's, it's improving at 1.3%.
But then with the use of TPU
extensor processing units, um,
the efficiency.
Has increased in a 7%, but then,
but then the big deal is in the
data centers and in the energy
mix in the data centers, the
improvements uh since the uh the
improvements in, in data centers
themselves, um.
Um,
From the, the, the ones that
were used at the beginning of
chatTPT to now the improvement
is um for example, the Google
Iowa is 10 times more efficient
in CO2 than the average of the
United States.
And, and so on, all right. So,
um, another, another, uh, area
of research is related to the
energy mix. So, uh, if we go to
this line number uh number.
Let me see, number 6. Here you
will see the share of
electricity production from
fossil fuels during 2023. And so
the clearer areas, they are the
ones that are doing better in
terms of CO2 emissions, we can
see that the United States is
not among the best ones.
Some are doing worse, right, but
they are not.
What we call developed
countries, all due respect, um,
we are amongst the bad ones.
Uh, among the developed
countries, so.
Uh, for example, Brazil, they
have a lot of hydropower. They
do much better than us. We don't
have that much Ecuador. We have
a lot of sun, a lot of wind, and
a lot of other possible sources
of energy that we can use rather
than oil, um, um, France is
among the best ones, but because
they use 70% of nuclear energy
and probably we don't want to do
that either. Um.
So here is one thing that we can
improve. What are the challenges
that, that we, um, that are,
what are the challenges of the
usage of AI? Well, the, the
effectiveness of the power
usage, right? So we need to use
as much renewable energy as, as
we, as we can, of course,
cooling and um renewable energy
integration and limitations also
There is a lot of effort, uh, to
put on site uh green energy in
data, in data centers and um
about the management of the
energy.
Then, so.
Why do I say that we can use AI
to, to improve the AI. Well,
because that is
A ton of ongoing research in the
academia and private companies.
Uh, that are around several
areas, several tools, several
technologies that are already
mature that have about between I
would say 30 and 70 years
old and that are extremely
powerful in order to improve the
the present situation, the
present energy landscape. So,
for example, in our lab, my lab,
we are working in preinforcement
learning that can be, is a
technique that can be used.
to adaptive optimized resources,
minimize the usage of CO2, deep
learning, which is the, the
star, the rock star in, in AI.
It is being used to do uh energy
and, and, and, and, and, uh,
generation forecast, so we can
know and we will see an example
with a high level of confidence,
how much energy we're going to,
we're gonna use tomorrow or in
one hour. How much
Renewable energy we're going to
have in 1 hour, in 15 seconds in
a day or in a week.
This is something that is
underused and it's very
powerful.
We can also detect faults in
facilities, cyber attacks. We
can control cooling systems and
we can use things like
evolutionary algorithms, like
genetic algorithms, for example,
inspiring, in, in, in evolution
to uh resource allocation,
workload balance, and others.
In slide number 9, there is an
example. Well, you can barely
read anything here. I can either
so
um one of the experiments that
I, I did myself is related
directly to use artificial
intelligence to optimize the
resources of a facility. It can
be a house, it can be a
building, it can be a data
center and there we can predict
up to an extent.
How much power we're going to
use, how much workload we're
going to have in the next,
during the next 24 hours in
order to optimally allocate
energy in order to move those
chunks of warlock that can be
moved in time and we can uh we
can also, um, accelerate or slow
down processes in order to minus
the quantity of energy that this
um resources I'm gonna use.
And that is that is oriented to
minimize the usage of fossil
energies. And also we can tweak
the algorithms in order to lower
the bill.
Then
In the next example.
Here we use data from Noah and
from Kaiso in California in
order to uh estimate the energy
demand forecast and so we do it
with confidence intervals. So we
know how much the machine is
that how, how good the machine
is doing it. So we can estimate
the risks of that, which is
particularly important in a
facility like in it.
Data center in next slide in
number 11.
We do the same also in
California. This is real data.
This is uh also real time. So
this is happening now. Um, here
we have an example where we uh
estimate the quantity of solar
energy that we can produce in a
given day.
And finally, the quantity of
wind energy and all this, we can
do it
by uh estimating how much the
machine, how, how good the
machine is doing.
So we can estimate how risky it
is following the recommendation
of a machine in terms of, for
example, money in terms, in
terms of impact too um
minorities or protected
communities.
And this is something that can
be applied to uh data centers.
It can be applied to the uh
energy efficiency of artificial
intelligence.
So as a conclusion.
AI is, it's here to stay.
No doubt.
And so it, it, it faces
challenges and barriers, um, um,
so some of them are ethical and
sociological, and so, uh, AI can
be adapted.
To minimize the sociological
impact, impact. AI can be
constructed and designed to
include what includes the values
as defined by the institute
Institute of Electrical and
Electronic Engineers and as
defined by the United European
Union.
One of the values is
sustainability.
And we have experience and we
have a lot of scholarship in
ways to introduce, to wire these
values into AI.
Um.
AI is itself extremely valuable
and powerful to, to uh creating
environmentally friendly AI and
uh at the University of New
Mexico, we have the expertise we
have the resources and the
motivation to advance towards AI
sustainability.
Great, thank you both. Before we
take questions, I have a, a
question for Do or Director
Bridges, water, where I just
came from the water committee
last week in Questa, um, so we
are in drought, New Mexico. What
What's the likelihood we get
another data center and how
clean does the water we use have
to be because of our water,
because of our drought
situation, so.
And I don't, I can't speak for
what Microsoft and Facebook and
Google are planning, um, yeah, I
do a lot of work with the
National Labs and the computer
science professor. My, my
research is in sort of the
supercomputing space.
They are continually operating
and building their data centers.
I know Los Alamos, for example,
has done a lot of really novel
things to reuse uh lab water and
purify it to then use in the
facility so that they're even
more water efficient than they
normally are. So if you look at
my slides, water use a good
water utilization efficiency is
like.
1 L per kilowatt. Los Alamos is
probably hovering around 0.7 0.6
L per kilowatt. They've done a
lot to improve water efficiency.
You can do things, but at some
point, you know, you just, you
evaporate the water, and it's
like again, it's like a swamp.
You evaporate the water again
and again, and it gets more and
more minerals in it and it gets
more and more crud in it and you
have to just let some fresh
water in and maybe run, you
know, run the appropriate
filters in your in your EA line.
It's, it's, you know, there are
A more sophisticated than I am
when I'm going to Salmon's and
buying things to make my swamp
work, but it's, it's the same
kind of thing, right? So, um,
That said, I, I, I don't think
data centers are going anywhere.
I mean they are building like
nobody's business in Arizona and
in Utah where they have the same
water problems, the same drought
problems we have.
Um, they're actually more
efficient here, right, when
it's, when it's really hot
outside, you can't use dry
cooling by just running your
water through a radiator to cool
it off.
If you're in Los Alamos, and
it's the spring or the fall or
the winter, and it's, you know,
45, 50 degrees outside, you
don't need to use water, you can
just run the water through a
heat exchanger through the
outside air and get rid of a lot
of that heat.
If it's the summer and it's 85
or 90 outside, you have to use
water to to make up for the fact
just like.
After my after during the summer
here.
Um, but I don't think we're
likely to see less data centers.
That said, the vendors I've
talked to, the companies I've
talked to, the startups I've
talked to who are talking about
moving to New Mexico are talking
about running immersion.
I think I've talked to at least
3 different companies that are
planning to put in immersion
data centers in New Mexico,
Those use almost no water.
Because the cooling loop is
running at 100 or 120 degrees,
you can actually just take that
mineral oil and run it to a dry
heat exchanger and blow a fan
across the fins, and the heat
leaves the data without using
water. Um, there's a company
down, um, I don't know if you
know the old FAA facility
outside the airport that was
there many years ago. There's a
company called Addison that's
prototyping immersion cooling
data centers out of there. They
have some contracts they say
they have Alamos to run
immersion cooling there.
Um, and people are sensitive to
use of water and a lot of the
data center providers are
starting to figure out what can
we do so that we can actually
keep citing data centers and
keep building this capacity and
not use all these resources and,
um, you know that.
So, you know, so PUE in an
immersion data center gets down
well below 1.2 to 1.1, 1.05.
They're remarkably efficient.
The hardware you buy is more
expensive. It's specialized,
right? It's not, you can't go
buy a Dell immersion cluster.
Right? Dell doesn't and we're,
we're buying, we're looking at
buying Harbor today. I actually
asked Bell as part of our RFP
process, the cell immersion
hardware like, oh no, we don't
do that yet.
So the technology sort of in
terms of availability at at
commodity is coming along, it's
not there, but it really is
moving where um, you know,
people are going to figure out
how do we run the systems that
are more dense, that are more
power efficient, that are more
water efficient so that they,
you know, so that what we get is
not, you know, so onerous to
run.
I
I'll I'll ask questions after
everyone's done. So let's go and
start with Senator Solz. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I was very
fortunate about almost a month
ago, I got to go to Germany for
a week on an energy policy tour
and this was one of the topics
when we were up in Hamburg, uh,
the, I don't know if it's an
international, but uh.
Essentially a data center for
climate change, which has huge
supercomputers all the way in
it.
Um, how much of the energy issue
is an economic issue because
there, and I think they use
mostly emerging cooling, but
they then set up regional heat
utilities and use the utilities
or the heat to
Warm all the buildings and heat
the water in the systems and you
know, and use that energy
instead of just trying to to
dump it. Is that an economic
issue or is that a technical
issue?
So a lot of data centers do do
some sort of heat recycling,
right, where you can take the
heat out instead of just venting
it in the atmosphere, you can
run it into, you know, steam
generation or or other heat
systems. You, you have to have
a, you know, you have to have a
um a set that.
You know, gives you something to
do with the heat.
Right. If I'm just building a
data center out in the middle of
the desert and there's nothing
to do with the heat.
Then, you know, what am I going
to do with it? If it's part of
an integrated facility.
Then yeah, you can use the heat
that the computer generates to
then recycle back to do steam
generation to run heat for
buildings to, you know, to do
all the kinds of things you do.
That's that's, there are lots of
things people are trying to do
to figure out.
How to use, you know, this
energy effectively. That's and
it's a good, you know, if you,
if you do it as an integrated
system, not just a data center
plot somewhere, but you know, an
actual, you know, we need to
take electricity and generate
heat and the heat goes here and
you know, it all fits together
into a a cohesive plan, then
you're much more efficient and
much more economical. Madam
Chair, and that's part of why I
ask whether it's an economical
is in Germany, they're paying 30
cents a kilowatt hour for
electricity. They aren't going
to waste that energy.
just dumping it out into the
atmosphere they can get another
use of it of heating the water,
heating the buildings, and put
in whole heat utilities for
whole communities. I drive past
the Los Lunas data center and
see all the solar panels and
energy, and yet all those houses
are probably burning natural gas
to warm themselves too, while
they're trying to get rid of the
heat, you know, and, and is that
just mostly economics of the
cost of putting in
Uh, a system to put radiators to
every house using the the extra
heat or, or is it something more
technical and yeah, please.
So, uh, that's a very good
question, and I, I agree with
you it's more an economic
problem. So, um, you can, it's,
it's difficult to, to translate
the culture uh Germans to other
countries and uh all, all due
respect, I, I, I admire Germans.
I'm a European and I know them
well. Um, what they mean is
that, um, if you, I'm a Spanier,
right? So.
Um, you translate this to Spain.
And what happened there is that
Uh, if you want to install your
solar panels, you have to pay so
many taxes.
That is more efficient for
economically to just
go to, go with the um energy
that is served to the, to the
grid. And this is what happened
in many situations. So if you
install heat sources of energy
or energy sources that are
sustainable, then somebody will
make less money.
And this is something that
happens uh in, in many other
areas, but mostly in energy.
Thank you. Um,
Madam Chair, uh, yes, it was
very interesting because a very
different attitude about energy
and policy in there then here
where everything is driven by
economics and capitalism and
things there and much more
driven by public good, it felt
like as far as a lot of their
policies and so when they've got
extra energy, how are we going
to use that rather than how do
we get rid of of all of that. So
that that was more just where my
Questions came from is it seemed
like, you know, they're, they're
trying to do that.
Instead of everybody's on their
own, you know, to, to use the
energy and get rid of it and I
mean that I think that.
To add to that, you know,
getting rid of heat is expensive
for data center people, right?
It's not free, right? I mean,
even if even a cheap, you know,
I mean, I think the answer is 50
megawatt data center. It's a big
data center.
And so if they're, you know, I,
I don't know what their water
bill is. They don't publish
their water bill, but it's
probably, you know, if it, you
know, it, it's, it's a big
number. I can, you know, I'm,
I'm pretty confident it's a big
number. If there was some way
for them to say, Los Lunas have
our heat.
Right, and that saved the money,
they would, they would do it
like that because they would
much rather not spend all that
money giving, you know, to
pumping water out of the ground
and treating water and running
the facilities and if they could
just say, we'll give you our
heat, do what you will with it.
You know, I mean, you're right,
it's, it's, you know, how do you
integrate the whole system and
how do you make it work
together? Yeah. Madam Chair, you
know, lots of it is, you know,
getting those people together
and there's large initial
investment costs in being able
to build the infrastructure to
move the heat to where it's
needed and, and where's that
money come from and much more in
kind of the German philosophy as
well, that's common good, the
government's going to cover a
lot of that, and they pay very
high taxes to get those kinds of
benefits. So I get all of that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Nix.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. How does
quantum computing fit into this
because if we want faster
algorithms and more power
efficient hardware. Is that an
area that is uh emerging to be
helpful for data center.
reductions in heat and
everything?
Well, first of all, um, quantum
computing is not developed yet
as uh as a useful thing, right?
because of the big challenges
that it still poses, right? So,
um,
Uh, quantum computer needs to be
run at an extremely low
temperature.
Uh, I think it's about 0 25 or 0
15 Colvin and the, the universe
is 2.4. So we have to
We have to spend a huge quantity
of energy cooling down to a
temperature which is uh cooler
than anywhere in the universe.
And that is the one big problem.
And so, uh, while quantum
computers they promised to be
extremely fast, much faster than
uh any other computer sent
before. Um, the quantity of
energy that they are going to
use, I don't think it's clear.
And also the space that they are
gonna use. Um, we are dealing
with hundreds of um um of um.
Of cubits, a Qwit is the unit,
the, the main unit of a
computer, but, but we need
hundreds or thousands or
millions of them in order to
construct a, a, a computer that
is uh useful. And so,
The other side, uh, the quantum
computers and conventional
computing, probably in, in the
form of extra scale computers.
I, I don't know if this is true.
Ex-scale computers, I don't know
if they're gonna fly or not,
but, but, uh, but conventional
computer and quantum computing,
they need to coexist.
Because, uh, they have different
applications. So you cannot use
quantum computers for the
everyday computing because the
philosophy.
The structure of a quantum
computer and then the usage is
different.
So I mean just to add to that,
the kinds of algorithms that
quantum computers are good at or
some of the sort of
combinatorial like design
exploration space that is really
important in terms of designing,
you know, engineering systems,
right? So a lot of the power
that goes in a lot of big
computers today is around, you
know, we have all these choices
we could make, what's the best
one? That's kind of a quantum
computer, you know, if it ever
if it if it comes, you know,
when it comes to fruition, would
be very effective at solving.
which could help us design
better data centers or better
computers or those kinds of
things. And we would need high
quality data centers for hosting
quantum computers for exactly
the reasons Monell says, they're
big.
Cold, sensitive pieces of
equipment that require, you
know, uh, you know, high quality
facility to run.
Thank you. And then my other
question is when you guys
started out, um, did you have
any idea that this is where you
were going to end up?
I mean, at what point did you
start realizing, I didn't, I
mean, it didn't exist when you
started out in your education.
I, I've been, I guess I've been
at UNM22 years now. I mean I've
been, I've been a high
performance competing person
since the since the start and so
this is sort of, I've I've
watched the whole process. It's
sort of hard to look back and
To know what I thought, that the
emergence of AI has been just
Spectacular, um, I mean, I, I
remember my, my mother was a
computer science professor who
taught neural networks and AI
and uh you know, when I was an
undergrad back in Mississippi in
the 90s when this was, you know,
the kinds of things I was
learning. Um, but to just see
it, you know, blossom like it
has has been, has been amazing.
Um, and, you know, and scary
and, you know, I mean, all the
things they're all saying what
do we, what, you know, this is
very promising and something I
pay attention to you.
I, I did my PhD in 20202029,
something like that.
In AI for communications because
I started to see
That that was gonna be a big
thing and uh I almost don't pass
because the committee didn't
believe me.
Um, I, I.
I presented some algorithms that
were very cumbersome and they
said this is impossible to make
work and I said, well, now, but
not in the future, right? Um, I,
I didn't know what was gonna
happen. Nobody had any idea, but
then I jumped into it because I
thought that it was going to be
a big thing.
One of the best things of our
lives in terms of technology and
that is what I, what I always
thought I had no idea that we
were going to be here today
talking about this thing. Um, I
always tell my students that AI
is a quest to imitate the human
brain.
And this is something that has
been, this idea has been
constantly developed from the
inception of the artificial
neural network to today with
Chat GPD or other things. And
when I was um doing my PhD, AI
was at its infancy.
Now I used to say that uh AI AI
is a teenager. Nobody knows what
they think. Nobody knows how
they will evolve when they grow
up.
That's it.
Thank you. That's, that's
downright poetic, but thank you
for sharing those perspectives.
Oh.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
not sure if the presenters can
answer this, but I want to throw
it out there for conversation,
um.
So it's agreed that you AI uses
a lot of power.
And it's agreed that AI uses a
lot of water.
And we're like
It's just happening.
Uh, you know, it's just
happening. It's happening to us.
And the question I have is what
role do we as a government
To try to address those issues
because this is a significant
issue for us in the desert.
Um.
And for my community, Los
Alamos, which has, as you
pointed out a fair amount of
computing going on. Our
community gets electricity. We
share it. We share electricity
with the laboratory. And the
question of in terms of what
impact that would have on us
having a reliable electric
source for the uh the actual
people who live there,
you know, residents, human
beings, um, I, I don't know what
kind of collaboration is going
on to make sure we're taken care
of. We know there's
Talk about, uh, Madam Chair,
putting in a redundant electric
line, which of course is being
opposed by every environmental
group in the state.
Um, that I can think of, so.
Oh
we want AI. It's gonna have a
big impact on us, our resources.
No one's talking about how to
regulate that, I guess that's
what we're supposed to be doing.
Is anyone in anywhere in the
country trying to deal with some
of these issues about
significant drain on some
resources.
I don't know. I mean that I
think there's a lot of concern
like Melanie said around safety
and transparency and ethics of
AI, the resource utilization
side is much more, I mean,
The companies are very sensitive
to it.
Um, I, I think something that's
that's something that I think
about and, you know, speaking
for myself here is that when Los
Alamos spins up a big computer,
that's serving.
Us as a, as a country, right?
Because it's, you know, it's
staff at Los Alamos and it's
students that are coming into
the state and it's in the
national interest and to some
degree. Now we can argue about,
you know, what that is, but
it's, you know, it's a public
institution.
You know, it's employing people,
lots of people in New Mexico to
do things here.
Right, a data center here that
Microsoft runs or Facebook runs.
is a big resource for Microsoft
and Facebook, which has value
and there.
Paying things, um.
It would be interesting if we
could make sure that Microsoft
or Facebook made sure that New
Mexicans had access to the
resources that they were
spinning up and providing for AI
if they're going to be using our
electricity and water to do so.
Right? So, you know, if it's, if
it's if if they're gonna have
14,000 homes worth of power and
water usage, it might be good if
New Mexico got 14,000 homes
worth of value out of that, not
just shipping data off to, you
know, other parts of the
country.
Um,
You know, and so when I, I, you
know, working with the labs, I
see the value that comes out of
the lab's computing because I,
I, you know, work with them
closely, um, when I use Chat
GPT, I see the value of that
just like, you know, Senator
Padilla said and a variety of
other people that, you know,
there's, there's a lot of value
here, but, you know, it's.
You know, it's complicated and
you know and this the resource
usage, the companies are, the
companies.
Say a lot about wanting to be
efficient. Um, it's hard to know
what each individual data center
uses. They say, oh, we want to
be water positive worldwide.
Does that mean there's gonna be
water positive in New Mexico, I
don't know.
Right,
they don't,
I don't represent the world.
Maybe you guys do, but I do not.
So did you want to add
something, sir?
Yeah, so, um, well, what, what
can the government do, right?
Well,
the, the, the usual things are
regulating the AI providing
resources for research, but I am
particularly concerned about
education in AI. So, um, I am
concerned about that and I'm
preparing a class that is called
demystifying AI and that's
simply teaching.
from a social technical point of
view.
We see AI as an artifact, as a
computer program that runs and
if it, it's, it does something
wrong that impacts and represent
the communities, for example, we
tend to think that it's the, the
program that we have to change.
And this is wrong.
We need to educate.
People in AI.
In order to for for them to be
aware of the potential of AI of
the risk of AI, of how to use AI
for the good of the society.
It is, it is very well known
that, um, that more developed
communities, they use more AI
and less developed communities
underrepresented communities use
less AI and
even if they have access to it.
And that produces uh uh uh
discrimination. It produces a
gap in the development of
underrepresented communities,
and this is partly because we
don't, in general, we don't know
what AI is. We talk a lot, you
turn on the radio, there's
always somebody talking about
AI. Most people don't know what
AI is, and I don't care about
whether they know or not the
detail, the technical details
of, of it, but from a social
technical point of view, we need
a
lot of education.
And uh the impact of that, it
will also, uh, turn into a
sustainability in AI and also
less bias, less discrimination
and um less, a lot less of other
barriers and problems of the.
Just to add one thing, if I can
take a second, I think, you
know, as Mel said, I think Melli
has hinted before, there's a lot
of potential value in AI around
a quality of access, you know,
we've been teaching at
universities a long time. We've
had the students who you could
tell got lots of good help in
terms of writing their essays or
writing their programs.
And you know, and.
And so now today in some sense,
every student has access to high
quality tutors for doing things
if they know how to use them
well if they're provided the,
you know, the, the universal and
uniform access to them.
So it's not just the people that
can afford to pay someone to
help them with their essay or
write their computer program for
them that gets the benefits that
that people have talked about.
It can be if it's if it's made
available broadly, you know,
much more democratizing and
equalizing, and if it's not,
right, it can be just yet
another tool to make sure that
the people that can afford to
pay Open AI to get access to the
latest and greatest models get
the best help.
I think that's, you know,
thinking about that is
important. Um, in terms of data
center resources, one of the
reasons I, I, you know, I, I, I
mentioned that the sort of
metrics on power efficiency and
water efficiency, is those are
standards that, that the
legislature could think about.
In terms of things to say to
data center providers.
You know, what should an
appropriate standard be for
power utilization efficiency for
water utilization efficiency if
you're going to deploy a data
center in the state.
Yeah, I mean, we kind of went
around a little bit. My interest
is, I, let's just acknowledge AI
has a potential for doing a lot
of good things. You don't need
to go over that again.
My concern is the cost.
To us in terms of resources that
we just seem to be sweeping
under the carpet, and if this
were a discussion about oil,
everybody in this room, well,
many of us would be saying,
methane rules and we can't have
them by schools and we can't do
this, and we better and, and you
know what, oil brings in a lot
of good to us too. We have cheap
gasoline, we heat our houses, I
mean we can go on and on about
the benefits of oil. I'm sorry,
but at a certain point, the cost
to us.
of that resource and it brings
in huge amounts of money to the
state as well, not
inconsequential, um, to us, we
have decided we need to start
getting our arms around and my
concern is nobody wants to talk
about getting our arms around
the cost of bringing AI into the
state. It were water is a huge
issue in the state and, um,
energy is a huge issue for some
of us who live in little
communities that have to share
our um electricity.
The gigantic mammoth facility.
So I, I, you know, we have to,
I'm just putting that out there,
um, we should be thinking in
terms of those kinds of things
instead of saying all the
companies really want to be
helpful if it's economically
advantageous to them to be
helpful, um, so, uh, you heard
my little soapbox speech, Madam
Chair, thank you.
On what I want to piggyback on
what you're saying. So you have
in your slides, um, you have
solar, right? During the day,
wind primarily at night, maybe
energy storage addition. Could
that run what we have in New
Mexico that run a data center?
Do we have enough energy based
on just solar, wind and possibly
energy storage?
The um that is.
I'm sorry, this is um
the the constructing this in
this infrastructures they have,
it has a coast, right?
Um, so the main problem is that
this energies, they are
stochastic. You don't have them
when you want them. You have
them when there's win on the
sun, so you'll have to properly
manage them, manage their
resources. It is possible, yes,
absolutely plus plus, um, there
is the possibility of using
hydrogen. This is
a long shot, but uh I mentioned
Spain before.
is they the leading country in
hydrogen.
And they install plants and they
produce the hydrogen, they use
it there on site they produce
electricity and so as you know,
the hydrogen, we take it from
water using solar power. We, we,
we released the, uh, we can't
release the oxygen, and then
when we burn the hydrogen, we
recover the water or part of it,
so that might be sustainable,
right?
Um, technologies are there.
Do you not believe in energy
storage or is that part of it?
The wind, solar, and energy
storage? Large batteries,
so the solar energy storage can
be done in, in many ways. One is
hydrogen right in in China and
in um Eastern China, they just
use um
big uh bricks that they, they
put them up with, um, you know,
and then when they have to.
Release the energy they just
take them down, um, you can use
water that you store and you can
use batteries. Batteries, they
are not too sustainable because
they are beaten, right? So you
can store, I don't believe that
you can use
A a facility full of batteries
to feed uh data center at night,
at least yet, but there are
other, um, there are other uh
options. So when you don't have
energy in New Mexico, you can
buy it from California.
And it might be uh green energy
too, right? So we will never,
well, in a long time, we won, we
won't get rid uh totally uh
fossil energies. This is not
possible at this point or
nuclear energy. I, I don't think
we're gonna get rid of nuclear
energy in the United States ever
and actually increasing.
But um.
If we um are able to, if we are
able to apply the existing
technologies to renewable
energy, we will be able to
increase our share of renewable
energies as much as any other
country.
And we are behind.
Thank, thank you, uh, Senator
Pope next.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
you're taking all my questions,
but.
That's what chairs can do. Um,
and, uh, for Rep Chandler, you
know, that's, that was gonna be
my concern on really what we're
going to do here in the state
and I think that's what our role
here is to make that decision on
what type of state we're gonna
have, um.
And so I understand we're going
to have AI probably quantum in
the future and there's gonna be
a need for some of these
centers.
That being said, what type do we
want here, right?
Um
We don't have the water.
To be
You know, having the, the type
of data centers that in some
cases we're talking about, um, I
think there's gonna, we're gonna
have some that we need, but I
just don't want the notion out
there that we're going to become
northern Virginia or Illinois to
where this is going to be this
economic boom of data centers.
We, that's just not what we're
going to be able to do here in
New Mexico. We're not fit for
everything. We're not going to
have a surfing competition in
New Mexico anytime soon because
we don't have an ocean and
water, right.
I mean, so, um, we have to do
things that are going to be
right by us and our resources
and our communities and do the
right thing.
And so I don't really have a
question for both you and thank
you for presenting this because
to me this is really concerning
and just even what we have here
now when we talk about water and
what we're dealing with and just
understanding right now what the
current usage is right now is a
little scary with
With what we're looking at when
we look at our state with the
drought and the water that we
have.
Um, I like the fact that we're
talking about technologies,
we're talking about those GPUs
and things, right, that could be
more efficient and better
systems and I think that's what
we might have to look at as a
state to where we say, hey, you
know, we can have this, but it
has to be this type of
technology that doesn't.
Um, you know, use our resources
or.
Harm the resources that we
currently have, so I, I just
think this is a discussion that
as a legislature, we have to
start working on this, um, and I
think that is our role. I just
don't want us to sit back and
Say, well, we need this and we
feel like our duty is to not
play that role and let it come
in because
We're gonna be dealing with the
same issues, some issue we're
dealing with now, I mean.
We're dealing with toxic waste
that we're calling produced
water right now.
Because in a lot of ways we
said, hey, here's the benefits
of this industry.
And look what we're dealing
with. And so I just don't want
those unintended consequences.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Rip Chandler for team
me up.
Do you, do you want to comment
on anything he said and so just
I think the 11 thing would be
very helpful and having looked
this, I don't know what the
water utilization or power
utilization of a lot of these
facilities are.
Right, and I think
Having that disclosed and what
their PUE and WUE is so we know
how efficient they are and what
resources they're using would be
a great start. Because then,
then we can have the debate,
right? Then we can say, we know
what the benefits are like
Representative Chandler said,
what are the costs that were,
that were being incurred as a
state and I don't, I don't think
we know that.
Well, um, thank you, thank you
for your presentation, very
thought broking. Great questions
from the committee. Appreciate
you and if we have bills, would
you guys be willing to be like
expert witnesses for us
possibly?
Yeah. All right, thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
Our last uh presenters, quantum
computing programs status
updates.
Director Ivan Dutz. I'm Des
Deutsch, um,
uh, Jake Douglas and, um,
Michael Reben.
Whenever you're ready.
Which
Whenever you're ready,
gentlemen.
Who's gonna start?
Oh, OK.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you very much for this
opportunity to uh to speak to
you. Uh, my name is Ivan
Deutsch. I am a professor in the
department of physics and
astronomy at the University of
New Mexico and I'm also the
director of the Quantum New
Mexico Institute. Uh, I'm joined
here by my colleagues. I'll let
them introduce themselves.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I'm David Hanson,
Assistant vice president for
research at the University of
New Mexico.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Jake
Douglas. I serve as the Quantum
Business development lead at
Sandia National Labs.
Um,
Uh, I appreciate you inviting us
here to join you today. Um,
additionally, um, I'm a product
of New Mexico. I was born and
raised in Roswell. I went to
school in New Mexico Tech and
got my degree in chemistry. I
went to Highlands for my
master's and now I live in
Albuquerque working for the
labs.
Um, as a premier federally
funded engineering lab, uh,
Sandia conducts innovative
research and development to
anticipate and solve the most
challenging national security
problems, which includes the
complex.
Uh, space of quantum information
science and at Sandia we spent
the last 20 years building a
world-class program. Um,
that is comprised of hundreds of
researchers and scientists who
are helping us push the
boundaries of what is possible
with quantum technologies today.
Uh, we take great pride in
serving our nation and our
communities and strive to serve
as an impartial national
resources to to policy makers
like you, um, and we're very
excited to talk today about our
efforts to build a quantum
ecosystem across the state and
to answer any questions you have
about this critical emerging
technology. Um, at this time, I
invite Dr. Mike Rabin to
introduce himself.
And good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Michael Rabin. I'm a physicist
and group leader at Los Alamos
National Laboratory. I'm very
happy to be here representing
the laboratory which sees
providing information to the
state government as an important
part of our mission and
responsibilities. The laboratory
is supportive of collaborative
efforts across all domains
federal, state, tribal,
industry, uh, academia, uh.
Bring everyone together.
In this case, all of us together
to enhance the technical economy
of the state in our region.
The group I lead at Los Alamos
focuses on experimental quantum
physics, but it's just one part
of our larger quantum
enterprise, which includes
theory.
Physics, chemistry, nanoscience,
engineering, computer science.
Uh, the budget across the
laboratory for quantum
information science and
technology is conservatively
over $600 million per year. And
my rough estimate of our quantum
community, researchers who go to
work every day trying to push
the boundaries of quantum
technology over 100.
And really my feeling is that
all of us are very eager to be
part of the larger state and
regional quantum enterprise and
developing the quantum economic
ecosystem for the state of New
Mexico. Thank you.
So thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
we've prepared a presentation
that we we're happy to uh
discuss with you and then take
questions if that's OK to
proceed.
Very good. So, you know, I was
here, I think 2 years ago with
other members of my committee to
talk about the Juano New Mexico
project and we're very excited.
A lot has happened in those last
two years and we're really
excited to tell you about the
developments and take your
questions, uh, let you know what
we've been up to. So, uh, let me
just begin with the first slide
here, um,
In May of this year, uh, Quantum
Insider magazine published an
article uh that talked about
tomorrow's quantum hotbeds and
named seven cities that could
incubate the next quantum
technology ecosystem and amongst
those was Albuquerque, New
Mexico, um, that was they called
this out specifically these
bullet points were specifically
called out in that article. They
called out our world class.
Research institutions which are
represented here, the
entrepreneurial ecosystems, the
pro innovation government of New
Mexico and the other quantum
solutions that exist for New
Mexico's priorities like
aerospace and energy, water,
etc. Um, this article uh came
out as many things have
developed in this last year, uh,
in January of 2024, the
University of New.
Mexico launched the Quantum New
Mexico Institute, uh, which will
be a joint institute between the
university of New Mexico, Los
Alamos National Labs, and Sandia
National Labs, um, CNM received
a, a, a large federal grant it's
for a new quantum learning lab
that's going to reach, uh,
learners, uh, who are not
necessarily on the traditional
path for quantum learning, uh,
and, uh, we've been working hard
region.
as well, uh, the economic
development agency announced um
a number of tech hubs, one of
which is Elevay Quantum, which
we'll hear about more later in
this presentation, which is one
of 12 tech hubs that was
designated by the Economic
Development Agency through the
Chips and Science Act in
partnership with Colorado and
Wyoming. So we're very excited.
These are just 11 amongst many
things that are happening right.
Now in this in this space in
quantum. Uh, but let me maybe
just back up a little bit and
tell you a little bit what we're
talking about, you know,
quantum, the word quantum is
kind of bandied around quantum
mechanics as a subject's been
around for, you know, 100 years,
but now you may or may not know
we're living in what we call the
second quantum revolution, which
will be a huge technological
revolution based on the science
of the microscopic world
combined with information
technologies which
will create a whole new set of
emerging technologies including
quantum computers, new
communication systems, new
sensing and detection systems.
So let's go to the next slide
and maybe uh drill down a little
bit more into that.
Quantum is really going to
supercharge the information
economy that we live in today.
Uh, quantum computing is just a
completely new paradigm that
will we expect it's going to
enable us to solve problems that
are just provably previously
unsolvable things like.
Uh.
Drug discovery for
pharmaceuticals, uh, and
optimizing energy, our energy
grid, um, creating new batteries
and many other things, and I
should mention it's not stated
on this slide, but we, this
should be able to be done at a
much lower energy consumption
than traditional computers, not
only do we expect this to
accelerate our ability to to
compute but also reduce our
Energy consumption, something
that's understated about this
often. Quantum sensing is
another very exciting, uh, new
technology that will enable new
ways for us to navigate to sense
biological agents to explore
minerals and oil,
Uh with extreme precision, um,
and new communications schemes
that are very intertwined with
our need for cyber.
Security, quantum has an
important role to play in new
cybersecurity as well.
Uh, let's go to the next slide.
Um
Quantum is emerging as one of
the top technologies worldwide,
and this is reflected in a
number of ways at the federal
level there have been a number
of important acts passed. The
National Quantum Initiative Act
was passed in December of 2018.
It's up for reauthorization, uh,
it authorized $1.15 billion to
support and sustain both the
national and
On security, um, the National
Defense Authorization Act
authorizes DOD to carry out
research in quantum information
science technology and we
mentioned the chips and Science
Act and it's importance for uh
technological infrastructure and
quantum technologies are an
important part of that uh
infrastructure as well. Um, the
federal government at the
research and development.
Level funds tremendous number of
programs of which we here at
this table and all of the New
Mexican, uh, institutes of
research are involved in, uh,
and we expect there's going to
be a lot more opportunities in
the coming years with the
reauthorization of the National
Quantum Initiative.
Uh, let's move on to the next
slide. So with all this
background, we, as we discussed
two years ago and and we're
moving forward on the Quantum
New Mexico project Q&M and the
objective of Q&M is to make New
Mexico a world class quantum
ecosystem, and we want to build
on our historic strengths. I'll
tell you more about those, and
we want to expand the impact of
quantum technologies across the
state. And our real goal is
To create a vibrant ecosystem
that will cement New Mexico as a
quantum powerhouse for what we
think is this critical emerging
technology area.
I want to emphasize that we're
not just chasing the next hot
thing. This is something we've
been doing in the state for
decades. I, I came to New
Mexico, uh, to build this
program with my colleagues at
UNM in 1995 and that you can see
we're not going to go through
the details, but all of the
institutions here Los Alamos,
UNM Sandia have played critical
roles in the development, the
R&D, there
would not be a quantum
technology revolution were it
not for the basic research that
is being supported in the state
of New Mexico and we're very
excited about now building on
that strong foundation, uh, and
we think we have it, uh, to go
forward.
All right, moving to slide 8.
Um, so, um, within the quant New
Mexico project I've mentioned
the Quantum Mexico Institute
QNMI. And the QNMI is a research
and education center that's
going to make transformative
long lasting quantum
breakthroughs that through the
efforts of the science engineers
and also the business
professionals to really build
this ecosystem together, so
Uh, QNMI was officially
established, launched in January
of this year as a so-called
Category 3 institute. That means
it's a university-wide institute
includes arts and sciences,
engineering, the business
school, and others across the
university. We are working to
officially make this a joint
institute between the university
and the national laboratories,
and
the KI will help to sustain the
cycle of R&D.
Innovation to keep catalyzing
the growth of uh New Mexico's
quantum economy.
And importantly, this is not
just about you and A, Sandy and
Los Alamos. This is about the
entire state of New Mexico, the
QNMI is charged and we are as
the director, it's my job to
broaden participation across the
state, uh, and we're doing that
already in a number of ways, but
we want to expand that. Um,
Before I get to that, I think I
was asked, uh, we were asked to
talk also about the ways in
which the university and the
national labs are already uh
collaborating and the
collaborations upon which we'll
build as I you saw on the
timeline, there were years of
collaborative research that are
been ongoing since the 1990s in
this area.
The Center for Integrated
nanotechnology or syn is a
jointly operated uh laboratory
user lab, uh, it's jointly
operated by Sandia and Los
Alamos with UNM users.
We participate in many joint
projects together, our
institutions do both externally
funded research as well as in
partnerships with laboratory
directed research and
development. Uh, the center that
I have been directing for a
number of years, the Center for
Quantum Information and Control,
we call it CQuick is an NSF
funded focused research hub for
theoretical physics, and we
host convergence workshops and
collaborative spaces that
bring our institutions and
students together.
Um,
The New Mexican researchers in
all institutions are at the core
of the National Quantum
Initiative Center, so through
the NQI as we call it, there
have been a number of centers
founded both through National
Science Foundation and the
Department of Energy. Each of
them have 5 institutions. We're
part of 3 of them lead and and
um participated, including the
quantum systems accelerator and
the quantum science acceler.
These are DOE NQI Research
centers as well as one of the
National Science Foundation's
Quantum Leap Challenge
Institute, which is called
QSense, which is about this
quantum sensing that I described
earlier. Um, so we are really at
the core there. And, um, I
should say in addition, Sandia
and Los Alamos hosts New
Mexico's small business
assistance and technology
readiness gross receipts, uh,
programs. So there's a.
A lot of collaboration that's
going on already and we're going
to build on that for the next
stage.
Uh.
I mentioned workforce
development. Let's go to slide
10. Uh, it's at all levels.
Here's one such level, um, what
I, what's pictured here are all
of the students in the recent
years who have our students who
have gotten degrees at the
University of New Mexico, uh,
here these are all PhD students,
um, but they've done their
dissertation research at the
laboratories, be it at Sandia or
Los Alamos. So the laboratory
provide lots of additional
access for training and research
for our students in New Mexico,
uh, and it's accelerating. You
can see this line, those are the
students we previously graduated
above the line and below the
line are the current students.
There's, there's a large number
of them and we're building up
that program tremendously. Um,
but it's not just about PhDs. I
want to emphasize that fact
quantum, although it's a fancy
word, it's not just about PhDs.
In the quantum economy will be
important to everybody with at
various levels and we're
working, we're building the
program to ensure that we have
the workforce development that
we need across the spectrum and
what's shown here is a graphic
of some of those uh different
programs that we already have in
place that are active amongst
them includes Q Camp, which is,
uh, spearheaded by Sandia
National Labs, and it is a
program that
was introduced to train, um,
Uh, hundreds of high school
students and teachers, high
school teachers, to give them a
familiarity and access and
hands-on training in quantum
information science and
technology, um, as I mentioned,
uh CNM has a first of its kind
new quantum technician training
plant, those technicians are
people that don't necessarily
have a higher education degrees,
but they, but quantum
technicians are an important
part.
Of the new quantum economy and
Los Alamos, uh, has a
world-class summer school that
trains some of the our
undergraduate students, uh, as
well as at UNM there is the Q
Reach program, Qeach is a
program that is statewide that
gives access to traditionally
historically underrepresented
groups to come to UNM and have
an experience in a laboratory
and training and up through the
higher education scale.
through graduate and
post-doctoral programs. So
workforce development is, uh, in
our, uh, in our sites and an
important part of the quantum
New Mexico Institute.
Um, in addition, so the pillars
of the QNMI include research and
development, education,
workforce development and
industry engagement. So let me
go to slot the next slide,
please, slide 12.
Industry engagement is critical
for the Q&M project. Um, we're
working together with our
partners to drive economic
development by supporting
entrepreneurs through strategic
industry partnerships. We're
talking to people in the
industry. I should have
mentioned early on, maybe some
of you uh were present or heard
about the quantum New Mexico
symposium that we held last
Friday, uh, and that included a
large
industrial panel where leaders
from uh a host of quantum
companies came to talk about two
questions why quantum and why
New Mexico and anyone who's
interested, we have a video
recording of that and I'm happy
to share that, uh, with you to
learn more. Um, we want to
expand the capacity by
supporting large scale quantum
infrastructure initiatives and
projects. And importantly, as I
mentioned, we want to ensure
equitable.
Access
to information and new
technologies through intentional
community engagement and
outreach. And we want to
capitalize on the elevate
quantum economic development
agency Tech Hub Award, uh, and,
and Q&M will work in concert
with uh Eleva Quantum, which
we'll discuss in more detail in
the next slide, but before I
turn over the mic. I just wanted
to, you know, quote.
Directly from one of the leaders
of one of the, we think one of
the most important rising
companies, uh, who said the
following.
As the established leader in
quantum computing, Quanttinuum,
finds a perfect match in New
Mexico.
The state offers a vibrant
technology ecosystem and a
talented workforce that fits
naturally with our needs. This,
this was said by Doctor Rajeeb
Hazra, CEO of Quanttinuum, New
Mexico is a key collaborator and
leader in developing integrated
photonics for iron traps with
community that is amongst the
most advanced in quantum
algorithms development and error
correction techniques. The
partnership between
Quanttinuum and New Mexico will
further strengthen the mountain
West's position as a leader in
this revolutionary technology.
So we feel quite strongly that
we have potential partners in
the private sector as well.
I'll turn over the mic now to
Doctor Hansen.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. So
the, the slide 13, it gets to
what we've mentioned before some
of the details about our really
that's.
One of the most exciting reasons
to sit here, uh, today is, is
that we now have the uh elevate
quantum media tech hub award,
right? We won that.
Uh, competition with Colorado
and Wyoming.
Uh, we are selected as one of 12
phase two participants, right,
the big award this time. Uh, we
haven't got to say the big
award, uh, um, before in these
national competitions, uh, and
the only one that's on quantum.
So with the uh that's a big
deal. And, and there's the great
dollars in there, you know, uh,
$40 million in EDA funding, um,
uh, uh, 5 million from TEF.
We're hoping to get for another
$5 million from the state and 76
million from from Colorado's
legislature, which is really
awesome too to get this. And it
really establishes us, uh, in
the Mountain West as, as a core
and didn't matter that Illinois
put it, put up $500 million
right? We still won, which is
nice. So we gotta sit back and
cheer a little bit about that. I
always think it's.
Um,
And so, but, but I, I really
want to stop and say, um, we
wouldn't be sitting here despite
the excellence that we have at
the table that's not me, right?
It's all the other people. I'm
not quite in person. Um, we
really wouldn't be sitting here,
uh, celebrating this with
Colorado and Wyoming.
If we didn't have the TEF.
Because what we've had to do all
the time in the past to say,
we're going to go to the
legislature, we're gonna that
that we can make a promise to
try to get legislation going
through and it's coming, this
next session, this next year.
Uh, and the EDA tech hub.
Right, required
The money to be available.
And unencumbered at the time of
award.
Right, so we started out going
in for a bigger share of the pie
thing we would try to get more
from the legislature and work
with, with, uh, with executive
legislative branches to get
more.
Uh, and.
We could not
Stay in the game.
And play, uh, uh, at the level
we wanted to because we didn't
have the money to match, but the
tests saved us. It allows us to
say, look, we could, we could,
we knew we would be able to have
tough decisions.
On the existing funding that was
there made before the award
would come.
And that was a major critical
effort. So thank you, uh, for
that because it was critical for
a win. Uh, the second really
point I want to follow up on
that which I'll come back at the
end again, uh, is that we have
to continue these investments
and this committee already knows
that. I think the, I think
people know this, but I really
even want to say that, um, not
only do we need to be prepared
for future opportunities that
are coming up, uh, and will keep
coming that require large
investments. But I say to
recognize we've been recognized
nationally.
Right? With this program we've
been recognized nationally also
with other things that at least
made it to phase one of their
programs, uh, and it would be
fantastic to be investing in
these.
irregardless of us getting
another award.
Right, we, we, we've really
recognized we are, we are
national champions and national
excellence in multiple areas and
we need to back that.
The kinds of things we're doing
with this, um, on slide 14, uh,
this, the idea was focusing on,
uh, you know, creating actual
commercial facilities that we'll
need that we that are critical
here, uh, places where you can
actually collaborate between the
national labs and industry
partners and universities, uh,
um, and, and, and startups to
really create that real, uh,
ecosystem you need to to advance
and, and, uh, that we're really
missing before. And then to
educate, as we were talking
about, to include part has been
uh
Really keys, we, we have leaders
in, uh, um, in this, uh, room
here now with you that have just
talked about uh their excellent
training programs and we can
really expand that benefit and
bring in the whole state. Along
with that, as there are
accelerate things getting
startups going and then scaling
them, right? Those are the big
issues.
I wanted to break down for you
guys, um, on the following
slides, um, slides of 15 now, is
really just saying, what, what
does that mean? What is really
coming here? What, what we're
able to get.
And I do think that this is um
the creator is helping us
attract industry, right? This
has really been the missing
piece for Quantum in New Mexico,
um, uh, and that we've had
amazing government resources,
amazing academic input there,
and you need that industry
sector here.
Uh, and before, I didn't know
that there was an industry of
quantum that was real, right?
But Colorado prove, proved that,
right? That's one of the reasons
in our, in our team. They,
there's real quantum
information, uh, uh, industry,
real computers being built and,
and now it's something that we
can really have here, uh, that
the physical location, uh, we're
gonna start out just next door
over here, renting facility, uh,
uh, part of the space and the
research park, um, to put in
high level, uh,
Uh, equipment, um, that, that's
needed, that can be used by the
community, used by, um, a sort
of a user facility of industry
partners and startups and anyone
else who needs that, right? And
really open access that's gonna
have uh ED funds, EDA funds to
help people that rental, uh, and
EDA funds and TE funds to help
get the equipment and personnel
to actually operate it, right?
So it'll be up and running and,
and functioning, um, uh, to do
that. Uh, and then, um, we're
also pursuing additional uh
Uh,
funding through legislative
processes that that that the
government, the governor of the
EDDA has been behind to try to
get us here uh to really get the
other part of this, the award,
you know, was going to be bigger
and, and they cut everyone,
right as they do the first big
EDA build back better they just
kind of go ask for 70 millions,
no, we'll give you 40, right?
That was the same games they
played before. Not that I'm
going to complain, but that
means we didn't have one of the
really collaborative facilities
that we needed. We, we, we
really need this photonics.
also that we want to help, uh,
building out, um, and we had to
jug jiggle around to get, um,
uh, enough support for
educational aspects too
components which you want to
keep growing. And that's the
next slide is, is, is slide, uh,
16 talks about the include part,
right? We are, um, we're gonna
be training New Mexicans for
these high paying jobs.
Right before this, maybe we
still would have been in the
proposal if we hadn't had the
TAF funding, and we would have
been training our New Mexicans
to go work in Colorado.
Uh, um, and that, that's not,
that's great in some ways. We're
still training them, maybe
they'd come back. We do have
boomerang efforts to get people
back here, but we want to
really, um, have those excellent
programs to be training people
for jobs that are here.
And create those industry jobs.
And so that's a really big deal.
A lot of, um, support from EDA
and, and the TEF directly into
that. Uh, a lot of the leading
work, but Sandia and uh and uh
CNM leading out that UNM and,
and, and Lanel and others are
participating in that, getting
that, um, the space, uh,
physical space for the learning
lab developer is going to happen
right away. Um, right now you
can even see some of the pilot,
um, uh, some of the classroom
space down at the fuse, um, uh,
space downtown.
Then you're gonna get some
initial students through through
that and then start bringing it
out to the rest of the state,
right? We are collaborating. We
do want the whole state to be
involved in this.
Um, the next slide is actually
in, uh, an AI hallucination and
extra slide that got stuck in
there for you just
we need some AI correction like
we need quantum correction.
Eric Rich, but sorry, it's, it's
good if you go to slide 15 or
16, that's the, oh sorry, 18.
Thank you. It's too small for my
classes,
but they, uh, uh, really there's
a, there's a big deal here. This
there are on the left, um, you
know, there, there's
Industry partners are real. Um,
the color of your best startups,
uh, basedups inflection utinuum
atom computing, long path are
all already among the top 20
most invested quantum companies
in the US, right? So it's not
just that we have something, we
have the best.
And some of the best and
biggest, and you can see there.
And we also have some of the
biggest in terms of Amazon and
Google and and Microsoft, right?
We are, we are playing Anne
Lockheed Martin with, um, in
there. So these are really
critical, uh, uh, partners to
get us going and to grow and and
they have room to expand here
and they want to.
One of the ways we're going to
do that is on slide 19, uh, is
again now also pursuing an NSF
engine in this topic area.
Uh, but flipping it. So the idea
is we still want to need to do
the same things of creating
accelerating, uniting,
including, um, uh, in the
different areas, but we need to
lead it out of New Mexico. We
need to be the majority of it on
this side of, of, of the border,
not that we want, you know, give
our, uh, any hard time for our
colleagues up there in Colorado
and Wyoming, but, but we needed
a lot of it centered here. We
need a lot of support for that
if we're going to get this, um,
potentially another $160 million
over 1
Years. Um, that's gonna do
things like bring the sensing
and the communications, um, and
the other computations that uh
uh tools that we need here,
should we get that funded, uh,
and it's a nice timeframe, uh,
to this, uh, award gets
And the application gets
submitted, um, uh, in February,
should we be invited, um, this
month. And, uh, and in that time
frame you guys will be in
legislative sessions working on
this kind of stuff, but, but
they have a multiple phase, uh,
uh, multiple stages. If we have
legislation that's in there
saying that that what we're
doing, we could have it in the
proposal. It has been submitted.
If we have, uh, at the end of
the session, if if it gets
accepted, then when, when they
do a virtual site visit, which
is the second phase, which we
may do, um,
Uh, before the other one, then
we can update them and say, yes,
it's actually the money's
actually there, right? So, so
the timing is just going to
barely squeak out this time,
which is great, um, uh, should
we make it work? So that's very
exciting. And and really the
last slide, um, or the next
slide, I should say next to last
slide, um, 20 is, is really
getting us the idea that that
you really need to act now.
Right, this is, uh, if we can
really build on this EDA tech
hub effort and invest, uh, in,
uh, Quantum Campus, right, to,
to have to really attract and be
this space where our industry
and, um,
Academia and the research labs
are all working together and
doing their education and
workforce training in a physical
location and really be a shining
star for our state. We need to
do that now.
Um, and that really, I think,
uh, needs to be done whether or
not.
We get the next award, um, uh,
that's just showing we are all
aligned and can really move
forward, um, and complete this
ecosystem and it would be super
exciting, um, uh, to see that
happen.
So next, uh, uh, the slide 21,
we, we launched the institute,
the QNMI Institute, uh, just
last Friday. We're, we really
need to expand this industrial
base, uh, in New Mexico, so we
have the jobs for our trainees
to go to.
Uh, and then we need to, uh,
really work on that quantum
workforce, um, and in the end,
be that quantum leader um that
we're going to be.
So thank you very much.
I think maybe we have one maybe.
a few things to add, um, but
I'll try to do it quickly.
The joint message we all have is
that New Mexico is at the
threshold of starting a new
economic sector based on quantum
technology.
We're all extremely excited
about that.
The key thing we have to come to
grips with is that we have all
the ingredients for this
economic sector except capital
and companies.
OK, those are the things that we
need here. We have all the
research, all the education, all
the right people and so now we
have kind of a chicken and egg
problem for how do we kickstart
an economic ecosystem.
So we need a significant
presence of companies in the
state, uh, and a high tech
ecosystem requires research,
development, innovation,
workforce, customers, capital
and companies, right? So it's
the capital and companies part
that we we need to work on that
is the place where we have to
put attention. So we can do
that, uh, we can attract
capital, we can create new
enterprises that will require
some incentives, infrastructure
investments, and crowding in.
Quantum companies want to be
here.
OK, they look at us, all the
things that that Ivan and Dave
just talked about. OK, they,
they're excited about all those
things. Uh, they want a closer
connection. They want a faster
connection. They want
co-location, uh, and, and really
the thing I've seen in the last
year is with with the tech hubs
and the NSF engine efforts, the
quantum New Mexico symposium
that was Friday, crowding in.
Right, so the programs that we
are all part of are pulling
things together. Now, if you
asked me a year ago, crowding
in, I would have said, oh, it's
just a buzz phrase. OK, so it
is, it's an economics buzz
freeze, but it's also very real.
Sometimes people talk about
crowding out. That is not true.
It is crowding in that is the
real thing.
OK, early phase nurturing of the
New Mexico Quantum Economic
ecosystem is necessary to
overcome this chicken and egg
problem, and that's why I think
we are all here today. So the
quantum campus that Doctor
Hansen just mentioned is really
designed, intended to do just
that.
You, you know, I, I think of it
as always having three things,
it's got the education and the
workforce development component.
It has the laboratories doing,
uh, the research that is trying
to get out of the lab and to the
companies in market and then
commercial companies all in the
same place so it's really that
is really what we're trying to
pull off here, uh, and our
vision for that campus really
tries to pull everyone together.
And it's really critical for
success. So we need to build
what we call our translational
ecosystem, and it can create
real high value jobs, uh, unify
our workforce development
approach with leading
programming and advanced
facilities. Uh, it'll enable
entrepreneurial development and
industry growth. Uh, all of this
is really designed to create a
global leader, us with a
competitive advantage. Support
from state government and the
leg.
is essential to achieving those
things.
Yeah
I'll just wrap it up right there
because we've hit all the key
points maybe the last thing we
want to say is, uh this is
sometimes the land of
enchantment. We think it's the
land of entanglement for quantum
science and New Mexico is a
quantum state. We're happy to
take your questions. Thank you
very much.
Yeah, Madam Chairwoman, um, so,
so I would also like to add the
importance of partnerships. Um,
and, and how we feel like we've
been able to build that over the
past few years since we last
talked to this committee. Uh, in
our high school summer camp, uh,
we've reached teachers in Hobbs
and Almo Gordo in Farmington, uh
in Gallup, um, we're working
really closely with partners at
New Mexico Tech and New Mexico
State University, and UNM to
help lead our engines proposal.
Um, we're, we're trying to
connect.
With communities across the
state with their economic
development boards so that the
state can benefit fully from
quantum technologies in a way
that we don't really get to see
often. And quantum is one of
those areas where we truly are
leaders across the nation,
across the world, we've built
the foundational capabilities.
We have the people, the experts,
but uh after they're trained at
UNM they leave. And so, um, you
know, to, to just, uh, really
emphasize how important the
partnerships are across the
states. Um, we're doing a lot of
work in trying to understand how
quantum tech.
Technologies will be affecting
communities, uh, uh, you know,
across the region, and that's
one of our next steps is
ensuring that we can really
democratize access to this
technology at the onset since
it's so nascent, so we're not
trying to fix problems later.
Um, and so, yeah, with that, I'm
happy to take any questions.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for being here,
um.
Next time they have a quantum
symposium, be sure you go. It's
quite exciting.
Um, two questions.
And kind of you touched on it.
Actually, all of you kind of
touched on it.
Who is responsible to seek out
the companies.
Who is currently working on it?
Is there any kind of gap?
Awesome. Um, thank you,
Representative for the question.
So we have long and storied
relationships with almost all of
these industry members that
we've mentioned. Uh, we have
active R&D collaborations.
They've sponsored our workforce
development programs, um, and,
uh, many of them have been
started using national lab
technologies. Um, so in terms of
moving forward, who's
responsible for connecting with
them, um, in a lot of ways,
it's, it's all of us, but we're
we're going to be depending on
our economic development
partners, uh, to understand how
they'll fit in.
To their communities and and
help meet those needs to be able
to talk about the different, um,
um incentive programs that might
be stacked to maybe draw
industry to the state. That
could be through the NMSBA or
the trigger program to get
access to Los Alamos National
Labs in Sandia, uh, could be
through JTIP and LIDA, which
will be really critical to, you
know, reduce the cost of them
actually establishing a place
here. I mean something that we
didn't mention is industry comes
here all the time. They, they
fly in from Colorado from the
coasts, uh, they
Take advantage of our
capabilities. They, they take
advantage of our expertise.
Sandia has a quantum performance
lab that is benchmarked and
assessed almost every commercial
quantum computing system out
there, but then they, they
leave, right? And I think in
order to really drive rapid
commercialization, we need to be
co-located. We need to be close
so that they can come down to
the lab.
Have discussions between the
people who are building the
systems and those who are
programming them. And we have
that ecosystem in a lot of ways.
Um, but we, we need kind of a
unified way to to pull industry
here and that's why we're all
here together, coming together
as the state to show we're we're
here, we're doing that and um
through programs like the Engine
through the EDA tech hub. We're
trying to find ways to build
those co-located facilities and
dry industry here, so they stay
here, um, rather than flying
back home.
Uh, and Madam Chair, because I
remember 2 years ago and
probably this time, but I
couldn't stay for it seems like
every company and university in
the country had somebody trained
at UNM
there, now, do you have a point
person, Madam Chair, at EDD like
who's the point person for
quantum at the economic
development department.
And I'm chairing Representative
Garrett, um, we're excited to
say that that, I mean, the point
person in in New Mexico in that
sort of role would be Alice
Greenberg is in the governor's
office, right? Um, uh, who was,
who used to be at EDD and then
um Nora Sackett has been the
point person at within EDD. So
we've got in my mind, two
people um that are really
leading a point on it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, it's
good to actually have names and,
you know, cause sometimes we
have these great ideas and then
everybody thinks the other
person's doing it, so it's great
to see the four of you, and I
know CNM and others are involved
too, um, I think that, oh, so my
last question is simply, so the
facility that you're gonna rent
is at the start of the
co-location.
Uh, Madam Chair and, and, um,
Garrett, yeah, I, I do think of
that as, as the first space for,
for, well, we have the
co-located educational
activities also um in some ways,
but uh uh uh uh there with our
institutions all working um
through the the fuse space, but,
but this space will be the first
space to really do that here.
Thank you, those are my
questions. Representative Nick,
Senator Padilla.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you to the presenters, uh,
excellent as usual, I think I've
heard from all of you at
different times, not maybe that
together, but a different
presentations, um, very
impressed with everything that
you had to say, uh, so and I
can't really see that far right
now, but the gentleman in the
um.
In the blue suit, maybe with the
blue tie, uh, you answer, yeah.
Is that, is that a UNM logo on
your badge there? OK, so are
you, are you, uh, working at all
with Dr. Holloway on any of this
kind of stuff or?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Padilla, uh, yes, absolutely,
he's been integral to this, the
whole process. Yeah, I've met
with him several times and I
think he's just, you know,
really knee deep and excited
about this kind of stuff, so I'm
glad that you're partnering with
him, uh, on, on what would we
expect to be sort of the, the
outcome, Madam Chair, of the
work that you're doing, you
know, we've had talked all day
today about AI this and that and
you know, we talked about energy
requirements, water
requirements, any number of
other things.
Well, let's just throw into the
quantum box, hey, how do we do
this more energy efficient, less
water, or whatever, and let's
have that be the maybe the
byproduct or the product that
that New Mexico could benefit
from with and maybe that's the
project that you give the
students. I mean, there's, I
think you could probably use
what you're doing to help us
solve some pretty big problems
we're we're facing right now,
wouldn't you agree?
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator, I think we're, we, we
really do think that quantum
technologies, there are a lot of
ways I think that quantum
technology can benefit New
Mexico, uh, part one way is just
the development of
a new booming economy that will
bring good jobs to New Mexicans,
but the outcomes I do think will
solve important problems for New
Mexico and more broadly,
including things like.
Energy consumption in the
process of computing. I mean, we
hear about AI. It's important
and uh, you know, the energy
requirements are demanding. We
have strong expectation that
quantum is a different kind of
technology doesn't require the
kind of cooling, the dissipative
heat that happens in a in in
supercomputing this is a totally
different approach. The physics
underneath it doesn't require
that kind of dissipation.
That kind of heat and so that is
one aspect, but there's other
aspects like in the medical
industry, we expect new ways to
discover drugs uh based on a
computational model rather than
just pouring, you know, trial
and error pouring in the test
tube. We can simulate what
happens in the laboratory on
this new kind of computer. And,
and it's just a nascent
technology as well, but we're
very, we do think that this will
have strong
positive impacts on for New
Mexico and more broadly.
Appreciate that and thank you,
uh, Madam Chair and yeah, but,
you know, I, I, I get it on what
quantum would require to do its
work, but would you be able to
use the quantum technology to
help us answer the question of
how to bring some of this stuff
that we're doing, uh, more and
more in line with energy
efficiency, water management,
etc.
I thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I said that, but
you're super smart, maybe I
didn't hear it. No, I think we
do expect, you know,
Modeling, so solving some of the
world's hardest problems.
Climate change.
Uh, materials, materials that
are more efficient batteries
that can be more efficient and,
and, you know, depending on what
the mineral uses are. So these
are fundamental scientific
technological problems that we
do think quantum technology is
quantum computing will enable us
to answer.
in ways that we are currently
unable to do so.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair. So
I'm glad. I really want to
strongly with I I can't say this
strong enough, uh, use the
technology, use the, the, the
dollars that are being invested
into it to help solve our own
problems here. I mean, this,
this is, these are things that
we know have to happen and why
would we want to spend another
decade trying to figure out how
to make an immersion data center
work in New Mexico. Well, go, go
figure that out for us in 3
months and get back to us. And
we'd love that. I wanna draw
your attention now to page 10.
Of the presentation, the bottom
of page 10. I think this is like
so exciting and fascinating and,
and, and, you know, just the
human capital that's being
developed out of the work that
you're doing, I think it's just
really impressive. Uh, but I
want to ask you, um, are
minority students applying to
these programs because I'm
looking at this and while I'm
very excited for the individuals
that are here and I really want
to lift all of them up and I
want them to get and reach their
dreams and goals and desires in
life. I, I want to make sure
that, you know, we're, we're
reaching out to minority-based
students.
As well, because if I look at
this list, I think I see 3
Hispanic surnames out of a list
of how many folks are there and,
and no disrespect whatso I, I'm
thrilled that these folks are
making their way through this
doctoral program, this PhD
program, this PhD programs, but
I really want to make sure we're
reaching all of our students
here in New Mexico because we
want them to have grown up
somewhere in New Mexico and saw
again, like I said before, one
of New Mexico's biggest
problems.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I, I, you're
absolutely right, it's a
priority for us to do better,
um, we, you know, our graduate
program is of course
international, uh, you know,
I'll give you one example.
Adrian Orozco there on the top
right, Adrian, uh was is a did
his undergraduate degree at UNM.
He's a New Mexican, uh, I.
You know, saw some talent in him
and I said, you know, you really
need to get an internship at
Sandia National Labs, and he did
and then I convinced him to go
forward with a PhD, but it's not
enough, uh, and I think, um, as
we work, I think, you know, the
pipeline.
Of bringing more people from New
Mexico, uh, particularly in
underrepresented groups. I mean,
there are many ways we're
failing. You look at this group,
you see how many women are there
in, in this group, not enough.
That's, that's where I was going
to go back and not enough and we
are, we are, we are gonna do,
we're gonna do better and we
need to do better, um, we need
to work harder in the pipeline
so that and that it takes time,
but we're
But it is in our focus and we're
very aware and I appreciate that
question very much I appreciate
the response. I really do. I
don't want to slow your work
down in any way, shape, or form,
but I, I would like to see more
of our New Mexico students as
parts of these programs with all
the dollars that we're investing
in this in this kind of stuff,
um.
But yeah, so and it's
responsibilities on both sides
of the of the coin here. I mean,
are the students actually are
the minority or, or, or
disadvantaged, are they are they
interviewing for these, these
positions?
Are they applying for them and
interviewing for them? Um, Madam
Chair, Senator, uh, so just to
touch, uh, uh, briefly on, on
what we're trying to do to
expand participation. Uh, so, so
our high school summer camp Q
camp is specifically designed to
introduce quantum concepts
without the need for any
prerequisites. No math, no
science, uh, so that we can
engage with communities across
New Mexico. Uh, additionally, we
are targeting those communities
that are underrepresented or
come from various backgrounds
there, um, at a time where it's
Really critical high school,
we've even had a few middle
schoolers on what they're
deciding to do with their lives,
right? And if you don't know,
quantum exists, you're not going
to decide to go to school for
quantum. In most programs now,
you don't hear about until
you're, uh, you know, uh, junior
or senior in your undergraduate
program. Um, and so we are
trying to be very intentional
about building pathways across
the entire education spectrum.
Uh, so Q Camp is the high school
engagement, uh, again,
communities across New Mexico
have engaged in that. We're very
proud of that. Um, with the
hands
Learning lab, we're trying to
build opportunities not only for
students, maybe dual enrollment
in high school, but also
veterans who are leaving service
and looking to do a retraining
program and get engaged. Uh, and
so we have a lot of concrete
programs um with QA we have a
lot of data on what we've been
able to do to reach rural
students and communities, things
of that nature. Uh, so that we
can drive more part um.
Potential participation in those
PhD programs, uh, but also lead
to jobs, right? Um, and, and
there's high demand from the
industry partners there and so
we're, we're trying to be very
targeted and intentional about
how we do that in working with
our academic partners. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And the last thing
I'll comment here is just keep
doing what you're doing, do a
lot more of it. Um, you know, I,
I do, I want to ask you also to,
to when you're thinking about
these, these Q camps and what
have you. I'd like you to back
the bus all the way up to mid
school because if you don't get
excited.
You know, when I first came to
this legislature 12 years ago, I
helped fund something called See
the Change, which was to bring
uh female students into um um
physics and calculus and all
that kind of stuff, by the time
they're in the 8th grade because
of the stats that we were
presented with that at the time
if they're not fully engaged in
this kind of stuff by the 8th
grade, 70%, unfortunately,
probably don't ever pick it up
again and want to make a career
out of it. But the ones that do
end up running NASA and other
major corporations and programs.
Like that. So while I think it's
great that you've got the Q
camps and everything, but maybe
there's a junior Q camp. I, I
don't know whatever you'd call
it. I don't want to rename your
your program here. But, but back
all that that up to 6th, 7th,
and 8th grade, and I think
you'll see a huge difference in
who actually gets excited about
it in high school and then lives
it, you know, into working with
you, with you guys. Thank you.
OK, I have the same question
with Q camps. So you talked
about the eastern part of the
state. You said a lot of, what
about Albuquerque public
schools? How many?
Um, Madam Chair, thank you for
the question. So, um, we, I'd be
happy to get my government
relations team to get you exact
statistics here. Uh, we do have
a heavy contingent of
Albuquerque engagement as well.
Um, and, um, I on the student
side, um, our camps are this
last summer we did a 4 week
camp. So it was very heavily uh
here in Albuquerque and then we
also hosted in Santa Fe. Um, and
our our teachers are where we're
able to bring them in, um, you
know.
the state to come engage. So,
um, we'll definitely get back to
you with specifics on that, um,
but we, we have had heavy
representation from here as
well. Do you look at all the
schools in Albuquerque.
Or just certain schools in
Albuquerque. I mean, I know the
ones that would probably focus
on you, but do you get all of
them? Yeah, Madam Chair, thank
you. So, um, we, we have done
our best to leverage our, our
networks through our community
involvement office at Sandia
National Labs, uh, but we also
work with nonprofits. So, uh,
the Computer Science Alliance,
um, and a few others to try to
reach those schools. Uh, we did
a lot of very heavy outreach to
try to reach schools that offer,
well, it doesn't work so well in
New Mexico now, but free lunch
or other indicators.
Might be able to target some of
those students that wouldn't get
the opportunities. Um, and, and
Q Camp is really designed for
those who have an interest in
science but may not necessarily
be the 4.0 students, right? Uh,
if they have the opportunity to
to come learn, uh, play with
lasers, right? That's, that's
what we're teaching them at QCAP
to inspire that interest. That's
the, that's the community that
is our primary focus. Um, so,
um, um, yeah, hopefully that
answers the question.
I know how hard it is. I used to
teach high school math and
trying to get the girls to
trying to get girls and just,
just something for them to do
coding. It was so hard and
they'd start out and then by the
end that we had like 5 left out
of 20. So yeah, it's it's tough,
but if, and I believe middle
school is a good place to start
if possible, but it sounds great
and I, I was, I did count the
women.
Your PhD program, I don't know
why, but, um, this sounds great.
So.
Do you have an ask? What is your
ask for us? You have a specific
ask monitor. Tell me what you
want from us.
Um
Um, I, I would say, Madam Chair,
um,
I would say there's, there's 22
things that, that, well, I would
focus on one to say I know that
um right now we're working with
the governor's office and the
EDD um and they're working to
try to to come up with a large,
um, uh, package uh for
legislation, um, uh.
For to support the engines and
to support this, um, really
this, uh,
Um,
Institute, what was the other
term here, the campus. Sorry,
sorry about that, uh, the campus
in there. I mean, that was, um,
On the order of, you know, $200
million.
Um, and that's, that's what
we're we're working towards. I
don't know if anyone else want
to add Mike.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for the
question. Uh, I think we owe you
an additional chart. We have a
map of the United States at Jake
and his colleagues put together
that shows the investments in
quantum related infrastructure
by all the other states that
we've been able to get solid
numbers on. We owe you that
chart so you can see what it
will take to be competitive.
Right, so state of Illinois
state of Texas of each committed
over $200 million for
quantum-related infrastructure
in their states.
Uh, we, we tried to sort between
promised and what's actually
done that's sometimes hard to
do, but for us to be
competitive.
To attract companies here we're
going to need real resources and
will have to be competitive at
the scale that Dave outlined and
that is in uh uh Governor Lujan
Grisham's letter of support for
our NSF engine program, which is
a legislative initiative, uh,
and Mr. Greenberg from the
governor's office is also
working on this with an
estimated impact and value of
over $200 million. So to be
competitive, to
Win the NSF engine to attract
companies. This is really where
we're gonna have to be.
And and Madam Chair, this will
add to getting some my memory
comes back and I didn't help
And and Madam Chair, this will
add to getting some my memory
comes back and I didn't know,
but, uh, um, you know, 11 thing
is, uh, two, we will be putting
forward an RPSP right? We we've
done that in the order of 3
million,
3 million a year roughly, and
that is really going to build
that, that core, um, uh,
Human capital that we have to
have, uh, and that's, that's a
huge, um, it's gonna be really a
significant, um, and then we,
uh have a uh AI special like
related to AI and we've put in
that we're putting forward that
really, you know, in my mind,
if, if we want to solve our
problems that we need to solve
with quantum, uh, for around AI,
you know, we need to be funny
and have the resources to do
those, those kind of things and
and some of the difficult um uh
things that were
require a lot of computing right
now or things to prove that
quantum works.
Uh, right, and a lot of that
testing, so there, there's some
big areas in there. And the last
thing I'm gonna say is that and
really related to what, what
Mike was saying is that, um,
You know, we won the EDA award.
We're we're excited about that,
right? We've got, we've got the
40 million from there, the $127
million and Illinois still put
up 500.
And so we'd like to be on closer
level playing ground.
So 200 or 500 we're talking
about we're talking about 200,
200. OK, so that's, that's the
that's what you asked last time
when we were in Secoro, right?
And we've already kind of
started doing.
Working towards uh getting you
what you need. So if you could
give the map, and then any
supporting documentation because
we'll be working um
Representative Garrett and I are
on, yeah, appropriations and and
legislative finance committee.
So the more we have to push
this, the better, right?
All right. Anything else?
Sure, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
gonna um
kind of step outside of my staff
or uh rolled just a little bit
to make a reverse ask of all of
you, particularly you, Mr.
Hansen. You may not have heard
but when uh Senator Padilla
asked about minority students,
at least 4 of the members of
this committee said, what about
the women? Because they're all
looking at that chart and they
didn't see it.
When this committee uh was down
at New Mexico Tech 2016, 2017.
They had dedicated at the time
an entire vice presidency to
figure out how to recruit women
into STEM education.
And they were reaching down into
the high schools and junior
highs and trying to figure out,
OK, when do girls
Turn off and how do they keep
them in. It was a very big
concern for them because they
have at the time they had a 1 to
13 ratio for every girl there
were.
13 guys going in to uh in uh New
Mexico Tech, and that was a
terrible student ratio balance.
Um, if you and I see Mark
Cavedra is back there, can get
together with the uh council
university presidents and figure
out
a, a program to figure out, OK,
how does New Mexico recruit.
Girls into STEM education keep
them into higher education and
create that as a yearly report
of what you're learning and
whatever, and, and how the
progress can be made. My guess
is, given that I heard this.
Throughout a couple of them
left, but that this committee
would probably want to get that
report and it died at New Mexico
Tech because I think it was an
initiative of the president that
was there at the time, and it
kind of got morphed and went
away, but I'll bet you that this
is my guess that this committee
will really push that and
provide your resources. So I, I
throw that out there.
Thank you, Madam Chair for
letting me, uh, get on a soapbox
there.
Man and members of the
committee, thank you very much
for that. I think that that's
when we will definitely be
working on. I I would like to
say that I haven't looked at the
exact numbers recently, but our
I think our computer science
department may be a model for
that because my understanding
last time I checked is we were
leading uh one of the leading
computer science departments for
a number of women in our
faculty. And so I want, we, we
certainly have people that they
can tell us how to do it right.
Thank you.
Oh, Madam Chair, I was at
Sandia.
I don't know where I was, the
nuclear thing on Tuesday. I must
say I was impressed with the
number of women in top
leadership positions. So I would
also like to know, and you
probably give us, but, but you
know, when we're not focused, it
kind of goes over our head. I'd
like to know the National Labs
too, um, how it breaks down men,
women, uh, minority groups.
But I was impressed at Sandia.
Uh, Madam
A representative just as a
little anecdote. I don't have
good stats here, but I want to
use the quantum New Mexico
symposium from Friday.
OK. Women leaders.
Our governor
Vice President of Research
University of New Mexico.
Associate Laboratory director
Los Alamos National Laboratory,
Associate laboratory director
Sandia National Laboratory, who
is also a member of the National
Quantum uh initiative advisory
Committee.
OK, uh, vice president for
technology development from
Quanttinuum.
Each of those are women
engineers and scientists. Thank
you very much.
Well, thank you for a wonderful
presentation, and we'll work as
hard as we can to get you what
you need to continue to be
successful. Thank you so much.
OK.
I
