Portion of Bernelio County and,
uh, very happy to be here. I've
been on this committee as a
voting member the entire time in
the legislature for 12 years.
Uh, have some really good
legislation that this committee
has helped me craft along the
way that we've gotten done. Uh,
I'm not, Madam Chair, I'm not,
um, trying to be cool with these
glasses. I did have eye surgery,
so please don't think I'm trying
to run around like I'm Joe cool
over here. Um, please take care
of your eyes because it can go
south very, very quickly, but
thankfully I believe I'm on the
mend, so thank you.
Yeah.
OK. Thank you. Good morning to
everyone. I'm Nancy Senator
Nancy Rodriguez from Santa Fe,
District 24. Thank you, Madam
Chairman.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
everyone here. My name is Bill
Burt. I am a senator from
District 33, and that is I live
in Al Mogoordo, uh, covered the
northern half of Ochero County
and all of Lincoln County. And
glad to be back in uh
Socorro at Tech.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm State
Representative Joey Garrett from
Albuquerque's Northwest
quadrant, home of the Petroglyph
National Monuments. So when you
drive into Albuquerque, you'll
know I am there. Uh, it's just
great and exciting to be here
again. Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Bill Souls,
state senator from Las Cruces
and the beautiful East Mesa side
where the Oregon mountains, the
iconic mountains above Las
Cruces and the Oregon Mountain
Desert Peaks National Monument.
very pleased to be here.
And representative of Madrid.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Representing William Madrid from
Donana and Otero County District
53. Glad to be here. Beautiful
campus and I've not had the
pleasure of, uh,
Touring the campus to this uh
visit. And yet I want to commend
this, uh, New Mexico Tech for a
great program in the STEM
program that's helped my
community program out there in
chakra for about the last 8
years and they're celebrating
tonight.
The 8th year of winning
nationals.
OK, and this is a junior high
group of kids that have really
done a lot of things for our
community and I'm fortunate to
say that you guys are the major
components to facilitating this.
So thank you and I'm glad to be
here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Jason Harper. I represent
the, uh, Northern Riar Rancho
area in Sandoval County.
Um, I like Senator Padilla, I've
been on this committee all 12
years I've been in the
legislature. I love this
committee, um, it is just, uh, a
wonderful place and I love the
staff, uh, on this committee as
well.
Um, and I love coming home here.
Um, I got my bachelor's degree
in chemical engineering from
this wonderful place. I have so
many great memories, and it
really is just a, a gem in New
Mexico. I had the fortune of
going to Purdue for my master's
degree right after this,
surrounded by people from all
Ivy League schools, and I, I
didn't feel like I was a
disadvantaged at all. My
education was top notch right
next to all those folks. So
thank you for the great work you
all do at this wonderful
institution.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
next we'll go to staff. Can you
introduce yourselves?
Mark Edwards, I'm a drafter with
the Legislative Council Service,
and I've been staffing this
committee for about
1112 years.
All right, thank you. And I'm
Debbie Serna. I represent House
District 21 in Bernalio County.
I love this committee also. I've
been here 8 years now, um, and
we're gonna go ahead and
introduce the audience.
Uh hello everybody. Yeah, I'm
Adrian Custri. I'm the student
regent here in New Mexico Tech,
so I'm glad to meet everybody
and be able to sit down on this
committee. Thank you.
Hi, good morning. I'm Mariah
Thomer. I'm the executive
director of the Office of
Innovation Commercialization
here at New Mexico Tech.
Good morning, committee members.
My name is Mike Timmons. I'm the
director and state geologist at
the New Mexico Bureau of
Geology. We are a research and
service division here in New
Mexico Tech and your state
geological survey.
Good morning. I'm Mike Doyle.
I'm the vice president for
research and economic
development here at NMT.
Uh, Robert Boltz, I'm the
director of the Petroleum
Recovery Research Center,
another states designated
research division at New Mexico
Tech.
Good morning. My name is Selena
Landaoso, and I'm the research
program coordinator here at New
Mexico Tech.
Good morning. My name is
Patricia Landavazo, and I work
in the research office here at
New Mexico Tech.
Good morning. My name is Vanessa
Grain. I'm the chief executive
assistant to the president's
office.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
Jay Santiannis, lead lobbyist
for the New Mexico Exchange
carrier Group, a group of 10,
uh, rural, uh, uh, telephone and
broadband companies.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm uh
Van Romero, vice president for
special research programs here
at New Mexico Tech.
Good morning. I'm Dan Linsford.
I'm the director of information
technology and communications
here at New Mexico Tech.
Also the acting information
security officer.
You introduce yourself. Oh, I'm
Hayley Hansen. I'm the
photographer for the university.
OK
Beata Mar a marketing
communications director at New
Mexico Tech.
All right. Well, thank you all
for being here. Um, I appreciate
you being here. Um, we are gonna
go ahead and get started with
this, this group and welcome and
the 5G program at New Mexico
Tech of Mining and Technology
whenever you're ready. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Members of
the committee, I'm David
Monzano, the director of
governmental affairs here at New
Mexico Tech.
On behalf of Dr. Mayar Auzigar,
a relatively new university
president. It is my distinct
pleasure to welcome you all to
New Mexico Tech.
We are honored to host the
legislative Science, Technology
and Telecommunications Committee
on our campus today on behalf of
our entire community, students,
faculty and staff. I extend a
warm welcome to each of you.
New Mexico Tech has always been
a hub of innovation, curiosity,
and discovery. Our campus is
alive with research that not
only pushes the boundaries of
science and technology, but also
addresses real world challenges
that impact our state, our
nation, and the world.
Today you will get a glimpse
into the groundbreaking work
that is happening here.
From the depths of our
underground laboratories to the
far reaches of space
exploration, our researchers and
students are working on projects
that range from renewable energy
solutions and cutting edge
telecommunications technologies
to critical advancements in
cybersecurity and beyond.
We are thrilled to have the
opportunity to share some of
these projects with you today.
Your support and partnership are
vital as we continue to pursue
our mission to advance science
and technology and.
In ways that benefit all New
Mexicans.
We believe that the work being
done here at New Mexico Tech has
the potential to drive economic
growth, create jobs.
Improve the quality of life for
people across our state.
As you tour our facilities and
engage with our researchers. I
hope you will see the passion
and dedication that fuels our
work. We're committed to
excellence in everything we do.
And we're excited to collaborate
with you to ensure
Madam Chair, Carlos Romero,
Associate vice president for
research, that my co-presenter.
I had Nick Torrio. Um, I am the,
uh, senior research program
manager for uh 5G at the
Institute for Complex Seditative
Systems Analysis at New Mexico
Tech. Madam Chair, committee,
thank you for having us.
So, Madam Chair, with your, uh,
it's your pleasure, we're gonna
go through two presentations, so
my co-presenters couldn't be
here in their folks from the
Department of Defense. So this
committee toured our Plius
research and Training Center
last year and in 2022, you
received a brief about some work
we're doing in cyber
electronics, uh, and in
information warfare, electronic
warfare.
So since then, as you saw when
you toured our facility down in
Plius, we've laid 17 miles of
fiber optic cable at that
center, uh, with a 400 gigabit
backbone, enough fiber endpoints
to power half of Albuquerque in
a small remote town that we own,
um, 40 miles south of south of
Lordsburg. We've deployed and
almost completed an experimental
power grid from transmission,
uh, all the way down to
distribution systems, um, and
we're currently looking at
various
Opportunities. So since you
visited, we had folks from the
office of the Undersecretary of
Defense for Research and
Engineering and an office called
the Future G Office and their
director is, uh, Doctor Tom
Rondeau, who is the principal of
the of the future G Office.
He came from, um,
DARPA and went over a year and a
half ago to head that office in
the Undersecretary's office. And
really what they're looking at
doing is changing the, the
innovation, life cycle within
and matriculation life cycle of
procurement within the
Department of Defense around
connected devices and
information.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna give his presentation to
you and then Nick will give you
the presentation of what New
Mexico Tech is doing to meet
these national challenges.
So military information, I'm
gonna start on page one.
Military information exchange
requirements have vast outpaced
the capabilities of the DOD
related to wireless
communication.
So many of you may have 678
devices with you today. And all
those are connected in various
ways, um, to the internet. Yes,
sir. So we're gonna start with
the dark blue presentation right
here.
And I'm going to start here on,
on slide one.
So the
The Department of Defense began
to look, well, who's cutting
edge when it comes to wireless
technology? I know this
committee explores connectivity
in New Mexico whether it's uh
fiber optic or if it's wireless.
So the global industry has
outpaced the requirements of the
Department of Defense. It takes
the Department of Defense up to
a decade to feel the wireless
technology. By then the tech has
already changed.
And so they began to look at
What kind of investments could
the Department of Defense
Be involved with that would
leverage global industry
investments. So how could they
partner with both academia and
private industry to grow in this
particular area, and they begin
to look at the connectedness
within 5G, but they're also
looking at investments right now
in 6G and they are beginning to
look at investments into 7G.
And I'll kind of go through what
these different, uh, iterations
of those technologies mean right
now within the United States we
have some 5G systems that are
overlaid on an LTE or a 4G, uh,
backbone, which means we don't
have native 5G systems in most
places in the United States. You
have a, you have an older
technology that you have
overlaid with a 5G technology,
which means you don't see the
full potential of 5G.
Why is this important? Because
of the connectedness of our
society.
And as you want to connect
things, you want to have
autonomous vehicles. It takes
vast amounts of data.
As you want to have uh, you
know.
Um
Real-time solutions, you know, I
know this committee has been
looking at AI and other things
that requires tremendous amounts
of bandwidth. And how do you,
how do you deliver that not
necessarily be plugged in. And
how can we leapfrog technologies
for our rural communities in New
Mexico that should be one of the
questions that we're looking at,
and I wish the DOD was looking
at that. So if I go to the next
slide, you're gonna see, um, on
the left you'll see 5G and 5G is
deployed right now.
But currently the requirements
and the 6G standards are in
development and are able to be
influenced.
So
The Defense Department is
heavily involved in developing
the standards and look at
influencing the technology of
6G. And why is this important
for the United States?
Well, look at the companies that
are involved in 5 and 6G.
So
You have Huawei, which is a
technology out of the People's
Republic of China. It's one of
the world leaders in 5G and is
helping to set requirements for
6G.
You may remember, uh,
Places like Lucent Technologies,
Simen, Nokia, Motorola,
Ericsson, Nortel, those
companies have been combined and
now there's two companies in the
world, right? Nokia and
Ericsson. They are really the
technology companies.
And you have Huawei from a China
perspective.
If you want to kind of see a
map, turn to the last slide and
there's going to show you the
world of influence related to
those technologies and those in
red are the ones that are being
influenced by Huawei
technologies.
The ones in black.
Uh,
Our countries that have Huawei
bans, and it's the United States
and a few other countries and
provinces, uh, throughout the
world.
So right now the United States
is involved in
Infrastructure development, not
just for the United States but
our allied countries, and it's
important for our military
because as our
Military complex begins to
spread across the world, they're
going to begin to rely more and
more on these commercially
available networks. And if these
commercially available networks
are controlled and developed by
our adversary, it's not good for
the United States.
So that's why 6G, you know, 6G
is expected to launch sometime
in in 2027 to 2028.
And you look at, you're looking
at high data rates, high
mobility, high reliability and
responsive rates, mass
connection densities and all
domain coverage and also.
The
Promise of low energy and
integrated sensing. And that is
really important related to
situational awareness. So we see
all these things that we have
all the stuff to
enabled to hone that in in
inches rather than feet. Um,
So all those technologies are
really important and if I turn
to the next page. So where is
the Future G office of the
Department of Defense really
getting involved and they have 4
major investments. One is an
open centralized unit
distributed unit. So.
Sounds kind of redundant over
and over again. But it's really
looking at the underpinnings of
the technology that's going to
build the
6G systems and can be utilized
in 5G.
Networks right now.
You have.
Rand sharing, and I'll go into
that a little bit more.
You have expeditionary and
tactical uses, so our military
looking at getting into
Preparations for any kind of
conflict around the world. How
do you actually connect in and
be able to utilize this?
So right now they're, I'll give
you an example of, of what's
being done with NATO Allied
command transformation in Latvia
to look at movements of troops
in Europe, which is really
important.
Well, we're studying and what
we're looking at doing is some
of these related to the
Indo-Pacific.
As you began to look over vast
distances. So we we're gonna
take lessons learned, and you'll
see in the left corner there as,
as we're looking at that slide
that says future G priority
efforts for 2024. You're going
to see integrated sensing and
telecommunication. Remember,
this is not my slide, this is
the Defense Department slide
there. Can you see the Plias
Research and Training Center is
in their slide deck as one of
their major investments for
2024.
Kind of ancillary to those two
things but are really important
are one called the
microelectronics Commons, which
is how hardware innovations are
going to be spun up.
And the other is workforce
development.
And I was talking with folks at
the Pentagon yesterday and we
were talking about workforce
training and having a, a ready
STEM workforce and they had just
finished meeting with the
governor of Virginia to to push
out a program through the
Defense Department, uh, through
all their workforce development
department on training
workforce. And so when I
mentioned we have the same type
of setup here in New Mexico, so
they welcome to come to New
Mexico and began looking
at
What can be done when they look
at is New Mexico is a hub for
innovation in this area.
You have two national
laboratories who are cutting
edge in the development of these
technologies, and they're
looking at how can the
university sector within our
research schools and the
community colleges begin to put
a highly trained technicians,
engineers, and scientists to
tackle some of these integrated
sensing and communication
problems.
So I'm real quickly, I'm going
to go to the next slide and talk
about an open centralized unit
distribution unit initiative.
So this has to do with how do
you
Utilize what's called open
source technology.
Open source systems to be able
to feed into the DOD supply
chain.
And it's
Multiple areas, right? Software
is a big piece.
Hardware is a big piece. And
then when you put all those
things together and a thing
called a ran a radio access
network. So as you're traveling
down the freeway or you're in
your community, you have these
bars on your cell phone that
tell you how close you are to a
tower, right? I really tell you
the signal strength. They're
kind of telling you how far away
you are from a tower. Uh,
If you go into those, so you see
these big towers as you go down
the freeway, and you'll see a
little building, and I don't
know if any of you have been
into those communication
shelters by those, uh, cellphone
towers and there's big cooling
there. There's redundant power.
There's inside of there, there's
technology, there's stacks and
racks of computers in there.
There are
Connections to usually a fiber
optic network.
Well, all those pieces are
proprietary pieces and don't
have interoperability. So you
give a thing called vendor lock.
So one vendor provides that,
let's say it's Ericson, or if
it's Nokia, all the stuff in
there, it belongs to one vendor.
I can't take a component that's
really good from this vendor and
take another component from an
underpin and put them together
to build my system. Well,
That's not, that's not helpful,
right? It doesn't help you feel
the best technology. So what the
Department of Defense says, in
order to have a safer United
States, we need to have open
source technology. We need to
have that as our backbone as we
build out 6G.
And that's really important. So
you have these cores, you have
centralized units. You have
these distributed units and then
you have these radio units,
that's your cell phone, right?
So for some folks like in the
DOD, they're really interested
in the data that comes across
those. For other people, they're
interested in the voice and
other types of capabilities. And
Nick will talk about some of
those things here in a second.
And as the DOD is looking at how
they
Begin putting investments into
hardware stations. It's really,
how do you transition.
These products to US production.
How do we rebuild our
manufacturing capabilities and
our technological advance to
build these systems in the
United States.
And that's what the DOD is very
focused on this. How do we do
this? and how do we affect the
6G standards through open source
alternatives before it's set.
The next slide is going to talk
about spectrum management.
And you're going to be touring
the, the VLA, the Very Large
Array, I think this afternoon
and you're going to hear about
the next generation VLA.
And there's something that's
really important, so you might
want to listen to this when
they're talking, maybe ask
questions is it has to do with
how do you share the spectrum
with radio astronomers.
Radio astronomy requires good
clean spectrum, and we have it
here in New Mexico, right?
So you go to the plains of Argo
San Augustine, pristine area,
where it used to be pristine.
Until
People wanted internet
everywhere and we put up
satellites that are now blasting
with radio waves and cluttering
some of the electromagne, and
they can take care of that at
the VLA. They have technology
to, to filter that out right
now.
But there's another place that
has very pristine spectrum, and
that's the place you visited in
Playus?
So in February, we, we started
talking to the folks at the
Department of Defense. And then
we talked to the federal
regulatory agency that has
control over spectrum, which is
the national telecommunication
Information Agency.
At the US Department of
Commerce.
And then we started talking to
the National Science Foundation.
So all these agencies work.
On spectrum together, so the
Biden administration put out an
executive order 4 years, 3.5
years ago around spectrum and
developing a test bed for
dynamic spectrum sharing.
So how would you be able to
Turn up and down cell towers.
When you wanted to do research
at the VLA. So let's say we have
these, these celestial cell
towers, right? And they're
pushing, uh, cellular signals
down or signals so you can have
internet at your house.
And I need that for a particular
reason, so I'm gonna mute that.
I'm gonna move that wave so it's
not interrupting and I'm gonna
do that dynamically, right? I
need to have a clean airspace
for research, but people don't
necessarily need to be connected
at that time, so I'm going to
begin to share the, the
electromagnetic waves. Right now
it's a very manual process.
Literally people sitting in an
office doing calculations and
then turning things on and off.
So these things where you can
mute beams, you can do all kinds
of technical pieces so that you
can share.
That spectrum. There's very few
places in the United States you
can actually test that because
you have to start with a very
low floor in terms of having it
quiet. So we had 50 people that
came from, uh, one of the
national people in the national
security advisor for the White
House. We had people from the
Pentagon, the, uh,
National Science Foundation, the
Department of Commerce, National
Telecommunication and
Information Agency, and then
folks from Guam and other places
in the military, they're looking
at some of these problem sets in
the Indo-Pacific. They all
descended on Plius, 50 people to
go tour the facility.
And
They said, well, this should
become the national test bed.
We've been searching for 4 years
at a national test bed. There's
no place better than New Mexico
for this. New Mexico should be
the hub of dynamic spectrum
sharing and technological
innovation. And I was fortunate
enough to go with our vice
president for research, Mike
Doyle, to they call it Spectrum
Week. It's where all these
agencies come together and talk
about spectrum, and it was great
to listen to presenters from
DOD, from NSF, from all these
other places saying New Mexico
is the place that needs to drive
innovation in spectrum sharing.
And so Nick
Talk to you about how we're able
to, how we're going to help to
capture that and we need your
help to be able to do that. So
in this spectrum management,
this example tells you, is
showing you, how do you have
spectrum management in some of
this expeditionary. So how do
you do this for a military
perspective in what you're
seeing our airborne platforms
that do radar. A lot of you see
those those are E3s that do
that. Those are called Awa. Awas
are getting replaced with next
generation Awax. So they're
trying to do it in smaller
airframes.
You have electronic warfare
aircraft to do it with big
C-130s or EC-130s. They're
moving them to EC 37Bs that are
the size of a Gulfstream 650. So
going from a C-130 to a
Gulfstream 650 is pretty
dramatic in downsizing, right?
So a lot of technological in uh,
innovation is gonna be have,
have to be done in that
particular area.
I'm gonna skip the ranch sharing
slide. I'll let, uh, Nick cover
that in his area. I'm gonna talk
to you about this NATO allied
command transportation project
on 5G in Latvia. So this is to
employ standard 5G capabilities
that would provide
heterogeneous, scalable and
interoperable warfighting
networks among allied partners.
So, what's the relevance to
Future G in its leveraging 5G
capabilities for secure roaming.
ran sharing an inner working
between 5G cores and tactical
radio radios. So how do you, how
can you do more things out of
the same hardware? How can you
share that between
Uh, a business that needs it for
logistics, uh, a person who
needs it to communicate with
their family members and call
first responders or just to send
text messages to their friends
and then how do you allow the
military to utilize that same
backbone for their
communication. So that's what
they're, that's what they're
testing out in, uh, in Latvia,
and we want to take the lessons
learned from that and do the
same type of test and Nick's
going to help us do that imply
us. So how do we take that
nation-state example of
Latvia, bringing down to New
Mexico and really look at
resilient communications,
interoperability and operational
tempo.
And
You'd be amazed if you went to
Plias today to see the number of
connexes we have over there with
over $125 million worth of
telecommunications equipment
that we received from the
Department of Defense to deploy
across,
uh, far south.
Western New Mexico.
So if I take you to the next
slide that says integrated
sensing and telecommunications
and communications, you'll see
something that looks familiar
there. You see that blue sky and
that, uh, tower, that's actually
uh a 5G system that from
Nokia that's been deployed in
Plius, New Mexico. You'll see
the town site there. And really
what we're looking at doing is
intelligent reflective surfaces,
force protection surveillance
system.
And looking at objects
protection and sensing radar
communication, and spectrum
coexistence. And those elements
on there are 5G and 6G
infrastructure items. So you're
talking about radios, antennas,
towers, waveforms, and then
having sensors in AI-based
identification.
So a lot of stuff you kind of
see on TV that can maybe can
actually happen, but it requires
tremendous amounts of bandwidth.
I'm gonna skip over the uh, the
details of what we're doing at
Plius because Nick's gonna go to
those in detail, but I want to
talk to you about why is Plius
important to the Department of
Defense. Why is it important to
the National Telecommunication
Information Agency and the
National Science Foundation.
And it's really to support a
test bed.
How do we, how do, how are we
gonna take things to scale in
the commercial world.
Without testing them somewhere
first.
So we had the head of the
NSF program who came down.
And, you know, he flew into
Tucson.
Came from Washington, flew to
Tucson, got in his car, drove 3
hours, and he said, this is like
going to Alaska.
Except it's not as cold.
And there's actually
infrastructure I can drive on,
and I have cell phone signal. He
goes, it's amazing.
He goes, because you're so
remote, yet you're so close.
And that's a great thing, right?
We remote but close. And so,
It has, uh, good people. It has
a research center from New
Mexico Tech and it has a
population of folks that know
how to.
Do a lot with a little.
And that's huge, right? The
innovation can happen in many
ways. And so,
This can really impact our war
fighters. So the Department of
Defense is making investments in
the, in over 100 independent
systems looking for relevance.
How can they have agile combat
deployments. Electronic warfare,
cyber effects on cellular
telemedicine, signature
management, signals intelligent,
mesh networks, spectrum agility.
So one of the tests with the 5G
that just didn't come to
fruition because of some of the
issues related to 5G and, uh,
sensors.
On airplanes is they wanted to
do telemedicine from Joint Base
San Antonio and actually have
operations in the battlefield
from surgeons in San Antonio
utilizing 5G systems. That
didn't come to fruition, but
they did telemedicine.
And you'll hear a lot from Dr.
Aurora on some of the great
advances New Mexico has in
telemedicine. Well, imagine if
we could take that to the
operating room to a tactical
situation out on the battlefield
and make differences for our
warfighters and how could that
affect things in the private
sector? Imagine being able to
have operations in the out in
rural New Mexico from a skilled
surgeon somewhere else or out
on, you know, when somebody gets
into an accident and be able to
utilize these backbone
technologies to be able to
Provide those, uh, things. So
we're excited that we're able
to, uh, be a part of this and
these opportunities uh related
and next one is our workforce
development piece. These
opportunities the Department of
Defense is looking with the
naval postgraduate, uh, school
in, in California, the Michigan
Air National Guard in Battle
Creek, Michigan. The future G
Service Academy, uh, internship
program, and then the smart
program they're doing related to
To, uh, STEM disciplines. And so
what I, what I've been pushing
the Department of Defense to do
and us at New Mexico Tech is to
get New Mexico Tech on their
map.
And the research universities
and community colleges in New
Mexico to show that we're worthy
of an investment from the
Department of Defense is
significant investment on
trained workforce and really
building that pipeline because
in order to bring the research
development and companies here,
we have to have the educated
workforce around these
particular areas. Um,
And I think as we look at
What the Future G Office and the
DOD is doing related to military
data and network requirements.
It's really changing the way the
military.
Brings in
Vendors
How can you be a vendor to the
government?
And there's large defense
contractors that have this down,
but there are so many small
businesses in New Mexico is
filled with a lot of these small
businesses that have
Novel
In advanced technologies and so
one of the programs we have with
the Air Force Research
Laboratory in Albuquerque is
doing uh challenges to spin in
corporations, spin in small
businesses to the Department of
Defense. And so we want to take
some of that experience we have
and really look at how we can
Meet the Department of Defense
at the peace of commercial
development and bring that in
for our futures. So how does
this apply to New Mexico Tech
and why is this important for
you to really know about other
than it's a national security
problem. It is a global
competition problem and it's
also a place where New Mexico
can be a leader and, and Nick is
gonna go through how New Mexico
Tech is deploying these
technologies, Nick.
He's gonna move to the light
blue presentation.
Thank you, Carlos.
So I want to start this off by
um
Kind of taking a step back from
What we're trying to do there,
what we're doing appliance
before we get into kind of some
of the nitty gritty of where
we're at in our deployments and
our partnerships with the DOD
and other agencies.
Um, so if you take a look at the
first slide there, um, there's a
couple of things I want to
highlight. And number one is in
the bottom right there we see
the federal investments. I
wanted to give you a rough
breakdown, uh, and highlight how
important it is and how serious
our federal partners are in
investing in Plius and those are
few highlights of, of what
they're doing. So one of the,
the big investments that we have
is at $73 million initial
investment. This whole system
was initially set up at Hill Air
Force Base.
There was a variety of reasons,
uh, from operational technical
that it was not a great place to
have this system. It only had
about a 3 months of uh
experimentation and research
that was able to be accomplished
there. Not all their goals were
met. Uh, when this system was
decommissioned, there was 12
different sites, these rands
that Carlos was talking about
and 11 pretty serious score,
that's the brains of the
operation.
Uh, for
Engagement over several months,
um, we positioned ourselves to
be able to be the leading
candidate to take all this
equipment and we were successful
in that. There was some other
agencies, for example, the, uh,
Idaho National Labs and a few
others that were also vying for
this equipment to be this, to be
the center of 5G excellence,
we're able to win that. Uh, a
few other, uh,
Expenditures that they've sent
our way is that 6 million was
given to us as the seed money.
Of course, we get all this
equipment we need to, uh,
Pay staff hours we need to uh
get network connectivity. We
need to do some builds of
towers.
To be able to put this equipment
on so that that represents that
initial investment, which will,
uh, will get us, get us going,
but they won't fully sustain the
full deployment, as I'll talk
about here in a minute. And then
a couple other components, uh,
the mobile Colts, uh, these are,
uh, big giant trucks basically
sell on wheels, sell on light
trucks, that's the acronym. And,
uh, and these two devices, these
two sets of capabilities are
complementary to our overall
objectives here and providing
that realistic 5G test bed for
the nation.
Another big investment by uh
OUSD at Plius. And then lastly,
uh, this was funded by the our
peace contract and that's our
platinum system and I think we
talked about this last time the
committee was down at Plius.
It's a private closed loop
cellular system. Um, it's the
little brother to some of these
other systems, not quite as
capable but still fills in a
niche, particularly because it
works in the 3G and 4G. So we
have that full spectrum of
cellular capabilities apply us.
So with all that investment, I
want to just talk about a couple
of things.
Uh, that Carlos touched on. Why
on earth, why Polias, right?
What do they see at alias? So
Carlo's touch on a few things
that I just want to highlight,
uh, the importance of that, um,
that quiF RF environment.
is absolutely critical. Uh very
few places in the country that
can that have that kind of uh uh
environment uh to do the testing
that we can do down there. We
have a military operating area,
um, that exists right below us
and that's the tombstone MOA
kind of goes from Fort Wacht
Wachuca into New Mexico. We're
adjacent to that. We've got
special uh special temporary
military operating areas and it
gives us special things or
access to be able to do military
exercises in the airspace and
whatnot. And so that's, it's a
great position there.
Our proximity between ranges if
you think about for Fort Wachuca
is, White Sands missile range,
we're right in the middle. We
fill an important gap there. Um,
of course, as Carl's mentioned,
our, our relationships and
proximities to the national
labs, um, is also helpful. Um,
in terms of the general
infrastructure of the town, as
you all know, the power, the
serious investments to be done
with power and fiber. There's no
other range that literally has a
town and that we can actually
mock up what a real life
cellular environment would look
like. So that's
Uh, that's a really unique
aspect of Plius that, um, that
nobody else has. And of course,
the towers, we have housing, we
have apartments, we have
classrooms, we have storage
facilities, all these things
that we have in place are
implies.
Uh, the next thing is technical,
technical infrastructure and
capabilities. So on built on top
of all this infrastructure, we
have a very robust network as
Carlos mentioned, um, we know
how to grab the data, deploy
these sensors, interact with
these sensors, pull the data off
it, transmit the data, store the
data.
Analyze the data, visualize that
data, and get that data off onto
other people. That old chain
that I described there is, is
very complex and we've built um
the capability, the
technologies, and the workforce
knowledge on how to do some of
those things. That's another
area, another strength that we
have. Um, also, our RF spectrum
analysis, uh, uh, capabilities
is, uh, really, I think, I think
we're up there with some of the
best of them out there in terms
of the other ranges because you
can't just go put a 5G or any
kind of wireless system out
there and not be able to
Tell what that system is doing.
So we have some pretty robust
capabilities. We want to
continue to build that out, but,
uh, we do have a solid base
there.
Um, two other things cost. Um,
I'm pretty confident that we
As a university can do much of
the things that we're doing at
that test bed cheaper than a lot
of our competitors out there,
um, whether that's at the
National Lab, private, uh, some
of the other DOD ranges, we can
do it cheaper. And the last
thing is, and I want to
highlight, take your attention
to the left there on that line
of kind of timeline of events, I
highlighted two red boxes there.
If you count up the days there,
we're looking a little bit over
60 days.
And we're still here on slide
one.
Uh, a little over 60 days, uh,
from the time we got the memo
that said, hey, we want to take
this hill system, we want to put
it there. We got the official
memo. We got the funding in
place. We got the Nokia
contractors in place. We got
that equipment packaged up and
delivered. We got all the pieces
in place. I don't get all the
details.
In that short period of time
frame, very few places in the
country would have been able to
do that. And that's also been a
key factor in them deciding to
put all this money and
investment into Ply us. So we
got to continue to, to, to keep
on being flexible and, um,
And building on the capabilities
that we have already. So kind of
moving on to the, the next
slide, uh, what 5G systems do we
have at Ply us starting on the
far right, that platinum
cellular system that I
mentioned.
This is an investment through
our peace contract. Uh, we have
3 nodes out there at Plius. Uh,
we've been using them for some
exercises. We plan on doing more
with them.
The middle capability I talked
about, those big giant trucks.
Right now we uh lent them out
to, uh, our partners out at 29
Palms as part of the Department
of Defense exercise. We're going
to get we're going to get those
back actually a couple of new
ones with new capabilities on
that that we're going to be able
to integrate in the range and
our kind of our crown jewel
there on the left is our Nokia,
uh, fixed 5G system.
So
I won't go into the details, the
technical details of what they
are, of what's behind that, but
this is a very special
customized system that was
designed exactly for this
national spectrum strategy, uh,
spectrum sharing that Carlos
talked about.
Not many people have this
system.
Kind of moving on to the next
slide.
5G test bed tower and deployment
plans. So where are we? So right
now we have that core, that
brains of the operation set up
at play center. We have one
tower deployed and that's the
ski tower. I can't remember if
you guys toured that, but that's
Tower just about 1 mile outside
of Plas to the east. Where do we
want to go from here?
Well, we need to build out this
environment. Uh, the DOD and all
the other federal agencies are
asking us to build a realistic
environment. It needs to look
like what it looks like out in
the real world. What does that
mean? That means more towers,
right? More density, more
handsets, more, uh, phones, more
devices that are connecting with
5G and we have all, just about
all the components in place to
do that.
So this fall, uh, right now our,
our package is, uh, is on the
desk of the state Board of
Finance. We're looking for that
final approval for that capital
improvement project to build
some of the, uh, towers. We
have, we've asked for 7 towers
right now. We have one.
We have funding to probably
build 2 or 3 more. We're looking
at that, uh, we've identified
those sites as you see on the
map there's site 2 and 3. we
don't have funds yet to complete
that infrastructure buildout,
um, but we're, uh, we're working
on a few things there.
Go and go to the next slide.
5G build upgrade experiment
priorities.
I want to just talk to you just
briefly about our overall
strategy, um, from the beginning
to get this thing, to get this
plane off the ground, it's
always been about building the
infrastructure, building the
know-how, building the
relationships, open up those
contracts with the right people,
upgrading this system, of
course, it's hardware software
we always need to uh to provide
some kind of updates and
upgrades to it, um, to be able
to meet all the customers'
expectations and needs from
operational perspective,
research perspective, and then
we want to experiment.
And we're doing all these things
simultaneously as we move across
this timeline. Uh, things
folks who have funded, it's
given us all this equipment and
funded this initial, um, initial
deployment to get us off the
ground. It's not just them. The
defense had ran advanced
Research Project agency, Sandia
National Labs, uh, various
components, various research
labs within the actual services
themselves, Army, Navy, Air
Force. These are not just names
I threw on this slide. These are
actual phone calls, engagements,
meetings, interests, all these
folks and more. I couldn't fit
them all in the slide. They want
to come to play. They want this
thing yesterday.
We're trying to deliver, doing
the best we can. They have all
kinds of experiments, some we
can't discuss in this venue
right now. Uh, but Carl's kind
of touched on the top of that to
kind of give you an idea of, of,
of uh what kind of things they
want to do down there and more.
Everybody wantslias. We got to
build more infrastructure to
meet those needs. Um, and that's
going to start with the first of
couple couple towers. We want to
build out a total of 6 towers at
least, maybe 7. once we have
that, we're gonna have the crown
jewel. We were really realize
that vision of having a national
5G test.
that nobody's going to be able
to touch. And one last thing I
wanna discuss before I close up
is the urgency on this. So the
FCC has been auctioning off a
lot of the spectrum, right, the
shared use and this national
spectrum strategy has put a very
aggressive timeline on this test
in your research, and that's why
we're really poised well to uh
to be a part of this. And that
is by next year.
2025, they want to see some
plans for some initial
deployments on this.
Guess where they're going to
have to come. They have no other
place to go and fly us with the
way we're going now. We're going
to be the only place that they
can do a lot of this testing.
And then that timeline goes out
to about 5 years when they want
to get some of this technology,
um, figured out and deployed out
in the community and so this is
commercial and government
interest uh in this shared
spectrum, uh, scenario that
we're in right now. So I'll go
ahead and pause there. I know we
threw a lot at you to see if
you, if you have any questions
for us.
Right, great, we're gonna start
with um Representative Little.
That was
Um, also, would you introduce
yourself?
Good morning everyone, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
and everyone in the audience.
Thank you so much for this
presentation. It's, um,
incredibly fascinating, um, I,
uh, you may have mentioned this
early on, Madam Chair, but, um,
uh, I'm a new member, uh, uh.
Newer member to this committee
and my question is a basic one,
where is the bias located?
So bias is located in far
southwestern New Mexico. If you
take I-10 from Las Cruces, and
you drive about 2 hours and just
before you get to Lordsburg,
you'll see an exit sign that
says Plius, and then you drive
40 miles south, so it's 20 miles
from the Mexican border, 40
miles south of I-40, uh, in the
road ends at Playus.
10, excuse me, I 10, not I. I
10.
So it's uh it's, it's in the
what they when you look at the
state of New Mexico, you see the
boot hill of New Mexico, so it's
right there in our backyard, you
change over to Grant County, and
we're in Hidalgo County.
Thank you, and that is just to
clarify for me, if that's plius,
Madam Chair, not bias.
Thank you very much.
Yeah
Sorry.
Thank you. I forgot about that,
Madam Chair. So, uh, I am
Charlotte Little, I represent
House District 68, which is in
the northwest corner of
Albuquerque and Bernaliu, uh,
Bernlio County as well. Yes,
thank you very much. I'm happy
to be here.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
for this. I, my husband's a
science fiction fanatics. I've
read all these books and it's
like here it is. Um, my question
is, how are you involving the
New Mexico National Guard. Like
as I read all this stuff,
there's a tie for military
academic, are, are they involved
because it seems like that's a
resource. And then I think about
the high school pipeline, um,
getting people into STEM, ROTC
and.
Um, how are you working in that
workforce condominium, not
condominium, conundrum.
What's the word? Anyway, how are
you working there?
So, Madam Chair and
Representative Garrett in
respect to this, we haven't done
anything in this particular area
with New Mexico high schools
today. New Mexico Tech has
programs that reach out in
complementary areas, but on this
particular one we haven't done
any programs related to this.
What we're doing with the local
high schools in Hidalgo County
is looking at one called the
Cyber Patriot program to start
to
Working through the Department
of Defense to then come back and
work with our New Mexico
National Guard so wanna make
sure that if we have our
National Guard involved that
they're funded through federal
funds and not state funds,
right? And so, uh,
They've supported us through the
Red Horse team that's at, uh,
Kirtland Air Force Base has come
out to assess our airport at
Plius, uh, that's going to be an
important component to this, uh,
but right now, as Nick talked
about,
We got the letter of engagement
from the Department of Defense
in September of last year. And
so we are building those
networks right now. The National
Guard unit we have been working
with has been from Guam.
Uh, and really looking at that
because they're the lead on some
of these particular areas, but
we've already started those
conversations and they're on our
list of scheduled meetings to
brief the adjutant and others in
this particular area.
Thank you. And then just one
follow up question, Madam Chair.
So,
New Mexico Tech has had terrific
programs to train science
teachers, get master's degree.
This is another area where you
know weeklong seminars for
science and math and STEM
teachers so they can incorporate
this understanding which they
may not have ever had as they
work with their students to show
the practical real world
possible career paths. So I
would just hope probably you're
already thinking about that, but
I hope you are.
Chair and Representative Garrett
and Nick to kind of talked about
all this technology we're doing
in these systems and part of
that is being able to remote in.
So how can you do experiments
and train students in classrooms
and the cellular light trucks,
that's kind of the big thing.
And then the, the, the child of
the colt is the pony, and the
ponies are even smaller, that's
in the bed of a pickup truck and
you can deploy a 5G system,
let's say you wanted, let's say
you had an affected area in a
fire and you wanted to restore
connectivity to people, we could
deploy.
mesh network through this 5G
system through a startling
satellite and then be able to
connect, let's say a 1 square
mile radius to the internet so
they can access information.
Those would be great things to
get students involved with and
so that education component is
what we're working right now on
the office of the Secretary of
Defense. They're very interested
in the STEM pipeline. So we
would like for them to fund us
to do that, but the systems that
we have are going to be.
Amazing for our kids to get
their hands on because no other
kids are really have hands on to
those trucks seem, you know,
they just looks like a, it's a
$13 million piece of equipment
that's cutting edge and they
could run experiments off of it.
So we're definitely thinking
about that. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett Nix is Representative
Anna Narno, and could you, um,
introduce yourself.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, I'm
Representative Janelle Yonoru. I
represent the 19th district in
Albuquerque, 19th. 0, I can't
talk this morning. District in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. It's in
the southeastern quadrant of the
city, and I really, I just was
curious about something. So I
was looking at, oh, there's no
slide numbers. I was looking at
um the slide that has the little
map of the proposed sites, and I
was looking at site 7, that's
kind of right next to Cotton
City and it says under status
that Cotton City would create a
duplicate. Does that mean
Can you just tell me what
creates duplicate means? Does
that mean you don't need both.
Or would not need both. Madam
Chair, represented Ayu did I
pronounce that right?
It's Anya Nornu, but
representative is fine.
Sorry.
Uh, no, good question. Um, that
is exactly right. The proximity
to the other tower, um, in some
cases that is desirable for a
vast majority of our use cases.
And so you look at the the
position of these towers, we're
trying to strike a balance of uh
some of our customers wanting a
real dense cellular environment
like you'd find downtown
Albuquerque. Other customers
want a little bit more spread
out, kind of like what you'd see
in a rural area like this for
different operational reasons.
So we're striking that balance
between some of the towers a
little close, some of them a
little far, but, uh, one key
objective is that
Geographical spread, so we want
to get the best bang for our
buck. We can't do towers
everywhere. Um, Carlos has done
a great job at the reducing the
cost on this. I should have
mentioned this earlier, um, all
these locations we've
negotiated, no cost leases for
all these towers, which is
fantastic, and we're also gonna
let some of the county folks
utilize some lower spaces on
those towers where it makes
sense. So it's just a good
example of those partnerships.
It's a win-win for everybody.
They're giving us the land,
they're letting us build the
tower. We're letting them put a
few things on there. And, uh,
We get, we get what we need from
our customers, but does that
answer your question, ma'am?
Um, yeah, for the most part, I
was just, is there a scenario
where there would be sites 3 and
7 both in existence, so close to
one another, possibly, possibly,
yeah, I think with these next
two sites that we're looking at
building, we're going to go
through the next round of
engagements with our
stakeholders and say, hey, we
got some money for these next 3
sites. Let's weigh all the the
pros and cons of uh of where
those sites will be great. Thank
you very much. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative Nix is
Senator Padilla.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation
and I just love coming here
because I know that every time
what we do, we're going to find
out something new and exciting
and something that you're on to
that is just truly remarkable.
And so I, I'm very excited. I
mean, I, I think, uh, my only
question, Madam Chair, reside
around uh what specific you
covered a lot of ground here and
a lot of information and you've
done a wonderful job of, as
usual, you know, Carlos and
David and just helping you to
bring all of these wonderful,
you know, things together.
And the, these agencies
together, but how specifically
can the state of New Mexico help
you? So what are the top three
things that we should be
thinking about or should we have
ready to go for January because
don't want to miss this
opportunity, Madam Chair. I
mean, we really have a every now
and then we get, we really fall
on to something and then either
we don't focus on it and it goes
somewhere else. I don't want to
see that happen with this.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Padilla, that's a very,
it's a very good question. How
do you capture this? and we're
in competition, right, with
other states with federal
laboratories, with private
sector groups from and not
private sector groups in New
Mexico we're talking about
private sector groups in Texas
that are vying for this and
really it's the tower
deployments. It's building that
332 square mile group and, and
Nick talked about we have a
funding shortfall right there.
We don't, so we've asked the
Office under Secretary of
Defense to pay for these.
Towers, they're not tremendously
expensive, uh, but we have to
get them up. If we get them up
and we have the cell system
sitting in Conexes and we can
deploy those and use the DOD
money for the deployments.
There'd be no other place like
this in the country. So it's
kind of that, that last, uh,
push that we need help with, uh,
related to putting up these
towers. And I think the
engagement of, of members on
this committee.
I think the one thing that we've
heard from
People in the Department of
Defense and the federal agencies
is
New Mexico's policymakers are
engaged in this, and they don't
see that in other states where
it's like, yes, we want to be
the place where we have national
test beds where the government
makes investments into R&D, um,
and so I think.
You know, having this committee
engaged and members on this
committee engaged on what we're
doing and knowledgeable and then
helping to support some of these
capital needs that we have, uh,
would be tremendous, and that
would help us get across the
finish line.
Well, OK, that's good. I mean,
so, you know, is there, um, so
we talked before the previous
session, um, about maybe
creating some.
Um
Industry tranches, you know,
like where higher education
maybe, um.
Technology, water, uh, you know,
all of these things, and then
making an investments in those
and so is there is there funding
that maybe we could do that
would help you to match the
dollars that are available to
New Mexico. Can you think of
anything that maybe we could do,
obviously, you know, we're uh
The money, it doesn't run it
over, you know, but you know,
we, we want you to find things
that we could match that you
know maybe we do a 1 to
In Beshire and Cerm Pail this
legislature has funded the
technology enhancement fund for
the past few years, and that's
been extremely beneficial to the
universities.
In this particular project,
We don't have what's called
required cost share. The
government doesn't require us to
put up a match, right? They're
gonna fund us and they'll fund
us to a certain dollar amount.
So the technology enhancement
Fund works great for those that
require cost share. This doesn't
require it.
But if we had an investment on
an asset that would be continued
owned by New Mexico Tech and
these sites the majority of
these sites are owned by the
county of Hidalgo. These are
volunteer fire stations located
throughout the, the community.
So it's a win-win because it's
gonna actually enhance rural
telecommunication for, uh, for,
for first responders where they
have gaps right now. So I would
say.
I think having a pool and and if
you think about it like an
innovation fund, right? So you
have these closing funds for
private industry when we when
they do economic development or
you have companies moving in,
but when universities go after
large projects.
They don't have cost
requirements. There's basic
infrastructure that we have to
build to make our place
competitive with other states. I
would say some type of an
innovation fund that allows us
to tap dollars, maybe it's
controlled by the Secretary of
Higher Education who can weigh
those state priorities and say,
yes, this is a worthwhile
investment, you know, report
back to committees like this
that that's what we're doing
kind of have the finance
authority does with their
oversight functions reporting
back to an oversight committee.
That way it's, it's closely tied
to the legislature. I think some
Something like that could
Help the research universities
in New Mexico, be competitive
with those other schools in
other states that have access to
funding in a different way than
we do.
Well, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, and, uh, thank you,
Carlos, um.
So, you know, 11 of the things
we are trying to do is either
shrink, streamline, or minimize
the number of funds that we have
because we have a lot of funds
that become dormant and stuff
like that. So that's where this
whole conversation came from of
maybe 8 to 10 tranches of, you
know, investment monies, you
know, or whatever. So please
look at it from that standpoint.
I would love to work with you on
this and to help you try to
redefine if there are 17 funds
out there that we need to just
sort of eliminate, and I know
that's a shocker for some
People because they went out,
maybe they, I've created a
couple of funds along the way so
I wouldn't want that to happen
either. And I've created
departments and offices. I don't
want any of that to go away,
however, mine are the best
ideas, Madam Chair. No, but, but
where I'm going with that is if
these 17 need to be sort of
corralled into something that's
more meaningful because it's a
larger pot of money to do these
very large things like what
you're envisioning here, then I
think we should do that. So if
you can think about that, I'd
love to work with you on that.
I'd love to help you with that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Next is
Representative Harper.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Did you
Representative Harper.
Thank you Madam chair, and uh
gentlemen, thank you for the
presentation, um, it, uh,
You know, sometimes
The history of how that happened
and how it's evolved over the
years, right? I mean, Plius,
Madam Chair, I believe, was, uh,
a mining town actually owned by
a mining company.
And when those mines closed,
Um, that town essentially went
for sale, and I believe
if I remembering the story,
right, um, uh, Senator Pete
Domenicci said something to the
effect of
You know, this could be a really
great opportunity for one of the
research institutions in New
Mexico to uh use and I think,
uh,
I think Van, I think you were
the one that said,
I think Pete's talking to me
and, um, and New Mexico Tech
made, I think the brilliant move
to purchase this, this old city.
And start looking at ways it
could be used for, um, you know,
improving the security of our
nation, and I think, um, early
on, it was, you know, when we
were doing the, uh, the war
against terror, right? It was
really kind of a, a, a training
ground, and I think, Madam
Chair, even set up a kind of a,
a small like, uh, Middle Eastern
city in there for troops to go
around and train in and that was
fascinating to see.
Um.
But again, it it's evolved,
right? I think especially with
this, um,
War in Ukraine, we've just seen
how important
RF, you know, radio frequencies
are, um, uh,
I mean you
A lot of the ordinance, you
know, was GPS guided, and we're
just seeing all kinds of GPS
jamming and GP GPS denial
situations, um, drones. We've
seen how,
How that is just exploded by way
of use in, in, in war, and I've
seen videos where, you know,
folks are guiding in their drone
and they can, you know, virtual
reality headsets on and then
they get close and everything's
jammed and they can't see
anymore. And so just looking at,
you know, how can we
You know, make sure that
We understand that the whole
world of RF the spectrums, all
the interactions, and, and what
a great place we have for Polias
to, to help us understand that,
um, kind of having the, the low
noise floor, right? It's quiet,
you know, and all the things
that you can, all the knobs you
can turn that you really can't
really turn into a densely
populated area.
Um, so I, I, I, I just love
seeing how
New Mexico is agile, right?
We're, we're changing with the
times and we're providing
utility and, and, and innovation
and and potentially jobs. So
that's, that's just great.
So a couple of questions though,
um,
Uh, so on your first
presentation,
Slide 10, um, a couple of things
caught my eye.
Um, so Hill Air Force Base in,
uh, Utah.
Um,
Looks like it is a dynamic
spectrum sharing, interference
test bed.
And, and on the other
presentation, it looks like
about $73 million has been
invested in that RF test bed.
But here it talks about a
contract expiring for Hill Air
Force Base 5G and, um, that
closeout includes transferring
of equipment to Polias,
um, and so can you just maybe
talk about kind of that dynamic,
right? That, that we see
sometimes, you know, the
contract expiring, assets are
moved, and we can use that, we
can take advantage of that and
it looks like Polias has, uh,
Madam Chair.
So, Madam Chair, uh, and
Representative Harper, thank you
for your kind words about, uh,
and great memory and
recollection of our bias. Um,
but Hill Air Force Base is a
deployment that was done by the
Air Force Research Laboratory
director at RI out of Rome, New
York.
Uh, and they had a principal
investigator who, uh, did that
experiment. So their contracts
with their with Nokia and other
systems to build out their
system were coming to an end. So
Nick kind of talked about the
research was coming to an end
because when you deploy a 5G
system on a military
installation, you can't utilize
it the way you want to do it.
You have a wing commander.
Who has to run a base.
Uh, or, and then you have
researchers who want to who want
to do different things, right?
And so those became in conflict,
so they couldn't do all of their
objectives. So after
You know, doing their proofs of
concept and, and having their
minimal viable product to
deliver, they decided to
decommission.
And then they had this
competition across the country
of who is going to get the
decommissioned system. There was
a brand new system at Hill Air
Force Base and, and we were able
to win that competition.
Uh, Madam Chairman Carlos, thank
you for that. That's, that's
fascinating to me, um.
And, and I think
Made the reason I bring it up
is, you know, I feel like
Sometimes we in New Mexico can
get, um,
I won't say ungrateful, but just
maybe, maybe we don't appreciate
how much Sandia and Los Alamos
and Coan Air Force Base and
Canon and all these things
offer.
And
There are times where if we are
maybe not grateful.
Um, and, and maybe we're, we're
pushing a little on the edges
where those things can actually
be taken away and sent somewhere
else.
Like we see here at Hill Air
Force Base, right? Um, maybe not
a direct comparison, but I just
want to maybe share with the
committee here, we, it's
important that we understand how
awesome, uh, what a great
blessing these things are. But,
um, for example, our gross
receipts tax has chased away
almost all of the laser work
that actually started here in
New Mexico. All that work has
gone to China Lake and other
places because we kept raising
our gross receipts tax, um, and
that has to be paid on
government contracts.
Right, so we just need to be
aware.
Um, I mean, that's amazing
Polias got this, and I hope we
can gamble more from other
states. Let's be, let's just be
careful, um, not, not take these
things for granted.
Um.
Other question I have is, um,
And, and, uh, Representative
Earu kind of asked, uh, went
this direction on the towers.
Um, I was interested to see
Nokia.
Um, right, um, I, I didn't
realize they were still in the,
the cell business, um, you know,
there's all the, the jokes and
memes that you can't destroy
Nokia phone, but you can't find
him anymore, um, so, so
apparently, you know, can you
share with me a little bit
about, you know, uh, Nokia's
kind of current involvement and
are they actually, it looks like
you have a Nokia Tower in Polias
and are they going to be making
more? Just kind of help me
understand that relationship,
please, Madam Chair.
Absolutely, madam Chair
Representative Harper, thank
you. Good question. Um, so
Nokia, Nokia's gone through some
transitions over the years. Um,
they do, uh, through
acquisitions and through just
the changing landscape of the
telecommunications industry. Um,
they've assembled a pretty broad
IP portfolio, and they utilize
that, but they are still, it's
not in the it's not in the
customer's face anymore, right?
The Nokia phones, that business
is kind of uh whittled away, but
there's still a powerhouse as
Carlos mentioned in his slide 15
of the dark blue initial.
Presentation
Nokia and Ericson are still, are
still the, the big boys and
girls on the block when it comes
to this type of cellular
technology, innovation, support,
and whatnot. So, um, you
mentioned a little bit before
about, you know, some of these
contracts expiring. So many of
these contracts with these
subject matter experts like
Nokia, and this is a Nokia
designed custom designed
developed system. It's hardware,
it's software, it's all those
things. We needed to take those
contracts that were with OUSD
and we needed to transfer him
over to New Mexico Tech. So we
do
Nokia on contract, um, a pretty
good support contract. There are
global telecommunications
company. They're not cheap.
They're eating away a lot of
this initial that 6 million seed
money while I Nokia will burn
that, uh, through that really
quick, but, uh, it's, it's part
of the, it's part of the
process.
Um, so we have them on contract
for about the next year or so
and uh they're going to be some
of their, their key tasks are
number one, supporting the
hardware and software that we
inherited from there, just like
you'd get like a warranty, if
you will. Um, second thing is
the subject matter experts, the
engineers, the R&D folks. Um,
and the third thing is to
actually once we get those
towers up, these are the experts
that are going to take that
system and they're going to
deploy in the towers and they're
going to be there for our
engineers as the subject matter
experts to get the most out of
this system for
Customs. So, uh, and we, we want
to continue that partnership
with Nokia long term. They're
really critical in this whole
process and, uh, I'll leave it
at that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Nick,
I, I appreciate that. Um, OK, so
my last
Question, Madam Chair.
I can go to slide 3 on the dark
blue presentation.
Um, so I, you know, I'm familiar
with 5G. I think we're all kind
of getting more familiar with 5G
as it's getting rolled out and,
you know, my understanding is,
well, maybe a simpler way to
describe it is,
Compared to 4G, 5G has, um, much
higher data transmission rates,
but a smaller range and so
you'll need to have more 5G
connection points than you would
4G, but you get a lot more data
so you can watch more of your
Netflix or whatever.
So I'm, I'm curious here because
I, I really don't know much
about 6G, which is presented on
this slide and kind of looking
at the, the timeline bar above
here, um, you know, we've got
these different releases, but
really it looks like 6G
standards development and
influence window, so it looks
like,
People are talking about 6G and
what it's going to look like and
somewhere in fiscal year 28, 29
will have
6G set up and then we start
looking at a 7G so I don't know
if you can maybe help me
understand, you know,
what
What are we, I mean, there's a
little chart here on the right,
but I'm
I don't know, I'm having a hard
time digesting this, you know,
what can we, what do we know so
far about 6G?
I'll take a stab, just duly
noted, um, our, our big brains,
our big technical brains are not
with us here today. We're we're
doing the best we can, uh, but,
uh, Representative Harper, you,
you hit the nail on the head in
terms of, um, I think we, we
have a general understanding of
that, so the, the transition
from 2G 3G 4G was, was somewhat
incremental, um, evolutionary,
but the change in, in kind of
the back end and the
capabilities from 4G, um LTE to
5G new radio are
Just
Revolutionary. Um, and some of
the key components of that that
you touched on, we're talking
about uh density of the amount
of devices you can have on
there. Uh, the bandwidth, the
latency, that's the speed, you
know, things can get back and
forth between endpoints, um,
All those things are are super
are super powerful and super
important, but um one of the
things that many people don't
know or don't quite understand,
and that's part of all these
experiments and researches that
back end that open ran that open
source components that we're
trying to do that 4G to 5G
transition took that black box
of proprietary Ericson and Nokia
Systems and said no more, we're
going to break this up into
interoperable components with
open standards so we can have,
we can drive innovation in this
space, right, from a hardware to
software.
perspective that to me just
personally is really the big
driving change. 6G, more of
that. So it's going to build on
top of all these things that we
have with uh with 5G. And just
on that note, we have a meeting
today if I, if I can get to it
this afternoon with
Northeastern. Northeastern is
developing a 6G system built on
all commodity hardware, all open
source software. They want to
bring that to play. So I'm gonna
have to make room in my slides
for yet another cellular system.
So we're going to be on the
leading edge of not just 5G, I
think we need to take that away.
just use what you uh OUSD does
and they say Future G, right? So
they're covered for all versions
of, of cellular from here on
forward. But, uh, so yeah, we're
going to be involved in that.
Uh, we're gonna do some research
experiments. We're going to host
that system and collaborate with
these researchers from
Northeastern and uh continue to
drive innovation in the space
and and learn what can we do for
our warfighters and other
participants of the play
playground. And if you think
about ubiquitous and instant
access to information. That's
the promise of 6G.
ubiquitous instant access to
information. If you have an
autonomous vehicle traveling
down the freeway at 80 miles an
hour.
Right it's 75 miles an hour,
which is.
Uh
You want instant access to
information so that, that those
calculations can be done any.
Computer brain, right? That's
not necessarily on the car. So
we met with the Secretary of
Transportation on Monday kind of
talking what we're building in
playus about
How could this be a test bed for
the New Mexico Department of
Transportation as their fielding
technologies, but it's really
that expeditionary and tactical
use for military, but it's that
massive connection in all domain
coverage. That's the promise of
6G and as Nick said, setting
those standards right now, the
only way we're going to compete
with Huawei is by having open
standards, uh, and so, Huawei is
getting involved in almost every
country except the five eyes
that aren't allowing them into
their country.
Um, but, you know, so we, as you
travel throughout the world and
you have connected devices
throughout the world. You should
care about what is the backbone
to those devices.
So, Madam Chair and gentlemen,
thank you. I mean, just, wow.
This is exciting, um.
It's a cutting edge, and I'm
just so grateful for.
Our wonderful research
institutions here uh in in New
Mexico and especially New Mexico
Tech has a, you know, soft place
in my heart, but I just want to
say thank you for the great work
that you do and I'm so glad,
Madam Chair, that we got to hear
these presentations today. Thank
you.
I think Mark, he, he got them.
Thank you guys. Um thank you for
your wonderful presentation. Um,
it's always great coming here
and learning about what you're
doing. Um, the military has
asked me to carry a bill on a
funding bill also. It's so what
military I saw Air Force
research lab, the Army Research
Lab, White Sands, what other
military bases are you using or
working with on this?
So currently we're also working
with 29 Palms Marine, um, out
in, in California, so we have
two of our systems deployed
right now at 29 Palms on an
expeditionary and tactical use
case.
We're probably never going to
get those back because they
really like them, but as Nick
Nick didn't tell you he was in
Las Vegas at Ellis Air Force
Base last week, going on a
shopping mission, um, there's a
ton of equipment that was
deployed at Nellis and, you
know, hundreds of millions of
dollars worth of equipment, so
he went up there with one of our
engineers and they spent giving
their wish list to the
government, so getting two new
trucks back that can be deployed
to us. They are new.
And you think about these, like,
not just the use cases of
research, but having these
systems like the, the cellular
light truck that
When telecommunications go down
in one of our communities and
you have to connect hospitals
and first responders. New Mexico
Tech could deploy.
Those through these systems with
agreements from the government
we've already asked for them if
we could do this stuff and Nick
was prepared to go respond to
some of these things. We could
go set up a cell tower and
reestablish communications via
satellite for a community.
Um, and do that for a
significant period of time. And
so,
Those are some of the really
important things. So if you
think about all the military,
so.
When we're working with OUSD
we're working with all, all
services.
We're wanting to make sure that
we can service all services so
this connection we're involved
in.
The Army Intel Center of
Excellence, big exercise called
Vanguard will be involved with
that in a few weeks here. So
that is from Fort Wachuca to the
Center of Excellence for the
Army Special Operations Command
that's at White Sands Missile
Range.
But they look at players right
between. So they look at those
problem sets that we can have
the Marines, we've been looking,
working with the Navy on Indo
Paycom. So I spend time in
Hawaii at uh at uh Markham, at,
at Marine, um, and, and at the
Indo-Pacific problem sets that
we're looking at and if you look
at Plius and you draw some
circles around it, we could
become an island nation and do
some of our training missions
with our partners from Luke Air
Force Base, Nellis, uh
Uh
With Davis Montham Air Force
Base, we work with the folks in
Oklahoma. We work with the 55th
wing out of Nebraska. So
everywhere you can think of.
Do we have any other military
bases here in the state? Are you
working with any of our other
ones, Air Force base. So
currently there's a, there's a
test group out of Holloman that
we are working with that is
looking to field technology they
use white sands missile range as
their primary place. We would
like for them to use PLA because
when you do electromagnetic
stuff, you're not always the
high priority on an army
installation that does kinetic,
uh, so Plius could be that place
they could come. We're also
talking to the folks within the
special operations group out of
Canada Air Force Base about how
they can utilize
players. So we've been a partner
for them on exercises, but we
want to be exercises in all
domains, not just in the kinetic
effects.
Um, thank you, thanks so much.
I, I forgot about Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
my question can wait for the
next presenter. uh, if you'll
still be around, that would be
good. Thank you. OK.
Thank you, Ma. So I had just one
other question. A couple of
years ago in um.
Energy Committee, we had a 5G
bill and we had about 50 people
come and say it was dangerous.
Where do we stand on that as far
as as we move higher in these G
levels.
So I would say that there's a
lot of research that still needs
to be done, so the difference
between as you move from Gs is
wavelengths, right? And as they
get, as those wavelengths get uh
shorter.
And they can travel as far. So
as you, as you go into
technology, you're gonna have to
embed them in buildings, and I
think.
Some of the research I've read
is looking at the, the blood
brain barrier related to
electromagnetics, right? And so.
I think those are some of the
European nations are really
cutting edge in the research
related to some of the potential
health effects related to
electromagnetics and really
it's, it's the energy levels
that you're subjected to in the
human body, so we're not
involved in those places because
we're not that dense, right? So
we have, we don't have
population center, but I think.
It would be in the best interest
of our government to fund that
level of research and so I think
the
The answers aren't clear. I
don't think we do enough
research on the effects on not
just the human body but all
animals, uh, and what those
effects are on the brain and
other systems, so. Thank you.
And um I'd like to work with
Senator Padilla on this helping
you to get your funding also
seems to be a great topic is
funding for all these things,
but um you could even work with
the military and getting funding
through if we can get theirs to
work with them, I mean.
Both of you. All right, thank
you for your presentation and um
we appreciate all your do and
maybe we can get another tour
for as we get new people on the
committee. Thank you, Madam
Chair. We're always available to
the committee. Appreciate your
time today. Thank you.
You want to introduce yourself
real quick?
Sure, Senator Pope's Senate
District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque, Berna Leo County.
Happy to be here, jumping back
and forth to committees.
Right.
All right. Our next presenter is
Doctor Boyle.
Overview of the new research at
New Mexico Tech.
Whenever you're ready, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
So I don't think I, I have to do
much convincing to communicate
that New Mexico Tech is a unique
research.
Uh, university within the state.
Our priorities include applied
research to address societal
challenges.
Um, education enrichment,
workforce development, and, and
looking to catalyze the local
and state economy.
Some key focus areas and really
this is just a small sampling of
uh what's going on at NMT, but
You know, looking at areas like
water resources, data
management, and education,
energy technologies, and carbon
capture.
As you just heard, 5G and Future
G Spectrum Science, um, as well
as new advances in biotechnology
and next generation technologies
for AI and uh AI security.
Um, some highlights, uh,
include, uh,
Uh, game changing technologies
that we've created across
multiple fields.
Um, even though we're a, a very
small school, uh, compared to
the other institutions in the
state are, are, uh, FY 24
research expenditures reported
to the National Science
Foundation where approximately
132 million. Um, with 120
million of that coming from
non-state sources, which is uh
uh something I'll come back to
uh at the end.
We are very involved in
statewide collaborations, uh,
uh, on various projects that
really put us in the position to
take positions of national
leadership in in uh a variety of
areas.
So
Next slide
Oh, thanks, you've already got
it. Uh, so how's all that
possible? Well, one reason is uh
our centers and institutes.
We have a number of centers and
institutes covering a wide range
of fields such as energetic
materials research.
Hydrologic innovation.
Geophysics, complex editive
systems, atmospheric research,
astrophysics.
Volcanology, uh, geology and
mineral resources,
cybersecurity, uh, petroleum
recovery and research as well as
things like spectrum science.
Next slide.
So I'm gonna hand uh
The the mic off now to, uh, uh,
Doctor Michael Timmons, who's
director of the, uh,
Uh, the New Mexico Bureau of
Geology as well as uh the state
geologist.
Thank you, Mike. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thanks for this opportunity to
highlight some other research
programs within New Mexico Tech
and I think what you'll get from
the presentations you're seeing
today, and there's a lot of New
Mexico tech presence here is
this kind of, um, you know,
unique environment of applied
and academic research and as
Mike said, uh, the research
divisions kind of uh really
enhance the
Uh, educational opportunities of
students here, but also address
really critical societal needs,
uh, both at the national and
state level.
So, uh,
For us at the New Mexico Bureau
Bureau of Geology. Uh, some of
you may be aware of us, uh, so
we are a researcher and service
division of New Mexico Tech. We
are one of these things, the
so-called research and service
projects here in the university
environment. Uh, but we're also
one of these quasi-governmental
state agencies, that is, uh,
attached to a university. Uh, so
we serve as your state
geological survey, uh, much
like, uh, the State Department
of Ag serves at New Mexico.
State as our as our state ag
department. Uh, and there are
other entities, the state mine
inspectors here at New Mexico
Tech, the Hutton Center at UNM.
So there are these really
important state functions
residing in university
environments. And they're
important because they are a
serving a, a unique societal
need for the state, but also the
integration of student uh
workforce and student training
into those research activities,
uh, kind of create a.
A unique opportunity for
building that workforce for the
future. So we are one of the
oldest of the RPSPs, if you
will, uh, think of us that way
or our research division. We
were established in 1927, so we
are coming up on a 100 years of
service to the State. We are
non-regulatory, so we are here
as a research, research and
service, uh, uh, science agency
to the state and we work in the
natural resources arena.
Pretty broadly as as I'll
describe here uh shortly. We
have approximately 70 staff
members, uh, in our agency, uh,
but as I mentioned, you know,
we're.
Intimately connected to New
Mexico Tech, the environment
here. So we employ a lot of
students in the last fiscal
year, we had 69 different
students in employment at
various levels of our agencies,
so they might be working uh in
our bookstore, uh, as maybe a
sales associate, but they are
also working in our laboratories
and working on graduate degrees.
We are located right here at New
Mexico Tech, uh, our building is
on the corner, the northeast
corner of the
Campus, a really attractive
building there, and we've been
in that building since 2015.
Um, and our funding, uh, is made
up of a mixture of both state
appropriation that comes to the
university and uh a healthy mix
of external grants and contracts
that help support our overall
research mission. Uh, and again,
we try and align that to what
are the state needs in, in, uh,
uh, for our agency. So I'm just
gonna give some highlights from
some of the programs on slide 5
here, uh, uh,
In the in the Bureau of Geology.
So geological surveys at the
state level and at the national
level, if you think of the USGS
at the national level. Surveys
are about generating maps,
making maps of all sorts of
natural resources, so it could
be just understanding the
distribution of different rock
materials that may uh tell you
something about how water moves
through the ground or how it
moves out of a watershed. A lot
of those things are impacted by
the local geology. Where are
you?
Your minerals located, where are
your oil and gas and energy
resources located. A lot of that
are subsurface resources
directly connected to our
geology. So a deep understanding
of our, our local geology in the
state and, uh, and the resources
within it, uh, hopefully, uh,
helps both industry and the
public best utilize those
resources for the benefit of all
New Mexicans.
Uh, so our geologic mapping
program looks at both uh those
resources, but also looks at
hazards. So we think of a lot of
natural hazards within our
state, some of which
Uh, might be very conscious to
us, uh, collapsible soils and
things around new developments
in our community, but there's
also seismicity, volcanology
here, uh, that in the state that
we are, are monitoring and, and,
and doing research on.
Our hydrology programs may be
our most visible program here,
especially for, uh, this
committee and others, the
frequently, uh, present before
you guys and you will get a
presentation from our, uh, uh,
our hydrologist, uh, uh, uh
tomorrow for the Water Data Act
presentation, but basically that
program is, uh, you know,
leading the state and helping us
better understand our water
resources, subsurface water
resources, both brackish and uh
freshwater resources.
As part of our O for mapping and
monitoring program. We also
participate in the Water Data
Act. You'll hear a lot more
about tomorrow and then our
newest program is our water
leaders workshop. I know a
number of you have attended one
of these. These are our efforts
to bring water science to the
decision making, decision makers
bringing experts in the field,
uh, right to your doorstep in
not necessarily an office or a
convention style. Let's get you
out in the field. Let's look at
real world scenarios, and I
think
They've been very popular among
our uh decision makers to uh to
look at these issues more
closely.
We host a suite of analytical
laboratories that help us do
really cutting edge res uh uh
research here in the state, our
water chemistry, electron
microprobes, a lot of things
that you might see on a
university. We actually have in
our building and it helps
enhance the research that we're
doing on behalf of the state.
On the next slide, just
continuing through our programs,
you know, each of our programs,
um, you know, we may be a 100
year organization, but we aren't
doing the work we were doing 100
years ago. So when we look at
our energy resources or think
about our mineral resources in
the state, we have to look at
the, the emerging trends in
those worlds in those
environments. So right now, a
lot of our energy focus is in
geothermal. You guys funded a
program at New Mexico Tech, uh,
within the Bureau of Geology to.
Enhance our geothermal uh
research and kind of breaking
down barriers of communication
between industry, uh,
universities, and, uh, our
national labs, uh, and so that
work is, is right off out of the
gates already this year and we
are filling positions uh to kind
of enhance that program right
now.
In our mineral resources space,
uh, you know, really the, the
modern technologies that we rely
on every day, rely on minerals
and uh we're talking about
critical and strategic minerals
for the nation, uh, New Mexico
does have critical strategic
minerals, so we are updating all
of our state inventories on
critical and rare earth
minerals, so industry or some
future industry can uh uh make
use of those in, uh, in New
Mexico and uh I see this as
You're not familiar with
critical minerals and national
landscape. These are minerals
identified that largely come
from foreign sources, maybe
sometimes hostile foreign
countries, so understanding our
own resources nationally is a
high priority of uh the USGS and
the Department of Energy. And so
we're working with them, uh, to
update our, our inventories here
in state.
And then finally, uh, our
efforts to bring our science to
the public is a really essential
part of our mission area. Uh, so
we have a number of outreach
programs that includes our
mineral museum in our building
here in Socorro. If you get a
chance to pay a visit to that uh
museum. It is world class.
There's about 4000 mineral
specimens there with a real
distinct, uh, kind of, uh,
showcase of both New Mexican,
uh and international samples
there that are really
remarkable.
Uh, and then, uh, speaking to
the, uh, student and teacher
programs that we have, uh, we do
participate in the masters of
Science teaching programs, uh,
with a program called Rockin. So
this is bringing science
teachers, uh, both to Secoro and
places around the state to talk
about earth science and actually
provide exercises to them that
they can take back to the
classroom. So really from K to
uh senior legislator, our entire
audience uh is.
The state of New Mexico and a
very invested in and sharing our
science with you. And I'll just
kind of wrap up to highlight the
program that we are really
focusing on right now and is of
a critical importance to this
day is in our water resources.
So our up for mapping program, I
kind of gave just the lightest
of overviews, but basically
through the uh governor's water
and infrastructure task force
recommendation and the uh uh the
50-year water
plan, the New Mexico Bureau of
Geology has identified as a
critical player in addressing
the uh characterization of the
state's aquifers and trying to
uh establish a more robust
monitoring program for our
aquifers. uh, so we can better
manage that resource into the
future. And that's both looking
at existing resources but also
thinking about a potential
alternative resources in
brackish waters or uh.
Thinking about active uh er uh
recharge projects in the state.
Um,
So, uh, the water data
initiative, uh, you guys will
get a deeper dive on that
tomorrow, so I'll leave that,
and then the water education
program, uh, she will also have
a, uh, save the date flyer for
next year's, uh, workshop in
April of 2025, and that'll be in
Silver City. Uh, so we really
look forward to continuing our
dialogue with you and the
research we're doing on behalf
of the state and you know, when
we think about how our work
impacts communities of all, all
across the.
State, just a general list of,
of groups we interface with on
an
on a very regular basis from,
uh, soil and water conservation
district level all the way up
to, uh, state agency
partnerships, the state
engineer, interstate stream
Commission and our water
program. So, uh, we, we very
much value those partnerships. I
want to continue that into the
future.
With that, I'll pass it to our
next presenter.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for
Receiving us today, um, I'm
Robert Balch. I'm the director
of the Petroleum recovery
Research Center.
We're also a state designated.
Quasi agency, if you will, we
were created in 1978 by the
legislature.
For a particular reason.
Uh, and since the 1930s, oil and
gas has been an important part
of the.
The revenue stream for the State
of New Mexico and that continues
today.
But in the 1970s, middle, uh, we
were running out of the easy to
produce oil and gas. So they,
they created us to.
Uh, help sustain and, and
continue developing those
resources, and they also, uh,
added in other energy resources.
So why is this important in the,
in the context of energy
transition.
Uh, it's still a very large part
of New Mexico's budget, um.
This year in 2024, half of the
general fund is projected to
come from oil and gas revenues.
So, much like the, the bureau,
we're half their age, around 50
years, just under 50 years.
Uh,
We've shifted our focus over
time.
So in, in the, in the 1970s, we
came online, we're looking at
improved and enhanced our
recovery, trying to make the
most out of what people thought
were diminishing resources.
Since then, new technologies
have come along, shale plays,
things like that. But more
importantly,
There's been a shift in, in the
perception of these industries
and how they need to operate.
So the way that we can best help
companies in New Mexico right
now is through making their
operations more sustainable and
cleaner.
So, uh, I'd say about half of
our effort at the moment is
involved in carbon management
and hydrogen.
These are kind of
A present energy that you need
to clean up because it's not
going away as fast as people
would like it to.
And then future uh ways to make
clean energy like hydrogen, uh,
to make, uh, distributed energy
sources like natural gas easier
to, to decarbonize.
Water in New Mexico. We're an
arid state, of course, is very,
very important. We've got a, a
more than 25 year program and uh
water purification technology on
the number of patents over the
years, including some that are
currently going commercial.
So about 20% of our work is, is,
uh, in that area, primarily to
clean up very dirty water.
Like you find in oil and gas
development.
And then we still do maintain
traditional hydrocarbon research
in a number of different
categories.
So we like to think that we have
a pretty big impact in the state
where the investment that's,
that's given to us.
Uh, we, we do have jobs that are
directly created by our
research. Uh, I'll talk about
that on the next slide, but we
also.
collaborate with other
universities.
Our national labs in the state.
Uh, companies.
When we do a project and drill a
$1000 carbon storage well, we're
employing people in those
communities where that well is
being drilled.
So, uh, our carbon storage
research portfolio right now
stands at about $130 million.
We'll be spending down over the
next, uh, 4 to 5 years.
Uh, those projects impact both
San Juan and Permian Basin
communities.
And our researchers have a very
high profile in this field, not
just in
In the US but also worldwide.
We're also very proud of our
relationship with New Mexico
Tech, uh, in particular.
Uh,
we
Contribute in a in a really good
year and I pulled up FYA 23, we
drill a well up in Farmington.
About $500 back to the
university from our activities.
And I'll, I'll break that down
on a, on a future slide as well.
But other key things that we do
pretty consistently, about
$700,000 a year for student
scholarships and work.
And then, uh, faculty support
and we've been engaged with,
with most of the university at
one time or another.
It's like
OK, yeah.
So we stand at about 65 total
staff. That's 27 regular
employees. Uh, 7 of those are in
support and 20 are in research.
So we keep ourselves fairly
lean. Uh, we're a little
different than the Bureau of
Geology and that the, the, the
bulk of our budget comes from
outside sources, uh, typically
our budget is around $2 million
a year from the state of New
Mexico in 2023, for example, we
spent $200 million.
Those came from federal
projects. They came from state
projects and they came from
companies.
So we're very well leveraged.
Um, but to do that, we, we have
to be careful.
So we keep our, our main staff
lean. We rely on postdoctoral
researchers.
Faculty and New Mexico Tech in
different departments. We work a
lot with the Bureau of Geology,
and then, uh, students are a
very critical asset to
everything that we do.
So we have 32 students
supported, uh, roughly 18
graduate students, 14
undergraduate students. These
are people working in labs,
working in the field.
Getting their hands, uh.
Clean
In energy
If you will.
So this is our support to New
Mexico Tech, uh, in 2023 we
generated $4 million in
overhead. So when we, we do work
here, uh, bring in research from
outside, uh, a portion of that
goes to the university to cover
facilities and other things like
that.
Uh, $500,000 for student
support, $150,000 for faculty
support.
And then we have some other
institutional support that we
do.
So for our state budget of $2
million we gave back $5 million
to New Mexico Tech.
I think that's a great, great
leverage.
slide please.
So we have a pretty big active
portfolio of research.
Um,
About $226 million in total this
year, we were awarded a $54
million regional carbon storage
hub project.
And $10 million as part of a
carbon safe in, uh, the Permian
Basin as well.
We have 31 active projects right
now.
Uh, 12 of those are in energy
transition topics, another 8 in
produced water technologies, and
11 that are funded directly by
industry.
So this is us being able to help
them with problems that they
have.
An example of a federal project
that we, we, uh, have been
involved in for a couple of
decades is regional carbon
storage partnerships. These were
set up by the Department of
Energy in 2023, renewed in 2019.
And these are to understand in a
regional way how you can manage
carbon dioxide.
Uh, currently we are the lead
organization for 14-state
coalition.
In the western and southwestern
United States called the carbon
utilization and Storage
Partnership. We have 44 active
storage projects under
development as part of that,
that consortia and that comes
out of New Mexico includes 55.
5.5, 6 wells.
That are being developed right
here in the state for carbon
storage as we speak, one of
which has already been dropped.
And produced water. Most of our
work comes through the Bureau of
Reclamation.
But we also get funds from the
Department of Energy.
And uh other places.
The state of New Mexico in
particular.
Because we are an Arab state and
it is important. So we, we have
a focus on nanofiltration.
Using all the fiber membranes,
uh, this, this is in the process
of going commercial right now. A
number of those projects are
related to that.
And then we do projects with
industry. So test, uh, test bed
project in San Juan Basin for
cleaning up produced water, um,
helping our midstream companies
in the Southeast.
Clean up their CO2 emissions by
By enhancing their ability to
store CO2 underground as part of
their operations.
So we spent all research areas,
uh,
At the PWC with our, our
research portfolio.
Like I said, projects for the US
federal government, state of New
Mexico, and many private
companies.
And I do want to share just a
little picture here. This is a
water purification unit. It's,
uh, that is a commercial
prototype. It's sitting at
Pesco.
Uh, in Farmington, New Mexico,
Bloomfield actually.
That unit can process 5000
gallons a day and we're in the
process of permitting that with
the state for a field test.
Uh, of the technology. We also
have smaller versions of this
that do 500 gallons a day that
we are working on with Navajo
Technical University.
Uh, for cleaning up bad well
water on the Navajo Nation.
And threatened throughout our
work much like uh like Timmons
stated, we
Uh
Recognize that we need a mandate
from the public for the work
that we do. So we spend a lot of
energy on outreach,
communication, tribal engagement
in particular in the state
trying to make sure people
understand what we're doing, why
it's relevant, and why it's
important. Thank you.
Oh, I'm sorry.
Sorry. So many of the projects
of the Bureau and PWRC are
highly collaborative and
collaboration is, is a theme
across the university and, and
our centers and initiative
that's in development or is in
development to expand these
kinds of collaborations even
further across disciplines, and
this is another initiative
that's coming out of PWRC. Uh,
what you see on the screen is a
screenshot of a website that,
uh, in very small type at the
top.
You can see the URL if you would
like to visit it yourself, but,
uh, this is a new website for
the consortium for Energy
Sustainability, and advanced
management, and this, this
effort is looking to connect
people to foster community
engagement, education, and
collaborative research.
Um, and with this particular
focus in crucial areas including
oil, gas, geothermal energy,
renewables, hydrogen, carbon,
carbon capture, uh, and storage
batteries, critical minerals,
and, and in the essential role
of water in, uh, energy systems.
The idea is to create a
transformative uh level of
community engagement. Um,
And education initiatives
focused on energy across the
state.
Next slide.
Um, you've already heard a lot
about the, uh, 5G and FutureG uh
spectrum science work going on
at Plius, uh, at the Plias
Research and Training Center.
Um,
I just want to emphasize this
center is becoming a national
resource for uh research in the
area of spectrum science and as
and in wireless national
security technologies, and it's
an important collaboration space
for the DOD, NASA, NSF, um, as
well as academia.
Next slide.
So expanding on the subject of
collaboration.
Uh, while there are too many
collaborations at NMT to list
them all, some highly some
highlighted programs have been
specifically designed to expand
partnerships and collaborations
across the state.
Most of these efforts
which is focused on biomedical
research excellence. New Mexico
Escore, which is focused on
stimulating competitive research
and the ability for New Mexico
Research Institutes institutions
to be able to compete with other
institutions across the country,
uh, for large projects. The New
Mexico consortium is a uh uh an
entity that was created to
facilitate collaboration between
Los Alamos National Lab and the
three
Um, uh, research institutions in
the state and and it's having a,
uh, just over the last year,
it's had a tremendous impact on
various departments within New
Mexico Tech in terms of helping
to uh expand our research
capacity.
In addition, there's uh uh out
of uh the National Science
Foundation, there's a new
program called the MSF Engines
Program, uh, it's the largest
But, uh, grant program to ever
come from the National Science
Foundation and the focus is on
creating uh
Uh, regional innovation.
Hubs across the country and
blanketing uh the nation uh with
these, and, and
In, in the first year, uh, which
was of this program and which
was last year, there were
several what are called type one
or planning grants that were
awarded in the area of water
resources.
Space technologies and uh uh as
well as, uh,
Particular water resource
activities in the Permian Basin,
but they're.
New proposals under development,
um, in areas.
For example, uh, focusing on
artificial intelligence
technologies and next generation
biotechnologies.
Next slide.
So we're even doing research to
advance the science of
collaborative activity itself.
Uh, as part of a recently funded
MSF, uh, uh, grant called ECO,
uh, NMT is enhancing the
research capacity of the state.
We're creating a custom
artificial intelligence tool to
support research within New
Mexico. I'm, I'm sure you're all
familiar with things like uh
chat, GPT that have sort of
taken uh uh the
Uh
The pressed by storm and and uh
the the captured a lot of
attention across the country.
We're in the process of
developing a
Secure private version of that
kind of technology where we
train an in-house, what's called
a large language model with
things like research proposals,
patents, contracts, technical
papers, and
That then allows us to make uh
this, this.
Very uh engaging and interactive
kind of tool accessible to New
Mexico Tech faculty and research
staff.
Uh, we can train, we can
generate data for training uh
than an external large language
model that can be used uh to
provide a secure way to enable.
Uh, external entities to access
this knowledge base and, and
what this can allow us to do is,
uh, uh, create a, a system to
assist in finding collaborators
across the state. Um, if
somebody wants to know what's
going on at the institution,
they can simply ask a question,
um, you know, who, who at New
Mexico Tech is working in a
particular research area and it
will generate uh detailed
information on the.
And and uh you can even uh query
about uh potential areas, areas
of interest that maybe are just
starting to emerge, uh, that
could open the doors to entirely
new projects and new
collaborations and, and put us
in place to prepare for.
New opportunities that come for,
for uh proposals. This pilot
project that we're running at
New Mexico Tech is is then gonna
be uh rolled out statewide. Um,
And it'll create a statewide
resource uh for, for finding
research collaborations across
the state.
Next slide.
You know, I mentioned the NSF
engines program, there are
actually 6 efforts underway
across the state and New Mexico
Tech's involved in in all six of
these, um, the engines program,
if funded, each project would
receive $1600 million over 10
years to create these uh these
regional hubs, and they provide
opportunities to make New Mexico
a national leader in areas such
as spatial biology, which is uh
Includes cutting edge bioimaging
technologies, quantum
technologies, uh, where we're
creating game changing quantum
materials technologies, for
example.
Um, new technologies for water
resources, uh, new technologies
to secure space-based systems.
Um, as well as, uh, creating the
next.
Uh, uh, level or the next wave
of uh technologychnologies to to
uh
Support
Uh, artificial intelligence
moving forward.
So there are two specific engine
projects that I'd like to
specifically highlight, um, one
is led by New Mexico Tech and
the other is led by the New
Mexico Tech Research Park
Corporation.
The first uh I referred to
before was the New Mexico engine
for spatial biology.
And this will allow uh uh New
Mexico Tech and, and uh a
network of collaborators across
the state to create cutting edge
imaging technologies to capture
intricate biological data.
Spatial biology is, is a, a new
area. It's the hottest thing in
the biotechnology area right
now. It was named Method of the
Year by nature, uh magazine in,
in, uh,
In January of 2021.
Um, and it's, it's a technology
that allows the imaging of and
mapping of biological activity
uh at a, at a cellular level in
cells and tissues and uh Mike
Timmons mentioned uh the value
of things like uh the geologic
mapping.
Take that down to a microscopic
level and these technologies
will allow us a new way to
understand what's going on. It's
almost like a Google Maps for
cells and tissues where we can
not only see what the structure
is, but we can see what's
happening in, in at a very
detailed level, uh, in, in these
areas and, and
This particular engine project
is going to allow us to apply
these technologies that have
currently been focused more in
the area of, of, uh, animal
biology, but we're gonna be
looking at focusing them in
plant biology and looking to see
how that can help stimulate
agricultural productivity, uh,
which is an entirely new area
for, for, uh,
Uh, this area of science.
In addition, this engine is
going to create workforce
development programs to train
researchers and technicians in
this new uh important area, as
well as create an economic
ecosystem for technology
translation to foster a
continuing stream of new
startups in the field. This will
allow us to bridge the gap
between advanced spatial imaging
and practical agricultural
applications. Um,
As well as addressing,
addressing the shortage of spill
of of skilled spatial uh biology
technicians, um, enhancing the
computational capacity to manage
and analyze these kinds of data.
A single experiment in spatial
biology can create volumes of
data that that many people
haven't seen before, uh, if you
think about the amount of data
that uh the entire entire Google
Earth system. It's it's in the
area of petabytes, um.
Which, uh,
Um, is 1000 terabytes is a
petabyte and, and, and spatial
biology experiments can generate
hundreds of petabytes of
information in a single
experiment, so.
We need new kinds of systems,
new approaches to be able to
analyze and, and understand the
the this massive flood of uh of
data that comes from these new
technologies.
But this also will create
workforce pathways for students
from underrepresented and
indigenous communities to enter
these high paying uh uh new
fields. There's, this is a
rapidly expanding industry that
has a, a huge vacuum in terms of
uh where they can go to find
people to staff these new
projects and we will be creating
those pipelines to generate
an entire
New skilled workforce in this
area.
Next slide.
The second project
Which is led by the New Mexico
Tech Research Park Corporation
is the New Mexico engine for
decentralized AI.
And this is gonna leverage new
uh AI platform technologies and
AI security technologies, again,
to create a vibrant
technological ecosystem focused
on the development, deployment,
and commercial commercialization
of the next generation of AI if
you're all familiar with things
I mentioned like chat, GPT.
These kinds of systems that are,
you hear about today, they're
very centralized.
And, and you, if you ask
questions of these systems, for
example, everything you provide
gets absorbed into these
systems. Well, because of that,
they're very serious concerns
about security and, and so there
are entire sectors of business
that won't go near these with a
10 ft pole, areas like
healthcare and banking and
finance. And so,
The next natural evolution of
this will be a decentralization
of these systems where you can
have uh,
Uh
What what's called sandboxed
areas where, where AI tools can
be used with the privacy of the
information, the security of the
data is protected while still
being able to leverage these
incredibly powerful new
technologies. Well, we're gonna
be creating the platform for
that next wave. And so when it
comes,
We have created the environment
for this all to happen and
that's what this engine is
focused on, and that's going to
catalyze the formation of
startups, uh, as well as promote
things like AI security
innovation and, and, and spur
workforce development within the
state. Another issue relating to
things like AI is the amount of
power required to, to, uh,
Enable these technologies is
massive and, and they're big,
their major concerns about the
environmental impact of things
like artificial intelligence and
and.
A major component of our project
is looking at the use of
alternative technologies for
sustainable AI computation and
And uh part of that project is.
A
Related but separate project
going on at New Mexico Tech
where we're working with a, a,
uh a company called uh Green
Data Centers, uh, looking at the
feasibility of creating a large
solar farm to be.
Located on NMT's campus. Of the
research uh camp uh campus area
that will.
Uh, power a extremely large data
center that will essentially
house an AI supercomputer with
over 10,000 what are called
GPUs, which are, which are the
units that drive these AI
systems, um,
And that will help.
In a, in a number of ways we can
start exploring ways to advance
the science and still uh uh uh
minimize the environmental
impact of these systems going
forward, but it's also going to
create an entirely new
generation of jobs, uh, for, uh,
the area for the state and even,
even for the nation. Um, and
it's gonna transform New Mexico
into a hub for these, these
technologies that will.
Position New Mexico as a leader
in AI driven solutions and
attract further investment and
partnership opportunities into
the state.
Major focus is to leverage New
Mexico's growing capacities or
capabilities and technology and
innovation while significantly
advancing the state and the
nation's technological and
economic landscape. So this is
an extremely exciting project
that, uh, uh, we're, we're
looking forward and hoping that
we get funded.
Now what I've presented just
begins to provide a glimpse of
how New Mexico Tech is really a
unique research university,
unlike any other in the state.
And I've shown how we're doing
applied research addressing
societal challenges.
Collaborating with state and
national partners, enhancing the
research capacity of the state
and creating engines of
innovation for both the state as
well as the nation.
So how we, how have we been able
to accomplish all this in a, in
a university that
You know, has less than 2000
students and 135 faculty. Well,
you know, as I mentioned, uh,
we, we're, we're leveraging
state investment to yield over a
10 to 1 return on investment
and, and so as I mentioned, you
know, NMT is in 2024 produced
over $132 million in research
expenditures, 120 million of
that is from outside the state.
And, and
We've been able to do that
through mechanisms such as the
RPSP mechanisms and, and, and
the TEF, uh, but.
Things like these new
opportunities like these engines
projects as well as TechHub, uh,
projects from the federal
government are really opening
the doors to an entirely new
ways to leverage uh these with
programs like the technology
enhancement Fund have been
invaluable in enabling us to get
to this point.
Uh, but we can do so much more,
uh, and we'll be able to do that
with your support.
Thank you.
All right. Thank you for your
presentation. Our first question
will come from Senator Souls.
our state in that I recently
heard the director of the
finance committee indicate, oh,
we shouldn't be going into these
new areas. We ought to put our
money in the things that New
Mexico's already good at.
And I find that frustrating
because we do New Mexico Tech or
other research institutions are
two national labs.
We have the brain power and the
ability to be leaders in these
other areas and to move into
these when they're new and ripe
for investments and, and growth
within the state and so, you
know, I, I guess I'm frustrated
and I would challenge uh our
members who sit on the finance
committee to make sure that
we're looking up and out to
these new areas where we've got
some expertise, we've got
abilities to do.
And not just look at, you know,
doubling down on what we've
already had, which you know has
right now we're on a boom with
the oil and gas, but typically
is not led to lots of prosperity
in the state of New Mexico. So,
you know, I find it very
exciting, but I hope that as a
state and as legislators, we
really are looking at making
those investments.
You mentioned the technology
enhancement fund and we can do
so much more.
How much, what do you need? I
mean, do we need to put more in
that? Are there other areas of
that sort, um, I know there are
some tweaks we need to make to
the technology enhancement funds
so that it expands where we can
use monies. Give me a number and
how do we expand it?
Well, thank you, uh, uh, Madam
Chair, Mr. Senator, um, great
comment and it, it, it hits the
nail right on the head that
that.
There are particular areas where
we can take leadership position
and, and I, and we have an
opportunity to do that, and I, I
called up specifically spatial
biology, uh, for example, well,
the leaders.
In that field are in New Mexico.
Um,
And this is a
You know, it is the latest.
greatest, you know, movement in
biotechnology today and and
major discoveries are going to
come as a result of this new
field. Um,
No other state is, is, is
looking to take this kind of
leadership position. We have an
opportunity to do that now and
if we do that now, we'll be able
to build something that, that
will establish us uh for decades
to come, uh, the same applies
to, to the area of uh artificial
intelligence, you know,
everybody's talking about the,
the problems relating to how do
you secure uh uh
Information in this environment
and, and they're talking about
the problems. Well, if we get
out ahead of the curve, we can
create the environment that will
enable the next generation, the
next wave, uh, of, of AI and
this is an area that really
leverages the strengths that we
have across the state.
The this that particular
collaboration includes Los
Alamos, Sandia, University of
New Mexico.
Uh, New Mexico State and it's,
and it's led by uh uh New Mexico
Tech, uh, uh, RPC and, and
If we look at these, these
engines projects. So this is the
2nd year of the engines, uh,
program from NSF and you can go
online and see a map of the
regions and their, their
objective was to blanket the
entire continental US. Well, you
look at.
What the first year's round, you
know, funded, and there are some
very big holes and one of the
big holes is New Mexico. It's
one of the areas that currently
doesn't have a funded engine.
Um, these are incredible
opportunities. Each engine
project is $160 million of
funding over 10 years and
The odds are very high that one
engine at least will be funded
in New Mexico. I think the odds
are pretty high that 2 will be
funded as long as they, they
will fund engines that are
regionally overlapping as long
as they're not topically
overlapping and they, they, in
the first year they did that on
the east coast, for example. Um,
we have an opportunity, I think,
to get to funded engines in in
the state. We look at the, the,
the states that were successful
last year. They had
Tremendous state support.
Um, Illinois, Colorado,
Colorado, for example, put
together a a capture fund of
over $50 million that
contributed to their ability to
go after that money, so what,
what can we do? One thing we
could consider, for example, is
maybe creating a fund that, that
allows.
Where, where we say, whichever
engines get funded, the state
will provide.
Uh, you know, X number of
dollars. I to, you know, to be
competitive, I think the state
could put $500 million aside and
say, whichever engines get
funded.
Uh, they get 25 million.
There's 0 chance the 3 engines
would get funded. So, you know,
but I think if, if 2 got funded,
each one could, could, uh, then,
uh, uh, you know, the all of the
engine's proposals could tell
NSF, look, if we get funded,
we'll be able to count on $25
million in state support, and
that carries a lot of weight,
uh, with the, uh,
The
Program reviewers at NSF in this
particular program. So that kind
of fund would be tremendously
valuable. Another thing we could
look at is being proactive about
being able to go after these big
projects, things, you know,
there's this ongoing stream of
new big initiatives like the,
the EDA tech hubs.
These NSF engines.
If we could, you know,
and, you know, we've, we've
talked, for example, about the
possibility of, of the state
creating what's called a capture
fund, which is a uh uh a fund of
Uh, that's, that's set aside.
To help
Uh, uh, put together and support
these large statewide
collaborations across all the
institutions where there'd even
be a staff within the fund.
That that is prepared so that
we'd be able to respond quickly
to these opportunities. Last
year when the first NSF engines
announcement, you know, came
out, there was only 2 months to
be able to pull together the
teams and, and, and get the
proposals out. Um, so oftentimes
when these big opportunities
come along, there's very little
time to respond and the state
could really get ahead of that
and put us in a position to
compete with with.
Uh, you know, the other states
to go after these, these major
projects and
And
You know, a number of the
engines are leveraging the areas
that we're already strong in, so
I think we need to take a hybrid
approach. We need to, we need
to, you know, continue to be
strong in the areas that we've
historically been great in, but
there are new areas that we can,
we can plan our flag and we can,
we can, uh, really take a
position of national leadership.
Thank you and Madam Chair, I
appreciate and that was very
much what I was looking for is
some specific.
Things and in our current
budgets and we keep hearing, you
know, there's not a lot of
recurring money.
But $50 million when we're
talking about $3.1 billion last
year of new money is, you know,
some couple of quarters in the
couch, maybe that we could
easily put towards this to, to
make sure and as you put it,
make us competitive for these
funds that show that the state
is in support of it. And so, you
know, Madam Chair, I would hope
that, and maybe for our next
meeting that we actually work
with council service and start
putting words to paper about
estab
pushing some of these funds that
can then go to, to start looking
up and out to what a future for
New Mexico could be. We
certainly have the brain power
here to complete, compete with
the research triangle in North
Carolina and other places, but
as a state we've got to start
looking that we are a wealthy
state that has the funds to do
this and we've got the brain
power.
And we've got to show that we've
got the, the initiative and
desire to do so. And, and so I,
I, you gave us a couple specific
ones, the technology engine.
F at $50 million I think that
ought to be relatively easy to
put aside, and I didn't, you
didn't hear a number on the
capture fund, but you know, give
me a number that we can put onto
the paper. So the capture fund,
uh, uh, we had, I had had some
discussions with uh some, some
folks on the LFC a while back
about this idea and the thought
was looking at maybe 200 million
for something like that.
Thank you. And, and I'm also a
believer in, you know, but what
you really want there, not just
what you could get by with.
Sometimes the finance people,
you know, you, you put $75
million and they cut it back to
50 thinking they're saving the
state money but you still got
the 50 million that you needed,
so, but if we, you look at the
ROI that we tend to get on these
things, it's gonna pay for
itself in in a handful of years.
Uh, uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Sulz, can I talk a little bit
about the TEF? I know you had a
question there as well. Um,
We're highly dependent. We're
not like the Department of
Defense funded.
Agencies on campus. Department
of Energy requires 20% cost
share.
And our annual budget from the
state provides us the ability to
pay some of that, usually 300 or
$400,000 a year, but when we get
a, a $50 million project, and
we're looking at a $2 million
cost share bill, we're in
trouble.
And the, the TEF.
Well, we have two choices. We
cannot go after those
opportunities, which is
counterproductive or
Or you have to figure out a way
to get the money. So when the
TEF came out, I mean,
I applauded Carlos's efforts. He
was involved in in helping get
that going, but, uh, the vision
of the state to have a program
like that to me is something
that that could make New Mexico
a powerhouse and all these
different features. So,
The practice of the TEF uh has
not been very effective for us.
And I say that because we've
received $341,000 of cost share
through that program, but we've
requested about 40.
And there's just not enough
money in there, but there's also
some organizational issues are
still trying to get rolling.
They actually uh finalize a set
of policies immediately after we
had gotten some awards that then
became non-eligible to apply for
the fund even though they'd
applied for it before. So
getting that structurally set up
would be great, but there's no
limit to the money you could put
in there that would not be
coming back tenfold. So I would
strongly look at at uh.
and making the funding of that
program, something that's a
regular part of the budget that
you try and accelerate when we
have good times and maintain
what we have not as good times
because the return on
investment, the opportunity to
become.
Uh, much greater and to go into
new areas really depends on that
kind of support from the state.
Thank you. I appreciate that and
I know I hear from the, the
VPRs, the vice president of
research that it's been good,
but there are some glitches we
need to fix, um, and some
misunderstandings from some of
the leadership on the finance
committee that want to limit it.
Or seemed to want to limit it to
um spinoff entrepreneur monies
rather than the strength of
basic research that you're not
sure what's going to come out of
it. Um, and so I'm, I've already
got on my list of notes for this
next year's legislation is to
work on an already talking with
uh some of the people here in
New Mexico State and others
about what do we need to fix in
the language so that it does
what it needs to and get people
to understand.
How much that's bringing in
basic dollars basic economic
dollars into the state on a 10
to 1 ROI of all of the research
that these are major economic
drivers. These are not costs
that are that this fund uses.
Um, your story, I mean, I.
It, it first came about when I
was hearing stories from the
vice presidents of research that
they had to tell some of their
hotshot faculty, you can't go
for that grant because if you
win that, we cannot make the
match.
Well, that just seemed foolish
to me, you know, the, the state
ought to be helping make all of
those matches, so we're never
turning turning down a big
research grant for lack of funds
to make a match.
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Senator, 11
thing I would add is, is when
you're looking at the, whether
there's a requirement for a
match, oftentimes there are
programs where there isn't an
explicit requirement for a
match, but it's clearly
communicated the projects that
have a match are more
competitive and will be looked
upon more favorably. We ought,
we ought to be able to use these
resources to go after those
kinds of things and compete.
Yes, and, and Madam Chair, and
I'll say it again, we are a
wealthy state. We can absolutely
afford to do this, and it sets a
different trajectory into the
future for where our wealth will
be coming from and you know,
that, that to me, looking up and
out is much better than just
doubling down on what we've
always had. Um, I got a note
here.
And I'm not sure I fully
understand, so someone may need
to is, you know, how many FTEs
do we need?
Who is this from? or help me
explain.
Please, please, Mark, go ahead.
Uh, Madam Chair, my apologies,
staff is not supposed to ask
questions when we don't have to,
but I have such terrible
handwriting. I was asked, I
wanted you to follow up on the
question about staff cause uh uh
Vice President Doyle had
mentioned having an office or or
staffers that could do that. So
as a drafter, I was wondering,
OK, how many FTEs did Colorado,
uh, put towards this and is he
proposing
A staff at an MST or a new
bureau or office somewhere in
the state government. Madam
Chair, thank you, Mark, for
clarifying the question I was
hoping to ask.
OK
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Edwards,
uh, so what I would, uh,
Uh, say is if you, if you look
at various states, some have a
dozen or so people that that are
available to help put these
projects together. Some have,
you know, a few less, but uh,
you know, what we're talking
about is something that could be
a a an office, you know, that's
uh as, you know, a state office
that is a resource um for all
the in research institutions to
uh, uh, you know, come together
and, and
You know, build these
collaborations and, uh, and, and
go after the new opportunities
and, and that, that office could
In addition to, you know,
Uh, being prepared to go after
new opportunities, it could
also be proactive about going
out and creating new
opportunities because some, you
know, oftentimes a lot of these
opportunities, uh, emerge from,
you know, a few words mentioned
in in the air of, of, uh, you
know, uh, legislators, uh, at
the federal level.
Thank you. And you, you, you
stimulate even more ideas a few
years ago when we saw concern in
early childhood, we created a
new department and stood it up
and it's now well funded.
Currently, I think most of the
TEF and other things are housed
in higher education, which is
one of the smaller bureaucracies
within state government and
whether there's a different
place where this ought to be or
whether.
New Mexico research ought to be
almost a standalone cabinet
secretary level type of of
program. I don't know, but it,
it might be something
interesting to start looking at
and you know, and certainly
potentially for this committee
to, to look at as uh something
to endorse or start trying to
move forward. So I'm just kind
of throwing some ideas out
there. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's my questions, but if
you'd like to respond. So yes,
Madam Chair, Mr. Senator, uh,
I, I agree that that has
tremendous potential and if you
look at the ROIs we're talking
about, you're talking about a
return on investment of billions
within just a few years, that
that would be.
And inevitable result of really
taking this and moving it
forward.
Um, before we go on, um, we're
about 30 minutes behind. We have
a tour at 2:30, so we wanna kind
of move on with answers, um,
Representative Garrett.
Thank you. I'll be quick. Um,
Madam Chair, I want to ask David
Monzano to make a list of all
the ways we're hearing we're
number one, because I am sick
and tired of hearing we're
number 50, we're 49, education
alone, if you really do a deep
dive or not number 50 across the
board and even some of our state
executive officers repeat that
negative mantra. I'm sitting
here so excited I can hardly
stand it. So David, all those
things where we're number one.
And other exciting thing you
said is that the population of
Hidalgo County actually has
grown and so that's another way
where everything you've shared
this morning, uh, you know, the
governor is advertising in Texas
for doctors, but we should be
advertising across the state for
this technical stem, uh, you
know, people keep saying our
population is going down. I
believe we're making a
foundation that's been outlined
here to actually grow our state.
But we have, we're the best kept
secret practically in the whole
country. So just thank you for
the inspiration, um, as just
done here. I have one question
that actually came out of the
um.
Passing, I don't know if you can
answer it, Madam Chair.
Several places on the handouts
that talked about enhanced
mobile broadband. And I wondered
if that is something that we can
use in rural New Mexico to
expand broadband.
Is that something new, old, uh,
needs to be followed up by
somebody else.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, uh,
Uh, Madam Representative, uh,
the answer is yes.
It, it, these, these are
technologies that will have
additional benefits including
our ability to, to enhance the
reach.
Of uh
Uh, you know, the internet.
To areas that were previously
unreachable.
Thank you, and, and later maybe
we can hear more about that, but
thank you very much. That's it,
madam chair. Thank you,
Representative Nix. Represent
Harper. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'll be very, very brief, uh,
but thank you gentlemen for
being here.
Um, I guess I just wanted to
maybe make two quick comments.
The first is, um, it's a
pleasure to, to meet the, uh,
The the lead president of the.
NMRRC, um.
My, uh, my wife actually works
there uh while we were here
together and uh, um, Doctor
Griggs was who she worked with
and um just had a great
experience there and I'm just
great to see you've got 32
students working at that
facility, um.
You have undergrad, half
graduate, that's just.
Great real world experience for
them, so very grateful for the
work that you, you and the team
over there do it the, uh, uh,
PRC.
Um, the other account I just
wanted to make is just to echo
what Senator Solz said, Madam
Chair, um, Senator Sols really,
um, has been the champion, um,
really the one that made the
technology enhancement fund a
thing.
Um, I, I had a very small part
that he let me play in it, um,
but, uh, you know, just for
example, serving on the NSF E
score with him for a little bit,
seeing how many opportunities
are out there that we're missing
out on because we don't have
matching funds and and they're,
you're just exactly right. It's
an instant 10 to 1 return on
investment. It's not a, it's not
a risk.
Um
So, um, I love the idea of
developing a, a, a, a capture
fund or a technology engine fund
and, and then also making sure
that
You know, when we start
something new, we, we, we put
our thinking caps on and we, we
put together our best idea of
how it should work and then in
practicality.
We learned that, uh, well,
actually we need to make some
changes and some tweaks, and so,
yeah, helping us to understand
what those should be so that
it's a.
Available to the right folks
that it was intended for and is
not a bunch of red tape.
Um, but also, yeah, this is not
a uh a fund to help spur
economic, you know, development
and entrepreneurial work. This
was to fund basic research in
our institutions, so.
I just wanna echo that and
hopefully we can, we can keep
strengthening that fund and
start some other ones. So, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Harper. Um, thank you for your
presentation. I just want to
narrow, um, kind of zoom in on
two things. I do believe we need
a state office for a research
institution, and I will work
with Senator Souls and whoever
wants to work on it, so we can
because, and I think bringing
you guys in to justify
everything would help, so we
need to keep talking, try to
figure out what we're gonna do
and um that's how we get things
done, working together, right?
And you, you guys are great at
that. The second thing, Dr.
Boyer, you said that um you
spoke with LFC. Who did you?
with what was their response?
I'm on LSCs and Joy on so yeah.
Uh, Madam Chair, so this was
just a side conversation after
my presentation where I made a
similar kind of pitch and uh uh
Meredith Dixon and I were, were
talking afterwards and she uh
seemed very enthusiastic about
exploring these kinds of
possibilities.
OK, well, I, I'm, I'm on LFCL,
so I will make sure we, we look
at this closer. Let's work
together, um, but I think this
is what we need. I mean, we have
the labs, we have the
universities, we have what we
need. We just have to get it to
be important in LFC and I can be
very loud as you probably heard,
so maybe we can get this
something done. We need to do it
now. We need to start working on
it now. try to get something
done this year, um, but let's
work together on this. So thank
you for your presentations.
Thank you again for everything.
Oh,
So if, 00, we gotta do minutes
first. As I know you've all read
the minutes several several
times over. Annie, can I get a
motion for the minutes?
So, oh.
One second. You can take it,
Senator, um, Padilla in a second
by Representative Garrett and
Senator Tolls. Um, do we have
any opposition?
No. All right. Thank you.
All right, lunch is outside on
the right.
It's waiting for us.
Let's try to be back about, um,
one or.
