Whenever you're ready, thank
you.
Press the red, the, the man on
your thing.
There we go. All right, that's
better. I can talk pretty loud,
but
This is better.
Um,
I do have copies of the
presentation and some
supplementary materials here.
Um, so I am presenting on behalf
of the supercomputing Challenge
Board of Directors and um just
by way of introduction,
Um, I'm a fellow at Los Alamos
National Laboratory. I'm on the
board of the challenge, and I
also served as Governor
Richardson's science advisor for
4 years, um, with me today are
some members of the
supercomputing challenge.
So Lee Rand, who is the
treasurer for the challenge.
you can move up.
Tim Thomas, who's the president.
Patty Meyer, who is the program
manager, and I believe online we
have the president.
David Kratzer, David had a death
in the family just a couple days
ago and could not make it.
Um, so let me skip to the chase
here.
So some of you may be familiar
with the challenge, but let me
just go through things quickly.
It's a 35 year old statewide
STEM program. Uh, it started off
being for high school students
and then we expanded it to
middle schools, we realized the
skills of students in middle
school were really accelerating,
uh, rapidly with, you know, um,
iPads and things like that. Um,
the students conduct independent
research and it's a competition
for scholarships and prizes at
the end of the year.
It's really an after-school
program that runs from September
through April or so. So for 6
months they worked on a research
project. It was started by uh
Sig Hecker, the director of Los
Alamos in 1990 because he was
really very forward looking. The
laboratory needs, um, people who
are skilled in STEM and who have
some coding capabilities that's
central to the mission of the
laboratory. So he started this
to help grow students in high
school who later could become
staff.
At Los Alamos Labs.
Um, we're a 501c3 nonprofit.
And, um, our mission is to Bose,
what is your presentation look
like?
Pardon me, what is your
presentation look like these are
the ones to hand out. You may
have, yes, you have the wrong
ones, I'm afraid. So there's
copies for everybody here that
can get passed out.
A little confusing, yes.
A little better.
So while those are being handed
out, um, let me just say, you
know, we're really looking to
find students who are interested
in, um, in challenges, uh, and
technology challenges, so we're
looking for budding engineers,
researchers, and so on. And we
want to have some elements of
coding of computational skills
that we teach them during this.
So the way it works, the
students pick a problem in the
fall and they get a teacher who
mentors them through
throughout the year and just
like any program or project, you
have to do regular reports. You
have to have a plan. You make a
final report at the end of the
year, and they make a
presentation to a panel of
judges in the spring, and the
judges then award prizes which
include, you know, some
technology items and mostly
scholarships to students. So
basically, they're learning how
to do research and development
and what we're really doing is
working to help to prepare New
Mexico students for high tech,
high salary.
High-paying jobs here in New
Mexico and I want to stress that
in New Mexico part, so this is
not all vaporware. There
actually are real jobs, um,
which are begging, uh, for
students, uh, for people. So one
of them is in the area of
cybersecurity, information
security. So this is projected
to be the 10th largest 10th
fastest growing occupation over
the next decade. It's growing at
a rate of 31% compared to 4%.
For others, and one of the
interesting things is roughly
20% of all the cybersecurity
jobs are currently unfilled
because they don't have
qualified people.
So we want to start teaching
students here in New Mexico to
do this. Some of these jobs they
may go and get an associate's
degree. They may get a
bachelor's.
You have a
Mm
Something that's playing music.
That something is. I don't know.
Cell phone or something. It's
probably a cell phone.
The cell phone thinks it's
smarter than I am. Sorry.
That
It's always doing that. Um,
So there's about 20% unfilled
jobs, so we're really working to
prepare students here in New
Mexico. And the thing about it
is many of these jobs are remote
jobs, so they grow up, they go
to school here, they don't have
to leave. They can stay here in
New Mexico and work for a
company in California, Colorado,
um, all over. So,
Um, I give a reference here to
some information if you're
interested in further on that,
but
Over the last 34 years we've
trained over 12,000 students
here in New Mexico and really
all across New Mexico, not just,
you know, um, Albuquerque area,
um, they went on to attend many
of them, New Mexico colleges and
universities. Some of them went
to other schools, MIT, uh,
Princeton, some others, um.
And the teams have done after
they present here, they present
their projects and other venues
such as the Siemens National
Competition in math and science.
And we've had students take
first place in some of these
competitions and win $100,000
scholarships. So the teams
really learn a lot on a national
level. They're competitive, and
one of the things I wanted to
know at the bottom here is that,
you know, we worked very hard to
make this equitable so that we
have a distribution of men and
women.
Got a distribution of Anglos,
Hispanics, Native Americans in
the program. And if you flip to
the next page when I say we
teach students from all across
New Mexico. These are the towns
across New Mexico where we've
taught students, and I bet every
single one of you will find one
of these towns in your district
because we just cover all of New
Mexico and a lot of it is rural.
It's not restricted, just, you
know, the Albuquerque corridor
here. A lot of it is out on the
eastern plains, the west.
Permian Basin area. So
These students work on these
things in the spring, they come
and they make a presentation. So
the 2020, 2024 challenge shows,
um, some of the presentations by
students there. We had 34 teams,
150 students, so that's typical
of what we train. Um, and you'll
see that actually we had more
women than men this year in the
challenge. Um, the award
ceremony, the bottom picture
there shows you how many people
were there. There was, I think,
probably close to 200 people.
there so, um, and, and both the
kids and the parents, the
teachers were so excited when
they would win an award. It's
announced there, you know, they
jump up and yes, you know,
they're high fiving each other.
So that personal contact and and
excitement is, is something
that's really important.
So, why are we here? Our request
to you is $200,000 in support
starting in fiscal year 2026.
Um, we did receive support at
that level for many years from
the legislature, um, that
stopped, uh, during when COVID
hit, um, funding went away, uh,
when COVID came. So this year,
Representative Christine
Chandler, who I believe is on
your advisory committee, uh, is
sponsoring a bill on behalf of
the Senate.
of the challenge, uh, to make an
appropriation and appropriation,
um, would be to New Mexico Tech.
Where we are now in the past
they've always handled the
financial elements of this and
the president NMT president has
agreed once again to have tech
handle the fiscal serve as the
fiscal agent.
And I know
Well, Van Romero was here, still
is here. Van is familiar with
this program at tech over many,
many years, and I think it
reported to you probably for
many of those years.
So why are we here?
So what we've done here is um
laid out.
What the budget is and what the
revenues are on this page.
So revenues have been going down
at the start, Los Alamos Labs,
uh, completely funded the
challenge, uh, as we switch to a
defense contractor, it started
going down. Now our challenge
is, you know, this is a
long-term investment in the
future of the workforce. It's 4
to 8 years before these students
are going to end up working at
Los Alamos or somewhere else and
You know, companies now are
saying, well, that's great, but
what can you do for me now? What
can you do for me next year? So
that's been a challenge.
Um, this year, um, we're running
on a budget of $163,000 total.
Um, we had to cancel some of the
elements. There's a summer
teacher institute and I'll talk
more about that in a minute. Um,
We were unable to hire an
executive director, didn't have
the funding.
So what we need to do is get up
back up to a base of around
$290,000 in, in, in revenues and
$200,000 of that would come from
the state legislature.
So, let me talk about why the
$200,000 is needed and where
it's there. So one of the things
that supports is a two week long
summer teacher institute. So
teachers would come here
typically to New Mexico Tech for
2 weeks. We would pay them for
their expenses in a small per
diem, um, to come here and we
help them learn how do you
mentor students? And one of the
things that's important about
this was while they're learning
how to mentor students. They're
also learning how to teach their
science class.
is better, so they're learning
more about the science, the
techniques, the technology,
resources that are out there. So
the Summer Institute, uh,
Teacher Institute doesn't just
support the challenge, it really
supports, you know, tens and
100,000 other students here in,
in the science courses. Um,
We believe it's really important
to have an in-person yearly
award ceremony, um, when we give
out these scholarships, it's
really phenomenal to see.
We have been limping along on
On volunteer basis for all of
us,
uh, so we haven't had a
part-time director. We need to
recruit students and most
importantly, we need to secure
private sector funding. And so I
talked about the focus shifting
from long term to short term.
One of the things that happened
in Mexico consortium, which I
think you are all familiar with
the three research universities
and the labs. They used to give
us $55,000 a year when Steve
Blow was president. Uh, now that
Paul Angin is the new president,
he said we don't have that kind
of money, so we lost that, uh,
support there. Uh, COVID, as I
said, impacted the challenge.
The other problem is this last
point, which I think is very
important right now we don't
have any really a stable base
funding for the challenge.
So when we go out to businesses,
the ones who have typically
given us money in the past 10 or
200 or $30,000 that, well, you
know, we're not quite so sure
what's going on with you guys.
We're we're only going to give
you $5000 this year. So if we
can establish stable base
funding through the state, then
we have a much better leverage
arm to go out and get funding
increased funding, uh, from
these other organizations. So,
you know, our request is the
$200,000 to New Mexico Tech to
On the program, uh, you know,
it'll strengthen the STEM and
coding skills of our students
and you know, with the growth of
AI and machine learning and all
of this now.
This is so important to the
future of this state and the
country and of the students.
These are the jobs of the future
that we're going to be training
these students for. So, you
know, we have tremendous support
from people all across the
state. Um, we were very
privileged to have
Representative Chandler sponsor
of the bill. She's very familiar
with it, of course, being from
Los Alamoshi.
Knows about all these issues
very, very well.
Um,
and so, you know, we hope that
you will provide a
recommendation for funding, and
we thank you for allowing us to
come and, um,
Present to you. Does anybody
else want to speak, or?
No, it's him.
All right.
I'm German, distinguished
members of the committee,
distinguished guests. Uh, my
name is Tim Thomas. Uh, I am
chairman of the board of
directors. We're a 501c3, as Dr.
Bows mentioned, um, I have a PhD
in physics with a heavy
background in computation. I've
been in New Mexico for 31 years,
uh, most recent 7 years I've
been a member of the workforce
at Sandia Labs. For that, I was
in the business community for 5
years before that, almost 2
decades at UNM.
Um.
I had my first challenge team,
uh, 27 years ago and uh been
mentoring him ever since, but as
I came on the board became
treasurer, vice president, and
so forth. I still like to teach
at the kick off if I can mentor
teams if I can.
Um,
As you heard from Doctor Bowles
all about the challenge, I'd
like to emphasize the diversity,
both the diversity of skills we
teach, but also the diversity of
people we address. So as you see
in the slides, almost 40%, um,
um, women in recent years, uh,
quarter Hispanics and 10% Native
American, we've been very
delighted to see those numbers
evolved the way they have. And,
uh, in terms of diversity of
skills, we not only teach, uh,
elements of computer science
technology, but also are trying
to evolve in the direction of
modern software engineering
practices that students would,
And a counter if they come into
the workforce things you may
have heard of like agile, uh,
Kbon, scrum, that sort of thing.
We also pride ourselves on
teaching various very important
soft skills, communication,
speaking, writing reports,
giving PowerPoint presentations.
So, uh, these are things we're
all very excited to, uh, and
hope to continue. So I'd like to
encourage you to consider, uh,
supporting the challenge in the
manner Dr. Bows discussed. Thank
you.
That it? OK.
I hope David is is on the line.
David, can you hear us?
David is the
Questions. Thank you. Do we have
any questions from the
committee?
Joy, or representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I have a
quick question on the, I think
it's the 2nd to the last page,
revenue issue Laow focus shifted
from long-term to short-term
staffing. Can you just explain
that for a moment?
Right.
So Sig Hecker in 1990 was
looking forward to the long term
sort of strategic planning for
the laboratory. And the, the
Department of Energy has
encouraged the laboratory to
hire New Mexicans as staff
members at the laboratory.
That's part of our performance
appraisal to the Department of
Energy. So SAG was looking
forward and saying we need to
really start teaching kids in
high school, the skills that
they're gonna need to expand on
in college so that when they get
out of college, they can come
and work for
For, uh, for Los Alamos, uh,
Sandia had the had the same
agenda. So at that point, the
Sig was looking at, we're making
an investment this year in
students and the challenge and
maybe in 8 years that student
will show up as a staff member.
So he's really looking off into
the future.
Once we move to a defense
contractor, many things changed
at the laboratory, as I'm sure
all of you are aware. I've, I've
been at the laboratory for 45
years now, um.
And one of the things that
changed is that business sector
is much more interested in
what's the next projection for
the next revenue stream. What's
happening next year or the year
after. So they're planning
extends out over a year or two,
and they said, you know, these
plans that are for 8 or 10 years
out, those are good, they're
nice, but they don't have our
priority now, so we're going to
reduce the funding. We're going
to focus more on programs,
outreach.
plans and so on that reach out
to students.
Our staff, you know, in the next
year or two, so they're more
interested in college students
who are going to become postdocs
and come to the laboratory in
the next year or two than they
are in high school students.
So Madam Chair, I suggest
there's a new executive director
from September 16th of the Lanno
Foundation, uh, unfortunately,
we're gonna miss her from the
legislative education Study
Committee. He name is Doctor
Gwen
uhrea ornament, and I suggest
that you contact her on
September 17th and share this
representative Garrett, thank
you. Uh, I've already contacted,
uh, um, Glenn Warman.
ornaments,
um, in fact, both of her
children were children, uh,
participated in the challenge,
so she's aware of it. Uh, I met
with the LA LESE staff last
week. She was going to meet with
me and then got called out, uh,
at the last minute as you're
well aware of how that happens.
Um, I do know other people. I've
got friends at the Lano
Foundation, um, you know, we're
going out and looking for
support everywhere we can find
it. again.
Part of the question is, well,
if we support you this year,
you're still going to be around
the year after. Is this an
investment that's just going to
terminate or not?
And right now we don't have an
answer to that question, so it's
makes it difficult to go out and
solicit funds.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Nope. All right.
Well, thank you for your
presentation. I was a high
school math teacher, so I did
participate with some in some of
these challenges. I'm not sure
if it was this one.
For the kids, but um, they
always came back very excited
and uh.
Excited about everything they
did, um, at Monzano, we had a
strong team, I believe, and, but
we lost the teacher so um.
So, but the kids were always
excited, always talking about
it. So thank you for this and
hopefully we can get the
funding. Um, we'll work with
Representative Chandler to
assist her if, if at all
possible and um.
Thank you for presenting. OK.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
we appreciate your time. Um, I
did leave some short brochures
here and some.
Books, which are the reports
from this last year of the
students. And if you look
through these, the things the
students are doing are just
absolutely phenomenal. I mean.
That they amaze me. I mean, I'm
a nuclear physicist by training,
um, but the quality of the
things that they're doing is
just phenomenal, and a number of
the things they're doing have
direct outputs, so let me, if I
may, Madam Chair, just 30
seconds.
Um, one of the teams came up
with a way to help handicap
people. And so they developed
gloves that have sensors in them
and then strings in them to a
little micro motors and a
microprocessor, so when someone
say who has had a stroke reaches
out to pick up a glass, and they
can't hold on to it. The sensors
will pick up what they're trying
to do. The motors will kick in.
They'll be able to grab the,
the, the, uh.
The cup, pick it up and take a
drink themselves instead of
ringing for somebody else to
give them a drink.
They're actually looking at
patenting this. So some of the
things are not just, you know,
esoteric, often in the in the in
the air. Some of them are really
down to earth things.
Doctor Balls, if you'll put
those on the table as people
come in that members can take
them on the, OK, all right.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
I
OK.
Yeah.
All right. Our next presenter
will be Doctor Romero, vice
president of Special research
programs at New Mexico Tech.
Space and astronomy research and
development.
Whenever you're ready, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
My name, as you said, my name is
uh Van Romero, uh, I think, uh,
more germane to this is I'm a
graduate of New Mexico Tech. Uh,
my family's from New Mexico, uh,
and I'm a boomerang, right? Uh,
I graduated from college and
couldn't get out of here fast
enough. Uh, a few years later, I
couldn't get back fast enough.
Uh, so I'm happy to be here this
afternoon, helping me, uh,
advance the slides back there is
uh Zach Goodrich. He is a
student here at New Mexico Tech
from Grants, New Mexico. Uh,
he'll.
be graduating with his degree in
physics this semester.
Unfortunately, we're gonna have
to kick him out of the nest. Uh,
he's going to go up to, uh, CU
Boulder, uh, to get his graduate
degree, and I'm hoping he'll be
a boomerang as well because I
know he likes his work here in
New Mexico, so, uh, first thing
I wanted to do is give you a
little bit of history, um, you
know, there, uh, we live in a
world that's, uh, pre-COVID and
post-COVID, right? So, uh, I
have a little video that we're
gonna run and
Now this is previous work, this
uh video was made just as we
were going into COVID, uh, and
so it's a little bit dated. It
refers to some things that that
are gonna happen. I can tell you
everything that we said was
going to happen in this video
did happen. So go ahead, Zach,
take it away and hope the sound
gets picked up.
New Mexico Tech started its
support of commercial space in
1997, with the contract through
the Air Force Research lab to
test liquid fuel rocket engines.
Shown here is a 2001 test.
Of an ignition system.
Now, all types of rocket engines
from solid fuel flight testing.
Of innovative propellants in
collaboration with Los Alamos.
To novel propellants such as
nitrous oxide and ethanol.
Yes, laughing gas and Everclear.
This work is done in
collaboration with India
National Labs.
And recently, New Mexico Tech
started working with a small
business through an SBIR to
develop 3D printing techniques
for solid fuels.
Shown here is a small amount of
fuel.
And demonstrates the capability
of a 3D printed fuel.
From a lab bench, the launch pad
and beyond. The Mexico Tech
students are involved in space
technology applications.
In 2019,
Students designed, built.
And launched payloads that
evaluate the structural
integrity of spacecraft in real
time.
Flights from Spaceport America
were used to develop the
structural health monitoring
payload.
Pictured here is a test specimen
used to calibrate the
instrument.
This work culminated with a
payload launch as part of the
International Space Station
resupplies mission this past
November.
The instrument will orbit the
Earth until it is installed and
the ISS in early 2020.
New Mexico Tech students have
competed in the experimental
sounding rocket Association
competition.
And in 2014, the New Mexico Tech
team won the altitude
competition in Green River,
Utah.
Now this team is focused on
supporting White Sands research
and developers, a small business
in Las Cruces could develop
rockets and payloads.
Shown here is a recent launch
from Spaceport America.
Followed by the equally
important landing of the
payload.
And finally,
Once your payload is in orbit,
New Mexico Tech can keep track
of it.
The 2.4 m telescope at the
Magdalene Ridge Observatory was
designed to track and monitor
objects launched into near-Earth
orbit.
Here is a tracking of a NASA
black branded rocket as it
emerges from the clouds over
Wiser.
The telescope inverts the image,
so it appears to be headed down.
Now we show a slow motion clip
where the image flipped.
Nothing is too small to trash.
In 2008 while on an EAV, an
astronaut lost control of a tool
belt.
The tool belt drifted away from
the International Space Station
and orbited the Earth for a few
months before it burned up on
reentry.
The 2.4 m telescope and MRO
could easily track this piece of
space debris.
Bigger objects can be imaged as
well as tracked. This is an
image of the International Space
Station taken with a 2.4 m
telescope.
The image was taken without
adaptive optics.
From the lab bench to the launch
pad to orbit. New Mexico Tech is
at the forefront of space
technologies.
So now it's uh what's happened
since COVID, uh, actually, uh,
on the next slide I'm gonna do a
little bit more of the history.
So yeah, this is a picture of
the VLA. You're gonna go out
there to visit them this
afternoon. Uh, the VLA was
built, uh, here at New Mexico
Tech while I was a student. Uh,
so it was a really big thing,
right? Uh, uh, the interesting
thing, and, and that's really
what started uh a astrophysics
and astronomy, uh, here at New
Mexico Tech, Sterling Colgate
was the president at the time.
He was a big astrophysicist. He
was
Instrumental in bringing the VLA
to New Mexico, uh, and so that
really took off. Uh, our physics
department has joint
appointments, uh, they're, um,
half their time they're uh
physics professors, the other
half of the time, they work for
the VLA, uh, but primarily
instructing students and working
with students on on their
projects. Uh, to me, the most
interesting thing about the VLA
is, um, when it was built back
in the 70s, Pulsars were new
things. They had just been
discovered in the late 1960s.
People
to understand understand
pulsars. Uh, and so they
designed this instrument uh to
uh examine these new strange
objects.
Fast forward some 30, 40 years
later, 50 years I guess now as
I'm getting older.
Someone has told me that 15% of
the papers published at the VLA
or on Pulsars.
85% are on things they didn't
even know existed when they
built the facility, right? So
it's that new discovery. When
you build a new instrument like
this, you discover new things.
Uh, and we, so we have no idea
uh where we're gonna end up. Uh,
I know it's kind of hard to see
up there, but as a result of
the, uh, well, I'm, I'm not
going to talk about those words
because I'm gonna bring them
back, uh, again a little bit
later. Give me the next slide,
Zach. So what are we doing now?
Um, you heard about this, uh,
structural monitoring system is
is really
Fascinating, uh, device that
gets embedded in the hardware of
the spacecraft in the metal in
the uh in the components, uh,
and these are sensors that can
detect small cracks or or voids
or deficiencies, uh, high strain
rates that, uh, start to occur
in the material, and when that
happens, they pick up the
signal, they send it back to the
quote owner to see if some
corrective action can be done.
When do they use this? Well
Uh, on the bottom bottom kind of
middle left or right, uh, you
see, um, uh, pre-launch
diagnosis. So, uh, when we're
assembling the the device and
putting it together, the rocket,
the spaceship, is everything OK?
Uh, we don't want to launch it
if there's a flaw. So this,
these types of instruments can
tell us if something's gone
wrong. Then we launch it. That's
a really dynamic activity,
right? Huge G forces take place,
things could break. We want to
know if they broke or we want to
know.
But the condition of them is
after the launch. Then in
operations, they're subject to
high radiation fields, uh, big
temperature swings, uh, all
sorts of things, uh, and so as
the um as a spacecraft orbits
the Earth, uh, how is its health
progressing? So all of this can
be uh diagnosed on uh on uh on
site in situ, as they say, uh,
and maybe corrective actions can
be taken or maybe.
Uh, it needs to be serviced, uh,
in some way. You can see over on
the right, the funding agencies
uh basically uh NASA with some
private funding from uh
Spaceworks. Next slide.
Additive manufacturing, of
course, additive manufacturing
is one of those things that's
really taken over, uh, it's a
particularly useful, uh, in uh
satellite business and space
industry, a lot of the
components are unique, one of a
kind. Uh, I can't go down to
Home Depot and buy another
widget uh for my spacecraft. Uh,
so I'd have to order it, uh, and
it could take months, even
years, uh, to come in. Uh, if I
have the specifications of the
of the uh.
Uh, of the part of the part that
I need, I can build it right on
site, right? So this 3D
manufacturing, uh, is certainly,
uh,
Helpful for our space community,
uh, here in New Mexico. Next
slide.
Um, one of our professors in
mechanical engineering is
working on what's called a
fluid-fill cellular composites,
uh, essentially this is the
helmet that the astronaut wears.
Uh, we want to make a better
helmet so that it can absorb
shock, but also absorb
radiation, uh, high radiation
fields, uh, in space, we want to
dampen the amount of of uh of
radiation, I mean, uh, reduce
the amount of radiation and
dampen the shock effects, uh,
and so we're working on that.
Next slide, Zach, uh, we're
making good progress, uh, and,
um, looking at the, um, um, uh,
how the uh solar uh particles
can be absorbed by this
material. Uh interesting thing
about this material, uh, it
looks like it could be a good
candidate.
Or
You guessed it, helmets for
football.
The NFL is actually interested
in how can we better absorb
shock uh with these fluid filled
membranes. Uh, so, uh,
hopefully, uh, if this is
successful, we'll go up into a
much more expanded uh uh market
um for this work.
Uh, Zach, give me the next one.
Where are we at? Oh, CubeSat,
right? Seems like everybody's
got a cubesat, um, if you go to
any university, oh yeah, we have
a cube set that we've launched,
uh, which is great, um,
activity uh for students,
especially students, this comes
from electrical engineering, uh,
what a great.
Project to work on as a student
building.
A small satellite that's
actually going to orbit the
Earth. Not only orbit the Earth,
but you'll be able to get data
back from your satellite and
analyze it, right? This is what
really engages students, really
keeps them focused on their
work. This particular, um, cube
sat, uh, the, um, big thing that
they were looking at is uh kind
of down in the lower left you
see the Langmere plasma probe,
the LPP, uh, the student.
And the faculty member who uh
came up with this project, uh,
wanted to investigate Langmere
plasma, uh, that is, uh, in the,
uh uh uh upper high altitude
atmosphere. Why Langmre? Well,
Langmere is kind of our, uh, one
of our claims to fame here at
New Mexico Tech. We run the
Langmer lab, uh, Lightning
Research Center, Irving Langmre
won the Nobel Prize, uh, in
chemistry, uh, and one is the
really movers and shakers in uh
uh science revolution
and post World War II. Um, so,
uh, uh he's, that's kind of a
legend around here and the
students decide, well, let's,
uh, let's go look at the uh
Langmer plasma that exists uh in
the upper atmosphere.
Next, Zach, what do we got?
Another one from electrical
engineering. This is electro
optics, uh, uh, one of our
faculty members, Scott Ter is uh
one of the world's expert in,
uh, it's called adaptive optics
and wavefront sensing. When we
look out through our atmosphere,
uh, into the night sky when you
look at the stars, they twinkle
a little bit, right? Well, the
reason they twinkle is because
the atmosphere between you and
the stars is moving around, it's
boiling. It's uh uh non
homogeneous.
Because the light comes through
the atmosphere, it gets
deflected and moved around and
to your eyes, it looks like it
twinkles. Well, we don't like
that as scientists. We want to
look at the actual image, right?
We've got to get rid of that
twinkle. So what do we do? We
sense that light that comes
through and we look at the shape
of the light, what we call the
wavefront.
And we can correct that
wavefront by bending the mirror
that's collecting the light. So
we bend the mirror to compensate
for the bubbles in the
atmosphere, so that what we see
is very clear. And it's almost
like in, in, I mean, I've I've
I've seen this personally when
you, you look at something
that's, you know, nowadays we
just look at computer screens,
so we're looking at a computer
screen and the adaptive octopus
is not turned on. And what we're
looking at is kind of fuzzy.
And then all of a sudden then we
switch on the adaptive optics
and it's like putting glasses on
and the thing just gets clear,
right? It's amazing. Like, oh my
God, we can learn so much more
by taking that atmosphere out
of, um, uh, out of our viewing.
Lots of applications for that,
for communications that helped
if we can um laser
communications get disturbed by
these atmospheric bubbles, so a
lot of commercial applications
besides just astronomy. Uh, and
then also on the bottom right,
um, we're working on um energy.
Uh, harvesting. We're putting a
lot of satellites up in space.
We can only put so much
batteries on each satellite and
of course they have solar
panels, right? But those solar
panels get damaged after a
while. Uh, how can we come up
with other ways to produce
energy, charge the batteries,
run the satellite to prolong the
life. Uh, if you're commercial
industry, putting up a satellite
or a constellation of
satellites. It's a $1 billion
dollar operation. You want it to
last as long as you can. So
anything that we can do to help
them in their service life, uh,
is very important to them.
Um,
Next,
Yeah, OK, yeah, we're on track.
So, um,
That's a uh uh a quick synopsis
of some of the stuff that's
going on in the faculty, as you
heard before lunch, we have a
number of research centers, uh,
at New Mexico Tech, uh, one of
them is the Magdalena Ridge
Observatory. Uh, this is a, um,
a view of the ridge on the
Magdalena Mountains, which are
right behind us. Uh, the
elevation of the ridge is 10,600
ft, uh, which is really, uh, an
excellent place uh for
astronomy, um.
And the other, uh, important
thing about the ridge is that
it's a ridge. It's not a point
of a mountain. So when you have
a ridge up on top of a mountain
that gives you a lot of space to
build things. So as you can see
we have a number of uh
facilities up on the ridge, and
in the top, uh, on the, in the
far background is a 2.4 m
telescope. I'll talk about that
in just a second, um, well, good
thing I finished talking about
the VLA.
It's a
Um, in the, in the center of the
picture on the right, there's uh
what we call an assembly
building, uh, for telescopes
that we're building and then in
the front foreground is our
optical interferometer, uh, and
which is essentially the uh uh
optical analog to the VLA and
I'll talk about each of those
facilities as we go through
here. So, uh, Zach, let's go to
the next one.
next thing we have here is, uh,
one of the things uh that are
2.4 m telescope uh participated
in.
2.4 m telescope uh means uh the
primary mirror is 2.4 m or 100
inches. Uh, it's essentially the
primary mirror is very similar,
uh, to the telescope, uh, that
was used by Hubble, uh, to
measure the red shift of the
universe back in the 1920s. Uh,
at the time, that was the
largest telescope in the world.
Now a 100-inch telescope is a
pretty mediocre. But this
particular telescope is
designed.
Specifically,
To look at things inside the
solar system, what we call near
Earth objects. So we're not
looking into deep space with
this facility. We're looking at
things in and around, uh, in and
around the earth. And there's a
lot of stuff, uh, as I'll show
you in a second. Uh, NASA came
up with a, a really interesting,
um program a couple of years
ago. It was called Dart for dual
asteroid redirect test, um, the
scenario is there's um 2
asteroids, uh, one.
It's called Didamos and the
other one is dimorphus. Dimos is
the big one, and dimorphus is
rotating and is orbiting around
its parent, uh, so small child
orbiting around the parent and
this pair is going through the
solar system. It gets near Earth
sometimes and it goes away and
then comes back.
Well, we're worried about an
asteroid that may impact the
Earth. Uh, and we're getting
better and better at tracking
asteroids, discovering them, uh,
and we'll know, uh, years in
advance of a of an asteroid that
may be on a collision course
with the Earth. The question is,
can we do anything about it? Can
we actually go and push the
asteroid so that it's will no
longer intercept the earth. So
this was an experiment that NASA
put together, and it got a lot
of fanfare a couple of years
ago.
where they sent a rocket out
spaceship, and crashed it into
the small asteroid to see if we
could change the orbital period
of that asteroid. Uh, if you
look down in the bottom there,
these are pictures taken by the
2.4 m telescope. We were the
ones that confirmed for NASA
that it actually did hit, right?
Yes, they made the impact, uh,
you'll see, uh, 10 hours after
impact, the system, and we're
looking at just the whole system
now. It's getting a little
fuzzy.
34 hours later, it's even
fuzzier and has a tail, and then
58 hours later, the tale has
kind of gone away and we're
getting to the point where, OK,
now we can actually make some
measurements. We had to get rid
of all the dust.
So that we could actually look
at the system, OK?
So the next slide, Zach.
This is what we call the light
curve. So we stare at this
little point of light.
And the light gets dimmer and
brighter and dimmer and brighter
in a very uh distinct fashion,
and from that we can compute the
orbital period of the pair. So
we do this experiment before the
impact. We do it after the
impact.
And then we get the result, and
the result was, go ahead, Zack,
the next one was yes indeed, we
did change, uh, NASA did change
the orbital period of the pair,
so we can.
Influence things that are
outside of the Earth-moon
system. You know, by the way,
This is the first time in the
history of man that we influence
something outside of the earth
moon system, right? We're
actually poking stuff that is
way out in orbit, uh, around,
uh, the solar system. Uh, so
published in Nature, uh, and,
uh, Bill and Eileen Ryan, uh,
are, um, professors here that,
uh, uh, we, uh, co-authors of
the Seminole paper, uh, on this
event, uh.
A lot, a lot of um press on this
particular event.
Go ahead, Zach, next, uh.
N
The interferometer
So, uh, just down the road from
the 2.4 m we're building, we're
in the process of building an
optical interferometer.
Uh, what an interferometer does
is it collects signal from
discrete points, and then
interferes that signal from
those discrete points to
simulate one large aperture, one
large telescope, right? So when
we're all done, we'll have 10
1.4 m uh diameter telescopes
that get spread out over the
ridge, the, uh, uh, circle that
you see around the
interferometer, uh, gives you
the notion of of the
of the um collecting area uh for
this telescope, so it's 350 m.
So we're building a telescope
that has a collecting diameter
of 350 m. Uh, and that results
in 100 times.
More detail than the Hubble
Space Telescope or the James
Webb Telescope. So our ability
to resolve small, small, I don't
wanna say small because they're
far away, but, uh, things that
are small from our vantage point
on the earth, our ability to
resolve those will increase
dramatically.
Why are we doing this? Why build
something like this? Go ahead,
Zach.
So, uh, we're attempting here
to, to, uh, explain to you
something in 4 dimensions on a
two-dimensional piece of paper,
so bear with me, OK? So the this
first axis, uh, that comes out
towards us is called faintness.
So the way we get to better and
better uh uh look at things that
are dimmer and dimmer, things
that are fainter and fainter as
we build bigger and bigger
mirrors, right? We just collect
more light. And since the
telescope was first utilized,
By Galileo, uh, people have been
focused on building bigger and
bigger mirrors, segmented
mirrors together, so we can
collect as much light as
possible and look at things that
are fainter and fainter and
fainter. Great, good. Let's,
we'll keep doing that. There's
a, uh, you know, the 30 m
telescope is uh hopefully will
be built, uh, at some point we
can do even better job in that.
Around the turn of the last
century, we started
understanding uh the spectrum of
light that comes uh from distant
objects, and so that's that
color axis. Uh, so we started to
explore different colors, uh, we
get different colors from the
same object. What does it mean?
So a lot of science associated
with that. And now, as we, uh,
uh, build more and more
sensitive instruments, certainly
the stuff that we do, stuff that
goes on at the VLA. We can look
at
Time variabilities, do things
change? How rapidly do they
change? Um,
All of that stuff is great. We
need to keep pushing in that
forefront, but we're going into
a different direction. We're
going into detail. We want to
get as much resolution as we
possibly can to look at fine
structure of things to really
try to understand the universe.
Uh, and what are we gonna do? Go
ahead, Zach.
Things that we're interested in
as scientists are things like
AGNs, active galactic nuclei. So
these are uh
Uh,
Galaxies that are forming, they
have black holes in them. Uh,
how are they faring? What are
they doing? How do they behave?
Uh, we want to look at star and
planet forming regions. Can we
find a star that's just forming
or a star that's just formed and
planets that are forming around
it so we can understand how
planets evolve, um, and then,
uh, stellar accretion disks
looking at mass losses, uh, and,
um, uh, magnetic fields of
stars. So scientists, that's
what we're interested in.
But the Air Force is funding
this project. And the reason the
Air Force is funding this
project. It's kind of explained
on the next slide.
This is the debris. These are
satellites.
And debris that surround the
earth. Obviously this is an
artist's concept, but there are
some 7000 operating satellites
around the Earth and orbit
around the Earth, uh, but in
addition to those 7000
satellites, there is.
Hundreds if not thousands, even
multiple thousands of debris,
just junk that's left over in
space, right? Uh, the, the
cluster of um of dots that you
see near the Earth, those are uh
um uh low Earth orbiting
objects. So these are things
like, um, uh, communications and
and other things, um, your, um,
you could have your, um, uh,
internet coming from one of
those satellites. The outer ring
are what we call geosynchronism.
Satellites. These are satellites
whose orbital period is 24
hours, so there's there's
stationary over the same spot of
the earth all the time, uh, and
they can look down and survey
things also for communications
and uh all types of activities,
but this, this slide is a little
deceiving because there's a lot
of space in space, uh, and this
is all shrunk down into one
small thing. So there's a lot of
room in between these dots, but
We hear the term space is
becoming congested. Uh, and so
we want to know what our
neighbors are doing, uh, is our
satellites in good shape, uh,
what can we do? How can we image
a satellite, uh, that's up in
orbit around the Earth. I showed
you the International Space
Station that we took, uh, it was
in the video, uh, that was
taken, uh, from a normal
telescope, the 2.4 m telescope
here on the Magdalena Ridge. But
that particular satellite is
near Earth orbit.
Near Earth orbit, we can see it,
right? When it goes out to
geosync, it's too far. Nothing
on that we currently have, uh,
on the surface of the earth can
image that satellite that's way,
way out in geosynchronous space.
And that's where all the action
is, right? So, uh, next slide.
We have designed the Magdalena
Ridge Interferometer.
Uh, to look specifically at geo
objects, things that are
geosynchronous orbit. There are
4 other interferometers, optical
interferometers, uh, around the
world, uh, when we look at their
particular uh specifications,
uh, some of them can look at,
at, at dim objects. Some of them
can look at big objects, uh, but
we're the ones, uh, you see here
in red, this is the space that
we live in, uh, and the space in
blue is where uh
Geosynchronous orbiting objects
are. So, uh, we've designed the
interferometer at the Magdalena
Ridge to specifically be able to
image uh uh satellite that's in
geosynchronous orbit. Why are we
interested in that? Well, you
think of a satellite that's up
in orbit. It probably has, well,
I'm sure it has, um, uh, solar
cells, right? It has a solar
panel to get charged up, right?
And then it has an antenna, uh,
that it communicates back and
forth.
Uh, uh, with its, uh, uh, host
country, then maybe it has
something else, could be a laser
weapon, could be a microwave
weapon, but it could be
something bad, right?
We want to know if people that
were not too friendly with, we
want to know if that satellite,
who may be in a very benign
position, all of a sudden
changes its position.
And if it does change its
position, what's pointing at us,
right? So we call this the pose
of the satellite. So we can do
that by that, uh, what I showed
you with the 2.4 m telescope on
Dinamos, the light curve from
the light curve, we can tell you
it's moving, but we don't know
it's moving from which position
to which position. So with an
interferometer, if we take some
images of it, compare those to
the light curve. Now we've
calibrated our light.
so that we can very quickly
through a light curve, refer
back to the images we've made
with the interferometer to now
know what that foreign
satellite's doing. So this
becomes very important to our
military customers. The other
thing is for our commercial
customers. Uh, what if that, um,
antenna that they communicate
with, uh, is kind of has gotten
bent or something's happened to
it. We can tell them, uh, what's
gone wrong or, or what
physically has changed. So very
important.
To commercial space community.
Uh, how good are we? Go ahead,
Zach, next one.
The first, uh, don't leave it
there for a second. Uh, this is
an image of a satellite, uh,
with the current uh uh largest
telescope on the surface of the
Earth, uh, and you see it's a
blob.
Uh, next one, is the two
proposed telescopes, 30, the 30
m telescope, these are 30 and
then the European Space Agency
is also building a telescope,
you kind of start to see some
resolutions probably easier to
look at it on your handout. Uh,
the, um, uh, you just can kind
of start to see the antenna and
stuff, but then the last one,
Zach, this is our image, it's
hard to see up on the screen,
but you can see from our image,
uh, from the Magdalena Ridge,
We'll be able to tell you
exactly what the satellite looks
like. So that's, that's a kind
of resolution, uh, that we're
going to get, right? Again, uh,
We're building a new instrument.
When you build new instruments,
you make new discoveries, whole
bunch of this stuff, we don't
even know what we're going to be
doing 10 years from now because
it'll be totally new.
The real reason why we're doing
this, go ahead, Zach.
As for our students, uh,
You know, I, I always uh like to
tell a story that um but the
interferometer, uh, we have
space for um 3 different
experiments to, to be conducted.
Uh, one of those experiments
will probably be for the Air
Force or Space Force.
We're going to charge them a lot
of money to use that, right? Uh,
another one of the, uh, another
one of the stations will be for
our faculty members who go to
the National Science Foundation
or NASA, uh, and they'll get
funding to do some experiment on
some very important scientific
problem, and we'll charge him a
little bit of money to to do
that.
The last one's going to be
reserved for students. And
they're gonna get to use that
for free. And they're gonna do
stuff with that experimental
station that we think is utterly
stupid, right? They'll come to
us and we're like, that's never
gonna work.
But try it.
Because if one of them.
Makes a discovery, it'll be a
huge discovery, right? So this
is an opportunity for students
to try stuff that old gray
bearded people like me think,
no, no, no, that's never gonna
work, right? But eventually it
does. And that to me is the
excitement. So education for
students. Go ahead, Zach. This
is the slide that you couldn't
see. Hopefully you can read it
on your handout when the VLA
first came and we started
astrophysics here at New Mexico
Tech. We got involved in things
like space weather, uh,
planetary atmospheres,
chemistry, molecular clouds,
hydrogen regions, interstellar
media, star formation,
exoplanets, high mass, uh, uh,
stars, evolved stars, stellar
evolution, uh, dwarf galaxies,
all sorts of things, right? Um,
I'll point out exoplanets. You
know, currently, uh, there's um
over 5000, I think, uh,
discovered planets that have
been discovered on other stars.
When I was a student here, we
had just, no, no, no, uh, when I
As a student here, we had not
discovered any planets and other
stars. When I came back to New
Mexico Tech in 1995.
We had just discovered a planet.
On a, on a different star. First
one in history, and the person,
one of the people credited with
that is Dale Frail from the VLA,
uh, so right here in Socorro is
one of the people that
discovered the first planet uh
on uh on a star, uh, in our
local neighborhood. So this is a
hotbed of astronomy. Next one,
Zach. Uh, we have a space
management, our management, um,
department, uh, engineering
management, uh,
has recognized the need.
That we see here, especially,
uh as uh this commercial space
industry develops in New Mexico,
um, for, uh, management, we do a
lot of, we do a good job of
training the engineers and
scientists, and then we turn
them into managers and hope they
do a good job, right? Uh,
disaster.
So, uh, we have a number of
courses, uh, uh, graduate level
and also at the undergraduate
level, and if you read through
there, you can see, uh, we're
not the instructors, right? Uh,
the people who, uh, work in the
space industry, uh, like Bryce
Kennedy, uh, and Matt Fetrow,
uh, from AFRL are the people who
uh who are teaching these
classes. So uh we get a good
help from local community here
in New Mexico to to teach these
classes. Uh, another class that
we teach, go ahead, Zach.
Uh, is orbital mechanics in uh
our mechanical engineering
program. Uh, this is always, you
know, you're trying to figure
out how these things move around
and all that stuff, so.
Um, Dave Westwald, one of our
retired faculty members, uh,
continues to teach this class
and, and now he's in mechanical
engineering, so it's a great
class.
Uh, and then, um, finally, um,
the one class that's near and
dear to my heart.
It's a class called The Origin
of the universe. I teach this
class. Uh, it explores the human
race's concept of the origin of
the universe all the way from
the ancient Sumerians, uh, up to
our current, uh, Big Bang Theory
and how it works, uh, and, uh,
we get a lot of engineers, uh,
and scientists in there, uh, to
look at, um, how we actually
Take science, convert it into
engineering solutions, but how
society interacts with that
stuff, because, you know, if we
develop stuff as scientists and
engineers, and nobody uses it.
Nobody accepts it. So what? All
right? Uh, so, uh, we really
focus on uh how can, uh, we get
people to understand that the
the importance of what we're
doing and accept the technology,
uh, and it's
Very interesting story when you
look at it from an astronomy
standpoint, right? Galileo
didn't get along too good with
uh with the church when he first
came up with uh getting things
uh orbiting around uh uh
Jupiter. So, um, we have other
people that we, um, collaborate
with. Uh, go ahead, Zach.
Uh, turbo is uh from the
University of Minnesota. They
are actually in the process
right now of installing
telescopes up on the Magdalena
Ridge, these small little
telescopes, uh, that scan the
night sky very fast, uh, and
look for things that change. Uh,
they have a sister set up in
Greece, uh, so they're using the
earth, the two sides of the
earth, to look into the night
sky and triangulate on the
things that are up there. What
they're.
Uh, interested in is, uh, there,
uh, closely connected to LIGO,
which is an experiment to look
for gravity waves, which could
be caused by the merger of black
holes and other things like
that. So if indeed LIGO sees, uh
oh, we think something happened,
then Turbo can immediately look
at it, triangulate on it because
it's sister over in Greece is
doing the same thing and get
optical information on what was
uh seen by um by the like.
facility, uh, and direct others
to, uh, towards that. Another
project that's in the works uh
is Cosmos, uh, from the National
Center for Atmospheric Research.
Uh, this is a solar telescope
that uh we are uh just ending a
full year of study of, I think
they said there were 5 different
locations around the world. Uh,
they, uh, National Science
Foundation was supposed to
announce the finalist uh here.
In August, uh, they probably
won't make it to August, but we
think the announcements coming
out pretty soon. We're hopeful,
fingers crossed that indeed we
will be the facility. We have a
little indication that it looked
pretty good uh for us. And so
they're gonna be studying the
corona, uh, around the sun, uh,
and trying to understand, of
course, that corona is what
produces the solar wind and all
of the stuff the, the, the space
weather that we see here on
Earth, things that affect
communications and all that
stuff.
They're gonna want to study
that. I've become involved in
this personally, uh, because I
think there's a huge New Mexico
connection here. A wonderful
fascination. Go to the last
slide, Zach.
Chaco Canyon.
In Chaco Canyon in the sun,
right? So Chaco Canyon, if
you're not familiar, they have
uh uh something called a um sun
dagger.
There is a particular location
uh on Fajita Butte where at one
instant for 15 minutes.
The sun shines between two
rocks, uh, and goes on to a
petroglyph and it marks
Winter solstice is when they had
a huge ceremony, you know, Chaco
was not really where a lot of
people lived, but that's where
people came to trade. It was a
trading post and their biggest
trading event was during the
summer, I mean during the winter
solstice. So they had to know
when it was coming, right? They
needed to plan ahead. So a lot
of the things uh in the uh
construction of Chaco Canyon are
all centered around the sun and
how the sun could be used to
predict when uh
Certain events were going to
happen. On the right, you see uh
uh aerial view view of Pueblo
Bonita, uh, which is the largest
part in Chaco Canyon. Uh, it
turns out that we've discovered
that the, the, the, the straight
wall in the back that part of
that straight wall is exactly
east-west oriented east-west.
It's oriented east-west to
within a quarter of a degree of
an angle, OK?
And I was recently out at at
Chaco. It's amazing to me how
straight these walls still are.
Right, uh, 1000 years after they
were built, they're still very
straight and they go exactly
east-west. The other um wall in
Chaco Canyon goes exactly
north-south. That one's accurate
to 1/16 of a degree of
north-south. What do we mean by
north-south, Magnetic north? No,
they didn't have magnets.
Right?
So it's Polaris, right? They're
looking at the North Star. No.
It's exactly aligned with the
rotation of the Earth, the
Earth's axis.
How did they do that? 1000 years
ago.
How did they have the
technology?
One, to understand what was
going on, science.
2, to translate into that
construction of their buildings,
engineering.
So I think there's a huge
Connection between
Indigenous people in New Mexico
and the study of the sun. So
we're working closely, uh, with,
um
um Gregario Gonzalez of the uh
uh the state's cultural affairs,
uh, uh, bureau uh to set up
meetings uh with uh tribal
leaders around New Mexico, uh,
and I think uh we're gonna make
a a really hard run at getting,
uh, indigenous people, children,
uh, here in New Mexico.
in the science of the sun.
So, um, with that, I'll stand
for questions.
Great, thank you. Do we have any
questions from the committee?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Right, represented little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
It's uh this is really exciting.
I, uh.
And another part of my younger
life, I was very interested in
astronomy and almost went down
that path, but I did not. It's
not too late.
That's what I hear. So, Madam
Chair, um, it was really uh
encouraging to hear, uh, you
wrap up this presentation, the
wrap up of this presentation
focusing on the indigenous
scientific knowledge that
existed before um all those
thousands of years ago, and I'm
especially encouraged to hear
about the importance, the
acknowledgement of the
importance in reaching out to
native communities uh to include
these children in them.
Um, I come from the pues of San
Felipe and Taos,
uh, uh, my husband is from
Mescalero Apache and through all
of our relations throughout the
state and across the country,
the um importance of the cosmos
is uh clearly evident to us and
it's very encouraging to, uh, I
can't say enough and I commend
you on and the institution of
focusing in your organization.
Focusing on getting including
those um descendants of the
ancestors who began this.
Who uh
Marked this, um.
This period of time and uh.
Uh, I will be sure to spread the
information as well, and I'd
like to offer Madam Chair any of
my assistance that I can
provide. I'd be happy to do so.
Um, I'm encouraged as well by
including indigenous children.
It's not just educating and
reaffirming the, the, the um
traditional scientific
knowledge, but it's also to
share that with other groups as
well to see there are many other
indigenous um.
Uh, locally based, uh, cultures
who have these um narratives as
well, so, um, thank you for your
presentation and wrapping it up
in this way. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Little, um, it,
uh, you know, my family is, uh,
from New Mexico for generations
and um.
We, we, we seem to as a society,
be losing our appreciation of
nature and what's around us. And
in New Mexico, we we can't let
that happen. Uh, it's just too
important to our culture.
So thank you for your support.
Thank you. Next is
Representative Harper.
Right
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you. I really enjoyed your
presentation, um.
I really enjoyed the video, uh,
happen to have some interstellar
music in there I noticed, which
is my favorite movie of all
time, so you had me at that, um.
So
I, I'm excited that we'll be
able to go visit the VLA here in
a little bit, which is
essentially a big radio
interferometer, um, did not
realize we had.
Another one, it's a Magdalena
Ridge Observatory. Um, and I
know I've, maybe I can just ask
you, is it
It's taken me a while to kind of
figure out how an interferometer
even works and, and I, and I
know they're used to measure
things from like microscopic
cells all the way to gravity
waves and you've got optical and
and radio ones, so maybe is
there like a
Uh, basic way you can describe,
um, how an interphronter works
for us.
So let me take a stab at it when
I know there's an expert sitting
right behind me, um.
Uh, from my perspective, what
we, uh, I'm sorry, uh, Madam
Chair, and, uh, um, Senator
Harper, um,
We take when we, when we do
interferometry, we take the, the
collecting instruments, either
the antenna or the telescope,
and we combine them in pairs.
Uh, and so essentially what we
do is we, we take signal from
one, the signal from the other,
create an interference pattern.
OK.
And which is, and since you're
graduating in Mexico Tech, uh,
you're gonna understand this and
we're gonna give you a quiz
afterwards, right? Dang it. When
we interfere those two signals.
What we get is the Foyer
transform of the image.
OK, we can record that, come
back later on and um and
investigate that, OK? So we
record all these Foyer
transforms. We take uh um uh I'm
sorry, it's the inverse Foyer
transform. When we go to analyze
it, we take the Fourier
transform, and that produces
essentially a pixel.
Of, of the image, right? And so
if we have, so we have 10
telescopes, right? They have 27
dishes, uh, 10, so it's 1 with
21 with 31 with 41 with 5, and
so there's a lot of that gives
you a lot of pixels and 2 with
32 with 42, it gives you a lot
more pixels. So with all of
these different I'm, I'm, I'm
stretching the definition of
pixels here, but with all these
different pixels, all of those
different.
Bits of information add up and
we can make the image that we're
interested in, uh, the more
pixels we have, the better
definition we get, and what we
like to say is that we become
model independent, uh, which
means if you tell me I'm looking
at a football and I take 1 or 2
pixels of the football. I can
describe the football to you,
right? But if you don't tell me
what I'm looking at, and I have
to rely on all the data, it
takes me a while before I figure
out that I'm not looking.
At a basketball, I'm looking
actually looking at a, at a
football. So that's kind of the.
The um uh short version of
interferometry 101.
Madam Chair, and uh uh Mr. M,
thank you for that. I, I was
just told that actually our, our
tour guide might actually be an
expert in this too, she is
looking forward to learning a
little bit more do a much better
job than than me. No, um, thank
you and uh
And I guess just my last um
little comment, Madam Chair, and
uh
And I, I didn't realize that our
uh our Magdalene Observatory was
involved in the DART mission so
that that's really cool. we were
following that and uh I thought
I was just, um, you know,
interesting to see the plume
and, and the change in the
period and all that. I didn't
know we had some roots to that,
um, work being done here, so
that, that was really cool to
see too. Madam Chair
Representative Harper, uh,
actually, because of our
involvement in DART, I was
invited to the launch, uh, at
Edwards. It was a night launch.
I highly.
Men are going to witness a night
launch, uh, like that, but, uh,
as cool as that was, of course
it was SpaceX, so SpaceX knows
how to promote itself. Uh, they
had cameras on, you know, uh,
you have the booster that goes
up and and gets the thing up
into orbit, but then the booster
comes back down. Uh, this
particular booster came back
down onto a platform that was
off the coast about 15 miles off
the coast of Mexico in the in
the ocean, uh, and they had
cameras set up.
With uh flat screen TVs all over
the launch area so you could see
the return of the booster. That
was way cooler than the launch,
so, um,
you know, I'm remiss, uh, I, uh,
as I was hurrying through this,
um, the interferometer, uh, we
have about $700,000 that have
been invested in that from the
Air Force, uh, and, uh, we hope
to get in order to get 3
telescopes operational, we need
about 16 million more that we're
working with Congress to try and
get that money.
But we don't get everything that
we need, uh, from those types of
grants as Carlos was talking
about. They fund a whole bunch
of, of, of, uh, really neat,
cool instrument, but there's
certain parts of the
infrastructure that they don't
fund. Uh, so we're competing
here on campus with our uh our
one time requests. It's uh gonna
go for capital money up to Santa
Fe. Uh, we're asking for what's
called a reach stacker. The
reach stacker will pick up the
telescopes and move them from
one.
Location to the another, why
would we want to do that? It's
like a telephoto lens. Sometimes
you want to look at a tree in
the forest, and sometimes you
want to look at the whole
forest. So we want to be able to
move the telescopes around and
we need about $1.5 million and
that's our request for the uh
one time money for the, for the
reach stacker.
Awesome.
Thank you. Thank you. I'm next
to his representative, um,
Garrett.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Thanks for
the presentation. Um, my
question is on the space
resources management initiative.
How is it interacting with
spaceport America, and it's I
think 9 businesses, including
Virgin Galactic, and then you
mentioned SpaceX are students
interning and involved with
these projects. How does that
Um.
Trying to answer this
politically correctly.
Uh, the answer is yes. Uh, you
know, there's these, uh, like
the Space Valley Coalition,
right? So those are the, those
types of coalitions are the
people we want to get involved
in because they, they have a big
umbrella that, that works with
all of these industries, right?
And our students do go out and
work with uh uh all of these
different companies. Now, I
know.
That we have students working
for uh for SpaceX. I know we
have former students working for
um uh Blue Origin.
But we don't have any working
for,
for Virgin.
I don't know why that is. It's
just, um, maybe our students, I
mean, we only have a finite
number of students, so maybe
they get sucked up, but, uh, I
have reached, we have had a
number of, of interactions with
with Virgin. Uh, I know, you
know, they've kind of gone
through some ups and downs. So
we continue to to uh to work
with them and we're happy to
work with them. Uh, and you
know, the key is getting our
students to working for those
companies because once those
students work for those
companies, we have a really
tight connection coming back,
right? Uh, they remember where
they came from, uh, so.
Uh, we have a good foothold in
the other ones, but we're gonna
work on, on Virgin.
Right. Well, thank you for your
um presentation.
Any more questions? Thank you.
You're gonna have a wonderful,
uh, uh, tour of the VLA. It's a
really cool place to visit, so.
Have fun.
Yes, so
Where you guys came in today in
the parking lot, there'll be a
bus there waiting for you. So
just when you finish here, go
down there. I'll be, I, I can
guide you down there and uh I
think Trish will be accompanying
you to the VLA, so enjoy your
tour this afternoon and your
dinner.
Do you want to say anything? OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just want to
introduce myself. I'll be
chatting with you on the way out
to the VLA and uh and while
we're there, but my name is
Patricia Henning. Uh, I go by
Trish. I'm the director of the
Very Large Array Radio
Telescope, really looking
forward to the experience. Now
we're all New Mexicans, so we
understand about whether on a
late afternoon in August, so
there's, there is rain, there
are rainstorms in and out.
They're coming through. They
dump rain, then they move on. So
exactly what it's going to
Be like in an hour. I can't. I'm
not that kind of a scientist,
but, uh, but we'll go out there
and, and, uh, and see what we
can see. Looking forward to it.
Thank you. Um, real quickly,
we're also having a dinner
tonight. Um, Jay and Matita, uh
Santalinas are, um, hosting a
dinner at 6:30 at Jackson Ranch
Steakhouse, which is the North
northern part of the of of
Socorro. So, um, if everybody,
well, let me get a count. Is
there any who would like to go
to, who's gonna go to the state
dinner.
3
Maybe, maybe.
Um
And I'll be there, the other one
gets to go nuts
So 6 when staff
staff.
No? OK, 8.
OK, I'll tell him.
David, David, should we put our
stuff away in our cars first.
OK, we'll do that real quick.
OK, thank you.
OK, thanks David. David, will
this be locked up so that any
electronic stuff or webcasting
that they can be left here. OK,
so we can leave our stuff here
if we wanted to.
