Can I start with, um, Senator
Tobias.
I
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Senator Tobias and, I'm from
District 21 Northeast
Albuquerque. I'm a business
coach and for my living for the
last two decades, I've focused
on helping build leaders in New
Mexico and help them take action
and innovation in their business
model to meet their ultimate
vision, so I'm really thrilled
to be on this committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Anthony Thornton. I'm a
retired aerospace engineer. I
used to work at San Die National
Laboratories. I represent the
East Mountains, which is
Bertollio, Sandoval, Santa Fe,
and Torrance.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, uh,
Mr. Edwards, thank you very much
for having me. I'm Senator
Michael Padilla. I serve as the
Senate Majority whip, I've been
in the Senate for 13 years, and
I did chair this committee for,
uh, or vice chair for 10 years,
and I just love the work that's
done in this committee. It's so
important to New Mexico, so I'm
looking forward to what the work
plan's gonna look like. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
The Morman chair Representative
Tara Luhan, I serve House
District 48 here in Santa Fe and
this is my first time as a
member on this committee, and
I'm looking for, oh, no,
actually, when I first started,
yeah, 2020, COVID, sorry, um, so
this is my 2nd time serving on
this committee. It's a wonderful
committee and um.
I'm happy to get to work a lot
of our uh budget will reflect
the work that we've already been
doing, and I'm just excited to
see how, how that's going to
interplay with the interim and
our our hearings. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and,
and people, uh Bill Souls, the
state senator from Las Cruces
area and then in the Senate for
13 years, but I really enjoyed
this committee because we deal
with so many things of which New
Mexico is uniquely positioned
to, to capitalize on with our
national labs, our universities,
and this committee is vital to
the future of New Mexico as we
look up and out to what that
might be.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Linda Trujillo, I represent
Senate District 24 right here in
the lovely city different and um
this is my 2nd time being on the
committee. I was on it when I
was a representative, and I
really enjoyed it and there's a
day that goes by that I, when
I'm in uh to can carry that. I
don't remember that we all had
an opportunity to climb that
wind turbine. I didn't do it,
but I do remember that Senator
Sos did. So, um, very brave, but
this is a really great
committee.
It's an opportunity to really,
really kind of look at a lot of
different um avenues. Thank you.
Good morning, madam chair, and
um,
There's the vice chair, vice
chair. Oh, like.
Um, Representative Christine
Chandler from Los Alamos, House
District 43. Um, it includes Los
Alamos, parts of Santa Fe, and
Sandoval counties. Happy to be
here, formerly was a lawyer at
Los Alamos National Lab.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members, I'm
Representative Mariana Anaya for
House District 18. That is the
Knob Hill, UNM CNM area, lots of
innovation happening.
Thanks, Glad to be here. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Anita Gonzalez. I'm
state representative for House
District 70, Semien Torrance
Counties, um, for the past
22-ish years. They've been a
STEM educator, um, so I've spent
my career working with community
colleges, um, our state
institutions, um, in our state
industries is getting um
students into that career
pipeline for stem works, so very
happy to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'm
Representative Meredith Dixon
from House District 20 in
southeast Albuquerque, um,
overlap with Senator Thornton,
um, and I have, uh, Sania
Science and Tech Park, uh, in my
district.
Go ahead and, um, Josh, uh.
Representative
Sorry, I didn't like madam
chair. Uh, my name is uh
Representative Joshua Hernandez.
I represent District 60 in Rio
Rancho. Um, I have Intel right
outside of my district, um, and
a whole bunch of
fun new stuff that's headed our
way, hopefully so.
And I look forward to uh taking
part in this committee. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
And my vice chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Heather Bergman, the senator
from District 15, which is in
midtown Albuquerque, and I'm
really excited and look forward
to learning and exploring a lot
on this committee.
Thank you all. Um, I'd like to
move to Mark, our step staff
attorney.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Mark Edwards. I'm with the
Legislative council Service, a
drafter, I'll be drafting most
of the bills that come out of
this committee, uh, over in the
back corner there is Joanne
Montague, our wonderful LCS
librarian, she is replacing
Ralph Vincent, who has finally
decided that he moved to
Scottsdale a couple years ago to
be near his grandkid and uh
finally decided traveling back
every
for these meetings while he
loves being in New Mexico, that
just became too much. Uh, he's
probably online right now, um,
but she's going to be feeling
big shoes.
Uh, Ralph had been on this
committee since the inception of
this committee, back before it
merged. This is actually the
merger of a Los Alamos or
national labs Oversight
Committee and a IT commission
Committee that uh so it's hard
to say exactly when this
started, but Ralph was at the
beginning of it, and then over
in the other corner is William
Mason, who is one of our
proofers, who is going to be
staffing this.
this year as well.
Thank you, Mark, and we will
miss Ralph, but um thank welcome
both of our new stampers, great
to have you guys. All right, I'd
like to um have the audience
introduce themselves so we know
who's here and who is um, if you
don't mind, can you come close
to where the microphone and and
tell us who you are and and what
you do.
Hi, I'm Todd Baron, I am the
general counsel for the Office
of Cybersecurity and look
forward to the work of this
committee.
Good morning everyone. Justin
Guru with Conservation Voters in
New Mexico and conservation
voters in Mexico Education Fund,
Climate and energy is my
specialty.
Everyone of Chloe Dixon, uh,
district legislative aide, House
District 20 Representative Meri
Dixon, and no, we are not
related.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Pat Block. I'm a contract
lobbyist here in New Mexico, not
appearing on behalf of.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Roy
Soto. I'm you know dynamics.
And he testified before this
committee, even before the
merger, both had black hair, so
here with the committee.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. It's
so nice to see all of you. I'm
glad to be here for the first
time that my committee's been
watching most on Zoom. My name
is Marco Gonzalez. I'm a
registered lobbyist and for
space.
Um, I represent Oracle Q
continuum.
And new Space Nexus. I'm really
happy to be here and to, uh,
start the excite.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
members of the committee, my
name is Mark Savera and I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Council University
presidents, which includes our 7
universities here in New Mexico,
Eastern New Mexico University in
Portales, Mexico State down in
Las Cruces, New Mexico Tech and
Socorro, Washington Mexico
University in Silver City, of
course, University of New Mexico
in Albuquerque and New Mexico
Highlands University in Las
Vegas and Espanola, but and I
also work closely with the New
Mexican Independent Community
Colleges as well.
Um, and so we just, again, we
appreciate all the work that the
committee does, uh, connects
higher education, our research
institutions, our community
colleges, our comprehensives. I
didn't, um, along with the House
Bill 20. Thank you,
Representative Dixon. um, and
then also just a number of other
items to work on. We're looking
forward to working with the
committee.
I, everyone remembers at the
committee. My name is Sky Devore
and I wear many hats, but today
I'm here as a constituent.
Well, thank you all for being
here and I know we'll see you
throughout the the interim.
Thank you for that. Um, I am
Debbie Serana. I represent House
District 21 in in Bernalillo
County, the Monzano High School
area, um, background computer,
computer database management
systems administration, I
actually programmed in Oracle,
who said Oracle? Somebody did,
um, yeah, it's great, great
system, um, and I was a high
school math teacher at Monzano
and a couple of middle schools,
so, um.
I've been on this committee the
entire 9 years I've been in the
legislature and I really enjoy
it. I think we do some amazing
things. We focus this year, the
last couple years we focused on
trying to get good legislation
passed through this committee.
So that's what we focus on, um,
and we have just to let you
know, Mark is amazing and he has
kept this committee going for
several years and um you can
always call on him cause I.
Right, even when you're stuck in
traffic, um, but, um, again,
thank you for being here and um
I think we're ready to get
started. Anybody new come in?
No.
Um, we're still waiting for a
few more people to come, uh,
I've gotten some text. All
right, we're gonna go ahead and
start with a work plan, Mark.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
before I get started, Roy left
off one thing on his resume. He
was the original secretary for
the Department of Information
Technology. So he was there at
the very beginning. Um, OK, so
hopefully all of you have a copy
of the work plan, uh, for those
of you who are new members, I
draft work plans to be a table
of contents. Uh, when I first
started work plans used to be 4
or 5 pages that were bullet.
Points of every little
Single issues or three words
that people wanted to see during
the interim, but there was no
coherence to it, so I've tried
to make it more focused, so
people have a general idea of
what the committee is about. And
if you don't see something in
there, please look at the
categories that are in there and
see if it fits within cause it
probably will show up on an
agenda, especially if you ask
for it to show up on an agenda,
uh, but I do try to avoid
putting too much in.
Because
It just loses coherence.
Um,
that's it.
The committee was
Created again this year on April
28th by the Legislative council
and as time permits, the
proposal is to continue the
committee's oversight functions,
and with regard to IT projects,
the developments in the national
laboratories, uh,
And the science and tech
programs at the state
universities.
Uh, it also, the proposal is to
continue examining development
of broadband infrastructure,
telecommunications market,
science and tech-based economic
sector within the state, uh
there was some good legislation
or important legislation, I
won't say good or bad, uh, but
important legislation in that
regard, coming out of the house
last year. The uh
And then, uh
This committee is always
interested in STEM programs. We
spell it out, science,
technology, engineering, and
mathematics, and education. So
we don't like acronyms uh in our
style, but STEM has become so
prevalent over the last 30 years
that I've been arguing with uh
proofing and management that we
should just adopt it as a word,
uh, that would be a monumental
thing, uh, it took 60 years of
crime shows before LCS adopted
DNA.
a term of art,
uh instead of spelling
dinucleotide blah blah blah blah
blah blah blah. So, uh
That's my sign. One thing
someone brought up that um
I had left off law enforcement
technology, and so I'm
suggesting that you may want to
add that in as an
and advancements or any changes
in law enforcement technology.
Uh, I had left off stem earlier
and had to add that in, partly
because
One thing this committee does
because technology plays and
everybody else's backyards.
Stem had started taking over the
entire work plan for this
committee, and a lot of
committee members were saying,
We hear this in LAC.
So we
I had started moving the work
plan away from being
STEM-focused, at least in the in
the presentation completely
forgot to put it in this time.
Same thing with law enforcement
technology.
It
Sometimes, uh, one of the
biggest complaints I often hear
from members is we just heard
this in 3 other committees,
exact same presentation, so I
try to avoid that.
OK, so moving on to focus items,
uh, aside from those broad
picture items, artificial
intelligence.
Its impacts and, you know,
How it is
Uh, seeping into every corner of
life has been a um
Focus concern of this committee
for the last 2 years and so is
proposed to continue looking at
that, and that will continue
with all sorts of things. Uh,
there was a bill on deep fakes
this last year that clearly
falls within.
Uh, the artificial intelligence
sector, the uh it also involves
government decision making or
private sector housing
decisions, rental decisions, and
uh if you have particular items
under there or a presenter that
you know could explain something
that the state might need to
look at, please bring them up in
this discussion or bring them up
to me or the chair or the vice
chair later on, uh, this
committee is
Mission from the council last
couple of years has been to
develop good legislation with
regard to
Artificial intelligence.
Uh, likewise, the cybersecurity
environment.
It's been a huge topic of
concern for this committee for
many, many years, and
So this committee will continue
looking at how, what are the
risk factors that are being
looked at.
I not only different government
agencies, but higher ed
institutions and going into the
private sector. Different
people, different entities can
afford different levels so they
have to adopt different
strategies, the NIST uh.
Standards
Contemplate a perfect world
where you have a perfect budget,
to be able to afford.
Cybersecurity at any level. Uh.
Continuing on that demands for
data privacy.
Development of energy production
and transmission, uh, including
technologies not in use AI to
detect and remedy leaks,
extraction of.
In a mining situations and
drilling situations.
The Western transmission
Consortium is a new regional
grid that was announced about
last month, I believe.
And so right up this alley, the
alley of this committee to learn
about.
And then finally, um, the uh
federal government is in a huge
internal negotiation about what
its role is as far as funding,
all sorts of government
services, uh, probably the
biggest two items I can think of
that may impact this committee's
jurisdiction are last year this
committee toured the VLA and
what they announced last year
was that
NASA had decided to put this, it
had drifted up to the #2 on the
priority list and the number one
dropped off to replace all the
radio telescopes at the VLA.
That's a, they have a
contractor. It's a Danish firm
that was has
Just last year they reported
they were trying to convince the
firm to move to New Mexico to
manufacture over a quarter of a
billion dollars worth of new
scopes here in the state.
Uh, that may be on the chopping.
So
The other is all the research
grants that come into our
3 main research institutions. I
should say 4 Navajo Tech is now
listed within our statutes as
one of the states for higher ed
research institutions.
And those programs may be also
in jeopardy, so.
Uh, we will from time to time
have updates.
On the agenda to look at what's
happening at the federal level
so that you can plan your
budgets next year.
Looking at the uh proposed
travel schedule.
In July,
Do you want to go through that
or do you want to go through the
work plan first. um, let's do
the works.
All right, so what I'd like to
do is just go around and have
you tell us what you'd like to
add or change, um, this, we'll
start with a rep uh Senator
Trujillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, uh,
um, just a couple of things in
the.
Uh, a paragraph A the.
Growing impacts of the use of
artificial intelligence. I would
love to hear how that is
helping.
Particularly in forest
management that, um, you know,
predictive fire, um, some of
those things, I, I would really
love to hear about that and
maybe even
Agriculture, but fire management
for certain, I, I think would be
important to hear about. And
then I continue to
I'm doing a lot of research and
communication, um, in regards to
juvenile justice and met with
the district attorney yesterday
and I continue to hear that
social media is a real issue
with our youth. Um, and, and I
know there's been some
legislation to try to, um, you
know, restrict social media for
young people and none of it has
really made it anywhere, but if
there's any opportunity for
that. I, I think it's something
that would be important to
address, and then the last thing
I would love to see, um, you
know, when we're in the Las
Cruces area, Madam Chair, maybe
a tour of spaceport.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Very
excited and happy to see um
paragraph A and paragraph C on
the agenda, I think, um, there's
not enough information.
Concerns arising from the use of
people's lives. Um, we've heard
a lot on, isn't it wonderful
kind of stuff.
That sort of thing, but not very
much on the risks associated
with people's everyday lives, so
I'm very happy to see both of
these items and appreciate you
for putting it on. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Cha. These
might also be subcategories
within those larger umbrellas,
but um I'd really like to see
how ice uses data, um, collected
by private companies, also
public utilities, um, data
brokers to surveil and locate
people and hopefully I'd like to
see that sooner than later, I
think time is of the essence for
that. Um, but also how data and
tech plays into discriminatory
policing, um, how AI is used.
And effects access to housing.
Um, data privacy, of course,
related to healthcare,
specifically abortion and gender
affirming care.
And last, I have heard many
concerns in our healthcare
space.
that we really need to assess
what kind of technology
platforms we're using and how we
can secure that data, but also
allow um healthcare providers to
share data across.
Um
Across the healthcare systems.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
maybe this might be a a sub note
possibly to to be.
But, um, you know, specific
focus on computer science
education and how um building
that pipeline ties into actually
feeding into industry. I know we
have an ongoing STEM network
that's forming out of NMSU, um,
and we, you know, there's other
entities here in the state that
are really actively working on
those recruitment of, of
students coming into those
pipelines.
Um,
Secondly, I guess in addition to
say item number.
D, um, I guess just opening that
up to looking at other energy
technologies, there's a lot
within the.
Renewable space that there's a
lot of emerging energy
technologies, so I think that
could be a focus for us here in
this committee, uh, and then
lastly, it wasn't mentioned but
within maybe the
telecommunication space,
definitely real internet and
connectivity, it's still very
much an issue in a lot of my
district as well as a lot of the
state, um.
How do we actually go forward in
getting reliable internet and
connectivity into a large.
Can you hear me? Yes.
Um, thank you, um.
trying to catch up, so, but a
couple of things that were in my
mind before coming was how uh we
can use the AI for um what is
the government data or who is
looking at that data? Do you
have any agencies or how can we
a person make sure like you
mentioned to, um, that, that,
that, that is the technologies
that we are using is not gonna
bring us back to things that we
have advanced already in many of
our
How can I say it, um, accounting
for for backgrounds and
diversity in many areas in
education, in housing in many
areas. Um, also, um, as you
mentioned, um,
where we are in accessing to uh
internet telecommunications. I
think we, it will be important
for us to know where we are, so
we know where we are missing
too. Um, those are the things
that are on top of my head right
now. I'm representative, would
you introduce yourself real
quickenitagurola,
I represent the West side in
Albuquerque and um love to be
back in this committee for
another 2 years. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
couple of things, uh, one I
didn't see, but I would like to
is quantum computing. God
brought up a lot this last
session, um, and I think there's
a lot of opportunities in our
very near future for our state
with quantum and the labs and
everything else. So I think that
that would be a good thing, um,
especially there has been some
very large advancements in
quantum in the last 6 months,
um, that now make it a five-year
reality instead of a 25 year
reality, so.
Um, AI, I think is another big
thing, um, I would love to see
what um regulations um have
happened in other states and
what is being talked about on
the federal level, even though
they are working at a snail's
pace on it currently, um, what
has worked in other states, what
has not worked in other states,
I know that, um, especially
Colorado passed a bunch of AI,
uh, regulations, and then they
had to rush back and um
Fix a bunch of them the next
year, uh, and I want to make
sure that we don't make some of
those same
Same, uh, mistakes when we go
down this path. Um, I would also
love to see what small tech
firms in New Mexico are building
around AI um or using AI, um, to
see what's happening in our
backyard. Um,
Uh, if we're going down towards
Cruises or the border, um, I
would love to get an update on
the Borderplex digital, um,
campus, um, down there. Sounds
like it's gonna be
Awesome, but um I know there was
a lot during session around it,
but I would love to see what
kind of their progression has
been, um, and on deep under
energy production, I would love
to also talk about um small
modular nuclear reactors, um,
now that they are
How to do or very close to
getting NRC um.
Approval, so something that can
start being deployed, um, I
think just getting some
education about that and what it
could look like for our future
would be amazing. That's what I
got. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Mr. Edwards for the,
the work plan. Um,
I just want to, I think,
reiterate the um in the first
paragraph, the science and
technology-based economic sector
within the state. I'm really
pleased to have that on there,
um, so that we can make sure we
talk about the um investments
the state's making in those high
tech areas and how we, um, as a
state government can support,
um, particularly the startups
and the commercialization of
technology. Um, also,
potentially, um just uh
following the progress of
The new technology and
innovation office um at EDD and
how that um interacts and then
um Representative Hernandez
mentioned a couple of things
that I was interested in, so
I'll just echo that, um, and
then, um, finally, um,
Talking about uh trigger, uh,
the program that the national
labs have to support uh the
commercialization of technology,
uh, that, um, tax.
Credit will be up for renewal in
2 years. Um, and so, um, talking
about the impact that it has had
thus far and, uh, making sure
that we're ready to proceed with
that.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Mark, um, I know I've
been talking with the chair
about some of my ideas before
and I'm glad to see that some of
them are incorporated in here.
The only thing I really wanted
to add besides echoing
everything that everyone has
said so far is I would really
love to see, and you mentioned
it uh before the, the use of
technology in law enforcement
and more specifically the
license plate reader technology
and how our local municipal law
enforcement agencies are storing
and using that data that they're
collecting.
I'd also love to see data usage
and data systems at and between
the state agencies. I know we
passed a bill this session for
CYFD to store their data in the
cloud, and I'm curious how that
implementation would be in,
well, how the implementation is
going, and if they have the
actual current technology
infrastructure to build such a
program as well as any of the
other, I know the committee
probably has heard from many
agencies over the past about
the, the lack of progress in
data management.
state agencies and being a new
member, I would love to hear an
update of where we're at on
that. But if that's too
burdensome for everyone who's
already been here. We can have
those conversations offline
also, and then maybe get some
sort of update on
Good progress rather than just
where we're stuck at.
Um, I'd also like to add, if we
can, I mean, echoing the quantum
for sure, and then for the AI
sections, I'd love if we could
get just a quick overview on one
day maybe of the environmental
impacts, specifically the water
usage of AI and if we were to
build AI data centers in New
Mexico, what would that water
usage look like?
That's all.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Couple of things, you know, as
we get to Albuquerque, I'm not
sure where the right place is,
uh, but very concerned about the
cuts in funding at the federal
level to National Science
Foundation and National
Institute of Health and how
that's affecting research at our
universities and our faculty and
our ability then into the future
to attract additional uh
research dollars coming in. Um,
I think Albuquerque might be a
good place and to get some
reports about both where those
have been cut, but also ways
that as a state we might be able
to fund research to keep that
going and attract top
researchers that are being
kicked out of other states that
can't afford to fund the
research that this look seeing
it as some of an opportunity to
build New Mexico's research
capacity. So along those lines
in the Albuquerque meeting, um,
when we get down to the Las
Cruces area.
Potentially, and I don't know
this committee has ever gone out
to white sands and gotten
science, technology, updates of
some of the amazing research and
technologies that are going on
out at the White Sands missile
range. Um, and that might be a
nice trip out of Las Cruces over
there, uh, Mark is well familiar
with how to do it. It does
require you get credentials and
that you've got proper entrance.
Papers and, and such things to
do so, but that might be a
really interesting and to see
some of what goes on there in
the museum that's over there at
White Sands. Uh, beyond that,
when we're in Las Cruces,
everybody mark your calendar to
stay over the weekend. Saturday
is gonna be the big air show and
air races going on there. Um, if
there is stuff and to see and
I'll make sure that you get
introduced and see some of the
amazing technology of these
airplanes that fly at over 400
miles an hour.
50 ft off the ground, going
around the pylon course, but on
that Thursday, potentially
having a barbecue type thing and
reception out at my hangar, uh,
where people get an opportunity,
we have some other pilots as
well to go flying and see what's
going on and fly simulators and
just see some of the technology
that's going around, around
aviation in southern New Mexico.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
a, um, a list of things that um
correlate to the outline we have
here. I'll start with the energy
security and reliability, um,
looking at, uh, uh, stable and
predictable energy supply as
being one of the critical
elements for economic stability
and community well-being, um, to
highlight the need for
diversified energy sources,
including renewables to reduce
reliance on single sources and
and mitigate potential
disruptions. Um, on
economic development. I have uh
how we are leveraging, um,
energy policies to attract those
businesses, create jobs, and
stimulate economic growth with a
focus on how energy efficiency
and renewable energy investments
can drive innovation and
competitiveness, um,
environmental sustainability.
Um, how, uh, we are promoting
policies and maybe those
policies that we did pass, um,
that reduce carbon emissions and
protect the environment while
ensuring a reliable energy.
supply.
Consider incorporating renewable
energy standards and efficiency
and um efficiency requirements
to achieve our goals, um, for
grid modernization, um, how we,
uh, we, we need to invest in
grid infrastructure upgrades to
accommodate increasing renewable
energy generation ensure a
reliable, resilient energy
system. Consider how, um,
considering how we're going to
be using virtual or possible
virtual power plants to enhance
grid grid flexibility was one of
the conversations we had during
um session.
Uh, looking at that reliability
and microgrids.
Um, next to, um, uh, how we're
supporting policies that
incentivize the developments and
deployments of renewable energy
sources like solar, wind and
geothermal.
And it is mentioned by um
Representative.
Hernandez and looking at the uh
nuclear element of uh potentials
for our state.
Uh, what that means for our
state, uh, if, if we're going to
move in that direction. Um,
Energy efficiency, um, really
important, uh, promoting energy
efficiency measures in
buildings, transportation, and
industry to reduce energy
consumption and lower costs, and
that's, that's really, really
important, um, as we're moving
into uh the technological
advancements that we have, um,
so that's really important, um,
and emerging technologies, I
think that was mentioned already
in exploring those potentials of
uh new energy technologies like
battery storage, um, we passed
the
legislation for carbon capture
and storage, and, and, um, what
is, what is it gonna take to
enhance energy security and
reduce emissions, uh, the
balancing costs and benefits as
mentioned with water usage, how
we're going to have that that
balance as we are growing those
emerging technologies, um.
And I think that's about it. I,
I just really want to emphasize
stakeholder engagement as we're
having these conversations.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
uh a lot of has been mentioned
I'll go over some things very
quickly, but on the quantum
stuff, absolutely, uh, was able
to get the 50 or so million put
into the budget this year to
make sure that we got that
rolling, but I just wanna, you
know, make everyone aware that
$50 million barely gets out of
the parking lot on this thing.
So we're gonna have to do a lot
more there. But what I'd like to
see us do in quantum is have
maybe sort some sort of a panel
of some kind, Madam Chair, that
what's the strategy? What is our
plan here? You know, because
this is a lot of money that
we've already put and we need a
lot more.
Uh, maybe bring in higher ed,
what are they gonna do? What's
they're gonna, they're part of
this gonna be, uh, the gov gov's
office has uh a quantum advisor
now, uh, that is part of his
portfolio, so maybe he should
come in and present and then
economic development department
should likely come in and talk
to us about what it is that
they're trying to do on this
topic as well. So I think that's
pretty important. Um, on
broadband, um, you know, I'm
just out there creating as many
offices as I can over the years
that I've been here, but I'm a
very concerned about broadband
and the Obay office right now.
Uh, they're now through their
I think I'm counting 3 directors
and about
5 or so years, and I'm very
concerned about that, and I'd
like to know literally an update
A to Z, what the heck's going on
over there? Because I'm very
concerned that they've got a lot
of planning, they seem to be
running around in circles,
putting a lot of plans together,
but what are they? What, what
are they gonna be? Um, so that
would be great.
Um, we need to, I believe
there's gonna be a new director
named soon, so, you know,
without, you know, shocking that
person like we love to do here,
right? Um, let's make sure that
we get that person in here.
Hopefully that's announced by
the time um that person gets
here, then I, I think the
committee is aware that we were
awarded the 675 million um bead
money for New Mexico after I
created the office of Broadband
in many of us did a large part
of that, but it's absolutely at
risk, everybody right now. OK,
just cause it has the word
equity in it.
Uh, so I wrote a letter to the
president, and I, I don't think
he looked at it, but somebody
there looked at it, and it's
digital equity, it's not the
equity that he's necessarily
thinking trying to get political
here or anything, but, but I
think that's a huge, you know,
risk for us here. So I wrote him
a letter and I said, you know,
Please look at this a little
closer. So I'd like an update
from the OA office. Where the
heck is all that money? Because
that's gonna be a huge loss if
we lose that. Um,
The, uh, you know, I'd like to
understand the structure of do
it.
Because several of us attended a
call a couple of weeks ago and I
was on a call before that and we
need this purchasing power, that
signature power, we need the
ability to enter into contracts
and I think that because of how
we set it up, I'll take
responsibility for this. You
guys take responsibility for the
good things. How we set it up, I
think, created a couple of hoops
they have to jump through in
order to get things done, you
know, in a timely manner. So
we're gonna try to reconfigure
some of that, but I just want to
understand what's the do it
structure.
I mean, you know, who's who's on
1st, who's on 2nd, who's getting
this done and that done, OK? So,
I'd like them to come in and
talk about the do it function,
obey cybersecurity, um,
I just put, I think, right,
writing now, I think I put etc.
there. So really everything like
the help desk, you know, how are
they, how are they interfacing
with the various agencies and uh
I would like to get an update.
We used to do this when I was
chair of this committee, uh, the
top 10 implementations, where
are they? What, what's the
status? Are they on budget? Are
they red, yellow, and green? I'd
like the, the cabinet secretary
to bring in the top 10
implementations and tell us what
what's going on here because
some of these things, you know,
like um the epics implementation
that we're all, you know, huge
issue.
Mexico at the time. It took 8
years during the Martinez
administration, and it wound up
being like a, it was never
really fully implemented. It was
5 times the original budget. I
think they should, the secretary
should be able to come in and
talk to us about that on
implementations.
I'm almost done, madam chair.
And then the last thing I want
to mention is uh I was able to
get about a million dollars put
into the budget this year for,
I'm not quite sure exactly the
new terminology for it, but
basically where they're able to
use the existing cameras and
things on school grounds, and
they can use the technology to
identify firearms that are
coming onto the property, and
then immediately alert local law
enforcement, etc. I'd like to
get an update on that. Um.
Because there's a million
dollars there, they don't have
to throw out any of the
technology that they have, they
can integrate what they already
have, but there's, there's
software now that can totally
recognize this stuff, and I
think we would be really silly
in New Mexico not to make sure
that that gets done. And so if
we could get a presentation on
that.
I have other things too, but
I'll stop there. Thanks.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
A lot of it has already been
said, and there are a few issues
uh that uh.
Senator, uh, here I mention uh
broadband infrastructure. I
think I'm also interested in
seeing where we are with that.
And I'd like to compare our
broadband infrastructure goals
with
Especially in the rural
environment with how we are
going with comparing that to
what Starle could offer today.
And what the cost would be in
the terms of instead of going
down, putting in lines and
optical cables and things of
that sort. We have the
availability now of just getting
it through the satellite. I know
I've done that personally for
myself at home, and I got rid of
all my other internet
connections, and that works
perfectly fine. So, and it was a
lot cheaper in the long run. So
I think I want to find out what
we're doing with broadband
infrastructure, how we're
supporting our, our rural
communities and uh see what we
can do better in that regard.
Um, regarding, uh, there's a
convergence right now going on
between the AI robotics and
energy, uh, they all work
together. Uh, we're going to see
more and more on robotics, and I
think one of the things I'd like
to understand before it happens
is what potential impact is of,
of as the robotics start rolling
out and moving into uh
factories, what impact is that
gonna have on our businesses
here in New Mexico. Um, I, I
expect that by the end of the
year, we're gonna start seeing
Uh robotics being produced at
large numbers, and, uh, and it
may not come in Mexico right
away, but it will eventually
come to Mexico. So what's the
impact on labor?
And what's an impact on, on the,
on the local community because
of that.
Um, on regards in regards to the
energy needs, uh, as we know,
uh.
Data processing centers require
lots of energy. And so I'm very
much interested in getting small
module reactor technology to New
Mexico, um, it, it's a shame
that we haven't gone much
further. I mean, we've been
running small module reactors
and in uh military aircraft
carriers for.
years, and they're running in
submarines for years, and yet
somehow this country can't seem
to figure out how to make spam
reactors for communities where
you can power 60,000 homes for
25 years, no emissions. And so
it seems to me we ought to be
pushing that forward and, and I
always considered New Mexico the
nuclear state. This is where it
all began. And, and so we ought
to become one of the first
people reading that uh effort
forward in in in installing
nuclear reactors.
As a, as an energy source, and
if you truly want green, you
need to have a strong, strong
solid base. That's the only way
to get there.
I, I'm, I'm, I'm not against
solar and wind, but that's never
going to get us to where we need
to be for the power it needs
that we see coming in the
future.
So, I'd like to see a real
effort put in the small module
actors and get the folks who can
help us with that technology.
Um
As we go, uh, uh, Senator
Bergman mentioned the uh data
management issue for our public.
But I, you know, a number 3, you
mentioned.
Did it
Data privacy, but I'd also like
to understand the data
transparency, so this is part of
the data management piece in
terms of
A lot of public expects a lot
more information from state
government, and they kind of
want to know what's going on,
who's doing what, and I don't
know how well we're doing that,
and so I'd like to, so if we're
gonna talk about data privacy. I
also want to know about data
transparency in terms of what's
available to the public in terms
of how we can provide more
information to them so that
we're being transparent as
legislatures, so that they
understand the things that we do
budget-wise, how that impacts
them directly. So it's, in other
words, getting that data out to
them in a, in a much more
transparent man.
Um, and finally,
Uh, on July, I guess we're going
to go to Los Alamos and, and,
and I just got word that there
was a group of uh quantum
physicists at Los Alamos.
Who are Chris who have developed
some technology to make the grid
unhackable. And so if we're
there, it would be nice to be
able to try to get them to come
and give us a presentation on
what their technology is and
what they're doing. So that
would be helpful. Um, quantum
mechanics is, is, uh, evolving.
An evolving technology, it's
actually moving a lot faster
than most people anticipated,
and it probably will have a
major impact on the future, but
I think it's again, this
convergence of AI robotics,
energy, and, and quantum is
going to be part of that game as
well as we go forward. Things
are moving fast and I think this
group, we have to get beyond
thinking about today and
tomorrow, but think about 5
years from now, because things
are happening a lot quicker than
we expect.
Thank you, doctor.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
also be repeating several things
that um legislators here have
mentioned, but we are facing an
energy crisis, not just here in
our state, but nationwide so I
am very interested in what our
upgrades are to our grid, how
we're working on that very
interested in the group that's
um come up with a way to ensure
that our grid is not hackable,
um, it really makes us very
vulnerable, um, how quantum
physics and AI data facilities
are going to launch us further
into
um an energy crisis and what
we're doing about it, um, the
small modular reactors, I think
are the answer not only for
those data facilities, but for
our rural areas areas in
particular and the science is
absolutely amazing and um the
data has proven that they cannot
melt down the way they're built.
They're completely different
than the Chernobyl era, um,
nuclear plants that we all knew
growing up, um, K through 12
education, I'd like to know what
we're doing as far as um
Positioning these children to
understand the importance of AI
and quantum physics and
cybersecurity and readying them
for a a higher education to help
that industry here in our state.
And then um when it comes to a
healthcare centralized system,
that's something that is very
personal for me. Um, my husband
has an autoimmune disease and we
have gone through doctor after
doctor after doctor, and we've
had to travel out of state, um,
look all over the country.
for doctors that can help him
from time to time, and for us to
really work on a centralized
system just here in the state,
if you think about probably
every one of us sitting here
have gone through at least one
doctor or has a family member
that has, um, I think it's vital
for us to really make sure that
whoever is taking care of our
citizens here in our state has
access and easy access to their
medical records, so I would like
to see us, um, hear from some
people on that and I know it's
been
Talked about over the years, so
it'd be interesting to know
where we are on that technology.
Thank you.
Um, any.
Is this all?
OK, good.
Madam Chair, um, I just had a
couple of, of add-ons. I hadn't
really thought about locations
until after everyone kind of
talked, but um you know some of
the places there's a lot of
options, but it, like when we in
to carry, um, I'm assuming there
might be some sort of wind
technology there with Melance,
but they also have an agent and
unless you agents, so maybe a
possibility to incorporate ag
technologies, um, and just in
the October visit to Las Cruces,
I just
want to echo, um, Senator Soul's
recommendation for the White
Sands, the NASA White Sands test
facility that's down there. Um,
there's a lot of aerospace
technology that, you know, that
we could possibly visit or, or,
you know, um.
Get a little field trip into um
and also just as an FYI on
October 24th, there is an
undergraduate student research
conference at NMSUAM conference
that they have every year and
they bring students from across
the state that are doing
technology research.
You. Can I just, um, data
privacy, that one is a big deal
for me, um.
Especially now what's happening
at this administration, uh, I
used to be a database manager,
computer program and uh what you
can do with data is scary and
not knowing what's happening
with our data is, is scary, so
we need to figure out, I think
data privacy is something we
really have to look at, um.
cybersecurity, uh, the checks
work, um, working with that, um,
do it and um keeping track of
what's going on in cybersecurity
all over the state, what they're
doing, um, I want to make sure
they're they're on somewhere,
um, white sands. I used to work
at White Sands. I love that
place. Um, yes, I would love to
go back. It's been a long time,
um, just to see what they're
doing and what technologies they
have.
Um
score, we want to bring in to
see how like Senator Soul says
the funding, what's happening
with them because we have some
great scientists out there with
a great technology they're
bringing, and we need to see
what's happening, um.
Uh, Obai, there is a lot of
changes and we do need to pin
them down and see what's going
on. I think there's so much you
covered everything, um, the
license plates. Does that mean
we need to front front license
plate too, possibly, or if we're
going to use technology
tracking. I mean, they're
currently doing it without one,
so, OK, OK. Um.
But otherwise we have a uh
full uh gender, um, so we will
take no breaks during our
meetings and uh no, no, I think
this is great. This is a, this
is what we're here for. So, um,
Mark, uh, you want to keep going
with the schedule or you want to
speak a little bit on the tops.
I just want to make a couple of
comments, uh, everything that
everyone talked about.
Fits within the mission of this
committee.
And if you
Spent if you did everything that
you all talked about.
Tomorrow would be the next day,
and we would finish up some time
in mid-November straight
through. Uh, so you're gonna be
a little disappointed cause I've
got 8 days to scrunch everything
in.
Uh, I'm, I'm an expert
scruncher, so you'll get a lot
of it, but uh I know that there,
I'm gonna try to build in time
for you all to actually have a
discussion about something you
learned about, so you can
discuss, OK, what sort of
legislation might you want to
introduce what works, what
doesn't work. Several members of
this committee suggested that
when it comes to AI and data
privacy, that there be
presentations on some of the
bills.
were introduced and got to the
house floor, but didn't go
anywhere after that. Um, so
that, you know, both chambers
since with this committee is
made up of both chambers can
discuss, hey, maybe if you
tweaked it this way, maybe you
could spring it off the floor
and we could, we could debate it
and over in the other chamber,
uh, so.
There's gonna be some of that.
The
The question I have, um, several
of you brought up the
What are the agencies do?
Essentially it's a question,
what are the agencies doing with
IT and how are there projects
working. I spent a lot of time
with a couple of years ago
trying to create a agenda that
would have people that talk
about IT development and how to
manage that. And I
LFC staff and I and uh
Sat down last year with the uh
IT developers for CYFD and we
talked about
Have the current state system,
which is is a model for IT
management developed in the
1940s, essentially.
They know about
agile. It scares them to death,
so they immediately start
talking about waterfall.
Which they've heard about and
they know they've done, but it's
more of a top-down management
thing, so we had talked about
having a presentation on how to
change that, but it's really,
it's very hard for the
legislature to, to tell the
executive, you're gonna manage
your projects this way or that
way.
Uh, it's more
You have levers with regard to
incentives.
And
Calling up and saying, OK, why
is it taking 5 years and you've
ended up with a uh
And IT software package that
looks completely different than
the one you pitched to us at 5
times the cost. Uh, when Senator
Patilla was talking about the uh
Ecosystem and the changes that
went through that.
That whole process.
Uh, sometimes they simply
decide, OK, we've gone enough on
that. We're gonna change the
name of it. We're gonna have a
new thing.
sounds different so
That sort of uh integrative
iterative, uh, discussion where
I would bring in panels and we
talk about how to do IT
management and where the
pressure points are and how to
make it more efficient for the
state.
It is almost a different
committee.
It's a lot of work, and you've
got to have the people on this
committee that know about that.
And I've recruited specifically
asked some of you to, uh,
To ask to be appointed to this
committee because you have that
sort of background, uh, but
The uh
It takes a lot of agenda time.
So I really need to know if that
is something you just want a
taste of.
Whether you want to dig into it
or not. And that's kind of the,
I'm gonna be right now, I've got
a laundry list and I can come up
with several agendas that will
touch on each of the things
you've said.
But you'll probably just get
tastes as opposed to really
digging in.
So from a staff perspective, I
just kind of know what are the
committee's priorities when you
look at the number of things
that you're colleagues have
asked about and uh what you see
on the paper right now.
Um, Mark, I, I believe I've, um,
cybersecurity and IT are very
important. We need to know
what's going on in the state. I,
I, we, we, our school districts
are hacked all over the state.
Our data is out there. There's
just too much not to talk about
cyber and IT together and trying
to figure out how we have a
system that
Somebody knows what's happening
and we don't have that system
now. So we might need, we need
that. And um in order to keep
our, our state safe as a
legislature, we've never been
trained on cybersecurity. I
mean, there's so many little
things that need to be done. Um,
we do that in schools, that's
the first thing kids have to do
is go through a training and um
we need to have that done, um.
So I believe for me, those are
important, that is important.
Anyone else?
Senator,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Mark. I mean, the
suggestion I'd offer is, I think
everybody had a lot of great
ideas and I thought everything
that everybody said we should
make an attempt to do it. Uh,
maybe a longer days, I hate to
do that, and I'm want to be
unpopular with the committee,
but that's how it goes. Uh,
maybe we need full days when we
do meet and I know there's, I
know, you know, um, sometimes we
don't start till, you know, 9 or
10 or whatever. I think maybe we
should maybe kick it up a few
notches and move it a little
earlier, stay a little bit later
and get our work done. So that's
just
it's just my two cents. I, I
know that people have a lot of
driving to do. But, you know,
insofar as we can do that, let's
add a couple of more actual
meeting hours, and, and maybe we
can get through most of the
agenda that came up today.
Anyone else? Represent Chandler,
um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
trust you as the chair to
evaluate what has been proposed
and made the judgments, um,
that's your role. So I know
you'll do that in a very
equitable way, but I just want
to reinforce that. This isn't.
You know
We'll work together on this, but
of course you have the
discretion and our judgments,
madam chair.
Thank you, Representative. And
we do want to have some good
legislation coming out of here,
even though it's just a 30 day,
um, that's, I think that's a
focus we have to have is what
are we going to come out with
and, and how are we going to
back it as a committee. Thank
you. Any anyone else?
OK, thank you. Um.
Moving on to locations.
The
proposed itinerary is to start
off in Los Alamos.
We normally meet at UN, the UNM
Los Alamos campus, and then try
to tie that with a tour of the
labs.
And we have labs come over, they
have an AI team, they have a
cybersecurity team. They have a
number of groups that uh can
give good presentations. So it's
a mixture of what's happening uh
with UNM and with Los Alamos
Labs, usually at that meeting. I
will say in a couple of you have
been on this committee or have
been to uh other, with other
committees to secure facilities.
Go find your passport and your
Birth certificate and your all
of your, your data information
and put it in a folder where you
can find it now, because
If we go to White Sands, they're
gonna ask the same thing, uh,
and I've got Albuquerque on the
next
item that is supposed to be a
sandia Labs.
Centric uh.
Uh
Meeting, so there, if we do a
tour of both labs and White
Sands, you're gonna need all of
your essential background
information so they can do their
security clearances beforehand.
Uh, we have had members who have
gone through that and then have
forgotten to bring their, their,
uh,
Particular ID with them, and I
will send you several uh
reminder notes so that you'll
get to go to this uh tourists as
they come up.
So that's the first one is July
would be a lannel, uh, tour tied
with, we always have to have a
meeting. This committee needs to
meet where the general public
can
view it so we tend to meet at a
facility and you and in Los
Alamos campus is wonderful, so
I'm hoping they will host us
again.
Uh, Albuquerque, as I said, the
idea is to make that a sandia
labs tour.
We have met at the school of the
deaf and blind, uh.
That is
Just down the street from the
gate.
In the past, uh, the suggestions
we made in the uh
Technology Park.
I don't have a good contact
there, so if one of you has a
good contact there, I, I'm gonna
be looking for a venue that this
committee can meet.
And then, uh
The following month in
September, uh.
This committee of years ago met
at Masonlands. They are the only
school that has a wind tech.
Uh, program that actually has a
wind turbine that the students
learn how to work on it, you
know, at 200 ft up in the air.
And people learned that there
can be great mechanics, but they
don't like heights, and they
can't work at heights, uh, to
souls took them up on the
opportunity to climb up the
interior of the thing. It is a
long climb, uh,
I didn't do it last time because
I was afraid that uh I was gonna
have a heart, a cardiac event,
so if you are interested in, in
uh touring that. I'm sure they
will, uh, offer, they offered
anytime any legislator wants to
go up in a wind turbine, they
will make space for it, so that
I'm sure that they'll do that
again this time, but get out
your running shoes and start uh
doing your cardio now so that
you're set for it.
I plan on doing that. The uh,
and then the uh last proposal is
to go to NMSU. We typically go
to one of the research
institutions in the state, we
haven't been to Las Cruz NMSU
Las Cruces campus in quite some
time.
And they, I never have to ask
what's going to be on the
agenda. I'll call them up and
say, here's the work plan, what
do you have? And then they give
me 6 pages things, uh, so that's
one of the easier ones for staff
to arrange.
Except when you all want to go
to someplace else, right, like
white sands or the spaceport,
those are a couple of hours
away, so that those trips will
take 4 or more hours out of
agenda time.
Uh, just warning you. I, I, this
committee, I don't think has
ever been to White Sands, so
that would be an interesting
one, and
It might be a good one, a good
side trip if the committee were
to meet at the NMSUFordo
campus sometime cause that's, I
think only 25 miles out of town
as opposed to an hour and a half
away, but that's just some
thoughts.
And that's it.
Any comments on the schedule?
Representative, I mean, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Mark, hasn't there in the past
been an opportunity to do a tour
of that nature, the day before
the con the the meeting starts
or after seems like that's
harder because we all want to go
home, but it seems to me we did
something the day before. Is
that a possibility? So it
doesn't, I can call and find out
if they're willing to set us up,
I mean part of it is working
with their schedules.
We have done that in the past.
Typically, attendance for a tour
ahead of time is very reduced
cause all of you have
Uh, very tight schedules as
well, but I'm more than happy to
give him a call and see if that
works. So, Madam Chair, I think
there was a, I would be willing
to forego the spaceport. I, I, I
think the white sands would be
uh a great thing for us to all
go to, so I would say if we're
gonna do anything, let's go
ahead and take out the spaceport
and do the white sands.
But I think a day before would
be great, we could at least
check into it. Thank you, Mark.
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just gonna echo that is um, look
at this and filter perspective
is that's in my daily life, but
uh a lot of times when we go
down to NMSU, like scheduling it
for your post so you can tackle
it on the way in to town or on
the way out of town.
I think just as a suggestion
there, but um you come a lot of
different ways coming through
Alma Gorter direction if you're
wanting to pit stop it makes
sense.
Anyone else, uh
Thank you, man. So.
Um, in October for the Las
Cruces, are we?
Are we
It's gonna switch that to me in
Alamogordo instead. I'm just
confused.
I'm sure
why would we need
because of white.
It's, it's outside I mean right
is outside
it's closer to Las Cruces
OK, I'm just hearing uh.
I'm just trying to make sure
that, you know.
I mean, we have a couple of days
we could do one day there in one
day in Las Cruces. I don't, you
know, that's what I'm trying
cause I'm hearing two different
things.
OK. It's about 20 minutes.
OK.
Right, that's, that was my
question because of the the
we've I've heard a couple of
things. I just wanted to get
some clarity. I mean, and it's
up to you as, as, as you want to
do that, but also on if we do go
to White Sands, they have
And I don't know if this falls
on a full moon, but they have an
evening, they have evening
nights tours at White Sands,
which
Just to throw it out there.
Yeah.
So that's what I'm wondering.
That's where my conflict is like
where are things we're talking
about relationship actually
going to the missile range,
which is 20, just over the hill
like you said. So we go to the
missile range that's possible if
we can get that. And we, I
believe we probably need to just
stay in Las Cruces because
there's too much to cover. OK,
thank you.
All right. Anyone?
OK, great, great. All right, can
I get a motion for um the work
plan?
Approval of the work plan.
OK. Thank you. Any opposition to
the work plan?
All right.
The work plan. OK. Um, do we
have public comments?
Or
Yeah.
They have
Madam Chair, we do have 4
attendees in the uh participants
window, would you like to
inquire?
Um, then if they would like to
make public comment.
If you're online.
If you'd like to, um, make
public comment on the work plan
or anything we've talked about
today, um, please raise your
hand.
Yeah
No one has raised their hand
yet. Thank you. I just wanted to
give him an opportunity. Anybody
in
Soto, let's start with you.
Other coming.
I'm Roy Soto again, um, the only
comment I would have would be
that the committee may want to
look at
During the past session,
Section 7 of which 7 million.
60
So you may want to find out.
what the impact that the federal
level is 60% federal funding
that be impact somewhere
healthcare authority, but
there's a lot. Thank you. Anyone
else?
Anyone else? No.
Do we have anything else anyone
would like to say on the
committee. Thank you. Yes.
If I could make a request.
If uh
You all have contacts, uh,
particularly with regard to uh
AI impacts on the labor market,
a number of people have asked me
about that. I tried to get
somebody through you and him
last year and
Evidently, the AI working group
between you, you and him and uh
the Santa Fe Institute and
various other highered
institutes has been more, they
focused on other items. They
haven't really been focusing on
The labor market, both increases
in potential decreases, uh, of
AI. So if you've got a good
presenter, please send them my
way. Thank you.
And I think Mark that goes for
cyber and um uh quantum and um
data, if you have someone who
could come and speak, um, please
let Mark know. right, I think
that's it. Well, thank you for
coming. This is gonna be a great
committee. It's exciting to see
where we're going and what we're
going to be doing, and I
appreciate all you new people. I
hope you'll, you'll like this
committee. I think you will, it
will, it's good. Um, and I
believe we're adjourned. Thank
you.
