Good morning everyone. Welcome
to the science, technology and
telecommunications second
committee. If I can turn this
on.
Uh you.
And
First, I'd like to.
Yeah.
OK, OK. First, I'd like to thank
the um early college Opportunity
High School for hosting us, a
beautiful school you have and I
especially like the security at
the front. That is perfect.
um,
It's great to be in Santa Fe. We
come here a lot, but it's always
nice not to have to go to the
capital. This is great. So we're
going to start off with
introductions and we're going to
start out with Senator Rodriguez
as well, good morning to
everyone. I'm Nancy, Senator
Nancy Rodriguez from Santa Fe.
Yeah, you're here in my
district. Isn't this beautiful?
I'm so excited about this place.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
everyone. My name is Bill Burt.
I am a senator from District 33.
I live in Alamogordo in my
district covers the northern
half of Oro and all of Lincoln
County and pleasure to be back
in Santa Fe today. Nice cool
weather. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, fellow committee
members and everyone out there.
I'm Charlotte Little. I
represent House District 68,
which is in Northwest
Albuquerque. It's wonderful to
be here. Thank you.
Good morning Madam Chairwoman.
Uh, I am
Who am I? That's the question.
State rep Joey Garrett,
Northwest Albuquerque right next
to Representative Little and
home of the Petroglyph National
Monument. Thank you for hosting
us. Senator, Senator, um, Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Harold Pope Junior served as the
Senate Majority caucus chair and
the senator for District 23,
Northwest Albuquerque, Bernalio
County. Happy to be here. It's
always a little cooler here in
Santa Fe than Albuquerque.
Good morning. I'm Bill Sols, the
state senator from Las Cruces,
very happy to be up here. It's a
lot cooler up here than it is
down in Las Cruces. Uh, but
again, this is always very
interesting, uh, committee I
learned lots on, so thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Mark Edwards. I'm a staffer
from the Legislative counsel
Service I've been staffing this
committee for about 8 years now.
Hi, I'm Sabina Gaynor. I am a
staff attorney at the New Mexico
Legislative Council Service.
Hi everybody. My name is
Michelle Rivera Ramirez, and I
am a law student, uh, intern
here at the Legislative Council
Service. Glad to be here. Thank
you.
I'm Leo Gonzales, and I do the
webcasting.
Oh, Michelle was one of my
students back in, um, one of my
math students, so I'm very proud
to have him here as a, a 30-year
law student. Um, I want to
specifically thank the committee
for coming. This is a tough time
to get a committee together, but
especially, uh, Senator Burt,
with all he has to do with Rioso
and everything. I'm so glad
you're here. I appreciate you
being here. Thank you.
All right, I believe we're
actually, I'd like to do some
quick introductions of the
audience if you wouldn't mind
just telling us who you are so
we can see who's here to, who's
here visiting, um,
Let's see, sorry, Mark.
Hi, my name is Salvador. I'm the
college and career readiness
coordinator for the District of
Santa Fe.
Hello, my name is uh Joe Batam,
the
Uh, director of communications
for the Santa Fe Public Schools.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members. I'm Alisa Lauer. I'm
chief of staff to House Majority
Leader Gay Chasey.
Good morning Madam Chair and
members Zach Chavez, Turquoise
Trail Charter School.
And Mary Ellen Dannenberg,
turquoise Chi Charter School.
Cliff Reese from Santa Fe, a
seasonal, uh, Senate staff to
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mark. I know you
wanted to get steps in, so I
just thought I'd help you.
All right, um,
We'll go ahead and start with
Santa Fe Public Schools. If you
can introduce yourself whenever
you're ready.
Great, good morning and welcome
to Early College opportunities
High School with me at the table
this morning. I'll go through
into our introductions from my
left at the end of the table is
Doctor Neil Weaver. He is our
chief information and strategist
officer.
Next to him is deputy
Superintendent Vanessa Romero in
charge of curriculum
instruction.
To my right is our longest
serving board member, and she's
held all of the positions on the
board. Kate Noble, who is also
the president and executive
director of Growing Up New
Mexico and then to her right is
Deputy Superintendent Christy
Wagner over operations and
she'll talk a little bit about
this great facility and
athletics.
So again, welcome and uh as you
guys mentioned this morning, we
are more than willing to host
any committees here in Santa Fe
at any of our facilities, so
more than welcome just reach out
and we'll, we'll gladly host
you. Uh, this morning,
For now she is vice president,
vice president Kate Noble will
give a brief introduction before
we go over our presentation of
not only what we're doing in the
district but also over AI and
this facility.
Thank you, Superintendent. It's
great to see you all. Um, so
many champions of education
here. It is a distinct pleasure
and as you all know, it's a
different perspective when you
sit in an elected position and
are accountable to the
constituents, um, and, and so I,
of course, speak from that
perspective as a longtime school
board member. I'm in my 8th year
now, uh, on the school board
and, and I've
A lot and ultimately,
You know, I think, I think most
of you all are aware that
funding is the big thing in
schools and of course there's
always going to need to be a
balance between accountability,
um, with that funding,
but as we saw with, I don't
know, let's go back to No Child
Left Behind and high stakes
testing and some of the things
that are still really prevalent
in our education system today.
Sometimes more accountability
does not make it better. We have
a highly professional workforce
in our teachers. They are highly
qualified. They are highly
educated, um, and what I've seen
and what I've learned over my 8
years on the school board is the
best thing that we can do from
positions of power is often to
support and empower the
professionals to do their work
that, um, putting in reasonable
common sense accountability,
yes, that makes sense, but more
is not.
Necessarily better. I am
fortunate to work with a highly
professional team in the Santa
Fe Public schools. Um, you'll
hear from many of them up here,
um,
But ultimately, uh, the
specifics that we'll be talking
about today, they do matter. Um,
but they don't change that much
and foundationally and for those
of you that have been teachers,
I, I, I think you must feel this
in your bones that letting
teachers teach, paying them
well, supporting them because
things are really hard. We are
still working through lots of
post-COVID stuff in our kids,
everybody kind of
As you know, 2 years behind that
we're still making up and
schools are reasonably well
designed to make one year of
progress in one year of
programming. Uh, and, you know,
so that means that the 2 years
we lost are still somewhat lost.
What you'll see today in the
early college opportunities
school and programs is some
degree of increased
specialization so that people
can choose the passionate place,
um, where they can find
education, whether it's working
with their hands and we have
some other successes with the,
the specialization and giving
families options for how their
children learn. And again, those
specifics do matter and I'm very
proud of a lot of what we're
doing at the Santa Fe Public
schools, but I appreciate the
opportunity to fra
from my perspective, what I see,
which is that we need to
increase funding. We're still
looking at an erosion of
teachers and, and professionals
in the education system. It is
not over the workforce crisis
that we've seen in our schools,
and we need to work on that. And
that comes back to money. And
then figuring out a reasonable
balance of accountability so
that we can let the highly
professional people who work in
education in this state, do
their jobs
Their expertise. I love
listening to educators and
knowing what you know the people
who live and breathe this or
experiencing, um, and I think
it's really important that we
Have the patience, um, to let
them do their job and, um, to
hold the space for the changes
that we implement to take
effect.
So again, thank you all for
being here. Thank you for your
service. Thank you for your
championing and support of
education, and I will turn it
over to the superintendent, uh,
and the team to let you know
some of the specifics of what
we're very proud of in the Santa
Fe Public schools.
Thank you, Vice President Noble,
and again, welcome. It's great
to see you guys here once again
and, and again, uh, wanna thank
you for the investment in
education. It is paying
dividends not only with
retention but also student
outcomes and we'll talk a little
bit about that, so we are going
to take this opportunity to
celebrate what we're doing here
in Santa Fe Public schools,
celebrate what we're doing as
far as with this facility and
options, but also what we're
doing as a district to move
forward in artificial
intelligence, I think that is.
is something that I noticed on
your agenda but also as a school
district, I think we have the
responsibility of educating our
staff and our students and our
community. So we'll talk a
little more about that. With me
today, I, I mentioned who is
here, but uh this is a wonderful
facility, ribbon cutting April
of 2024, and we'll go into this
a little later because it is
amazing what we did with this
facility, and I want to thank
Deputy Superintendent Wagner.
Community review committee and
all of the community here that
has really put their vote and
their confidence behind us in
educating our students.
This facility really does
provide the backbone to CTE here
in Santa Fe Public Schools and
hopefully growing that number of
students who not only attend but
also graduate graduate from Eco.
You'll hear some of the amazing
stats as far as graduation rates
here at Eco and what it looks
like as we continue to move
forward. This building alone has
a capacity of 400 students. We
are roughly about 150 students,
so we have plenty of room to
grow this, this program out.
Students do earn college credit,
dual credit through different
colleges and universities and
again we see the need as far as
students either being prepared
for a college or university, but
a career. And so for us, we did
have a resolution changing the
way we define CTE from college,
um, to also college and careers
we added an extra C. So college
career is what we added. So
again, I want to thank our board
as we, as we know, as you guys
know in your positions.
When you have stability in
positions, it could be the Board
of Education, it could be with
district leadership and
specifically we cite leadership,
you will see better outcomes.
And so for, for me, I'm very
fortunate that I have a great
team and I also have a very
supportive board of education
who really allows us to invest
back into our students and
staff, so I wanted to
acknowledge them and again, uh,
Vice President Noble here has
been our president through COVID
and then she moved off that
position and back into.
An officer's seat, so she did
have a a very large task in
front of her when we were not
only navigating in through, but
I also when we exited, so I
wanna thank you for that.
First one, if we go ahead and
there we go, is
Our summer programming, when we
talk about
year-round school, and I know
Senator Solz has that in his,
his district. Um, it's very
unique and also we were trying
to be creative on what we were
going to do to really try to
provide a stop gap for the
summer slide. And so one of the
things that we did as a district
and as a board of education with
our federal stimulus funds will
start small pilot programs and
grow them if they were
successful. Well, what we found
is, this is our 3rd year
running, we offered.
Summer programming to any Santa
Fe public school student.
And again, it was free. I just
want to emphasize that there was
no cost to our students to
attend.
This year alone,
We had over 4,200 200 students
participate on a voluntary
basis.
We offered 51 programs at at 15
sites.
We had 229 teachers, EAs, or
principals. This was not
required or this was not asked
of them. This was all on a
voluntary basis. So when I said
that as students, it was also
for teachers, EAs, and
principals as well. We also put
an all call to our community and
ask them if they wanted to
participate, as we know, some of
our best educators are in our
communities, so we asked our
community members, community
groups, would you want to
participate in our free summer
offerings.
And again, we would cover the
cost, right? When we started it
from our federal stimulus, you
know, very fiscally minded
board. Now we are rolling this
over into our operational budget
so we can continue with this
offering for our students.
We had 58 transportation
workers, 29 nutrition workers,
and that was something that we
heard from our community that
they wanted, uh, you know, a
safe place for programming, but
they also wanted to be able to
know that they were going to be
fed and so that was something
that we did work in. A
councilors and social workers.
We also had nurses and nurses'
aides on sites. What we've seen
in this population, so 3 years
ago we started this and we had
2600 students participate. A
year.
Go, we had 3300 students
participate. You can see it
continue to grow. We had 4200
students participate. We also
have a waiting list for some of
our programs because they're so
well liked. Now we are very
creative in our programming. We
didn't say this is.
Pre-algebra. This is
This isn't, uh, your ability to
increase your math skills, your
reading skills. We were creative
in the way we branded it, so we
called it Math Adventure camp.
We called, we were very creative
in the the branding of our
summer programming. We wanted to
make sure that they understood
they're going to come have fun,
but they're also going to learn.
So it was curriculum based at
the end of the day. And what,
what we saw.
If students participated in
these programs.
90% of the time or more.
You saw great outcomes. We had
reading programs, we had math
programs, and when you saw 95%
of attendance during those
programming offerings you would
see upwards of a year's worth of
academic growth. So as we're
talking about outcomes we're
trying to be very creative as
well in what we're doing to meet
the needs of our community.
Another big program that we
started using our federal
stimulus money is work-based
learning.
Our internship program.
It was a very unique way to to
start our
Internship program our
work-based learning program. It
was about 3 years ago.
Deputy Superintendent Wagner and
I were discussing what are we
going to do with our
transportation department. We
have 8 mechanic positions. We
only had one field.
So we and it was perfect, uh,
that we're here at Eco.
We discussed, can we go to Eco
and ask our students if they
would like to intern in our
transportation department
because we have an automotive
track here.
To our surprise, to our
surprise, everybody in that
class raised their hand and
said, I would love to work in
your transportation department.
So we paid them a stipend, they
earned elective credit, and that
was how we started our
internship program. That
internship program now.
is highly structured. We hired
an internship coordinator. We
knew we couldn't do it on our
own if we wanted to really
invest in it, be intentional and
grow it.
We provide a 3 week boot camp to
our students that prepare them
to fill out an application,
learn how to dress, learn how to
engage with their employer, how
to interview, how to write a
resume, so we just don't place
him in one of our business
sectors. We actually give them
the skills prior to that.
Since that point in time when we
had 6 it started with 6 interns
in our transportation
department. We are placing 100
interns.
Every term and those we have 3
terms fall, spring and summer.
So right now we have 100
interns.
In our community.
This summer and we continue to
do that each term. Those
interns.
95% complete their internship,
very successfully. And the
growth that you see from these
students from being shy,
don't want a public speak to
being confident learning time
management skills.
are translating over into the
business sector, but also into
their educational life. They're
doing so much better in school
they are re-engaging. They also
understand that there is
something that they may not know
about. We've had interns in our
child care program. We've had
interns in medical facilities.
And they wouldn't have had the
opportunity to do that if we
wouldn't have created this
pathway and by doing it we
leveled the playing field.
Every student who wants to
participate has the opportunity.
It's not about who you know, who
your family knows anymore. We
want to expose all of our
students to an internship
program and maybe a profession
that they wouldn't have had the
opportunity to access if we
wouldn't have created this. So
it's a wonderful, wonderful way
to engage with your community
and I know there's a large
internship program down in Las
Cruces and other places.
Um, for us it was very important
and we cross all business
sectors here in our community
and as you can see we have over
70 business partners. Uh, we
could go, uh, down the line, but
we cover just about every
business sector that you can
think of here in Santa Fe.
I must have missed one.
Community investment investments
and partnerships is something
that we wanted to really
highlight because again we think
there it is.
It's
Different approach to education.
We're here talking about
education. There's many of you
on the committee that are
educators. Our approach is
slightly different. We
understand we're here and that's
our responsibility, but we want
to be good community partners.
We want to invest back into our
community and we understand by
doing that we have to open up
our doors.
So for us we wanted to make sure
that we're opening up those
doors in different ways. What
we've heard from our community
is we know our children are safe
in our schools. What can we do?
What can you offer so we can
advertise.
That across the district. We
have free movie nights.
We rent a movie projector and a
large screen offer free popcorn
uh have our community partners
show up, offer free goodies to
parents to to students, to
siblings, we are going to on
Wednesday.
Give out over 1000 bags of
school supplies. Last year we
thought I gave the team a task.
Can we pull this off in 2 weeks?
Well, to my amazement, they did.
We gave out 365 bags of school
supplies in 19 minutes. We ran
out of school supplies and had
to turn away about 150 cars. So
we invested a little more. We're
going to give out 1000 bags on
Wednesday just to tell the
community we understand, here's
a start to the the.
year and we unders we understand
that sometimes buying supplies
is a stretch for for mom, dad,
or their caretaker, so what
better way to say here's a
little bit to release some of
that burden.
We offer free parent academy
this year we had 432 parents
participate bilingual tutoring,
computer classes, as we all
know, a lot of our adults don't
know how to even turn on a
computer or access a computer.
So we provide them those skills,
something that we're very proud
of. We just started um a GED
program for parents of our
students. What better way to
start to break.
That circle of poverty by also
addressing it with the adults.
We know that if you can earn
more money.
Your, your students, the
siblings, the dependents will
have better opportunity for
better student outcomes.
So not only do we know where in
the profession to educate
students, but we're also going
to help educate the adults. And
that is something that the Board
of Education has really been
high on and investing highly in.
We also have a lot of
community reading programs for
our students.
This year we did participate in
the state's structured literacy
program, but we also piloted our
own. We had over 250 students
here in Santa Fe Public schools
that participate in the
structured literacy program
through the state of New Mexico,
but we also had additional ones
and when I did say we offered
and we had the data to show.
The growth, one of those areas
was in literacy. A year ago we
offered it for the first time
prior to the state offering
theirs this year.
And that's when we saw the
growth in literacy. If you
attended 95% of the time or more
and that was a 4.5 week program
you did see a year's worth of
growth.
So we are trying to make a
difference in the community, but
we're trying to be creative
without over extending our
staff.
This is something that we love
celebrating. Employee retention,
you know, we feel we go above
and beyond to try to attract but
also try to invest and retain
our employees.
Our goals, and it should be the
goal of everyone's is to be
fully staffed.
Our vacancy rates?
are probably some of the lowest
for a large district that you're
going to see in the state of New
Mexico nationally the trend is
anywhere from 16 to 20% as you
see nationwide 55,000 vacancies
in New Mexico alone 690.
We have 850 teachers.
We have 30 vacancies. We are
well below the national average
and probably well below the
state average. We are trending.
To start the school year with
only 20 vacancies and these are
teacher vacancies. So again,
we're really trying to focus in
on how do we retain but also how
do we recruit.
Principal retention, as I
mentioned in the opening, if you
have stability.
At the board, at the
superintendent level, at the
site level, you will see better
outcomes.
We had an assistant
superintendent leave Santa Fe
Public Schools, and he became
the new superintendent and
Tucumcari, New Mexico.
We filled that position in with
a principal from Ortiz Middle
School. We had a 2nd principal
ask for a leave of absence
before she'll return.
So without those two requests
and movements. We have 28
schools. We would have retained
all 28 principals.
We would not have to have
replaced anyone.
Special ed teachers.
That's a high priority area.
There's 255 special ed vacancies
in New Mexico alone.
We're at 10 and we're continuing
to hire.
So even in that area, a high
needs area, usually an area that
takes a lot from not only the
state but also local districts
to feel we're trending and
filling those positions as well.
Other high priority positions.
Bilingual. I love celebrating
this one.
This is the 3rd year in a row,
1st time ever for Santa Fe
Public Schools.
No bilingual vacancies.
And what we did to solve that
problem is leverage our federal
stimulus once again to pay for
our teachers to get their
transcripts reviewed, but also
pay for their the teachers to
take the test and become
certified in bilingual or Tal
endorsed just didn't make sense
that we're asking educators to
come join us.
At their expense. So the Board
of Education and I discussed,
and this was another area to
invest in to really fill those
vacancies. So again, I think
we're trending in the right
direction and we are bucking the
trend nursing positions, we have
a 0.2 nursing position, and
that's it.
Other than that, we are fully
staffed with 43.
Nurses, nursing aids.
We only have one nursing aid
that we need to fill. So again,
doing great there counselors, we
are down the 2 councilor
positions that we need to fill.
And really trending to fill
those as well.
And again, big investment into
early childhood educators.
We have in our early childhood,
uh, program, and I think some of
you guys had been there to see
our child care program. We have
one teacher, the two EAs, we
have expanded pre-K and we
filled those positions so we
know that again a few invest
early on and if you're patient,
you will see outcomes as those
students start to graduate up
through through the different
grade levels.
We also want to show that uh.
We're really investing in
diverse high quality staff.
So we're
Talking about professional
development all the time,
mentorships, professional
learning communities.
And again,
We want to thank the Board of
Education. As you guys know, I
want to thank you employees who
make less than $50,000 the
benefits is the 80/20 split.
The Board of Education for
anyone who makes 50,000 or more,
or I guess 51,000.
Their benefits are covered 7426.
So it was a creative way to
extend the paycheck.
Here in Santa Fe, especially
with the high cost of living.
It is very costly to live here,
so we continue to lose families,
educators.
Community members because.
They can't afford to live here.
So the board was very gracious
in covering additional
percentages of their benefits,
which really helps them extend
their paycheck.
Another celebration is our
childcare center. We just
received notification by the
state of New Mexico. Uh, it's in
its 2nd year.
That it went from a 3 star to a
5 star.
So the reimbursements are much
higher.
We made it very specific to
employees.
If you're a full-time employee,
you have the opportunity to
participate. It's lottery base.
There's only 44 seats.
One year olds, 2 year olds, and
3 year olds.
And what we did is
Made it very specific. You must
be an employee of the district
and the reason why is when you
contract out.
Not only are you paying
salaries, benefits, but
overhead.
And contracting companies
started getting smart, so did
educators.
Counselors, social workers,
therapists, teachers.
They were starting to move
towards contractors, which was
costing districts much, much
more money because you couldn't
feel it.
So we said, well, if you're a
contractor, you don't qualify,
but if you're an employee, you
do qualify for this program.
We have been able to convert
over.
Contractors to full-time
employees because of this
benefit alone. I've had
individuals call me.
And ask if they qualify or how
do, how do you apply? And I ask,
well, how old is your son or
daughter? Well, I'm currently
pregnant. I just want to get on
the waiting list. So it shows
that it is something that we're
using as a tool to be able to
retract and also retain.
As we mentioned, high quality 5
star but low cost. Our lowest
paid employees pay $150 a month.
Our highest paid employees paid
$250 a month.
And so for us, again, it's
another way to leverage our
tools but also extend the
paycheck and invest back into
our workforce.
What we did 2 years ago.
Continues our investment in our
employees.
There we go.
We wouldn't be in a school if
you didn't hear a bell, right?
We've created uh wellness rooms
every one of our schools for our
employees.
Again, leveraging our federal
stimulus we allocated $10,000 to
each school with the direct, the
direction to the principal that
they work with their staff to
create unique wellness rooms.
That fit their school community.
It wasn't top down. They're not.
You uniformed, they are very
unique to each school building.
We also offer yoga twice a
month.
And I, I put a note on there,
has increased employee attention
uh uh attendance. I received an
email from a couple.
Of employees.
And they've told me.
If it wasn't for the the yoga
classes I participated in.
I would have taken more sick
days.
I wouldn't have shown up to work
as often.
One employee
Specifically said I did not miss
one day of work this year
because of this program.
And again, it's at no cost to
our employees. We try to
encourage participation, but
also know that if you don't
invest in your employees.
You're not gonna have somebody
in that classroom to teach your
students.
School Heroes program, this is
something that we're, we're
developing and opting into. It's
a very unique program for our
employees, just announced it to,
to uh some of our
Schools this week, but they're
going to be able to provide,
it's a group that is investing
back in our community to
provide emergency funds for
educators.
Without them having to repay it.
They know that school supplies
sometimes are at a cost.
They also know emergencies.
Sometimes pop up and they can't
afford it. So this is something
that is very unique will be the
first district in the state of
New Mexico to implement this
program.
Then the last one.
is something that I don't know
if we're going to solve. We're
trying to, but we may need more
assistance from the state and
others in the profession because
again.
We are educators.
We are not developers, but we
are trying to really solve the
problem here of employee
housing. Uh, our delegation and
I want to thank both
representative Serrato and
Senator Rodriguez in investing.
They have helped us secure $1.6
million to look at the
development of a teacher here in
Santa Fe.
Next slide.
We know that student outcomes is
a huge priority of the district,
but we also feel we have to
invest in their mental and
social well-being. So within the
Santa Fe Public schools, we have
a restorative justice program.
Uh, this is a set of practices
that help students and adults to
resolve conflict and build
relationships. And so we have 3
coordinators, one that works
specifically for elementary,
another one with middle school,
and then we have a coordinator
at our secondary at our high
school.
Level. And part of it is
teaching kids conflict
management, how to have
dialogue, um, and using
restorative practices for
consequences with peers that
relate specific to the behavior,
and this is an alternative to
suspending kids, right? We need
kids in school, we don't need
them out of school.
Uh, the 5 Rs of restorative
justice are responsibility,
relationship, respect, repair,
and reintegration.
So that is the focus of our
schools. So for instance, if
there is um, let's say a
conflict at an elementary
school, they would call this
coordinator to come in and have
a restorative circle with the
students that were involved, the
victim, um, as well as the
perpetrator.
Because the idea is we want to
restore those relationships.
Uh, as a district, we also have
attendance coaches, uh, we're
fortunate. We have 4, we wish we
had more, but we started this,
um.
Uh, getting coaches with our
federal s stimulus money and so
we have these coaches.
That, uh, keep an eye on chronic
absences and they work directly
with the principal and the
secretaries to try and re-engage
the student and the families
into our schools.
We also have 2 comprehensive
student health centers, teen
health centers at our high
schools, and they offer uh tons
of services from just going in
for a physical exam or maybe
they need supports for mental
health.
We have 2 teen centers that are
at two of our comprehensive high
schools and um coming out of the
pandemic, of course, realizing
students needed not only
academic support but also
emotional and mental support. We
as a district have committed to
having one social emotional
learning day per quarter. And
with that, we do not want any
academics involved. We want this
as an opportunity for teachers
and students.
To build relationships at the
school site, get to know each
other, um.
We feel that this, as you all
know, right, if teachers are
building connections with their
students, they're gonna be more
successful in school. So we have
committed this, this is going on
our 3rd year, we let the
principal and the school
community, the teachers design
what their social emotional day
is gonna look like for students,
so it's not us deciding what
that would be like, uh, for
instance, Capitol High School,
they had a beautiful uh social
emotional learning day.
And they had a motivational
speaker and they had different
um team building, uh, centers
going on in the school or
writing activities. So it's
specific to the school
community.
As we're moving on, we, um.
Noticed
2 years ago.
I think it may have been on both
floors. You can see the little
AI robot.
And it was on display during one
of your sessions.
So we reached out and we are the
first district in the nation to
have an AI safety a robot at the
Santa Fe High campus. It has
really reduced the number of uh
individuals on campus after
hours, reduce vandalism and also
crime that takes place on
campuses when somebody's not
present.
This, this robot and again it
was by watching.
The legislative session two
years ago when it was on display
on the floor, tracks and
monitors can talk, can notify us
when somebody's on campus that
is not, and again.
It has not been destroyed,
damaged, and there's been no
disruption to the programming of
this by our students. They have
embraced it. They enjoy it.
And at the same time we
understand that this is another
way to really extend the dollar
by investing in in items like
this that can do the job when
it's hard to find individuals to
be on campus during the evening
hours. So this is a wonderful
opportunity for not only Santa
Fe public schools but also for
districts in New Mexico to take
a look at some alternatives.
We are moving towards.
An electric fleet. We were the
first district in New Mexico to
have an electric school bus in
operation last year. We're
hoping to have 3 more in
operation this school year and
by the end of this school year
have 8 total.
All of our school buses have Wi
Fi on it, and we are a district
that is a 1 to 1 district as far
as technology. So all of our
students also have a device,
which means when the riding
buses and the bus has Wi Fi on
it, they can continue with their
studies.
Uh, and the
Sorry, another initiative that
we have is looking at
standards-based learning and
grading.
So during the pandemic, we
realized that we needed to focus
on how we're engaging students,
but also identify, um, high
leverage standards so that we're
looking at, we're building
capacity of our of our students'
ability to master skills and
we're the first district in the
state of New Mexico to go to
standards-based learning and
grading.
Kindergarten through 12th grade.
Um, part of this effort, once
again was using federal stimulus
money to build capacity of our
teachers instead of investing in
programs, we wanted to build
capacity of teachers. So meeting
and grade level teams,
identifying priority standards
for our students as a team
across the district, and then
utilizing those standards so
that no matter where a school,
uh, a student attended school,
whether it be on the east side
or the south side, all of our
kids are exposed.
To the same grade level
standard. We also know, right,
that our children are 1 or 2
grade levels below. But if we
teach to that where a student is
at, then we're going to continue
to perpetuate the achievement
gap with standards-based
learning were ensuring that all
kids, regardless of having uh an
individualized education plan of
student with special needs or a
student who is learning a
language, everyone will be
exposed to grade level
standards.
And then we provide the
supports, um, to build those
students' skills.
something real
And I just want to add the
deputy Superintendent Romero was
interviewed on Friday by a
student of ours who now attends
United World College in Las
Vegas.
And that student identified
standards-based learning and
grading as a unique way, and
we've said this internally, but
now you have a student, an
outside perspective, a unique
way to start to address Yazi
Martinez and that came from
somebody looking at it,
investing and also coming back
to us, even though we've been
promoting it, saying this is a
great idea. This is innovative.
What better way to start to
address that lawsuit.
Uh, we just completed our 3rd
summer institute with teachers
and identifying and refining the
priority standards, um, but the
whole notion is that we're
focused on the learning and what
students know and removing the
behavior uh for myself and I'm
sure many of us, we went to high
school, but if you turned in an
assignment, you're gonna get an
A in English. We're trying to
remove those behaviors or if you
misbehaved in algebra, somehow
the behavior is tied into the
grade.
We really want to separate what
students know and are able to do
and remove the the behaviors and
provide actionable feedback to
our students and their learning.
Uh, and with that said, we, we
believe that we are trending
upward in the right direction,
the 22, 23 graduation rate is
83.1%. Um, the state of New
Mexico, their average is 76.7,
so we're super excited about
that. Um, according to
preliminary data in grades 3rd
through 8th grade, the state
assessment. We are also, um,
outpacing the state average in
literacy.
Math and so we're celebrating
that and believe that it's all
the work that the teachers have
done in building their capacity
to really focus on skills, um,
and ensuring that our kids are,
are ready for college and
career.
Right
Sorry, I turned it off. So as
you know, uh, artificial
intelligence is becoming more
and more prevalent, uh, part of
our life, and Santa Fe Public
Schools is invested, uh,
recently into figuring out how
are we going to ensure that our
students are using artificial
intelligence in an effective and
responsible manner for
education, um, but we're
actually starting with our
staff, um,
We're developing a two year plan
around artificial intelligence
and trying to make sure first
that we all understand what it
is and how we should effectively
integrate it. Uh, the
superintendent and deputy
superintendent, uh, Romero and
myself had a conversation and we
really thought that we should
start with cabinet level
leadership within the district.
So over the summer I believe we
are likely one of the only
districts, um.
Maybe in the nation in which our
cabinet dedicated two full days
to learning about artificial
intelligence, starting with what
it is, how are we using it
already without even knowing it?
How can we use it to support the
work we're doing?
And then we really started to
jump into the conversations
around how will we use it, um.
To support, uh, education within
every single one of our
classrooms.
We're not developing this
program in isolation. So we're
looking at national best
practices from, um, the
Department of Education and
Technology, uh, from a national
level, the consortium of
school networking ISD, which is
the uh international Society for
Technology and Education, and
even the Council of Great City
Schools were not a part of that
we don't have membership with
Council of Great City Schools,
uh, but we do have.
Um, the ability to connect with
some of the resources that
they're developing. So, uh, from
a combination of those, uh,
organizations we're able to pull
resources uh there is a, um, an
artificial intelligence, uh,
Sorry, I, I forget the word I'm
looking for an artificial
intelligence, um, it, it's, uh,
A framework that we can look at
each of the aspects around
artificial intelligence and
define where our district lays
within that specific aspect and
then the next step to that is
We're at maybe a level 0. So
here are the steps that we need
to take to move to level 1 and
then to level 2.
with that in mind, um, as I
said, we're focusing on district
leadership first, so a day, um.
Today intensive, uh, around, uh,
with the cabinet members. Uh, we
have moved to the principles,
uh, with their first day back we
had our leadership event, just
this last week and started to
begin the conversation with our
principals, and that will
continue throughout the, the
school year. So our, our
assistant superintendents, uh,
in charge of, uh, each of the
schools, um, we'll meet with the
technology department and the
instruction department and
Talk about, um, rolling out
artificial intelligence again as
an effective support of the
teaching and learning process.
From teachers we moved to our
teachers, we moved to our
students, and we will continue
um to help to ensure that the
community and especially our
parents understand what
artificial intelligence is. The
superintendent, uh, mentioned
the parent academy, uh, and I
believe that one of our plans
should be, uh, to integrate
artificial intelligence into
that parent academy so that, um,
when students are coming home
and talking about their use of
artificial.
Intelligence to support their
own education, uh, our parents
should understand what's
happening as well.
Uh, next slide.
Actually you're perfect sorry
interrupt you real quick. We
only have about 6 minutes left
in this part of the agenda. So
and we have questions, so if you
could kind of speed it up a
little bit. Thank you.
Absolutely. Our key steps again
are really to focus on
productivity, uh, so
understanding how we can use the
device in our everyday life. Our
teachers are overburdened and
overworked, uh, so we will focus
this year on helping them
understand how artificial
intelligence can support their
work and then we'll roll
Down the next school year into
how it supports our students.
Um, again, best practice we will
continue. We have a a a cadre of
digital learning coaches who are
in the schools on a daily basis.
Their role is to support the
integration of technology and
artificial intelligence will be
one of their primary focuses the
school year.
Yeah
skip this one. There you go.
OK, uh, so I just want to point
out, um, in, in this last minute
or two, the built environment
that you're sitting in, uh, the
early college opportunities
campus was actually at one point
in time the vocational and
trades location for Santa Fe
High School. So for many
generations, um, the campus
we're sitting on served the
vocational and trades track for
our high school, for our
comprehensive high school. In
2018, the Board of Education and
the superintendent recognized
that there was a need to
reinstate.
Career tech at or partnerships
with the community college
opportunities for students to uh
apply trades programming to
their future endeavors. And so
uh early college opportunities
was opened as an alternative
high school on the old Votech
campus. Uh, we began to engage
in the process of designing a
modern version of what that
facility might want to look like
and over the course of the last
6 years, we creatively, um,
Designed and, and reused
components of this campus, um,
to provide an updated version
and really uh a long term future
for career tech ad to exist in
Santa Fe Public schools. So not
only did we creative reuse, um,
the old Votec building saving
nearly $14 million to the school
district in that endeavor. Um,
we built with an eye towards the
future. Um, we have a ground
source heat heat pump system.
Um that uh is, is the most cost
efficient way to provide heating
and cooling to a school
facility, uh, the facility is
largely powered by solar panels
up at our, um, Santa Fe High
School. Um, we have rain
catchment systems here, you'll
see even rain gardens in the
parking lot, um, that divert
water off of the campus in
creative no cost ways. Um, we
have efficient lighting systems,
um, high high quality features
and finishes that are easy.
To maintain, um, really really
will endure the test of time,
um, and offered generations of
kids a new environment to learn
in. You'll see in the built
environment, um, attention to
detail around, um, an elevated
school environment. We
understand that, um, to keep, to
keep kids in a position of
feeling that they're having an
experience that's unique. You
need to have a unique built
environment, um, and so you'll
see some features in the
building that feel a little bit
like a college camp.
or a comments or a space out
other than school, and we think
that's really important at the
high school level, that students
began to see and experience what
it might look like to be in a
postsecondary program or to be
in a community college or be in
a work environment after school.
Um, so there was a lot of
attention paid to that. Um,
hopefully you get a chance, uh,
to take a tour of the facility.
Uh, it is, is highly energy
efficient as it can be as
flexible instructionally as it.
can be, and we believe, uh, very
welcoming environment for our
students and staff, which we
know based on studies, um, is a
heavy contributor to student
outcomes.
Those things matter, uh, air
quality, lighting, the, the, the
built environment really does
matter for our students and our
faculty.
And last but not least, they
have an 88.9 graduation rate for
2223 up almost 14% and uh
trending to be above 90% for
this previous graduating class.
With that, we stand for
questions.
Thank you for your presentation.
The first one will be, um,
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
thank you for your patience with
me here as we're trying to
decipher all this stuff that
you're doing, you do so much. My
goodness to the superintendent
and our president of the board
and um the assistant and vice, I
call him vice, but it was deputy
right? Superintendent staff. I
can't tell you how much I
appreciate you and all the work
you do. You know what truly, um,
you are an example and I know
I'm biased, but it's true, uh,
for
The entire state you are so
resourceful and your forethought
is far beyond what I could ever
do, um, in doing so much for our
students. I have just a quick
question, maybe 2, and Madam
Chairman, I'm going to defer to
others because I am so proud of
the school and of the, of our
administration and so on that I
could talk forever. Uh, let me
just ask you a question. One
little vagueness in my mind,
Superintendent, is this. When I
first got here and when I first
Saw that we are having the
meeting here. This is part of
the Santa Fe Public Schools
Administration, but the question
that I have is, are you holding
like ordinary classes as I try
to visualize, do you, what's the
difference between this
beautiful building and what you
do in it versus what you do at
Santa Fe High School that I'm so
familiar with there. Um, is this
something an extension of it or
or is part of that brought in
here and done here too and vice
versa.
How do you collaborate? Thank
you, Madam Chairman.
Madam Chair, Senator Rodriguez,
great question when we talk
about programming, this is our
main programming for CTE.
However, what we started last
year is bussing 20 students from
Capitol to Eco to take classes
and 2 students from Santa Fe
High to Ico to take classes.
They're all separate schools.
They are, they're all unique to
what they offer, but what better
way to give an individual the
opportunity to access a class
that cannot be offered.
At Capitol or Santa Fe High, so
very unique, all of the tracks
and offerings, Santa Fe Ha
culinary that they're very proud
of and others Capitol High has a
medical pathway that is very uh
well off and established, and
this one's more about greenhouse
construction management,
automotive, but there are kids
on those other campuses that
also want to take classes here,
so that's why we last year
bussed 20 kids as a pilot to and
from just to give them the
ability to access the.
Class here.
Thank you. Thank you for that
explanation. It helps me see it
a little more clear, you know,
that I see the, the real gap
that has always existed and um I
guess I, it never hit me before
so thank you for educating me,
but I can tell you that never
crossed my mind that offering
the parents also
education in the same vicinity
that they're that their children
go to school in, uh, would be
something that that we could.
or that perhaps we would think
of, but you thought about it,
and I think this is really a
great thing to do. Uh, when you,
it, it not only because it
educates parents and, and, you
know, gets them to um maybe
better jobs or whatever it may
be, but also because of family.
It's that family environment
that we miss out a lot, Madam
Chairman, and, and you have
brought up, Madam Chairman, many
good points at at other
meetings. I think it was LFC.
I've learned a lot from you and
just talking
About, you know, the, the
importance of the parental
involvement also overall and in
this case you do so much for
that and, and you're being uh so
resourceful and comprehensive. I
admire your internship program
amongst all the others. You are
actually paying students to
learn.
And, and bringing in parents to
get educated and and learn along
the the same uh the same group
basically. I mean, what a
wonderful thing to do and more
impressive is the fact that 95%
if I wrote it correctly,
complete the internship. Wow,
that's amazing, and so, um, and
you give them options and in
addition, I'm going to move on,
Madam Chair, I promise, but in
addition to that, I was
impressed by the mere fact that
you have also to deal with our
mental health issues, behavioral
health.
issues, stresses of life that
families go through now?
Uh, you have, um, 8 councilors
and social workers, and I think
I saw that you had 4 nurses. Is
that?
Part of here only link in this
career, uh, technical effort or
is it from Santa Fe Height
itself it's spread out and.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
Senator Rodriguez, those numbers
were specific to summer
programming only. So not only do
we employ many, many more during
the school year. We also knew
that that was a need and a
responsibility of ours to have
on site during summer
programming.
Wow, that is so, so awesome. I,
I leaned over.
Madam Chairman, to um, to, uh,
representative Sroder here and I
said, can you imagine all of
this being done today and where
our students are going to be
several years from now compared
to where we were when we went to
school and hardly had any new
programs. I mean, I, I didn't
have any. I don't remember any
programs when I was small in
elementary or even going through
junior high or high school, and
so, um, I just have to say thank
you. I, I'll let others speak,
but
I appreciate all your work and
and know that truly as I said
before, you have been an example
and continue to be. Thanks for
on and uh Kate Noble, president,
my goodness, here and with early
childhood and everywhere else,
what can we say? We're truly so
fortunate to have all our staff.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Nix is
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Madam Chair. Two quick
questions. I, I used to teach in
Pasadena, California, where 20%
of the K-12 population went to
private schools. What's
approximately the percentage in
Santa Fe?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Garrett, we've
looked at this extensively here
in Santa Fe. We probably per
square mile, have them the most
charters and privates, both
state and and district.
We are trending about 25% of our
enrollment in charters or
private schools.
Um, ma'am, did you have a
breakdown like charters are
technically public schools. Do
you have a breakdown of the
percentage in charters versus
pub private schools fighting
chance. No, not on the top of my
head. We can get that number to
you uh within the district, we
only have one district charter,
um, which is ATC Academy for
Technology and and the classics.
Other than that, they're all
state uh charters or private, so
we can get you that breakdown,
but we are trending above 25%.
Of our potential enrollment that
are in charters or privates.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, my
other question is,
Unfortunately, um, a high school
students tell us in Albuquerque
that they can purchase a gun
within 30 minutes. And as we
know, juvenile crime is hitting
lower.
ages. What are you doing in
Santa Fe to deal with that.
Whether whether it's directly
people coming on campus but
educating our students. Thank
you, Madam Chair, Representative
Garrett, we do a couple of
things. One, we were contracting
out for security services, which
we brought in-house and now
we're fully staffed 2, we have
all visitors check in through a
single point of access on any of
our campuses. 3, we have
anonymous reporting apps and the
ability for students to report
that without feeling guilty,
right, with their name being,
you know, Al.
there. So we also monitor social
media and if there's threats
against the school, then we're
alerted immediately to make that
notification to that school
community in case we need to
cancel school, go into a
lockdown or anything else. We
have a great working
relationship with the Santa Fe
Police Department who come in
and train within all of our
schools so they know the layout
of our schools, so continuing
that we've also added many, many
cameras throughout all of our
facilities internal.
External that are monitored each
and every hour that we are in
session.
Thank you. And, and just to
follow up, um, Madam Chair, who
monitors the anonymous reporting
because anonymous, that's vital.
does that Garrett.
That is a great question. We
have our own safety and security
department, but my phone does
not turn off at any time during
the day or night because we're
always getting those updates. So
not only do we do it internally.
We also purchased a software
that alerts us immediately if um
the keywords are typed out,
right, could be one of our
schools. It could be bombing, it
could be shooting. Uh, we also
make sure that we contact the
parents immediately and once we
contact the parents.
I would say 95% of the time it's
a hoax or it's somebody just
venting.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, representative. Next
is.
A representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank
you for the presentation, uh,
this morning, um, I have a
couple of questions related to
transportation. One, I'm not
familiar with Santa Fe Public
School District. And so if
you'll help me, uh, to
understand my question involves
transportation. And there's some
incredible programs, programming
here, um, and I was wondering if
if transportation was an issue.
I heard you describing thinking.
You very much. The two
instances, uh, in which you've
piloted, um, these programs and
I'm curious about the schools
out in the outer areas and their
accessibility here if they wish
to take advantage of the of the
opportunities. What is your
pilot telling you is my
question. Thank you. Yeah, thank
you, Madam Chair and
representative back up real
quick. In February of this
previous school year, we had um
Two choices in front of us. We
either had to cancel routes or
we had to restructure routes
because of the lack of drivers
when we talk about
transportation.
We decided to put 7 routes on on
pause, so we don't disrupt all
other routes and take a chance
of really.
Eliminating our ability to
transport kids. With that said,
we worked through Senator
Heinrich's office to help us
advocate, and this is something
that many of you can take back
to your districts.
Individuals, adults testing in
Spanish prior to this previous
school year, they were turned
back by the motor vehicle
department, DMVs, and they said
you can only test in English.
You could not test in Spanish
and being here in New Mexico, we
thought, well, that's just a
disservice to especially adults
who who want to work, but their
first language is Spanish.
So through through uh their
cooperation, we finally got the
state of New Mexico to say yes
they can test in Spanish, and
because of that, we were able we
were able to reinstate our
routes. We are fully staffed for
this school year and we have
substitutes, um, when schools
want to access programming,
we're always willing to listen,
you know, we don't want to say
no. The only time we say no is
when we've closed every possible
route to that answer.
Of yes.
Thank you very much. Um, the
other question I have is, um,
I'm curious as to uh the number
it whether you can share with
us, um, of it's very important
for children to see people who
look like them, and I was just
wondering how many uh Native
Americans specifically teachers,
educators, uh, support staff,
uh, you might have as well as
those from other communities.
Yeah, the bipop community.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative Little,
we're at 1.5% when it comes to
Native American employees, um,
again, we understand that we
work with community groups who
are bringing other possibilities
such as working with the
consulate from Mexico to get
individuals from Mexico to teach
from us. Uh, right now it's,
it's primarily Spain or Spanish
speaking individuals um from
Spain and we're trying to make a
transition to those from.
Mexico and a lot and especially
for our community here, I think
it's important to, to see what
you just said, those that they,
they look like, but our
investment, the board's
investment, was to try to get a
more diverse workforce, 1.5% is
not adequate, and we're trying
to continue to move that way.
Again, um.
I think our investments in
employees in general will
continue to increase that 1.5%
north.
Thank you, and just a follow up
question, Madam Chair, would be,
um, as, uh, it's generally
accepted that the population of
Native Americans is about 12% in
New Mexico, generally speaking.
So do you have a goal that
you're working towards, or how,
what are you sitting in?
Um, and it's fine if we discuss
this, uh, offline, but I'm
curious as to what um
How you're trying to reach uh
different communities for those,
the pools of teachers. Yeah,
thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Little, twice a
year we meet with our our local
um Native American governments,
uh, pueblos.
And, and again, trying to help
them.
Understand the system within
Santa Fe Public schools and the
opportunities so they can take
back the messaging. Um, it's
been well received. We present a
lot of this information to those
that we speak with as well. And
a lot of times we get responses,
right, from those neighboring
us. Can we participate in your
programming? Can we participate
at this school? Have you talked
thought about maybe a joint
facility, a shared facility. So
we're um exploring all options
as far as what we can do.
To not only attract individuals
into our workforce, but also
maybe attract students that
wanna look at uh our
programming.
Thank you, Representative, and,
um, thank you again for your
presentation. I, I think between
you and Las Cruces High School
or or Las Cruces School
District, we have some really
innovating districts, so thank
you for that. Um, I was able to
write on your electric school
bus last year and I was amazed
on how quiet it was. I was
thinking maybe the kids are
coming quite a more calm because
it's so quiet, but, um, I'm
hoping we, I have a bill for
that and I'm hoping we can Sen
Sol and I hope we can get
through this year, to get more,
more funding for that, um.
Your summer program, how long
does it, how long does it run?
Thank you, Madam Chair. It all
depends on the programming.
Again, we kind of keep it open
ended. Shortest is a week.
Uh, longest goes to about 4.5
weeks. Uh, depends on the
structure of it, who's teaching
it, uh, what the curriculum
looks like. So again, it varies.
Now it doesn't mean that they
can only participate in one
program. If they finish one
program, they have the ability
to join a second program or a
3rd program. Uh, we did start a
very unique program a year ago
and it was, it was career
exploration for middle
schoolers, and we know that's a
high attention area for the
entire state. And we thought,
well.
better way to reach out to them.
Through virtual reality. So we
started a career exploration
using virtual reality, and we
had 150 students participate in
that. We trained our teachers.
It was a great partnership and
it's helping to engage them.
They're on their phones, they're
playing video games. We just
have a cell phone policy that
we've been discussing, but what
better way in the summer to
engage them and have them learn
about careers, and if I could
just add, uh, we also have
Native American student
services.
that we we have and that we've
invested heavily in.
OK, my last question, um, so
based on your, um, proficiency,
22% for math, do you have
programs that focus on that?
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
and that was the state average
that was announced preliminary,
I think 2 weeks ago, uh, I think
Senator Soulz was there, uh,
where, as far as literacy, we're
we're trending a couple
percentage points in front of
the state and the state, I think
regress if I remember correctly,
by about 2% points where we were
pretty steady. Uh, we didn't
decrease, we didn't increase by
a percentage, but when you look
at the average, you know, we're
trending north by about 2+% of.
versus the state. Our summer
programs are academic based. It
could be literacy, it could be
math, it could be science,
technology, uh, we run the gamut
with our summer programming so
we can make sure that we're
investing in their education and
what we've heard from our
teachers, they come better
prepared and well behaved to
start the school year.
I'm just one more thing, um, so
you're if the state average is
22, you're about 24.
In mouth.
And that's, yeah, thank you,
Madam Chair, rough estimate just
because it's still embargoed so
until those numbers are publicly
released, that's where we're
trending.
Um, we were just in LSC a lot of
us last week and we were talking
about that and the proficiency
versus graduation rate always is
something we have to figure out
what's happening there, but, um,
thank you for that. And, and I
love the social emotional, um,
day. I think that's a great way
for teachers to really get to
know their students, but and
that's all I have. So thank you
for your presentation and
letting us get to know Santa Fe
Public Schools and and hosting
us here. Thank you. Thank you.
Yeah. We're gonna do real quick,
we're gonna do introductions for
the people who just came in.
Going to start with a
representative Serrato.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. My name is Linda Serrato. I
represent the South Side of
Santa Fe, including, uh, the
school in this area. So glad to
be here and glad to welcome
everybody to House District 45.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Janelle Yonoru
from House District 19, that's
the southeast Albuquerque metro
area, Fairgrounds International
District.
And Senator Pope, I mean,
Senator Pinto, sorry.
Morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm
Senator Pinto out of district 3.
Thank you.
Um, you also have the minutes in
front of you. Can I get someone
to, uh,
Uh, motion to approve.
Madam Chair, I move that we
approve the minutes for May 1st,
2024. OK, second from
Representative Van N. And do we
have any objections? No. All
right, thank you.
So on.
Thanks
Superintendent
All right, looks like the
superintendent's going to lead
us on the tour. Should be a
quick tour and then we'll come
back and we should have lunch
coming, so.
I think to look forward to.
Thank you.
