Good morning, Doctor Warrnaman.
Um, we're gonna let some of the
representatives who weren't here
yesterday introduced themselves,
go, did you, did you introduce
yourself? OK, um, Representative
de la Cruz, would you like to
introduce yourself?
Thank you, Chairwoman. My
pleasure to be here with all of
you. My name is Art de la Cruz,
representative for District 12.
I always described us as the
heart of the South Valley in
Albuquerque.
Thank you, Chair.
Welcome and um again, welcome
Doctor Wenament. We're gonna be
hearing from you first this
morning, so you may proceed.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. It's
wonderful to be here.
And happy Thanksgiving.
Um, OK, uh, we have a very brief
presentation, but um I think
it's fairly exciting, uh, this
is something that has been
A long time coming, um, there
has been a focus on STEM
education for quite a while in
this state, given that we have a
pretty significant need for a
very high qualified STEM
workforce. Uh, we have national
laboratories, uh, Sandia, Los
Alamos National Laboratory, the
Air Force Research Laboratory,
um, we have, uh, uh,
Workforce that needs in Las
Cruces, Energy needs in the
southeast corner, uh, northwest
corner, our entire state really
um has been a long standing
location for a national and
global leader in STEM innovation
and industry.
And
Our
education, as you all know, uh.
Really could use support.
In terms of supporting STEM.
So our presentation today is
going to be about an innovative
idea.
To support what we hope for and
this idea again is not new, um,
before I continue, I'll let my
colleague introduce herself, um,
and then we'll dive in.
Good morning. It's an honor to
be here today. I'm Kirsty Tyson.
I'm the director of K-12
program.
At the Lannell Foundation.
OK, so this is my first
presentation in my new role as
the um as and CEO of the Los
Alamos National Laboratory
Foundation and returning there
from um after 67 years working
at the state level.
Uh, this is very near and dear
to my heart.
Prior to my um work at the
state, I actually did a lot in
science education, um.
was played a role in terms of
the state adopting our national
uh next generation science
standards supporting STEM
education and at that time, um,
a good 10 years ago, we had
introduced the idea of a STEM
coalition. That's a noted change
in the title and what approach
that I think we're bringing to
you today to think about and
consider. A stem coalition would
have been a group of
individuals, uh, industry,
education, higher education.
Coming together to support.
Workforce needs and um trying to
lift up the education system in
terms of uh math, science,
writing, really connecting the
dots in terms of education.
And the industry
Well, a lot has passed over 10
years, um, and
We know that workforce needs
have significantly um increased
in New Mexico. Uh, we have a
capacity issue in particular in
all areas, but significantly in
STEM, um, I remember, um,
When I first started at the
public education department
speaking with some members of,
uh, the legislature and they
said at that point, I think
actually Representative Harper
might have been one of them.
How can we actually support STEM
education.
Uh, this is um something that I
think everyone is hoping for,
and we've failed to find a
strong answer too.
Um
This is not anything new, but
I'm gonna go over 4 significant
reasons why, um, stem, uh, this
idea is uh sort of needed. So
what we're proposing is a stem
innovation network.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
A network is slightly different,
and my colleague, uh, Doctor
Tyson will talk a little bit
about what that means in a bit,
but this network is a particular
structure that we're seeing
occur in different states.
So
Or hoping that you will consider
this for the 4 core reasons. The
first is, um, clearly we need to
increase student proficiency in
STEM subjects or maintaining
stasis in science education
currently right now, it's
nothing to write home about. Our
scores are.
Fairly flat, not great, but
they're not declining, which is
the actual case with
mathematics.
We 22% proficient in math.
That is
Something to be concerned about.
Not just in terms of the low
proficiency score, but the fact
that we're actually declining in
mathematics. Um,
You can look at it and slice it
and dice it, which you should do
in a whole host of ways, both in
terms of subgroups that are
connected with the education
lawsuit, also in terms of um all
different types of ethnic or
ethnicities, um.
And in each case.
Math is declining.
With the exception of Native
American students, or simply
maintaining. They did not
increase or decrease.
But there are 12% proficient and
they have remained there over 3
years.
Black students in the state went
from 20% provision to 9%
proficient.
So
It's an issue.
The second reason that we
definitely need focus and all
hands on deck approach to STEM
education.
Is
Significantly, we want to ensure
that there's adequate
representation of New Mexicans
in STEM careers in order to
support our national
laboratories, our military
industry, um.
Uh, healthy, diverse economy.
We need to support our students
becoming the next workforce.
And that that actually means all
students across New Mexico, so
the diversity of our students.
Will be parallel in terms of the
workforce.
Third is supporting state and
regional economic development.
I like to say that.
Fundamental, um, outcome, major
outcome may be the most
important outcome of public
education.
Is healthy communities and at
the core of a healthy community
is economic development.
There are two sides of the same
coin and until we are able to
connect dots or have connected
tissue.
That workforce to education
connection.
Will remains disparate.
Last but not least, we'd like to
provide equitable access to
career STEM, um, to STEM careers
and learning for all students
across Mexico. Here I'd like to
recognize that there are pockets
of good work that are happening
across the state, um, you see,
excellent programs, robotics
programs, um, you see wonderful
things happening from, um, the
stem labs that are happening in
Rio Rancho to STEM labs that are
happening in Carlsbad.
There are excellent examples
across the state. It's just
happening.
And very in a very siloed
approach.
And also, even within a
particular district only
happening at a certain grade
level.
In addition, even in those
spaces where there's something
innovative happening in school,
it's not necessarily connecting
with workforce.
And that's very key.
So we've provided a one-pager
here for you follows along with
the slide deck that sort of
outlines those four components.
There's some data from you from
the workforce solutions report
that came out in 2018, so it's a
little old at this point, but
Uh, if you looked at their
current web page, you'll see
some of the same parallel data
in terms of um
Occupations
Uh, and the actual demand of
stem beyond what you actually
categorize as STEM industry
needs. There's also a hidden
stem industry.
And most workforce at this point
needs stem skills.
That's huge, and I, I know that
this committee in particular has
had a concerted effort to focus
on AI.
And um,
I think recognizing that is
something for you to consider in
all of this, so.
I'll pass it to my colleague.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, so what is a STEM innovation
Network.
One of the ways that I've worked
to try to understand this as I
think about a student who's
about to graduate from high
school.
And I think about all the
opportunities that student has
had to make a choice to engage
in STEM in their next steps.
It's understanding that it's a
whole bunch of opportunities,
it's not just what happens in
school, it's whether or not they
have access to out of school
stem opportunities and then it's
also whether or not they've had
access to career pathway
explorations in STEM.
So what a stem network does is
it helps to organize and think
about like what are those
opportunities our students have
access to.
So it's taking a principal hub.
And then that principal hub
hires and coordinates regional
hubs. Those regional hubs have
directors that connect with.
Sorry, is this awesome.
That connect with uh the
principal hub, and that
principal hub has done the work
of trying to map what's
happening throughout the entire
state.
Push it back there. Thank you.
Is that better?
Thank you.
Right.
So the principal hub is
Starting to do the work of
mapping. What are the in-school
opportunities kids have to
engage in inquiry learning every
day in their classrooms.
What are the out of school
opportunities kids have.
explore STEM opportunities. If
you think about what
opportunities kids have in
sports, you can start to think,
well, how do we foster that also
in STEM.
And again, that's happening in
pockets, but how do we make sure
every kid has access to that.
And then the third part is how
do we really start to support
kids to explore and get excited
about what's happening in the
STEM career opportunities in our
state.
There are kids in our state who
don't even know like what's
happening 5 miles down the road
that there's international
research happening that's
contributing to the knowledge of
the world. So how do we start to
build those bridges.
By having a principal hub who's
mapping the opportunities.
And then
Holding accountable the regional
hubs that help us to start to
say like, OK, what's happening
in the southwest corner. What
are the needs that kids need to
do that, and then that helps us
to start to figure out, OK,
let's be responsive, let's come
up with a plan in this
community.
And all of this is guided by,
uh, steering committee that
brings together all the partners
who are concerned and thinking
about this. It brings together
the government entities. It
brings together industry, higher
education.
K 12 out of school and all of
the players so that we're
starting to have a common vision
for what stem looks like in New
Mexico.
Um
We're gonna
Wrap it up here with simply what
the legislative request is going
to look like. There are several
partners that are attached to
this. In fact, we had a stem,
um, innovation network gathering
of about 100 people who met a
couple of weeks ago, um, chair
Saagana was there, a few other
legislators. It was a really
wonderful gathering mix of
industry folks, um, as well as
education folks, and I think
that was fairly significant for
the state to actually have that
type of represent.
ation
Um, the, um, request is
two-pronged. The first is
actually some statutory
language, uh, establishment of a
STEM innovation network.
Second is $6 million over 3
years, so $2 million
appropriation essentially for
this year, um, with some
intentionality around supporting
this for.
2 more years, um, the $2 million
would establish the principal
hub, as well as some flow
through.
Yeah, I think initial ideas that
the flow through um agency would
be the public education agency,
uh, and they've been uh part of
the discussion as well as
workforce solutions, um, so I
think they're, um, the idea is
that this innovation network.
Has some.
Um
Separation, if you will, from a
state agency and lives um on its
own as a principal um hub with a
steering committee.
That way it is able to connect
among.
And with different types of
actors, um, so that it's not
held by a state agency, but
actually works to um in a way
that lifts up cross sector work,
so.
That madam chair
Stand for questions.
Thank you both for the wonderful
presentation. I'll go to
committee for questions. We'll
start with chairwoman Sarah
Young.
Thank you for your presentation,
um, listening on that.
network that you had, um, was
really inspiring. So as a high
school teacher, former high
school teacher.
I think about how this would
work in our schools, so, you
know, as a male teacher.
It's already coming in behind,
so we're trying to catch him up
and then do our actual
curriculum. So time is huge.
Would you have someone like in
the.
math.
Um
And they had that special person
come in and focus just on that,
and they got they they learned,
how would you do it in a high
school or middle school.
Would it be a separate person
who comes in and gets things
excited because his teachers
were overwhelmed with just the
curriculum we have to do and
this, you know, everything we
have to do as teachers.
I, I, I, I wonder how, how are
you doing that?
Sure, thank you, um, Madam Chair
and chair uh Saana. I'll start
and then if Christi has anything
to add, she can. Each hub is
gonna look a little different,
um, based off of their needs and
um the collaboration among the
entities in that hub, so I can
imagine a hub in a central
northern New Mexico since that's
where I'm located and then I can
imagine a hub, um, let's say in
southeast New Mexico.
Hobbs, uh, Carlsbad area, and
we'll talk about the differences
there. So in central northern
New Mexico, we could lean on.
Northern New Mexico as a
regional higher ed institution
to support the hub that, as the
Lanel Foundation and the Los
Alamos National Laboratory, we
contribute, we, uh, we could be
actually the fiscal agent, we
could support infrastructure,
um, and your question about
actually how we impact schools
would depend on the needs of the
schools in the district and what
they would hope for, um, as well
as our ability to reach in, so
if part of the work is to
provide professional
development.
for teachers.
And the hub can reach in and
provide supports if part of it
is to really increase
opportunities for students in
terms of robotics clubs, um,
competitions, those types of
things because that's what the
region is really asking for, um,
maybe it's curriculum, it's
those types of endeavors, if
part of the actual work is
mentorships and connecting the
dots in terms of workforce and
employers with high school
students and and building out
those pathways, maybe that's all
in in that area, right?
So each region will be
different.
I'm describing things that are,
we all need everywhere.
But, um, the more that a
particular region really um.
Focuses and or becomes an expert
at one thing, the more they can
share with other there a whole
state and so the role of the
principal hub can be to lift up
how different um successes are
happening in particular areas.
So if in the southeast Southeast
region, they're very good at
building career pathways, which
they are getting very good at.
And they connect those with
mentorships and there's a tight
relationship with industry. How
can a principal hub lift that up
and share that with other
regions, which desperately.
When I used to teach at Van
Buren, we worked at the Air
Force lab and did um robotics
and did all kinds of things, and
I was just, I just did a tour of
the of the of the erin and the
woman who used to do part of
this said it's, we don't get
kids anymore. So how do we get
them excited.
And I really think it has.
In my opinion, we have to have
something at the school that's
outside the school, but to get
the kids excited again because
I, I went to a lab at Monzano,
computer lab.
and it some, but it's just not
getting it
it's just.
I don't know how to get them
excited again on all the things
that
All the opportunities they have
that we never had.
Just, just to add and to point
to what some other states are
doing because I want to name
stem and STEM innovation
networks have been a solution
that other states have turned to
to try to address these issues.
So if you look at the Tennessee
STEM innovation Network, one of
the things they've done is
they've partnered with the
public education department to
create STEM designated schools.
And then that starts to put in
an entire system in a school
and, and also to help schools
understand like what does it
mean to be a STEM school? What
are all of the pieces that need
to be in place, including
partnerships with industry,
including professional
development for teachers to
bring in and learning and
problem-based learning, and
including looking at what are
the labs and what are the things
that we can do to draw students
come in like in 9th grade.
That pulls them in right away.
And then make sure that those
experiences are sustained over
time. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairwoman. We'll go
to Senator Brandt.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And
Doorman, it's good to see you.
So
This is a kind of an outside
school.
After school type room, how do
we in
The regular course of the school
day though.
Introduce stem.
And actually
Added an A and made it steam.
But you know, how do we, how do
we
Get students excited about that.
One example of what I've done in
Rear Rancho is I funded what
they call math lab.
Um
It's really a fun way through
games to learn how to do math.
I've never been in a math class.
Where all the kids loved math.
until I went
Toward Alabs.
But how are other ways that we
can get them involved because
not all kids are gonna be able
to stay.
And after school program or
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Brent, um.
Great question. Maybe
Most important question in terms
of STEM education in particular.
Um
So this type of endeavor is not
just about out of school.
And it's not just about career
pathways and workforce, and it's
not just about professional
development for teachers or
extracurricular, um, or.
The work, it's actually about
connecting the dots with all of
that.
And so I'll answer your question
in two ways. The first is that.
Um
This type of idea, a network
would and could potentially
support schools and work inside
of schools depending on the
needs of the hub of the region
itself. So if the region were to
elect, let's say, northern New
Mexico, said, We want support in
school.
We need to support our students
and our teachers with better
understanding of math education,
of science and inquiry-based
education, period. We want to
just focus there and we would
like our hub to focus and help
us with that, so the hub itself
would work on.
Training teachers better to
teach math and science better
because frankly, that is part of
the issue.
Um, looking for curriculum,
games, um, somewhat what you're
talking about, particularly
connecting students with um uh a
newer approaches to math
education that are.
Um, both include discussions and
hands-on activities, but I think
there's a significant piece in
here about recognizing that our
students are light years ahead
of us and using a computers.
And that's part of where our
entire education landscape
actually has to reckon with and
go.
So the idea of the math games is
actually very significant and
why you are seeing the students
taking that and actually
responding well. Um, the games
are designed, as you probably
know, in the research that
you've done with AI.
So that there is instant
feedback, and if you have
instant feedback, that's
addictive.
That is part of the cognitive
loop, right, that happens in
education. So.
Leaning on that or understanding
that as part of where you have
to go in terms of curriculum and
how teachers can operate in that
space, in this new space. So I
think
Cutting it short.
They can lean in and they can do
that in this type of endeavor
would hopefully bring other
entities to support schools
because schools desperately need
help from as many people as can
support them right now.
Mhm
Thank you, Senator. We'll move
to Representative Harper.
Take him in a chair, um, thank
you very much for, for being
here. I just have
I'll just be brief. I have maybe
a couple comments and then a
question.
Um, mostly just some comments
from my colleagues here who are
going to be carrying on and are
involved in education, but um I
was really sad to hear about the
falling math scores across the
state. Um, that's disheartening,
um.
And maybe just some personal
experience, you know, my
My oldest son, uh, he is.
22 now, but uh you know, went
through the school system here
and it seemed like
Every 4 years, the curriculum is
being changed, right? We adopted
4 and then we, you know, always
and I just felt bad for him
because he was having to relearn
how to learn.
Um
Like it seemed all the time.
Um, and, and I appreciated the,
you know, the principles behind
Common Core that we're trying to
standardize things, but
especially in math, the idea
that
You know, you should be able to
solve a problem in at least 2
different ways, you know, I, I,
I appreciate that, right, but
I feel like
And maybe an analogy, right?
When, um, let's think carpentry,
right? You look around this room
and you see all the beautiful
woodwork, right? Yeah, you want
to have a, uh, you know, a
professional who know, you can
say I want it to look like this
and that professional, he or she
can say, OK, there's different
ways we can do that. There's
woods, there's different tools,
you know, that's, that's where
we want our math students to be
eventually.
But you gotta start with
learning how to drive a nail.
Right? And how many of us
remember when we're driving
nails.
It wasn't very good at the
beginning, right?
So I just feel like we've kind
of gone away.
Especially in our math teaching
of just.
Drills and just memorizing
tables and
Just doing
Problems um
And there's even this big push
to move away from homework.
Um
And just
Learning the basics.
Or how you get to the point
where you can solve a problem
with lots of different ways and
understand a word problem. It'll
just start there.
So I, I really feel like
And then in our education
training for teachers, right? I,
I appreciate, Madam Chair, and
that was mentioned, uh.
Are you
That there could be improvements
in proficiency.
I feel like when someone goes
and gets an education degree at
UNM or NSU or wherever.
Um
They spend a lot of time
learning how kids learn.
And that's, that's great, that's
important. I really feel like we
should be spending more time.
Learning the material that they
will be teaching.
So it's their proficient in
that.
Um
Uh, there was a very interesting
study that came out that looked
at how female and male students
learn math.
And they found that through
elementary school, they were
comparable.
Right, but it was in middle
school, where the female
students
Started being
started picking up from their
female math teacher's little,
little insecurities.
And then they would start
internalizing those themselves.
And of course, the male students
were just blockheads and didn't
pick up on any of that.
Fine, right? Um,
But
I'm not saying we should not
teach teachers how students
learn so that they're able to
teach them.
Really
Focusing on the materials that
they are comfortable teaching
it.
I think it would be a huge help.
Um
So, so those are my comments.
I'll, I'll pause there and then
I'll have a a question um for
you as well, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Harper, um, I
only have one actually, um,
thought.
Appreciate all of what you said
and, um.
Math education is something that
we
All need to put our heads
collectively together to solve,
um, I think the changing of
curriculum is uh major issue the
Common Core state standards are
heavy, um, and.
professional development,
supporting teachers, all of that
is pretty cool. One piece that
I'll say is that.
Um
We were chatting earlier about.
What's going to change the
actual.
status of education in New
Mexico, and it's actually a
highly qualified workforce.
That's it.
That's it.
If you want to change education
in Mexico, you have to invest in
and have high expectations for
the teaching workforce.
And
That is not light in terms of
investing.
And it's not light in terms of
support for high expectations
either.
Um
Math, to be a math teacher right
now, I would have to give up a
whole host of other
Opportunities.
With that skill set.
For not great potential.
Maybe the inability to ever buy
a house.
Yeah, um
Adam, thank you for that.
Um, answer, um.
I love that perspective.
Uh, we could, we could talk a
lot more, but I, I don't want to
monopolize the time here. So I,
I'll, I'll ask my question and
then let my other colleagues
speak.
Um, so yesterday, uh, Madam
Chair, David Gibson from uh
Sandy Labs was here.
And uh he, he made a comment
about.
How
One of the things that he
believes is a challenge is we
have many
Many little um small efforts,
lots of nonprofits, lots of
groups that have um they're
trying to address um
Different issues, but we don't
have like a a coordination of
efforts that can really
leverage.
And and make progress here and
and I was just
I was thinking about that
yesterday evening, but also, but
I'm also thinking, you know.
I understand that, but when
you're, when you're actually
trying to benefit the one.
Right? Um,
You know
Maybe a small group setting, a
small organization that can be
really effective in the group,
the group that they're touching.
You know, is, is not such a bad
thing. Um, but I was really
interested to see your, your
stem innovation network, right?
where we're trying to maybe
coordinate lots of different
efforts together.
I'm just wondering if you have
um
some thoughts on that idea of
Of the individual disparate
efforts, um, versus a
coordinated.
Madame Chair Representative
Harper either actually could
potentially have an impact.
Reason that I would in my seat
right now advocate for a network
as opposed to an actual.
Inserted singular effort is
based off of where we are as a
state.
And leadership at state
agencies.
And I'm sure um.
Understood.
And I, I don't think this is an
R versus D thing because it's,
it's happened under both since
I've been here. It's uh it's
very frustrating but uh thank
you.
Thank you Thank you
um.
To your point, I just, I wanna
back up a little bit and just
talk about highly qualified
workforce. They just have a
thought about that being a
school psychologist. What we saw
during the pandemic, it was a
disruption of routine and
predictability, which is what
brains need in order to feel
safe.
And when our, when our brain
doesn't feel safe, it's flooded
with cortisol, which negatively
impacts learning and memory and
curiosity and exploration. When
we want our kids to be curious
when we want them to be
exploring their environment, we
have to ensure that they feel
safe, safety stems from
relationships. When we have a
high turnover in our classrooms.
The second most stressful event
in a child's life after having a
caregiver removed.
is changing teachers.
Those relationships are critical
and we have to support our
teaching workforce, and we have
to train them and make sure that
teachers know that the more
structure predictability, and
routine and um consistency
within that classroom and
responding to kids in a
predictable way and making sure
we're encouraging kids not
through punitive responses, and
we have to make sure that our
children in those schools have
access.
To their basic needs that
they're, when they go home, they
have affordable housing.
They're, they're in a safe
environment at home, so they're
coming to school and they're
curious and they're ready to
learn. So it is important that
we're teaching teachers how kids
learn as and that's got to be
the foundation until that's the
foundation we're not gonna be
seeing proficiency scores when
we have too many kids who are
coming just regulated, who don't
have their basic needs met.
We're coming into a school that
doesn't understand um how
essential that foundation is, so
that's my soapbox, we're gonna
move on to
before I leave the, the Senate,
I am making that point loud and
clear, and we're gonna move on
to representative Heron, thank
you.
I'm sorry, hurting.
That's OK. I can change my name.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. You know,
one of the things that I've
noticed in in New Mexico, there
are many things we seem to be
lasting, but one of the things
that we are a highly rated in is
the Albuquerque Institute of
Math and Science, which is rated
as number 20 in the entire
country, and so my question to
you, um, madam presenters, what
are they doing in that in that
school that we should be doing
in
All other schools and our, well,
your hub embrace the things that
are being uh taught in that
school.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Herndon, um,
yeah, Ames is phenomenal. They
do great work, um, and, um,
they're a shining light for the
state of New Mexico.
Um
I would say two things about it.
The first is, um.
Their model in terms of
curriculum and the environment
and how they lift up students
and have high expectations for
um students and so we want that
for all students, and we want
that for all, um, schools.
Um, and of course I think.
Yeah
Any opportunity we have to learn
from other schools or other
districts across the state.
Anyone who's above the trend
line for performance that we
need to lift those up and
highlight that work.
Uh, I will say it's very
important.
Uh, for all legislators to
understand that Eames is a
charter school.
And what that means is that
there's a self selection.
Involved in charter schools.
So if I compare Brinalio High
School with Ames.
Students who attend Bernalio
High School.
Do so because that's in their
community.
That's
The default school.
Ames is a charter school by
which their parents and those
students must apply.
And self-select in.
And the very nature of
self-selection into a school,
particularly if the school says
we are a high performing STEM
school.
Means that
This student may not go to Ames.
Even though we both live in Rio
Rancho.
She may go to
Burnley or Rio Rancho, and my
parents may say we want Gwen to
go to Ames.
We're gonna actually drive her
there. We're gonna go through
the process of applying.
We're gonna take her there that
whole
Level of of engagement from the
parent and the student to
actually go to that school, have
the opportunity to have some
transportation to get to that
school, there there is a
different level in terms of the
selection of those students.
So
That's a very important thing to
recognize about that particular
charter school, um.
I would say we have got a great
range of charter schools in New
Mexico. That's a wonderful thing
about our state is that our
approach to charter schools has
been, uh, very, um.
I would say open in a beautiful
way where we're embracing the
need for charter schools as a
state, um, and also the way that
they can help enrich the actual
education environment.
However, it's really important
that you recognize the
self-selection that happens in
those schools when you're
comparing that particular school
with another comprehensive high
school down the road. Ames in
Albuquerque, I'm thinking, OK,
what about Del Norte high school
high school, which there's no
self selection in that school.
It's a community school that
those students go to that
particular school.
So thank you, madam chair and
thank you, madam presenter. I
think that what I was focusing
on more is the curriculum, even
if it is a charter school,
whatever they're doing there in
terms of the curriculum of math
and science, it's been
recognized nationally and so it
could be adopted in other
schools even without
self-selection. So I just bring
that to your attention and, and
I ask all the time, why can't we
duplicate some of the things
that we're seeing there, even if
they are a charter school, but
the other thing that I, I wanted
to bring to your attention and
ask about
is with respect to music. We've
taken music out of the schools.
One of the biggest and most
successful ways of helping
students learn math was through
music, and how do you think we
could bring that in and be a
part of the curriculum and also
a part of your, your hub and
STEM education.
Yeah
Madame Chair and Representative
Herndon, um.
I, I love that idea. I do feel
like music is core music and our
our core pieces of the um basic
curriculum, um, particularly at
the elementary level, uh, very
enriching, supportive, uh.
Students love their music
classes. Uh, they love art and
um.
There
There is a, a direct connection
between brain growth, as
probably Senator Hempel knows,
and these experiences, um, so
not only a direct connection in
terms of mathematics and art and
music, but um also the enriching
experiences students have that
then um um.
Contribute to their frontal lobe
development. I, I feel like um.
The legislature has done a good
job of investing in public
education over the past 5 or 6
years, um, to a pretty
significant degree where the
districts are probably getting
more money if they're above the
line dollars to support with
that, but I don't know that
there's a ever been.
fought by the legislature in
particular to actually have some
bound parameters or requirements
around music education in
particular, the way that there
is around PE and the fine arts,
um.
Act
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. Just one
final question with respect to
your, your hub, you know, one of
the biggest and most influential
ways to help students practice
what they're learning is with
internships or uh having them go
out to certain places, uh, that
will accentuate what they're
learning in school. So my
question to you is with respect
to the hubs that you're gonna
put together. Maybe there are
people in Los Alamos or people
at the Sandia labs who are going
to agree that they will have a
number of internships each year,
even at accounting firms, for
example, and is that a part of
your bigger plan and innovation
for the strategic operations of
that hub.
Vice chair.
Representative of Hedon, I think
the answer is yes,
that, that is work and if you
look at what other innovation
networks have done throughout
the country, that is one of the
pieces. But it's doing it sort
of both finding out what are the
models that are working in
different regions and then being
able to lift that up to the
principal hub and back out to
the other regional hubs, but
then also having a focused place
where you can really build those
relationships between the
industry and your community.
Schools in your community and
even the out of school networks
in your community so that
they're all working in the same
direction and trying to lift up
and make sure that those path.
Like
Making sure the path is well
laid for students to go from
high school into internships and
mentorships, and then have the
opportunities to decide what
they're going to do post high
school.
Thank you, Madam chair.
Thank you, Representative
Herndon, um, we're gonna go to
rep representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for being here and, and for
those of you who aren't on
education, uh, Senator Pope, uh
Representative Grola,
Representative Saignana and
myself have been working on this
for 2 years.
So this is not something that
just, as I say, first the heads.
Sorry, that's my favorite
expression.
Things don't happen.
Um, I think it's really
important that we all realize
the steering committee brings
the diverse.
People
Um, you know, when I was in
first grade.
We went on a field trip to the
port of Long Beach Harbor, I'm a
product of the Long Beach
Unified School District. Today,
In this legislature last
Thanksgiving, I tried to go on a
tour again because the amazing
robotics and AI and technology
system in the port of Long Beach
directly relates to our I-40
trade port.
So exposing kids to the
practical application of science
and math makes a huge difference
and.
And that's what we have to do,
and several people have asked
this of school, in school, it
has to be integrated in school.
And um
I think a lot of teachers don't
have an industrial background
with their alternative teachers
were getting more teachers
coming. I actually worked in
public relations and public
affairs long before I was a
teacher was a language arts
teacher, my approach to teaching
writing was very different than
someone that never worked
professionally.
And so I think the purpose of
this hub is to start
Preparing our educators more
deeply to understand the
relationship between mass.
And science and real life.
Um
Which, which I mean when we talk
about and it's very appropriate
that I'm gonna say Doctor Gwen
and Doctor Christie and you can
call me Rep Joy.
It's like they, they get that
and everybody involved in that
gifts that we have to connect.
We have to engage students with
the why, why am I studying this?
I, I, um.
I love the Dodgers in 7th grade,
my teacher gave us this.
Wild problem about how did you
figure out how much grass you
had to buy to do the infield of
baseball field.
It was engaging to me because I
cared about baseball, and I
thought, oh yeah, somebody has
to figure out this stuff.
You know, and it's like then I
my last math class was, um,
calculus because no longer could
I see the connection.
It's like the teacher just
taught the subject and drilled
us in it, but I didn't see
where, how am I gonna apply this
in my life.
So the stem network is vital, so
that.
We
Improve our education by
connecting it to life.
And so that involves teacher
preparation programs.
Um
One, if you're a K8 teacher and
you just get one little math
preparation class is not enough.
You need more.
Re-educating teachers, um.
Um, New Mexico Tech had a
science and math, master's
degree.
That incorporated more hands on
stuff.
Getting so this hub, it's
actually very powerful, it'll
leverage the diverse
perspectives of education,
industry, higher education,
tribes, community voices, we
need it all.
And it needs, it starts with
teacher preparation and I mean
when's highly qualified work.
Highly qualified workforce is a
very profound.
Statement which I think
everybody thought.
Um, the other thing is the
return of magnet schools.
Um, we've had all this focus on
charter schools.
But we have to reinvigorate
magnet schools where it's not
just.
And a lot of charter schools are
great. Some came because someone
didn't want to work under
someone. They wanted their own
school.
Which is OK, that's OK to be a
motivation, but we need to see
more magnet schools within the
traditional public schools that
emphasize math and science, and
Doctor uh Doctor Herndon.
And I've turned in, please look.
Yeah,
we're all doctors here.
Um,
you should look at the
application for AIs to get.
On the, um, what do you call it,
the lottery list.
It's like, it's similar to
Albuquerque Academy.
And this is for a public
charter, so it is not just self
selection, it's very
interesting.
Some people are privy because
their connection to UNM also to
get in.
Um, let's see.
So, and I just want to give a
shout out to my favorite
professor in my post uh BA.
Uh, teacher certification
program was Gregory Kajete.
He is a Tiwa Indian from Santa
Clara, he taught our science
class. He he embodied steam.
He took magnifying glass and we
look at our hands and he.
Connect us to river systems.
It's like
It's the art and science of
teaching, and our teachers right
now, they're getting all the
science, but they're not getting
much art.
Uh, when I was first teaching
elementary, I went to science
things where I can now connect
you telephones through lemons
and string. I didn't know that.
But it engaged me in science as
a teacher, so there's ongoing
teacher education.
But um, why I'm such a big
supporter of this is it's
comprehensive.
Its statewide, it.
And it's inclusive of what
Representative Harper said the
small successful groups.
But they're, they're like little
bubbles. I have this great and
you probably know this
representative Harper, the
robotics thing that basically
works with homeschool students
in real Ranch.
It's great
It's terrific, but it's not
really connected.
In a powerful way, I maybe it is
more than I realized, I don't
know.
But we have to connect and
collaborate.
And that's what's missing in our
state. I think probably many of
us get 5 different.
Technical groups send us emails
every month. There's a
technology. There's this,
there's that.
But then there's individuals who
are collaborating among the
groups, but we need an
intentional.
focus
To, to raise this up, I think
it's really exciting, which is
why I'm signing on.
And um I hope everybody will
sign, but thank you for being
here. Again, this shows, it's
like we have these committee
meetings.
And we should actually have
education, science and tech and
what, you know, we have these
topics that apply to 6 different
committees. Anyway, thanks for
being here.
I'll get off my
Thank you, Representative, we'll
go to representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you so much for this
presentation, and I appreciate
the uh work and the information
that's been provided.
I'm not part of the education
committee, so it's really
enlightening to have.
To have um the information
provided uh to us this morning
on the work that is being done
and the efforts that are there.
So one of the things that struck
me immediately, uh, well, that I
latched on to, I will say is,
um, having been a student
athlete in schools, while I was
in school. What I, what I see
what I heard you describe was
like.
Uh
Sports
Uh, you compared that, you, uh,
compared it to sports in
schools, sports programs in
schools, and that got me on
that.
In that direction in that
mindset of of wealth when I was
a student athlete, we had
Not just PE during the day and
of course this was way back in
the 70s, uh when we still had
some core uh uh important uh uh.
Um, classes available to us, but
we were training during the day.
We were, it was reinforced by
the practices that went on in
the afternoon. You could also
compare that to homework.
And so I was, as I was
listening, as I've been
listening this morning and
thinking about.
The dedication that exists to
sports in many states, not just
New Mexico, but I look at this,
the uh entity what you're
describing, I thought of the New
Mexico activities Association.
Yeah. And so I'm thinking as
you're describing about at this
hub.
Of the information that gets
shared, the information that's
shared with not just the uh the
districts, but the coaches and
everybody else, the public.
They've got an entire website
devoted to.
What
Activities are taking place.
I, it, it.
For all the reasons that have
been presented here this
morning.
I was wondering, well, your
request of $6 million I can see
is well founded.
And it's to start.
And I'm wondering if
Uh
Because we have these issues
like the Yazy Martinez case that
it sounds like you all have been
in conversation about that and
have been addressing it.
Um
And so I think this intentional
focus.
That was described.
I like that that we give.
To the sports field, to our
athletes. And as Representative
Harper and I were kind of
sharing right here, it's like,
you know.
A lot of these STEM students,
many of our students are are
athletes, very bright, and that
opportunity exists for them, and
we need to make that. I think
it's important that we make that
available to everybody else as
well, at least the opportunity
to access this, the one thing
that is not lost on me though is
Madam Chair is listening to our
true and Sarana describe the
amount of time.
That it takes, it's not lost on
me, I wonder how in the world
you add on to the duties and the
duties and the responsibilities
and responsibilities that
teachers have.
Well, again, I looked at the
athletes uh to the structure of
sports in our schools, and you
see there's coaches and there's
assistant coaches that come in
from the outside. Some are
unpaid, some are volunteers, but
they are, there is a method by
which there are others that are
brought in to help.
Uh, because I just.
It's concerning to me, uh, I'm
not in the education field, but
it's of concern to me that that.
Isn't being addressed yet. I
haven't heard of more assistance
coming in.
More
Uh
Individuals who are coming in
with that expertise into the
schools.
Um, and it seems like perhaps
down the way that may be.
Um
An opportunity for us to uh to
be considered.
But um
My question actually was had
been answered earlier by just
the just listening to the
discussion, but I, my comments
on the.
Importance of
Addressing and funding.
Um
This program is so much more
than
What we're looking at right now
because it is integral to the
state succeeding.
Uh, uh, workforce succeeding.
I'm sorry, yes. So thank you
very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Little, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I,
uh
apologize for being late, had an
appointment this morning, um.
But I just love what
Um, you all have put together,
um.
Just want to remind folks, um,
it started as an idea for my
constituent of ours, you know,
Williams and
Everybody has just stepped up
and just become huge, just the
involvement.
Thank you all for
work that's been done.
Uh, I think this has been a
great conversation, and I say
this facetiously and jokingly.
You know, I
I don't believe we'll need
debate on this when it comes up
now. I think we're having a
lively debate right now saying
that jokingly, but it also gives
us
You know, some of the questions,
some of the concerns and things
that we need to still work
through and address.
Make sure this does what we want
it to do.
I think the importance of this,
um,
Look at it also in my life that
concerns how to get students
motivated and understanding.
I stem, steam.
Impacts their life and why math
and science.
STEM fields are so important.
And what are the real world?
You know
Like many students, I struggled
until I went into the Air Force.
saw really the application.
Working in a dental clinic,
working.
On satellite program.
I really didn't see it in my
youth.
And I think that's the key is
letting
It's know that these
opportunities are there.
Why are they doing math in?
Why is this important, not what
I'm going.
And I think we can motivate them
when they're when they're on
their phones, when they're doing
TikTok videos, when they're
gaming doing e-sports.
And understanding that tie
between STEM.
And how that relates there.
And if that's a career they
want.
You know, you need to know how
to do multiplication division.
and calculus, right?
Um, but I think a lot of times,
We don't make that connect.
I get so frustrated even when I
was working at Kirtland, the
fact that
Literally 2 blocks down the road
off of Gibson.
You have children that have no
idea.
Of
The
Opportunities in STEM.
Literally 2 blocks in the base.
We're operating satellites.
Right, it's so near.
So
That's what my hope is here.
That we're able to really
include folks in these
opportunities.
That are not only going to
people in our state, get out of
poverty and give them
opportunities.
But just be part
Of this system and we're talking
about here.
So important.
You know, I'm also uh a
substitute teacher, got to do
2nd grade last week and
students.
And I can tell you,
A are motivated.
You know, we were doing math and
I just spent the last
45 minutes.
I was just on the board doing
multiplication addition
division.
And having them come up.
The board and
They were just like so motivated
to do this.
So
I would just say this is part of
the solution, but just like.
You were mentioning that Doctor
Werner.
If we're truly going to
Really make those moves our
education system.
We really have to
Really be able to have.
That workforce that is able to
do it.
I can tell you being in the
schools.
As a substitute.
Stepping up and just seeing
sometimes come in just to help.
The teachers that are there,
they're not even out.
And so we have to make those
investments as well.
You know, it's all about, you
know, we, we got to hold our
educators accountable as well,
but we got to give them the
resources and the support to do
that job, right? And make it.
A career that we say
We support and invest in.
So, I think this is part of the
tools and this is part of the
solution.
Um, but I just want to reiterate
that we still have to do.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Senator Pope. I think
you made a good point. I, I did
my student teaching way back in
1993 and I had the most amazing
cooperating teacher or mentor
teacher, whatever he was, um,
who.
would always look and see what
was happening that particular
day and find a way to connect it
to um the math assignment. So
for example, he had this little
friendly rivalry with another
teacher in the school building
and she came in, had the kids's
toilet paper, his classroom one
time, so I went in and I
thought, oh, I need to clean it
up, and he's like, no, no, no,
no, no, this is gonna be our
lesson for the whole day. So the
kids predicted how many toilet
paper squares were used in the
toilet paper.
they did a lesson on measuring
and how much would the toilet
paper have cost and cost
comparison and what is toilet
paper made of and how many trees
and what is the pro it was
amazing. And so whatever it was,
if it snowed outside, they went
and filled up a glass jar with
snow and predicted how long it
would take, what would be the
temperature to melt it and how
long would it take and there
were just it was so such a
wonderful way of.
being introduced into how we
connect our lessons to real life
experiences to get kids curious
and motivated. That's where the
motivation comes in. So with
that, I'd like to go to our last
questions, Senator Rodriguez,
um, I'll let you finish this up.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Good
good morning, uh, Doctor
Warnerman good to see you. So
nice that you're working there,
still helping us and our
students in this nice lady,
thank you very much. um, just,
uh, maybe a couple of points,
Madam Chairman, and that one of
the comments that you made,
Doctor Warnerment was in the
beginning, uh, summarized most
of it when you said that it is
important.
To support
Our students in STEM.
And that support is what we're
talking about today. How broad
can it be? How comprehensive, we
need to have a comprehensive,
very um wholesome system to be
able to capture all those needs
within the
the STEM education.
One is crossed my mind as I was
thinking about that is on your
last point here, providing
equitable access to STEM career
and learning, you mentioned the
out of schoolsEM programs.
And that's one of the things,
Madam Chairman, that really
resonated with me because um
these STEM programs out of
school can be, um, you know, for
tutoring can be for mentoring
can be to give our students
reprieve.
From the pressures of all day
being in school with crowds and
students trying to conform to uh
what other students and then
others they can do, and so, you
know, while students can learn a
lot with our good teachers that
we have and so on, um, there's
always that.
That crushing feeling with so
much going on in the day and it
not only school and STEM, but a
lot of students bring to school
the problems that they face at
home, unfortunately, and so I
was thinking that in having
these out of school STEM
programs. I wrote just a couple
of things here we could have
students can have reprieve,
maybe help with their mental
stress also from throughout the
day. These are about giving them
choices, right? a choice to
join.
After school program or not.
It's not a requirement, which in
itself can be very liberating
for students, um, and once they
make that choice.
As we know, uh, they feel that
it was them, they wanted to do
it. They got the freedom to do
it. This is something they
chose, so they buy into it a
little more. So anyway, um, I, I
think that I've said most of it,
um.
Madam Chair, I wrote some notes
and they're so scribbled. I
don't know what else I have
here, but, um, one quick
question, but these are, I am
thinking correctly, right?
They're gonna be like volunteer
programs for students to join in
after school. It's not an
extension of something they have
to do to meet a grade or
something like that, Madam
Chairman, and that's all I have.
You can briefly answer that.
Madame Charon, Senator
Rodriguez, um, it's not
establishing out of school time
programming what it would do is
create a network that supports
and connects dots between
programs that are already there
or funding for developing and or
scaling programs.
So if in the area of um let's
take Rio Rancho. There's been
investment in, uh, the schools
ready to support robotics, which
there has, and they're very good
STEM labs that are happening for
the some of the elementary
schools and there's work that's
being done in terms of pathways,
perhaps that school district
finds that what we would really
like to do is dive in in terms
of math professional
development.
That's what we need.
Then the hub in that area is
gonna help and focus in and
really lift up and train
teachers and invest in that
area. If in northern New Mexico
in Espanola.
We're finding that there is a
lack of out of school
opportunities for students.
They, we really need, especially
when we have grandparents
raising kids, um, then maybe the
hub in Espanola in northern New
Mexico is really gonna focus on
after school programming.
So it really does depend on the
region and this endeavor is
designed to support the
strengths and the needs of each
area.
I see. Thank you so much for
explaining that. It's even
better because it really we're
doing is we're augmenting what's
there already and we're also
filling in these gaps that
altogether, so that's, that in
itself is that holistic
comprehensive approach we're
talking about. Thank you very
much, Madam Chairman, for the
same time. Thank you, Senator
Rodriguez. I just had a quick
question about your flow chart.
Um, I was looking at the
steering committee. I had a few
questions about the steering
committee. Who is, who makes the
decisions about who's on the
committee, who is ultimately put
on that committee, what is the,
the process and I know that
there was some pushback about
the steering committee, some
controversy. Can you talk about
some of that?
I'll start and then, uh,
Christie might fill in um with
some of the.
The nuances of actually the
steering committee and what has
been discussed about it.
Currently in state statute, we
have an um uh under the public
education department, what's
called a math science advisory
council or the acronym is known
as MSA.
And this council, uh, is under
chapter 22 of the Public
Education department and the
what the purpose of the council
is, is to in.
Provide feedback, support the
public education department, uh,
in terms of what they feel STEM
education should do or move
forward with, um.
And they produced a report and
you actually get a copy of the
report every year.
During the middle of session.
Um,
This MSA group has um.
played a role in various ways
over the past years that it's
been in existence so that
there's a little bit of
controversy between what's the
difference between that
existing.
Mass Science Advisory Council.
Versus a steering committee.
Well, the difference lies in
what this entity is.
So the entity, as I mentioned
earlier, is designed to live
outside of the public education
department.
That's significant.
It's designed to
Work to crop in a way to support
cross-sector collaboration.
And work with industry.
Maybe we also have someone from
Workforce Solutions involved.
Higher education, higher ed
department.
Higher ed institutions.
And the purpose there is that
this steering committee.
Needs to not just be a counsel
that's advising PED.
But I'll actually representing
industry and a whole host of
other um folks that are involved
in the STEM uh space workforce,
education, higher ed.
Community at large, tribal
government, right, so that the
steering committee then says.
This is how we establish our
principal hub.
This seems to be the direction
for these regional hubs and can
give feedback, but also help
hold this principle hold uh this
principal hub accountable.
Because the accountability
component of this, which is
necessary is that there are
outcomes out of this.
That data is um something that
can be reported back to the
legislature. So the steering
committee itself should be
composed, comprised, we have in
a little, the little orange box
in the one pager diverse
perspectives of education,
industry, higher ed tribes,
community voices.
In the legislation itself, there
should list sort of um.
Um
Not necessarily individuals by
name, but by roll.
Right, in terms of the steering
committee.
Great. Thank you for your
response. I'm gonna turn it over
to our staff member Mark Edwards
for some final questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
have any questions. I do have uh
some comments. Look at the flow
chart on the 2nd page, which
starts off with
The Legislature goes straight to
a fiscal agent and then all this
entire program is run at presume
through a contract with the
fiscal agent.
That's the mechanism the
legislature uses to uh try to
comply with the anti-donation
clause when it wants to do
something outside of the uh.
Of state government
There are, uh,
A couple of different uh things
that need to be thought of while
drafting this with regard to
absolute control of the state.
Fiscal agent process is to try
to
Work around anti-donation, which
is Article 4.
Section 9, I believe.
The uh
But absolute control of the
state is Article 4.
31, you cannot give state
functions to a nonprofit entity.
It has to be
He
entity that is
Reforming
functions
There is also under the uh
Education.
Article 12, a number of court
cases with regard to absolute
control state.
and they
Court did recite curriculum
specifically.
So
That is something I don't know
who the drafter is going to be,
but I, you, it may be uh
I think represent little Madam
Chair brought up the idea of
mirroring the NMAA.
They may have solved some of
that problem with regard to
athletic programs, uh.
But the more that it looks like
an education program, the more
that it's being run by the state
but not being run by the state,
I think that's going to raise
more constitutional concerns as
opposed to is.
If it is a contract for
extracurricular activities.
That's all I wanted to point
out.
Did you want to respond, Doctor
Wenaman. Go ahead. Sure. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um
In the work with uh all of the
partners and what has happened
with this as well as the um.
Day long.
Conference in convening that
happened that representative
Saignana was at and other
legislators.
Um, part of the intentionality
around this in terms of this
fiscal agency of the state, uh,
of a state.
Um
Agency
What is that the principal hub
should likely be a higher ed
institution.
And, um, an in-state higher ed
institution.
Particularly because of the
connection or connectivity
between a state agencies and
higher ed institutions and the
responsiveness to the
legislature, so I think that the
there's obviously few options in
New Mexico for that, um, but
this principal hub, the reason
we we really emphasize the title
principal hub is because.
Um, central automatically
defaults to UNM.
But I think that there's good
options in terms of Western, uh,
New Mexico State University,
Eastern, a principal hub simply
operates as a principal hub, so.
I think that's the
intentionality behind this and
the drafters, um, um, as
Representative Garrett
mentioned, Senator Pope, there's
been 2 years of work on this,
and I think this evolution of
what it is, how it stands right
now, it's very strong and so the
education committee holds the
space right now, I believe, of
drafting.
Excellent. Well, thank you so
much for your presentation and
the robust conversation. This
has been fun. I enjoyed it.
Appreciate that.
And we're going to move on down
our agenda next we have
representative Herndon, who will
be um presenting the proposal
for internet privacy and safety.
Thank you for your flexibility.
I think we're ready for you.
Thank you. Good to see you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
morning, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. I am
Representative Pamela Herndon,
and I'm before you today, uh, to
with 4 experts who will discuss
a proposed legislation on
keeping the people of New Mexico
safe while they're on the
internet and protecting their
privacy and it doesn't matter
whether you're 3 or 103. This
piece of legislation will
Certainly work to assist
everyone. Today we have 4
amazing experts who are going to
provide the information that
will be utilizing to to develop
the legislation that will be
presented during the 2025
legislative session. They are
Lena Weber. She's the interim
director of Public Policy with
ACLU in New Mexico, Nathan
Sabara, who's the program
manager of Equality New Mexico,
we have Cody Van Zink. He's a
senior.
Policy council at ACLU in
Washington. He will be joining
us via the webcast, and we also
have Nicole Rocha, who's the
principal at the firm of Rocha
Public Affairs. She also will be
joining us via the webcast. Uh,
there is a PowerPoint
presentation, Madam Chair, and
that has been handed out to you.
It will also be presented on the
uh on the web above us and the
presenters will uh now discuss
the proposal as
Legislation with you and we look
forward to the wonderful
discussion that will occur.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um, again, I'm, I'm Lena Weber.
I'm the interim director of
public policy at the ALU of New
Mexico, try to keep this mic
working, um, we, we're gonna try
to keep the presentation brief
and.
And tight, um, so that we have,
we have time for questions, so
I'll just give a brief overview.
Um, I'll hand it over to Nicole
Rocha to, to dig in on some of
the youth specific aspects of
this work, Nathan and then Cody.
So, we'll do a bit of a bing
boom bam, but we'll keep it
tight. Um, so thank you all for,
for giving us some time today to
talk about this really important
issue. I know this is an issue
that this committee has heard
about previously, um, and that
we're all very aware that our,
our safety and
privacy online is a really
pressing issue for New Mexico
and across the country and one
that
states, um, many other states
are also working to to address
in a myriad of ways. So really
what we're looking at here is we
all know that every time that we
go online, we use an app, we use
a website, we do an online
search, there is a wealth of our
personal information that is
collected, um, and then can be
used and can end up in many
people's hands. We also know
that access to online spaces,
communities, information
resources.
Um, it's really crucial for our
communities and, and we know
there's amazing work happening
in this legislature and across
the state to increase access to
Internet, especially in our in
our rural communities. So really
what we're looking at here is
balancing privacy, safety with
this question of access.
So when, when these online
entities are collecting,
processing and storing, um,
these massive amounts of
information about all of us,
this information can be used to
make discriminatory predictions
about our health outcomes. It
can be used to deny folks access
to housing or jobs. It can be
used to hike insurance rates,
um, and it can also wind up, uh,
being used to target users on
the Internet with
misinformation, um, and
manipulation.
The way that that this plays out
is first online service
providers, including social
media platforms will gather this
vast amount of information, this
can be drawn from our likes, our
comments, um, what's what
websites we're accessing our
physical location, um, and more
this data often is used to
create detailed user profiles on
each and every one of us, and
that does allow companies to
deliver targeted advertising.
Um, based
on our interests, our behaviors,
our demographics, um, and maybe
targeted advertising is in our
interests. Maybe we'd like to
receive targeted odds, right,
based on, on our interests,
maybe we like that, um, you
know, that a profile is created
about us and then we're targeted
with, with specific odds, um,
the, the problem here is that it
should be a choice, right? Um,
and we should be aware of how
that information is being used.
Um, in some cases, companies are
also selling our user data
directly to third-party data
brokers who use.
for their own purposes and then
there's also algorithmic
manipulation that happens, so
when these profiles are created
about us, um, they also help
determine via algorithms what
content we see on our feeds, um,
as algorithms are prioritizing
posts and ads that are aiming to
keep users engaged and target
content uh that they would most
likely be wanting to see or
would keep them engaged on the
platform.
So of course this causes a
myriad of problems, and again,
we're happy to dig into more of
any and all of this in the
questions, but of course this
raises privacy issues, um, just
the extensive amount of data
that is collected, um, it also
creates, uh, issues around
targeting, um, and, and this can
result in things like predatory
advertising and fraudulent
schemes, um, there's a lack of
user control, so many users may
not fully understand how their
data is being used or have
limited options to control.
it's collection and usage, um,
there can be discrimination that
results because the use of
algorithm and data can
perpetuate biases that already
exist and disadvantage certain
groups, and of course overall
there's a lack of transparency.
So I'm gonna pass it now to
Nicole Rocha, um, who's been,
who's been very involved in, uh,
previous work on this issue,
specifically on how this impacts
youth and I'll, I'll let her
speak to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
My name is Nicole Rocha, and I'm
the principal at Rocha Public
Affairs. I've been directly
involved with the New Mexico
Kids Code Coalition over the
past two years. While privacy
protections are important for
everyone. We now have
significant data to show that
the mental health crisis
affecting our youth has been
deeply exacerbated by the use of
psychologically manipulative
design features intended to
prolong time spent online.
Excuse me, at this moment, we
seem to have reached a breaking.
Point with the majority of
state's attorney generals,
including AG Torres, and
numerous school districts, suing
meta, TikTok, and other big tech
companies for these practices.
As a result of these lawsuits
and the whistleblowers that have
played a role in them. We know
even more about the dangers
associated with the status quo.
We know Meta commissioned
research on teens developing
brains to design their products
in ways that would capitalize on
their predecisions to impulse,
peer pressure, and potentially
risky behavior. In fact,
met his own research shows that
they are actively working with
advertisers under the promise of
being able to target
advertisements to specific age
ranges, including age ranges of
minors.
Although we have this trove of
evidence against social media
companies, it's important to
remember that they are not the
only bad actors. They're
currently the sector in the hot
seat. It's time to make online
platforms do something
different. This bill addresses
many of these issues, but unlike
some kids specific proposals
we've seen in other states, it
does not require any form of
content moderation or age
verification. Importantly, as a
code of general applicability,
it also doesn't place the onus
on parents.
to monitor their kids every
online interaction or consent to
data use in order for their
children to have access to all
the beneficial online
opportunities that are out
there. I want to emphasize the
importance of this structure, as
we've seen at all levels of
government proposals that fail
to respect the line between
children's rights and parents'
rights to raise their children.
This bill strikes that careful
balance, and as such, it
provides all New Mexican kids
the same protective internet.
Uh, Lena, could you do the next
slide, please?
One of the elements that makes
this bill work is it's
definition of actual knowledge.
While laws to protect kids have
been online excuse me,
while laws to protect kids
online have been around since
the mid 1990s. They largely rely
on platforms having actual
knowledge that a user is a minor
or they only apply to sites and
apps that are directed towards
children, like Sesame Street.
This framework has permitted
platforms for general audiences
like YouTube, Snapchat, online
game.
s etc. to avoid compliance with
these laws by claiming that they
do not have actual knowledge of
a user's age.
Platforms then use this consumer
data, including children's data
in harmful ways, so long as
there is consent. This bill
instead defines actual knowledge
to include self-identified age,
age provided by a third party or
inferences made by the platform
for things like marketing.
Inferences that we know the
industry already makes. This
definition ensures that
platforms can no longer have it
both ways. If a user is
identified as a minor for
marketing, then the platform
must activate additional
protections. These protections
would include preventing
direct messaging from unknown
contacts unless the minor first
initiates that contact.
would include prohibiting push
notifications between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. to
to ensure that platforms are not
keeping children and teens awake
all night, and it would prohibit
profile-based feeds.
These specific prohibitions
represent best practices that
have emerged since the advent of
design codes over the past
several years globally, and
create a better online
environment for youth to learn,
thrive, and doesn't limit their
access to knowledge or
community. Thank you again for
this opportunity to testify
today, and I'm happy to answer
any questions when appropriate.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, once again, my
name is Nathan Swatra and I am
the program manager for Equality
New Mexico. Uh, so when it comes
to protecting internet access,
we are well aware that it
requires protecting um data as
well as it does involve
protecting the content that
comes along with it. And then,
uh, that is why EQ and M is
involved in this new approach to
internet safety because us as
LGBTQ folks have a unique stake
in understanding how important
access to content on the
Internet.
is. That is why we have worked
together to create this
legislation that makes the
internet a safer place for
everyone, as opposed to
restricting the accessibility of
invaluable information in online
spaces.
Many other states, including New
Mexico, are also moving to make
the internet a safer space.
Unfortunately, sometimes these
attempts work to censor
available content on the
internet rather than
holistically making them.
Making the internet a safer
place as a whole. Uh, we know
that these attempts largely come
from gender straight folks who
happen to be adults also, and
what is missing in these
conversations is the
understanding that content
access is uniquely critical to
LGBTQ folks or people in
dangerous situations who might
otherwise be unable to find this
information elsewhere. This
approach will not allow anyone
with a political agenda to
decrease the level of access for
anyone. This is true for
individuals who are looking for
information on a variety of
topics.
Related to reproductive health,
mental health, and LGBTQ plus
well-being.
This bill works off previous
versions, like the
age-appropriate design code and
preserves or improves many of
those key provisions while
addressing the concerns. Nathan.
Uh
It looks like you're
Working off of the uh.
A handout
Could you reference the 1st 5
words of any page.
people can flip through and
and the title is Internet Safety
also means protecting access to
the information our families and
communities need to be healthy
and thrive.
Um, moving on to the next slide
now.
Overall, this bill provides
common sense safety legislation
for everyone. It addresses
targeted advertising, prevents
online activity, and geo-based
tracking, while also protecting
our personal and sensitive
internet data.
Furthermore, IPSA will prevent
the ability for any entity to
discriminate based on available
data, curb overactive and
unwanted notifications and
ultimately ensure that we are
safer by making our data safer.
Pass it on to Cody Vensky.
Thank you, Nathan, and thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. I am Cody Vansky.
I'm a senior policy counsel at
ACLU's national office. Uh,
we'll be turning now to the 11th
slide in the handout, which is
titled Ipsa Key Provisions. I'll
be drilling down as the title
suggests on key provisions
within the bill before I address
those key provisions which are
primarily situated in sections 4
and 5 of the bill. I want to
spend a brief moment talking
about the entities that are
covered by IPSA.
These entities were chosen in
order to identify those who play
a role in facilitating the harms
that Nicole and others here on
the panel have addressed so far
today, and are focused on online
platforms and services that
participate in one of 3
activities that you.
Those 3 activities that would be
covered by the bill are those
that collect information
directly from us, those who sell
our data through data brokerage,
and those who engage in targeted
advertising.
These 3 sets of activities make
up a data ecosystem where a
company stand to profit from our
information and often do so in
ways that can cause harms that
have animated much of the
discussion here today and over
the past few years, such as
discriminatory advertisements
that might lead to in people.
The 3 activities that triggered
the bill then will result in
application of sections 4 and 5
of the bill and it harms, while
preserving the benefit basis.
The first provision I want to
talk about is in section 5 of
the bill, which imposes
proactive obligations on
entities. This first one is the
key safeguard of the bill and is
data minimization.
Data minimization is a somewhat
wonky term for a rather
straightforward concept, and
it's that the entities that
collect and use our information
will only collect and use the
information they need to provide
the services that we request.
Data minimization is a common
sense safeguard against the
unfettered processing of our
personal information and the
harms that it can fuel.
A second key provision in these
two sections of the bill is
strict restrictions on sensitive
data collection use. IPSA would
set heightened protections for
the collection and use of our
sensitive data such as
biometrics, geolocation, health
data, which is only permitted
when strictly necessary, and
it's not permitted to be used
for advertising purposes or for
data brokerage.
Next, the bill establishes key
civil rights protections.
Civil rights laws often extend
to online spaces, but many of
those laws were drafted 30, 40,
or even 50 years ago, and
sometimes our application is not
always clear.
Isa includes a key provision
that would protect a wide swath
of marginalized groups from
discrimination through data
processing and any activity that
otherwise makes unavailable the
equal enjoyment of goods or
services. These are critical
protections not only in the age
of big data, but as artificial
intelligence and algorithmic
decision making are increasingly
involved in many areas of our
lives.
I'll move now to the next slide
in the handout title Key
provisions continued.
The last provisions I want to
address here include opt in
consent.
The bill requires opt-in consent
that must be clear and
affirmative to use our data for
advertising or data brokerage.
As Lina noted, the key here is
that participation in
advertising or the sale of our
data is something that is the
user's individual choice, and
not a choice made by companies
that profit from our
information.
Consent must be specific and
unambiguous in the consent in
this bill cannot be buried in
broad terms or obtained through
deceptive design.
Similarly, deceptive design is
prohibited in the bill. Design
pattern design choices such as
dark patterns that manipulate
the user intent and try to force
on users data uses that they did
not consent to, we prohibited by
the bill.
Next, the bill establishes a
variety of individual rights
that many other states are
ratifying in comprehensive
privacy laws. This includes the
ability to access the
information that is collected on
you, request its correction, and
request its deletion.
These are necessary tools in the
toolbox to accompany data
minimization to give users more
control over their information.
And then finally, as Nicole
touched on, the bill provides
increased user control with
minor specific protections for
known minors. These controls
include controls over
notifications that you receive,
whether or not content content
feeds that you use are driven by
profiles about you and whether
or not its strangers or other
unknown individuals may message
you.
For known minors, privacy
protected defaults are on by
default.
Turning to the final slide in
the deck, the New Mexico
Internet privacy and Safety Act
would make great strides in
establishing privacy protections
with the added benefit of
protecting our safety online,
not only for children and
grandparents, but for all of us
to provide meaningful
protections for everyone using
the internet in New Mexico,
helping prevent bad actors from
being able to prey on others.
With that, I will turn it back.
Think you, Cody, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um.
I believe we're, we're ready for
questions.
Thank you for the information. I
think this is such an important
conversation. I just saw a quick
presentation about how they were
able to track cell phones, uh,
of individuals who had visited
Epstein Island and track them to
different locations across the
country and we don't have that
data in the Europe because of
their privacy laws. I thought
that was interesting that we
have much more lax privacy laws
here and our phones are
Tracking us in ways that many of
us don't even understand. So
we're gonna start with
representative. Oh.
Um, De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. How does
this proposed bill differ from
the uh federal. It's on life
online safer.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, and I will
ask Cody to also chime in on
this, um, but the, the kids
online safety act some key
concerns with that proposal are
the ways that it could
incentivize censorship of
important information online,
um, and be politicized
unnecessarily, um, this approach
avoids incentivizing censorship
and avoids um.
language that would allow it to
be used in a political manner,
for example, by an attorney
general, um, who would make
known their, their views on a
specific topic to try to
pressure companies to cut off
access to certain types of
information or material, um, to
users in that state. So that's,
that's one example, but I, I, if
it's OK, Madam Chair, like Cody
too to also chime in on that.
Yeah, uh, Lena is exactly right.
It avoids some of the concerns
that have arisen from the duty
of care approach that is in
Khosa, this bill takes a
particularly targeted approach
by identifying the root of many
of the harms that have animated
concerns about kids' online
safety, as well as the safety of
many other people online, which
is the use of our personal
information to profile us and
make it possible to target us
with ads, with fraud, and things
of that nature. And so, unlike
Kosa, this has a number of
provisions that
Directly target that abuse of
our information. First and
foremost being the data
minimization requirement. It
becomes more difficult for our
information to be abused, if we
are turning off the spigot of
information, so to speak, at the
source, and that can help curb
the harmful profiling and other
abuses of our information. So
that's one critical aspect where
this differs from Kosa by really
focusing and establishing the
guardrails.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So if the
Act is in effect and this bill
is in effect as one or another
supersede the other.
Uh, the, the reference, what the
reference between this bill and
the Kids Online Safety Act if
the kids Online Safety Act were
to pass, want to make Adam
Chair, just to reiterate, so if
both are enacted.
Both are in effect.
There's one
Supersede another
Either the bill or the act.
I'll answer that. So as we look
at the federal legislation and
we look at the act that will be
in incorporated in the state of
New Mexico. Our act is gonna be
more provide more security, and
it will supersede.
Thank you, man.
Thank you, representative,
Representative Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Herden, I'm not
sure I agree with that, but uh
that's OK. Um, I want to first
say,
Thank you for bringing this bill
forward. Um, if I was going to
be around next session, I would
ask to join you be a co-sponsor.
I think this is super important
legislation.
Um, and I'm very impressed with
the team you have.
Um, it's a, it's not often that
you have the ACLU working with
you to try to limit
Essentially
What could be argued is a
limitation on the First
Amendment.
Right? But I like how you're
doing a great job trying to
thread the needle.
So I, I have a couple of
thoughts and a couple of
questions.
Um
The, the first is
I love the approach here of
Focusing on privacy.
Um, you know, the, the Money
Watch article here saying that
social media company video
streaming services engage in
vast surveillance of users.
And we all know that's true.
Um, and I just find it
fascinating, you know, I work at
Sandia Labs and
And
We do a lot of work to help the
intelligence community.
And we all get instruction on
PISA, which is the government
act preventing making it
illegal.
For the US government to surveil
US citizens.
But
Facebook and Meta and everyone
else are surveilling US
citizens.
Um, so why is it OK for them and
not for the US government?
Um
And
And I, I try not to be.
You know, a conspiracy theorist
or whatever, but I, I mentioned
last, uh, yesterday, I love this
YouTube series. It's a 12
minutes clips. It's what
happened in World War II this
week.
Uh, it's World War 2, week by
week. I just, and it's
fascinating just to think what
happened 80 years ago, how
propaganda was used, how, um,
Uh, how, how certain governments
drew
Lists of attributes of different
people that it was OK to
discriminate against.
And
I get a little worried that our
social media companies are
essentially generating pools of
data that in the wrong hands
could be used to discriminate.
Um
So I, I love the angle of
Um, protecting privacy and
allowing people to opt in.
As opposed to
Restricting what content is
available.
Right? Um, and so.
The example that's near and dear
to my heart is my 15 year old
son, um, this year signed up for
we, we, we allowed him to sign
up for a, an, an X and uh uh an
Instagram and a Facebook
account. And what was the
default in his feed?
It was all porn.
Right?
Um
Which
We can look at plenty of studies
that show especially in young
adults, that is very damaging.
Developing good relationships
and under, you know.
But I'm not here advocating that
we get rid of porn. I'm saying,
wouldn't it be nice if his feed
was empty.
And he was able to select what
he wanted to see.
Right, and that's why I think
this bill is doing, uh, Madam
Chair, and Hensel, I'll pause
there and make sure that
I'm, I'm not just hearing what I
wanted to hear, but uh
This is actually, um, I'm
understanding the bill contents
correctly.
You're understanding the context
correctly and I'm gonna ask Cody
and Lena to respond to that, but
that is exactly what we are
trying to do, and would you
please respond also?
I, I'm happy to weigh on a
couple of those points. First on
the national security
dimensions. There's a lot of
efforts happening at the federal
level to address the flows of
information to foreign
adversaries, and this has
happened both in Congress and
through the Department of
Justice, as well as some other
federal avenues, and one of the
concerns is it becomes very
difficult to prohibit data
transfers to China or other
foreign adversaries, if that
data is still being collected
here at home. And so by limiting
the amount of information that's
being collected.
in the first place as this bill
would do, it reduces the ability
of the information to be used
for, not just targeted
advertising, but to make its way
to data brokers and then onto
sale to foreign adversaries, and
so we did very much play a role
in addressing that national
security concern that you've
highlighted, and it's been well
documented how much of that
information is available uh on
not only all of us, but on
specific vulnerable populations
like our military on the content
feed, uh, I think you have
framed it exactly right as ACLU
can imagine, we are.
to avoid a bill, uh, where the
government plays a role in
dictating what content that's
constitutionally protected can
be on a platform or not, but
instead empower users to make
those choices. So this would
give users the ability to toggle
between a profile-driven feed or
one that is just the basic
information that is needed to
provide you with the content be
like who you follow. So it's
putting that choice in the hands
of users and from knowing
children, it's defaulted to.
representative and uh coach.
very much appreciate um
Those answers, um,
So maybe just 2 more.
Quick questions then or, or,
yeah, um, so, so the first one
is
You know, as this will obviously
impact
Thus
Um, because every 2 or 4 years,
we go out and advertise
ourselves.
Um,
Uh
And, and I know there's a lot of
Um
You know, we don't have millions
of dollars, so we'd like to be
wise with our resources and we
like to target.
Um, and often we'll, we'll look
at, OK, who's, who's a strong
Democrat or who's a strong
Republican or who's an
independent, where do they live?
And are they dog lovers, you
know, um, uh, so, um, I, I
guess, uh,
Madam Chair, representative just
for fun, you know, if this
passes, how will this impact
campaigning?
going to let Lena uh answer that
because she's been studying that
issue for a long time.
I think servers and I think,
Madam Chair, representative, um,
and I am actually going to ask
Cody to answer that question.
It
It would affect some of your
ability to target advertising.
As Lina pointed out at the very
top, this bill does not end
targeted advertising, but it
gives people the opportunity to
opt in. Some people will do that
because they find it valuable to
to get tailored ads to their
personal preferences, others
will not. And however, will not
affect your ability to advertise
based on information that is not
personal information, and
particularly is not sensitive
personal information and
sensitive personal information.
is uh precise geolocation, but
if you want to target, for
example, on a town or something
more broadly, uh, it would be
able to do that. Now, it's also
worth noting too that the bill
currently applies only to
for-profit entities, and so in a
targeting relationship, uh, it
can be a bit complicated, but
individual campaigns are usually
not for profit entities, uh, it
would not be covered directly
through that.
Yeah, Madam Chair Representative
and Cody, thank you. That's,
that's fascinating. Um, thank
you for pointing out the the
for-profit entity aspect, um, I
have to think about.
The implications of that.
OK, and then my
My last question just really, I
guess a thought.
Um
So
I, I feel like there's this um
I it must just be uh an innate
tendency built into humanity
that we, we tend to gravitate
towards people that are like us,
information that we agree with.
And, and I believe that his
Actually been negative. I feel
like
We, we see the parties going
more and more this way that
we're we're less receptive to
hearing someone disagree with
us. We think it's an affront
instead of, oh, I'd like to
understand why that person
thinks differently.
Um
And so
Um
I guess just a high level
question here, and I, I don't
even know if this really
directly pertains to your, your
bill, but
You know, I
I watched
Several different news stations,
not just Fox, right? but people
choose just to watch that, moves
them more and more this way and
vice versa.
Um
And, and we saw that Twitter had
algorithms that would, you know,
hide certain content and show
people their content.
Um
What we're essentially allowing
with this legislation is
somewhat of choice.
To only see and hear what they
want to see and hear.
Um
And I guess I'd just like to
hear your, your, your thoughts
on it.
Well
One of the things you're
absolutely right because people
will be able to opt in and to,
and if they want to stay within
content that is closer to what
they want to hear or things that
they are likely to align
themselves with that might
create somewhat of a small
problem, however, one of the
things that we are
Um
Hoping will happen is that the
broader use of this, these
platforms uh will allow people
to uh actually make a choice of
what they wanna hear and that
they will want to uh look at
things that are not only aligned
with what they believe in but
what they don't so that they can
make informed decisions, but I'm
gonna ask Cody to make sure that
I'm following what we have been
talking about in answering and
responding to your question.
I, I know Nicole had her hand
up, so I'll let her go first.
Nicole.
Yeah, thank you, thank you. Um,
I think one of the
things that we've been seeing
with the, with the internet in
the past 20 years, and that has
not been addressed by laws and
legislation is the fact that it
can go viral and the profiling
by default, which this bill
would prevent actually.
Will encourage more diversity of
thought and opinion instead of
only pushing
Advertising content groups,
whatever, that are the same as
what you already think. Now,
there's a lot more like user
choice and this as well, so you
get to control, um,
You know, what you, what you see
online more than than what is
currently available, but part of
the problem with the way the
internet currently operates is
that our personal information
has been gathered, um, when it's
not relevant to the service that
we've requested online, and it
is used to direct our, our feed
and other information that comes
towards us. Cody, I'll turn it
back to you, if that's OK.
Hm
I, I think Nicole is exactly
right. So the bill would
prohibit profiling by default
unless it's strictly necessary
for the service, but the other
key aspect that it, it addresses
is what we're calling profile
driven feeds, which is where a
platform uses personal
information besides who you have
followed or what you have
otherwise provided to the
platform expressly to build your
content feed in order to
determine uh uh what they want
to show you and these profiles
can be based off your likes,
they can be based off how
you linger over particular ads
or content in your feed. It can
be based on your online activity
off of that platform, and this
gives you an option basically to
toggle between a profile driven
feed and a privacy protective
fee that is just built on the
information you've explicitly
given to the platform, again,
like the entities that you
follow. And so it would allow
you to determine, am I seeing
this meme or this trend because
I'm living in a profile based
echo chamber, or is it because
this is actually the, the
consensus of
among uh people in my circles or
people I'm following online, uh,
and similarly with that sort of
tool available to you, it would
not impede on platforms ability
to make content moderation
decisions, because those
decisions, of course, are not
based on personal information,
and so it would not impede on
platforms editorial discretion,
which we've seen the Supreme
Court affirm is a First
Amendment protection.
No, man, and Rosette Hernon and
Nicole and Cody, thank you.
great answer to that question. I
can see how this
might actually
Allow people to not just be kind
of shoehorned into an echo
chamber, but actually,
Uh, explore other content and
maybe they, they like it and
then that becomes part of their,
their feed, um.
You know, my wife is super good
at this. Her Google feed can't
figure out whether she's a
Democrat or Republican, cause
she just, you know, she likes to
read everything. I try to do
that too. Um, so, uh, yeah, I, I
very much appreciate how you've
worked hard to really thread the
needle here, make sure we're not
limiting First Amendment rights,
not censoring, but that we're
looking to protect private
information and also
you know,
Yeah, yeah, offer people, offer
people choice, right? So, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Excellent conversation. Thank
you, Representative Harper. Um,
moving on to Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman. Uh, good morning, um,
Representative Herndon and all
presenters. Thank you. You are a
star, truly. I'm so happy you
brought this forth. Uh, I just
need a clarification and then
I'm gonna go on to a brief
little story because of time
that I have something happened
to me.
A few years ago, but before
that, I just need some
clarification, Cody or somebody
up there mentioned you answered
the question for Representative
Harper when he asked, would it
affect campaigns, for example,
and you said something that kind
of blurred in my brain here, so
tell me, it does, it affects
it's for nonprofit, not for, not
for for profit or the other way
around. I, I a little bit.
Gray on that. Tell me about it.
The bill only applies to
for-profit entities for profit,
so it's the other way.
OK, so then it would not apply
to.
Thank you so much for explaining
that. Now, real brief, Madam
Chairman, let me, let me see if
something like this would help a
situation that happened to me a
few years ago, and I know it
can't hurt, that's for sure,
but, um, a few years ago, I got
into my computer, my desktop.
I opened it up
And as soon as it went on,
there's this big screen inside
my regular screen.
And the screen said or
Microsoft.
Of course, and it was a
Microsoft logo, the whole thing
just like Microsoft.
And then it says we have locked.
Your computer because we're
trying to protect you, um,
Microsoft has the firewall and
all the stuff they went into
that sounded very much like
Microsoft.
And so call this number to um
and and we will help you unlock
it.
That was kind of unusual. This
was about maybe 6 years ago or
something.
So, oh my gosh, push buttons all
and long story short is nothing
moved.
So I thought, well, I'm gonna
call, you know, this Microsoft
all their logos, everything
looked perfect and.
You know, I, I just said, OK, so
I called.
And they answered Microsoft,
they will help you.
And so I told them what was
happening and they, and they
said, oh yes, you're calling
about your computer. Yes, we did
that to protect you and thanks
for being so, so much for that.
So he tells me, and I feel so
embarrassed and ignorant. Let's
put it mildly, but anyway, he
says, yes, he and these words
and it will unlock, you know,
when you open your screens. So
he gave me like 2 or 3 simple
words to open it up and I'm.
So ignorant.
Right.
To the uh the keys.
And immediately that went off
the screen.
And he, I could see his hands,
literally I could see his
fingers. He, he broke into my
computer because I
He needed me to.
To give him the basically to
open it up for him to be able to
get in and so with those words,
explore something that he gave
me, I'm gonna forget that word.
It opened it up so I could see
the cursor.
Of his in his hand inside my
screen and all this time I
thought he was helping me.
And so
It's a state there and I could
just see it ongoing and, and I'm
trying to speak, say something
like I mean, can I turn my
computer back on or something
like that. And he said we're
still working on it. They're
trying to get into your bank
accounts and all these other
things, so we're trying to help
you.
Here I was, and finally I
thought this is not right. Long
story again short is that I
called.
I
And um the manager from IT was
there and he says, doesn't sound
right. Hang up, hang up, hang
up.
And so
Um
I said, no, it's real. I need my
computer. And so it it's really
Microsoft. I try to convince
him. So with them, I mean, he
was speaking instead of me, and
he, he says, you are hackers.
And we will turn you in.
And on and on in his words, and
so, um.
We hung up.
After I just hung the phone up.
They kept calling day after
that. Now, I had to do away with
my computer entirely, just
completely raise it, throw it
away, make sure nobody because
I'm pretty sure that they
planted viruses and what's
called key logs in your
computer, meaning that those
they took all my files, a copy
of everything I had personal
information and all.
And then they, um, they planted
these key locks that tracked
every time I would push a key,
it was recording on their end.
So if I ever got into an account
or put a password in to get into
my computer, and they thought, I
guess the the and that's
hopefully done. I'm pretty I'm
sure I'm on the dark web
somewhere selling the they're
selling the information, but
For now, I did do away with the
computer, got new stuff and
started all over. It's all I
could do.
The question that I have is,
The screen that they put in my
screen when I opened it up.
That wasn't advertising or
actual hackers. So how does a
hacker
Find your computer through an IP
address. I guess they need IP
addresses to get into computers.
But how do they get that
address?
People like myself or anyone
doesn't give out IP addresses. I
didn't even know there was such
a thing. They exist in the back.
There's a little number and
that's your IP address, I guess.
But with this, be able to help
in something like that, um,
Tell me how, just briefly, like
tracking online activity. I saw
the number 3 line where it says
this bill will. I kind of like
that because obviously they
tracked some activity.
My computer, but tell me, Madam
Chairman, briefly because I know
I took too much time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Senator,
um, and first just to say I
think, you know, I'm so sorry
that happened to you.
And everyone across the board is
Targeted by by scams, by, by
hacking, we hear more and more
about data breaches, all this
stuff. What I, what I will say
briefly and then if, if anybody
else wants to speak to this a
bit more, but well, this bill
won't prevent hacking and and
can't prevent, you know, all
scams and and schemes and
everything that goes on, um, one
of the ways that folks are
targeted for um for scams is is.
through some bad, bad actors
can um purchase or access data
that is held about us, so these
kind of user profiles, all of
our sensitive information, um,
that is gathered, collected,
stored by by different um
entities and data brokers about
us, bad actors.
can access that data and can use
that to decide who they're going
to target, um, and so, well, it
wouldn't prevent hacking, you
know, the spill won't put a stop
to any of that, um, it can be a
little bit more of a guard rail
against um our personal
information that then can be
weaponized against us in that
way.
Thank you. And, and hey, you're
in a guard rail or something
it's, it's great. So thank you.
I know it's late and I'm gonna
go on. I appreciate you doing
this for us and Representative
Herndon, thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez for
sharing your story and new
legislators should know that
there are lobbyists who keep
profiles of every bill that you
vote for every bill you carry
who you tend to carry most of
your bills with, and apparently
Senator Pope and I often came
up, but that was who this
profile said that I carry most
of my bills with um Senator
Pope, and we all have profiles
as well.
To let us for I guess
fundraising contributions and
stuff, so, um, yeah, just so
everyone is aware of that. So
we're gonna move on to
representative Anya No.
Thank you
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, thank you, uh,
Representative Herndon, so, um,
if I'm understanding this bill,
I totally get how it relates to
things like social media
platforms and the like, and that
makes total sense to me. My
question is if this will have
any impact on.
Internet providers like cable
broadband companies, if they'll
be impacted by this legislation
at all.
So, um, representative Onanornu,
when you say providers, uh
please can you explain a little
bit more about what you're
thinking about a scenario. Sure,
yeah, so like the companies that
actually provide Internet to the
consumer, like the cable
companies like Xfinity or like a
broadband service, if they have
any responsibility or liability
under this bill.
So I will, I, I will answer
this, and I'm gonna ask my any
member of my team to respond,
but you still have to opt in. So
even if the cable, uh, company
is going to offer a service,
you're gonna have to opt in to
receive it based upon the way in
which this legislation works, so
I will ask other members of the
team to chime in on whether or
not they think that that would
create a problem, the internet
service provider and qualify in
some respects, uh, under the
bill in the fact that they're
often not.
Consider an online service and
platform, the FTC has made that
online privacy Protection Act at
federal level. The question is,
is as I said, uh, in order to
qualify as a covered entity, the
online service provider would
have to participate in one of
collecting information directly
from you using that information
for targeted advertitising or
engaging in the brokerage of
personal data. To the extent
they're engaging in those
activities and are doing so at
their own discretion and
control, they would be covered.
entity subject to the
requirement. Uh, in many ways
it's responding in some of the
research that has been developed
around some of the surveillance
that some internet service
providers are engaging in, uh,
using our browsing history and
other information in order to
place us to advertising
segments. Um, that's
particularly uh sensitive
information, not sensitive in
the definition of the bill here,
but in a common sense way, uh,
and this would provide some
safeguards around that
information.
However, if the service
provider, uh, excuse me, the
internet service provider is
simply following your
instructions, transmitting your
data to connect you to a
website. It is not making
unilateral decisions about what
to do with your data, uh, they
would not qualify as a covered
entity under the bill. I'm happy
to dig further into that.
OK, thank you very much for that
answer, um.
Madam Chair.
And representative that that
clears that up for me if they're
so it would not have any direct
liability if they're just
following the directions of the
consumer.
So, OK, that makes.
I'm next to Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, madam, or woman.
Um, first of all, I'm gonna have
to study this a lot more today,
so thank you for.
I have a couple questions.
When is a pet peeve of mine?
It's the fact that many websites
do not identify the ownership
responsorship.
The associated names.
Have you thought of including
that.
You don't even know who's behind
it.
One of the things that we, we
were very careful about doing
this First Amendment right and
in terms of that information and
whether or not it needed to be
revealed, but the bigger overall
arching item even you're allowed
to do the research that you may
want to do before you opt in to
anything, and one of the biggest
protections that we're offering
as a part of this legislation
again I we want to emphasize is
that opt in with respect to
anything that you receive so
that when you receive
information
without knowing who the
underlying option, uh, I mean
the providers are, you have the
option to review and research
that. I do that quite often and
I would anticipate that that
would continue, and I'll let the
rest of the team offer any other
additional information they
might want to.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, in the, the
language of the bill, well, it
doesn't directly have language
regarding what you're saying.
There's in section 7, language
around data processing
agreements and.
You know, Cody, Nicole, I see, I
think I saw Nicole's hand up
perhaps, but, um, one of them
could speak more to this, but
essentially if, if a website is,
um, you know, an online service
providers selling some something
through a website, um, but
they're also affiliated or
sharing data with another parent
company, let's say, that data
processing agreement would then
govern how that data needs to be
processed and stored, um.
In order to, to maintain those
same protections and, and
guardrails.
Yeah, if I could just follow up
on that briefly. There is a
definition in the bill for
affiliate and this definition
was included specifically to
address that concern of, you
know, Google or Meta or whomever
owning many, many smaller
companies, um, and a lot of the
time those smaller companies
aren't large enough to hit the
thresholds for different state
or federal privacy laws, but by
including the term affiliate in
a covered entity, um.
They would be included. And so
the protections would be
Um, there, whether you knew is
the consumer or not, that that
site was owned.
By Google or something smaller.
Uh, thank you.
And then my next question is,
are you working at all with the
Attorney General's office. I
know they've been.
Working a lot
The use of Snapchat and other
platforms for nefarious
activities like.
So have you come to them?
To consult with him about this.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
yes, we are in communication
with the Attorney General's
office, um, and their, their
consumer protection division has
also been looking at the
language and, and so we're in
close communication with them on
this as well.
Great, thank you.
Um
How do you enforce it?
enforces this, Madam Chair.
Actually enforces this.
How is it?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I'd like to ask Cody to dig into
the enforcement mechanisms, um,
just to
It
Provide the technical aspects of
that.
At a high level it's enforced by
both the Attorney General as
well as by individual
plaintiffs, uh, we thought it'd
be very important that given the
huge amount of entityation that
we not put the entire onus on
the Attorney general's office to
use what resources they have
workers that are out there, and
so this enables individuals to
be able to vindicate their own
privacy rights, uh, in New
Mexico. Thank you, and then, um,
What is law enforcement play
into this and enforcing or
monitoring.
Uh, I mean, you've talked to the
attorney general.
Does it have any relationship to
the roles of public safety
officers.
So Cody, I don't know if you're
gonna start by giving the
overarching uh conversation
about whether how law
enforcement other than the
Attorney General's office would
be involved.
Uh, the, the bill does envision
that there are a number of
exceptions to the restrictions
on uses of information that
would allow sharing with certain
governmental entities under the
exceptions that are articulated
in the bill. So one of the
things that we envisioned as we
were structuring the bill is to
ensure that it doesn't impede on
key governmental uh uh
functions, and so it helps
ensure that that personal
information is available to
those governmental entities.
in accord.
Thank you. And my last question
is, what do you do about minors
that like out there.
Which is very
Uh, I don't know Representative
Harper's son.
If it
Insisted on a birth year, but.
I know, probably of several 100
miners that are on websites.
Uh, where they are not.
We have this, it says, are you
older than 13?
But
Many aren't, and many are still
minors.
Old yet
Uh, but they are considered
children.
We deal with that.
Or do we or can
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Nicole, I see your hand up.
Would you like to speak to that?
Sure, I'm happy to. Um, so that
question brings up a complicated
web of both state and federal
law. Um, the federal law, the
children's online privacy
Protection Act, which was
enacted in the mid-1990s, dealt
with this, uh,
Term called actual knowledge,
right? And so sites that are
accessed by minors only have to
turn on privacy protections or
other protections for a kid, if
the kids, if those sites have
actual knowledge that the user
is a minor, um.
There's another whole part of of
CAA that deals with sites
directed towards children, like
Sesame Street, which I think is
not what any of us are concerned
about here. So we get back to
this question of actual
knowledge and that standard has
been one of the reasons that the
federal law has been pretty
inadequate at protecting kids'
safety and privacy online since
the 1990s. 1 of the great things
that this particular bill does
is it defines actual knowledge
for the purposes of New Mexico
law.
To include inferences that the
platforms are making about the
That user or the owners um self
attested age or any of these
other things. So if the platform
is the online, um, if the
website or app knows is using uh
Users' personal information for
purposes of advertising or
directing feed or doing anything
else, and they're making
inferences that this is a kid.
Then they have to turn on the
protections. So it's not a
complete solution.
But it is a significant step
towards um insuring that the
information that
Online platforms are using to
increase their profits, um,
they're also using that
information to create a better
internet for you.
Hopefully that answers your
question.
notes on that as
as well. One is that because
many, many, many of the
provisions in the bill apply to
everyone, the stakes and getting
that age verification down, uh,
or that that identification of
who was a minor down correctly
or the platform things that
someone as an adult that they
might be actually 15 team,
there's still, they're still
gonna be entitled to the update
that's still gonna be uh uh
protected and so the stakes are
a little bit lower here. The
other thing is this sort of
broad and still
Some of the pitfalls that we run
into other bills including
concierge verification or age
estimation, and because that can
require someone to scan their ID
when accessing a website or
might incentivize platforms to
scan their ID when accessing a
website or might incentivize
platforms tot already in order
to identify who is a minor in
this, as Nicole said says, if
they are processing the
information anyway to identify
it was a minor for advertising
and product development, they
will be deemed to have actual.
You, um, and I'll look more into
that. I'm just, when I was
teaching 6th graders, I was
amazed.
At the role of social
influencers on YouTube doing.
Um, just
Incredibly, anyway, thank you
for bringing this forward and
Or
Thank you, Representative
Garrett.
Thank you so much for the very
important bill and bringing it
forward representative. Thank
you for your
comments and the discussion.
Madame Cheerda's market was like
to, would he like to offer any
additional information.
Our recommendations for us as we
move forward.
Rosson.
I thought this was a good
discussion.
I think uh hopefully you're
taking notes on which questions
got asked.
My recommendation would be to
56 word answer.
this point.
Yeah
We've got 2 files that are being
drafted and I understand you
want to combine them.
You'll need to work with the
drafters.
But how you want to get those.
Thank you very much and thank
you for the conversation, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
It really does help as we're
developing the final bill that
will be introduced during the
legislative session and we
really do appreciate all of the
great questions that you raised.
Thank you, and I'm gonna just
see if there's public comment,
we'll have an opportunity to go
ahead and come, come up to the
mic.
Can you please speak into the
mic and
Introduce yourself. Thank you.
Madam chair uh members of the
committee, my name is Roy Soto.
I am a registered lobbyist, uh,
I was wondering if the bill
being discussed.
by the committee at this point
is available to the public
interest.
It's not available to the
sponsor yet.
Yeah
It's, it seemed like the
conversation was being
addressed, was addressing a
specific bill that.
That's why I'm asking.
It's still under draft.
It, it next needs to be a
drafting process needs to be
completed and then it'll be
introduced and then it's
available to the public. Thank
you for your comment. Any other
public comments?
Doesn't look like it.
Thank you again for coming and
for the very wonderful
discussion.
All right. So next on the
agenda, um,
It looks like we don't have
anyone signed up. Well, we're
gonna check and see if there's
anyone signed up for public
comment online.
Madam Charity have no one signed
up for public comment. OK, so we
have no additional public
comment.
So it is 11:29 and it looks like
um
adjourned, so I just want to
thank the committee. Thank Madam
Chair, for holding, oh, you have
to.
We're gonna have a picture that
should we adjourn first though?
OK, so, thank you, Madam Chair,
for holding down the floor. I'll
inter up and for the committee
and appreciate you letting me
here today. It's great to finish
up and thank you to the staff.
You've been amazing and
Really appreciated working with
all of you that we're gonna take
a picture and meeting is
adjourned. Do I, do I get? You
gavel.
Adam.
There we go it's official.
