All right.
Hello everybody. Thank you for
being here today.
Because
and um committee members, so
thank you for being here today.
I think it's gonna be a great
committee with electricity, all
about electric, so um let's
start with um introductions with
the representative Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Christine
Chandler, um, House District 43
from Los Alamos. Happy to be
here today.
Good morning to everyone. My
name is Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez.
Uh, good morning. Thank you,
Madam Chair. My name is Jason
Harper. I represent the uh
Rancho area in Sandoval County.
And I drove my New Tesla Model 3
performance up to today. So I'm
very interested in the program.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, State
Senator Harold Pope Junior,
District 23, Northwest
Albuquerque. Happy to be here
and uh on the road, but.
We're going to
Good morning. I'm Bill Souls,
state senator from Las Cruces. I
appreciate that you put, as I
always introduce that I
represent the beautiful Oregon
Mountain desert peaks National
Monument area that that's on the
screen up here. Those of you,
uh, I came up here going about
160 miles an hour flew up this
morning. It was gorgeous.
You represented Allison.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Anthony Ellison, I
represent District 4 of which is
in.
The northwest part of New
Mexico. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
those on the webcast. I'm
Senator Shannon Pinto. I
represent District 3, which is
in the northwest corner.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
colleagues, and those on the
webcast, I'm representative
Wanda Johnson. I represent House
District 5, McKinley, San Juan
County in northwest New Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I'll wait for
Mark to finish, but I am Debbie
Saignano. I represent House
District 21 in Bernalo County.
I'm very excited about. We'll
keep going with Mark and
introductions of.
Madam Chair, yes, uh, my name's
Mark Edwards. I'm with the
Legislative council Service.
Ralph Vincent's over here in the
corner, also at the LCS, the
Sabinena Gaynor, uh, who is
gonna be
Shuffling back and forth
between.
Here in
Another uh workstation.
All morning is also with CS.
Yes, Calo is a.
All right. So our first
presenter.
Um
Adam Chair, do you want to
improve minutes?
We don't have yet? OK, I thought
we had a.
Sorry, apologies.
All right, we're gonna go ahead
and begin with our first
presenter full um build out of
electric vehicle charging
infrastructure identifying
pieces of the puzzle. Miss Kilo,
um, whenever you're ready.
Yeah. Um, hello. First of all,
can everyone hear me? Can I just
get an audio check confirmation,
please.
You're coming through loud and
clear.
OK, wonderful. Thank you so
much. Um,
So, good morning. Thank you all
for joining. Um, really
appreciate the time today to
present, and I will be, uh,
starting off this committee
meeting by presenting on the
landscape of electrical vehicle
charging in New Mexico. Um, this
should serve as a nice primer
and foundation to uh get y'all
warmed up and excited for the
agenda for this committee, um,
and really just lay a
a nice overview of the basics of
EV charging and where things are
in New Mexico. Uh, next slide,
please.
Great. So I am the
transportation modification
policy advisor at Western
Resource Advocates and Western
Resource advocates is a regional
conservation non-profit, um, we
do work on clean energy, land
conservation, and healthy
rivers, um, in the intermountain
west. And so our goal is to
fight climate change and its
impacts to sustain the
environment, economy, and people
of the West.
Next slide, please.
And so, as you can see, we work
in the Intermountain West,
including in New Mexico, um, and
our work occurs on the state
level primarily and so we have
the pleasure of working with
state legislators like
yourselves, um, as well as with
state agencies and commissions,
um, with local governments, and
then we also do quite a bit of
work with um public utilities
commissions, including the PRC
in New Mexico. Uh,
And so we also work with
community partners and other
organizations, uh, to promote
the policies that help us reach
our goals of fighting climate
change and its impacts, so
that's just a little bit about
myself and WRA. Next slide,
please. Great. So for this
presentation, I'll go through
the agenda of what we're gonna
talk about really quickly. First
of all, we are going to do
everyone's favorite thing, which
is acronyms and definitions. Um,
And then we'll talk a little bit
about the basics of the
different types of electric
vehicle charging. We'll talk
about relevant federal policies
for electric vehicle charging.
We'll talk about state policies
in New Mexico, and then we will
talk about looking forward, um,
and what the anticipated
landscape of EV charging in New
Mexico is going to look like.
So, let's do the acronyms, um,
the first
one is I would say the most
important one, which is EV
electric vehicle, and so that is
a motor vehicle where
It is able to have its primary
or secondary source of
propulsion be either in a
battery or a fuel cell, um,
which converts hydrogen into
electricity to propel the
vehicle, um, and so within this,
you can see there's that
distinction between primary and
secondary, and so a bev is a
battery electric vehicle, so
think your Tesla
um
And
Any sort of vehicle like that
where the sole fuel source is
that electric battery and the
way to fuel that vehicle is by
charging it, and then you also
have your peabs, your plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles, and
those are vehicles that have
both a gasoline tank and then
also have a battery on board
that can be charged, um, by
plugging
in to either a wall outlet or a
dedicated EV charger, um, and so
that's really the
differentiation between a
plug-in hybrid electric vehicle,
um, and uh conventional hybrid
is that these plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles have an
all-electric range, um, and when
that's depleted, they will
switch to that gasoline fuel
source. Um,
So then, getting into the
different types of EV charging.
We have DCFC direct current fast
charging, um, and so that
utilizes instead of an
alternating current, a direct
current of electricity, and so
those are what you think of when
you think of EV fast chargers,
um, those are the ones that are
kind of at roadsides or places
where people need to fuel their
vehicles quickly.
Uh, for road trips and things
like that, they are also known
as level 3 chargers, um, which
segues nicely into talking about
level one chargers. Um, so a
level one charger is
Really not so much, uh, a
dedicated charger as just
something that you can plug into
a wall outlet, the same exact
wall outlet, you would plug like
a toaster or your phone into,
um, and that can charge your
vehicle as well. Um, and then,
A level 2 charger is an in
between, it uses a 240 volt
outlet. So if you've seen those
kind of bigger chunky outlets
that you plug larger appliances
like your dryer into. That's
what that is utilizing. So it's
a step up from your regular
outlet, um, and it is able to
supply a faster charge to those
electric vehicles. Um, so when
we're talking about home
charging, generally folks will
be using a level 1 or a level 2.
charger. I don't know anyone
that has a level 3 charger at
their home because you really
just don't need that, uh, that
level of charging capacity and
they tend to be
Expensive beyond what a typical
homeowner would want to put in
their house, um.
And then talking about the units
of EV charging. Um, I know that
folks are most likely probably
familiar with gallons and MPG,
and then when you make the jump
into thinking about units for
EVs, it's all in electricity,
and so it's a bit like learning
a new language, um, but the key
things to know are kilowatt
hours and kilowatts, so a
kilowatt hour is
The amount of power that it
takes, uh, to power a 1000 watt
appliance for an hour. So 1000
watts equals 1 kilowatt and so
it's 1 kilowatt of power
supplied for an hour.
is a kilowatt hour, so it's all
kind of in the name, um.
And then a kilowatt is the
capacity unit. So, um, that is
essentially for charging, which
is the application we'll be
talking about today. You can
have chargers that have lower or
higher capacities. So for
example, a level 2 home charger,
a very common capacity is 19.2
kilowatts and so that is only
capable of delivering up to
Um, 19.2 kilowatts as opposed to
uh more powerful level 3 charger
which could potentially go up to
350 kilowatts. And so that's
able to dispense electricity,
um, at a rate that is greater
and has more capacity. Uh, so
those are the key acronyms and
units, uh, next slide please.
Great. So I think that one
really big paradigm shift when
it comes to EV charging is that
you're not just going to the
equivalent of a gas station to
fuel your vehicle. Um, so the
most kind of 1 to 1 analog to a
gas station would be a fast
charger where uh you are pulling
up in your vehicle and you are
charging for like
15 minutes to 45 minutes, an
hour, and then getting back on
the road, um, and you're
probably as an electric vehicle
driver, not going to do that a
lot because frankly, you have so
many other options of where you
can charge that are kind of
better aligned to the charging
use case that you need and so
that like gas station model of
charging is largely going to be
relevant, um, for
fo lk s that are on road trips
or doing really long drives
where they need to top off their
EVs and recharge them. Um, but
what I would say is the most
common in the very commonly
cited statistic is that 80% of
EV charging happens at home, um,
and that's either on a level one
charger, which is just the
classic wall outlet, um, or a
level 2 charger, which is a
drier outlet type charger, um.
Um
That's where a lot of charging
happens because for most folks,
they can charge their car while
they're at home while their car
is just parked, um, and that
will give them plenty of range
for their daily driving needs.
Um, if you commute like 30 to 40
miles round trip and you get
home and plug your car in, um,
you're good. You will not be
needing to make a trip to a
public uh fast
charging station to be able to
do that. Um, you will
essentially start every single
day with the equivalent of a
full tank if you want to, if you
have a home charger, um, at a
level 2 home charger. And so,
For most folks that have an EV
one of the really appealing
things is being able to charge
at home and to not necessarily
have to go out and refuel their
vehicles. Um, so you can see on
the slide, the bottom two
photos, uh, we have kind of just
the classic 120 volt wall box on
the left, and then, um, more of
a level 2 setup on the right.
Um, and I'll also
some note that something that is
being deployed is more and more
charging at multi-family
residences. So the upper right
photo, you can see that it's
kind of a parking lot set up and
that there are level 2 chargers
installed there as well. Um, the
other kind of fun thing about EV
charging is that there's public,
uh, level one or level 2 EV
charging.
That's cited in places where
you're just gonna park your car
anyways. Uh, so for example, for
me, uh, my gym has an EV charger
in front and, you know, if
you're gonna be at the gym
working out, your car is gonna
be parked there anyways, and so
it's extremely convenient to
just plug your car in, and then
when you're done and ready to
leave, you unplug your car and
while you have been at the gym,
um, your car has also been
getting refueled.
And so
We're seeing more and more of
this co-location of level 2, not
fast charging necessarily. Um,
being at amenities like grocery
stores, movie theaters, um,
parking garages and places where
cars are going to be parked for
a decent amount of time, and so
it's possible to refuel the
vehicle while the car is already
just just there, uh, most of the
time.
Cars are, are actually just
parked, they're not driving and
so EV charging that is
strategically cited, can really
take advantage of that and kind
of fit charging into people's
lives as opposed to them having
to go out and kind of do this
gas station model where you go
to the gas station to refuel and
then you leave the gas.
Next slide, please.
Can I get the next slide,
please?
Thank you.
So to expand a bit more on
charging speeds, um, we've
covered them briefly.
But level one, you're plugging
into regular 120 volt outlet,
and that's going to deliver 3 to
5 MPH, um, depending on your
vehicle.
So if you have a larger vehicle
like um the F-150 lightning or
the E-hummmer, um, you're
probably gonna get towards that
lower range just because it's a
larger vehicle and you'll need
more electricity to power it,
um, to go the equivalent amount
of miles as something that's
smaller, like a Volkswagen ID4
or a Nissan Leaf or something
like that. Um.
And then with the level 2,
you're plugging into a 200 volt
outlet, um, and that will
deliver
Around 15 to 50 MPH, um, and
that's a really wide range. And
so what that depends on is the
kilowatt capacity of the
charger, uh, most level 2 home
chargers that are sold, um, are
generally 19.2 kilowatts, um,
maybe you're gonna get towards
the higher end of that range,
uh, but if for whatever reason,
um, you have a lower capacity
charger, you will get
Towards the lower end of that
range.
Um, and one thing that I will
add that is really cool in New
Mexico is that because New
Mexico has adopted advanced
clean cars too, um, all electric
vehicles.
That are sold in New Mexico are
required to come with a charging
cable, so that, uh, if you are
someone who buys an EV and
doesn't want to install a
dedicated EV charger, your car
comes with everything you need
to plug it in to um a level one
or level 2 charger. Uh, so
that's a perk for New Mexican
consumers that they don't
necessarily have to go out and
spend money on getting charging
installed.
Um, and then, as we discussed,
level 3 or direct current fast
charging, uh, that's, that's
kind of the big guns of EV
charging, those chargers are
480, um, and up in terms of
their vaults, um, and they can
deliver 50 to 350 kilowatts, uh,
that's their capacity. And so
the charging speed varies based
on vehicle capacity and charger
capacity, um,
We're seeing that vehicles are
able to accept a greater,
greater capacity charging, and
so, um, a lot of older EVs, the
maximum that they can accept is
50 kilowatts and so they're a
bit slower to charge, um, at
these fast charging spots, but
we're seeing that newer vehicles
that are coming on the, on the
market have increased, um, the
charging capacity that they are
able to do.
And so 150 kilowatts, 250
kilowatts, and then kind of the
top range that we're seeing is
350 kilowatts. I'd say it's
pretty standard to be able with
new models to um to have that
150 kilowatt maximum, and so
basically the way that that
works is there has to be,
there's a matchup that occurs
between the vehicle and the
charger. So, say that you pull
to a 150 kilowatt charger, but
you've got an older model EV
that you purchased maybe 4 or 5
years ago, and it's only capable
of accepting 50 kilowatts, uh,
you're not out of luck. What's
gonna happen is that that
charger will only dispense uh at
a 50 kilowatt capacity to fuel
your vehicle. Um, and then,
Your vehicle battery management
system communicates with the
charger so that the charger is
not trying to send more
electricity than the vehicle can
actually accept, um, and then
similarly, if you have a vehicle
that is capable of
Uh, 150 kilowatts and you pull
up to a 50 kilowatt charger, you
are only going to be able to get
uh up to that charger's capacity
and so the charging is actually
going to be a bit slower than
what your vehicle could
potentially handle. Um, but if
you pull up to a 350 kilowatt
charger in a vehicle that is
capable of accepting up to 150
kilowatts, um, the vehicle and
the charger will again
communicate and
that charger will dispense, uh,
150 kilowatts. And so that's
kind of cool that even though
there's a variety of
infrastructure, uh, and these
chargers all have different
capacities. Um, there is that
communication between the
vehicle and the charger so that
the vehicle is getting charged,
um, at an appropriate capacity,
and the other thing.
About these fast chargers is
that in order to protect the
battery longevity um of an
electric vehicle at about 80% of
vehicle battery, um, the
charging speed will taper off,
um, because with these batteries
for their long-term health, um,
it is, it is best for them to
kind of have, have that charging
pattern.
Um, so as you can see, the
bottom here will tell you kind
of the relative speeds that you
can expect from these different
charger capacities for the level
3 chargers. So for a 50
kilowatt, you're gonna get
around 90 miles on a 30 minute
charge or 150 kilowatts, you're
gonna get up to 200 miles on a
30 minute charge and then for
the 350 kilowatts, uh, over 200
miles in
About 20 minutes, um, although
We do not yet have a lot of
models that are on the market
that are capable of accepting
that capacity of charge, um, but
it has been really exciting in
the past couple of years that
I've been working on EB policy,
uh, to see all of these new
models coming out that are
trending towards longer ranges
as well as greater charging
capacities, um, that makes them
better suited for a variety of
consumer needs.
Next slide, please.
Great. So we'll get into federal
policy now, and I know that uh
there is a presentation by the
New Mexico Department of
Transportation on the agenda, so
I'll just talk about this very
quickly. Um, but one federal
policy that is really exciting
is the National Electric Vehicle
Infrastructure Program and so
through that program, New Mexico
was allocated a bit over $38
million to have electric
vehicle, fast charging.
On many of the interstate, um,
and highway corridors within New
Mexico, um, for each of these
charging sites, there has to be
a minimum of 1004, 150 kilowatt
chargers, so these are kind of
the middle ground fast chargers
that are faster than the 50
kilowatt chargers, um, and these
charters also have to have 24/7
365 public access, so that if
you are driving and it's
midnight, uh,
You can still use that charger.
Um,
And the way that this program
works is that New Mexico
Department of Transportation is
the program administrator, um,
and so they identify sites that
are needed, um, on these
corridors, uh, and these
stations have to be every 50
miles and located within 1 mile
of the designated route, and
there are exceptions that can be
made for extremely rural areas
or areas where it maybe makes
sense to have something.
2 or 3 miles off the route so it
can be co-located with amenities
or something like that. Um, but
essentially NMDOT releases the
sites, uh, and then private
market actors are able to bid on
these sites, um, and receive up
to 80% of federal funding cost
share these sites, and they
contribute the remaining 20% and
because this is a federal
program, um, once they sign that
contract,
That means that they are
committing to reliability,
access, and operation and
maintenance standards for these
stations so that uh the public
can have confidence that these
stations will be available and
be working when they need them,
and as you can see on the right
in this map, um,
New Mexico is really doing well
and that they have already
issued awards to build out some
of these stations, and um they
have subsequent rounds, uh,
coming that I will surely let
the NMDOT folks, uh, speak to in
their presentation. Don't want
to steal their thunder. OK. Next
slide, please.
Great. So here we just have a
map of this national electric
vehicle infrastructure program,
um,
So for, for the first round of
funding that has been awarded,
that's 11.9 million of that 38
million figure, um, and so you
can see the routes that are
highlighted are these
alternative fuel corridors, um,
where these National Electric
vehicle infrastructure EV
chargers will be built, and then
on the right, you can see the
awarded locations from this
first round of funding, um, and
exactly.
where they will be in terms of
the cities as well as who, uh,
the selected parties were um in
the competitive bid process, uh,
To, to build and operate and
maintain those stations. I am
particularly excited to see
that, uh, some of the EV
chargers will be located at
Allsops, uh, because those are
delicious burritos, um, and so
this is very exciting to see
that these stations will have
gotten their awards and will be
beginning construction and um
hopefully be available to the
public in the near future. Next
slide, please.
So to highlight and some other
relevant federal programs, um,
that are encouraging the
buildout of EV charging
infrastructure, uh, one is the
30C tax credit, um, and so that
provides up to 30% of
infrastructure costs, um, for
certain census tracks in the US,
um, and a wide, a very wide
swath of the US has been
designated as
eligible, including much of New
Mexico for those credits, um,
and there's a map that you can
look up on the IRS website that
shows you which census tracks
are eligible, um, but within
those census tracks, you can
claim a tax credit of up to
$1000 if you are a resident
installing a home charger, um,
and up to $1000 for commercial
EV chargers that are installed,
um, and those numbers are going.
To be the um the lesser of 30%
of the total project cost or um
$1000 or that $100,000 figure.
And then there is also the
charging and fueling
infrastructure discretionary
grant program, uh, what that is,
is, it's a federal competitive
grant program for installing EV
charging both within communities
to serve local populations, um,
as well as long travel
corridors, um, and there are
many rounds of funding for that
program, uh, but in the first
round of funding for that
program, New Mexico.
got some pretty significant
awards that you can look at
below, um, so Santa Fe County
was awarded a $3.3 million to
build both fast charging and
level 2 charging, um, including
at a multi-family affordable
housing units, um, and then the
town of Taos also was selected
for a community award, um, and
they will be building 6 EV fast
chargers.
Um, in parking lots of community
buildings, um, including the
Taos Visitors Center, uh, so
that's, that's pretty exciting
to see that New Mexico
communities are applying for
this funding and being awarded
this funding, um, and the
eligible entities for this
funding are like municipalities,
uh, tribes, uh, and others. So
there are a wide variety of uh
entities that can apply for this
charging and fueling
infrastructure grant program.
Next slide, please.
So, moving on to state policies
in New Mexico, um,
As as of this year, there is a
EV charger tax credit that is
available, and that is a
refundable as well as
transferable tax credit, um,
which is obviously very positive
for folks that have lower tax
burdens, um, for folks that
Our, our entities that do not
pay taxes, um, and therefore,
generally are unable to utilize
tax credits unless they are able
to transfer those tax credits,
um, so within this EV charger
tax credit package, um, there is
up to $25,000 for level 3 or
DCFC fast chargers, and then
$400 for level 2 chargers, um,
and so this is exciting to see.
that, uh, hypothetically,
residents and businesses could
be stacking the federal 30C tax
credit with the state tax
credit, um, to really
incentivize growth in EV
charging infrastructure, whether
that's within homes, um, or in
public places or workplaces.
Um, and another thing that I
will touch on, um, and I'm sure
we'll be expanded upon by John
Williamson from P&M who is also
presenting today is that
investor owned utilities in the
state of New Mexico are required
to file transportation
electrification plans, um, that
support a wide array of charging
use cases, including
multi-family housing,
workplaces, uh, public charging,
uh, residential charging,
including
specific offerings for low and
moderate income customers, um,
and these offerings, um, are all
The utility presents a plan that
is then litigated before the PRC
and so there's lots of
stakeholder input to really
ensure that these plans are
tailored to meet the needs of
the utility customers and their
service territories, and so that
is another, um,
Source of potential EV charging
infrastructure programs that,
uh, New Mexico residents and
businesses can utilize. Next
slide, please.
Great. So, this is a slide that
kind of tells you where we've
been, and then where we're going
with regards to uh both EV
vehicle adoption, as well as
charging infrastructure growth
in New Mexico, uh, so you can
see in the upper left corner,
uh, that EVs in New Mexico from
2021 through 2023, the number of
registered EVs over doubled from
just over
uh, from just under 5000 to over
10,000 vehicles. Um, and so
that's really exciting to see
that growth, but it also means
that infrastructure needs to be
coming along, um, to ensure that
those vehicles are supported and
the folks that drive those
vehicles are able to go where
they want to go and see all the
beautiful parts of New Mexico
that might be in more rural
areas or harder to get to.
Um, and so you can see on the
right, um, that from 2012 to
2024, uh, it's, it's rather
exponential if you look at the
growth, uh, over that timeline,
um, but even just from 2022 to
2024. Uh, there's been a lot of
growth with regard to the number
of public level 2 ports and
public, uh DC fast charge ports
and
I will also note that this graph
is exclusively about public
ports, uh, so this doesn't
incorporate any of the home
charging that folks have
installed, um, or charging that
is potentially like behind the
gate specifically for use per
se, certain multi-family
tenants, um, or certain
workplace employees and so it's
really, it's really hard to get
those numbers, um, but from
From this, uh, graph, you can
see that public charging in New
Mexico has been growing
steadily, um,
And even just in the last year,
uh, things have really, really
picked up with regard to the
pace that it's growing, um.
And then in the bottom left
corner is an estimate of the
types and quantity of uh
charging that will be necessary
to meet uh the EV projections
that are in line with the
advanced clean cars to rule that
New Mexico adopted, um, so you
can see that the large, large
bulk of the charging is that
home level.
and home level 2 charging
because
That is, that is kind of the
easiest place to charge if it's
possible for residents, um,
because you can plug your
vehicle in and have a long dwell
time there. Um, and that's,
that's a very generally low cost
charging as well since it's on a
residential electricity rate as
opposed to a commercial charging
rate. Um,
And then you can also see that
for public L2 and uh public fast
charging, the numbers that are
needed for 2030, um, assuming
these, uh, home charging numbers
are met, are actually somewhat
modest and New Mexico is very
much on track to meet those
numbers. Uh, this is for 2030
and then 2024, New Mexico had
319 public
2 ports and so that's uh just
over 30 ports to go in 6 years,
which seems, uh, extremely
doable, um, and New Mexico has,
oh sorry, the public L2 has
actually been exceeded for 2030
already. Sorry, I, I thought
those lines mixed up on the
graph. Um, but I will, I will
note that for all of these
projections about the amount of
charging that's needed. It's
really hard to settle on just
like one magic number, uh, for
types of charging needed because
if you have less home charging,
um, or if you have folks that
have different driving patterns
and are frequently taking trips
across the state. Um, you might
actually need more public
charging, and so there are a lot
of really interesting models out
there including from the
National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, uh, that can help
you kind of look at
different situations and the
amount of charging that is
needed, um,
But this is just one example
that I think is really
illustrative that shows that
most of the charging that's
needed is going to be lower
capacity charging for a long 12
times. Um.
Next slide, please.
Great. So I will wrap up there
and hopefully that gave y'all a
nice overview of the basics of
EV charging and where things
stand in New Mexico as well as
the policy landscape, uh, and I
will open up for questions.
All right, thank you for your
presentation. Um, before we do
questions, um, introduce
himself.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair.
State Representative Larry Scott
from
New Mexico House District 62.
The far southeast corner of the
state.
Hobbs and Central Lee County.
Pleased to be here. Thank you.
Representative Hunan No new
House District 19 in
Albuquerque, Mexico. It's like
the south
Albuquerque area.
We'll start with Representative
Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you so much, Deborah, for
your presentation, um.
Maybe just a a couple.
Observations from my short time
as a
EV owner and then maybe a
question or two, but um if we
could go to
Your slide on charging speeds.
But uh
Where it talks about level 1 and
level 2 and level 3 chargers.
Um
Thank you. So, um, I guess my
first observation is
Um, level one chargers are
completely useless.
Um
And, and they don't even include
them anymore in Tesla purchases.
If you want one, you have to buy
it separately. It used to come
with them, but they are.
And really 3 miles.
An hour
I mean that means I have to have
my car plugged in for like 3
days before it's got a full
charge, right? So, so no one
really uses level one charters
anymore. They're like a
desperation thing, um.
Um
Yeah, but level 2 chargers, um,
So I have one of those locks and
then it was uh.
$000 to install.
But um
Uh, those were great. Um, so I
have about a 60, 70 mile
commute.
Round trip
And I get recharged in
Yeah, 30 miles
Sandia, 3 miles back.
Um, and I get recharged in about
an hour and a half.
Our car has a range of 300
miles, and if I needed to go
from 0 to 300, that's.
Roughly about 5 or 6 hours, so.
Yeah, I totally agree with you
that.
The vast majority of charging is
done at home, and I
appreciate them are a little
sketch.
Um,
um.
Uh
Now, um,
We took a risk, my wife and I,
we, there was a concert in
Denver. We went to the Hans
Zimmer live concert, which was
amazing. We decided we would
take the Tesla and try it out.
And uh when you plug in a
destination in the computer.
It will automatically plot and
tell you where to stop for
superchargers and how long to
stay. And uh
We stopped at a nice one in Las
Vegas, New Mexico, it was right
next to a maverick. I don't know
about the nice restrooms and,
you know, pick up a candy bar,
um, and we, we needed to stop
there for um 10 minutes and then
we stopped again in Pueblo and
then.
Denver
added about
35 minutes to the trip, which
was later that that year or this
year we had um we need to take
uh uh.
A trip to Salt Lake City.
I was gonna add about an hour to
the trip and.
It was a little
timing was not so minivan for
for that one, cause, you know,
gassing up takes 5 minutes.
Um
But yeah, there's a lot of cargo
space in those minivans though,
um.
So, I guess my
Like
Question is, you know, I, I, I
really like, um, you know, the,
the, the Tesla supercharger
system and the app even, you
know, when you're plotting it,
it'll tell you, when you click
on the charger station, it will
tell you how many people are
currently there, how many people
are on their way. It gets the
battery conditions, so it
charges super fast.
Um
It's my, my.
First question is, all these
other
Um, chargers that are going in,
um,
I is there kind of a similar
Um
Like infrastructure or system
that uh.
So be aware of those locations
and and get that kind of
information or is it really just
a
Um
You know, Tesla specific thing.
Thank you, madam chair and
Representative Harper for that
question. Uh, so first, I'll
just very briefly address the
level one. I will say that I'm
not someone with a long commute.
I work from home and so most of
my driving is going to get
groceries or see friends or run
small errands, and so,
For me,
My, my car is generally at my
house and so getting 3 to 5
miles of charge per hour might
not be a lot for someone like
you, but it is absolutely
sufficient for someone like me,
and I'll also add that I am a
renter. I do not own my home,
and so that was a much easier
proposition than having a level
2 charger installed, um, which I
was unsure if my landlord or I
would bear the cost for that,
um, and it just introduced.
a lot of complexity to the
situation, uh, and then onto
your question Representative
Harper, about, uh, kind of the
way that superchargers have this
great software system set up,
uh, where you can see where to
stop, uh, there is a free open
source tool called a better.
Uh, where you can input what
kind of electric vehicle you
have, uh, the state of charge
when you are leaving and your
preferred state of charge when
arriving at your destination,
um, and it will pop out the best
route for you based on either
quickest arrival time or if you
want to do fewer but longer
stops, um, or many uh quick
stops, and then it will tell you
which charters to stop at, and
so that's a really exciting
tool, um, and I know that.
not
Other charging operators via
generally via their apps like
Electrify America and EV Go, um,
tend to have similar systems
where some of them have the
capability where you can look
and see if a charger um is being
used, or you could potentially
plot out a route uh via their
apps. Uh, I really like a better
route planner because it isn't
just one, charging.
provider and so you get a view
of all the different chargers
and it plans for you where you
should stop. Uh, but yes, to
answer your question, there are
various tools that are available
that are similar to the
supercharger tool.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh, this
is Kaelhoff, thank you, um, a
better route, that sounds like
something I should look into.
That's, that's very helpful
information, um.
I think my, my last kind of
comment and question, uh, Madam
Chair.
So just knowing that.
You know, most folks are
charging from home and if I'm
not gonna stray more than 150
miles in a day, you know, one
way, I'm just gonna come home
and charge at home.
Um, I think
Uh
Having supercharging kind of
high kilowatt charging stations
in strategic places makes sense,
like if you, you need to go on
more of a road trip.
Um
But I'm thinking more about kind
of the level 2 chargers that are
just around cities.
And I could see where maybe if
someone's a renter, that would
be helpful. Um.
Uh, or if you just want to top
off while you're at the gym, but
I, I never need a chart top off
when I'm in Albuquerque or Santa
Fe or.
Or Socorro.
Um
So, I guess my question is, uh,
what, what's your, what's your
take on like mandating
businesses put in chargers
versus letting businesses like
your gym.
Put in a charger if they would
like to.
Just from my perspective, I
don't think a lot of those
chargers when they're just
Going around the city
On a normal day.
Mountain Cha representative
Harper, thank you for that
question. Uh, I certainly do not
support mandating businesses,
uh, putting chargers in. I will
say something that I do support
and I think is a very proactive
and smart policy, um, is having
a land use and building codes
that require when new
businesses, um, are being built,
um, or if a parking lot is being
developed or resurfaced
Um, ensuring that there are a
certain number of spots that are
EV ready and so essentially
that's not equivalent to putting
a full charger in, um, but
rather it just makes it so that
if in the future, that business
owner decides that they do want
to put a charger in. Uh, they
don't have to go back and
essentially dig up that entire
parking lot, which is much more
expensive, um, and it adds a
very nominal cost, um, to, to
the building.
Building owner, um, if you do
that proactive policy, and so
I'm very supportive of that, and
I think that'll be helpful in
the future as more and more
businesses decide that they do
want to offer EV charging as an
amenity, um, either just as an
amenity to their customers or
they may partner with um private
EV charging companies that
install and maintain chargers,
um, and collect a fee for that
charging. Um,
I will also add that in making
these decisions about where to
locate chargers, it's really
helpful to look at the
demographics of an area and
better understand, for example,
if there are a large quantity of
folks who live in multi-family
housing or our renters that do
not have access to charging at
home and then citing things
strategically so that perhaps,
you know, it's in the same
neighborhood, and they
could potentially just park
their block, their car, like a
block away, and then just walk
back and get it. And so I think
that
This is a very squishy answer,
but, uh, citing level 2 charging
within cities, I think is
something that requires a lot of
understanding of that community
and how to best serve that
community with charging.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
and um and thank you for that
answer, um, yeah, I.
I, I agree. I think at this
point it doesn't make sense to
mandate it, um.
Uh, especially since
Again, in my case, I'm never
going to use a level 2 charger
when I'm within 150 miles of
My
My home, and if I'm going
outside of that, I want a fast
charger.
Um
I guess I would just caution us.
um, I, I think is more people
get EVs, you'll start seeing
apartments.
Listening to their tenants who
want to have chargers, and
they'll start putting chargers
up.
No, they'll be, they'll be, um.
They'll be uh apartment
complexes that cater to folks
that have EVs and will have
charters and that's where people
will, will.
Send their money. Um.
Uh
I, I just
Even making a parking lot easy
ready, I think.
Just knowing my little
3 ft
Run of cable to install my
charter cost to use it.
I just urge caution. Let's make
sure we're kind of data-driven.
Um, if we
Start going that, down that
direction.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think your Representative next
is Representative Chandler.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have a question that um arises
after.
Um, and what it was about is um
individuals with electric
vehicles arriving at a charging
station and it doesn't work.
And that prompted, um, you know,
questions in my mind as to who's
responsible for maintaining
them.
How does that all play out? Do
these various apps tell you when
a charging station is down, and
if it does, I question whether
how accurate that is, just
having heard read a story about
how Starbucks apps are generally
inaccurate in terms of
availability of certain kinds of
beans, um.
And remember, that's a profit
driven company. So I, you know,
I guess if you could comment on
that and and this apparently has
prompted some people for being
reluctant, um, and to, you know,
really going full throttle on
some of the purchasing electric
vehicles. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, so,
to answer that question, uh, I
will say that I think I've read
the same New York Times article,
and I also found it extremely
concerning. Um, there is a tool
that a lot of EV drivers use.
It's an app called Plugshare,
um, and you can click on any
urging location, um, and it will
give you a score of the
reliability and then you can
also leave check-ins there.
Um, and EV drivers are actually
really great at leaving
check-ins and so you can see if
someone has charged successfully
at that charger, um, or perhaps
if they got to that charger and
um the charging would not begin
or they had trouble with payment
or anything like that. And so
that's a really cool, uh, kind
of crowdsourced solution to this
problem of um EV charger
reliability, but I agree that
that's definitely a band-aid and
not
to rely on. Um,
One thing that I have seen
emerge, um, is that more and
more folks are getting trained
to be EV charger technicians
that are employed by these
charging companies, um, in order
to troubleshoot um and fix these
charging issues that do arise,
um, a lot of the time, the issue
with an EV charger is not
necessarily a hardware issue,
but rather a software issue
where it won't take your
card or the charging will not
initiate because of a
miscommunication between the
vehicle and your charger. Um,
and so these technicians are
being trained both in the
hardware and the software
aspects, and I think especially
as EV adoption um is moving
beyond just the early adopters
and into the early majority, the
patients that EV drivers have
with malfunctioning chargers,
uh, is significantly lower and
companies are seeing.
that and beginning to understand
that operations and maintenance
for their chargers is a very
crucial part of their business,
and so we are seeing a lot more
companies in the EV charging
space making investments and
contracting with local companies
that employ um EV charging
technicians to ensure that their
chargers are available, um, but
I would agree that it remains an
issue, um.
And in all of my policy advocacy
is something that I try to very
much promote is tying any
funding that is given to
incentivize EV charging to
requirements um about
reliability and up time to
ensure that just because a
charger is built, uh, that's,
that's step one, that charger
has to be running and available
for EV drivers. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So is it, if I may have
fallen, is it the actual manu
of the.
Charging station, the
responsible party for upkeep.
I, I mean, that's not clear to
me either, um, and are there
emergency phone numbers at these
charging stations that get you
to a technician, I, I.
I'm just trying to understand
what kind of assurances we can
make to people who are that
we're encouraging, frankly to
purchase these vehicles.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair.
So, to answer your question, it
very much
Depends, um, sometimes the
responsible party is the
charging company, so like the
Electrify America or EB Go or
Francis Energy, um, and then
other times, those companies
will contract, um, with, say,
the Starbucks that they're
co-located at, or the grocery
store that they're co-located
at, um, so that if there is an
issue with that charger, the
first person that should be
making a call
is the person that um is at is
working at that grocery store,
that coffee shop, um, so we've
seen both models, and I will
also add that.
Yes, like 98% of public EV
chargers do have an emergency
number that you can call. Um,
But I would really like to see a
situation in which folks did not
feel like they needed to call
the emergency number because
they didn't have any issues.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Representative Nix we
have a Representative Garrett
and.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning. I'm state rep Joy
Garrett, and northwest
Albuquerque.
Um of Petroglyph National
Monument and double eagle lots
of roads. So my
Questions, uh, Madam Chair.
The first is, are there any
states or municipalities.
Who have put
Uh, those kind of policies and
legislation.
That new development need to
have.
Uh those spots ready.
For EV charging station
installation.
Thank you for that question,
Madam Chair and Representative
Garrett concise because we're
already at time.
Thank you. Yeah, absolutely.
um.
Yes, there are many, many
municipalities that have put
that those building codes in
place, including uh Salt Lake
City, Denver, Colorado, uh,
Boulder, Colorado. Yeah, so
we're, we're seeing these
building codes all across the
country.
Uh, thank you very much. And
then,
Um, this is a question maybe you
can answer, but.
You know, as you do E vehicles
have self-contained.
A technology that indicates the
impact of weather conditions,
road conditions, heat, cold, so
that the consumer.
may think that they can get to a
charging station, actually may
not be able to get there due to
those.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Garrett, uh, yes,
so most vehicles will have a
little thing on the dashboard
that indicates your vehicle
range. So how many miles your
battery um is capable of
propelling the vehicle and
generally you will see that
range fluctuate throughout your
drive based on like your
acceleration speed, um, the
ambient temperature outside, uh,
if you're driving on a rough
road, you'll see that your
goes down because obviously it's
more intensive than driving on a
paved road. So, yes, generally,
that is the case.
Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
yeah, if we could just be a
little
Precise with the answers, no
criticism at all. Um, just have
a few questions. Um, you know,
we're talking about the level
one chargers and the fast
chargers. I know, uh, you know,
I own a Nissan Leaf. I've owned
it for years, um, but there's
been some degradation. You talk
a little bit about um with the
fast chargers, I notice
sometimes you can.
And you talk about that a little
bit.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Pope. Uh, so I can touch
on that very briefly, but I will
say there has not been a lot of
research into that topic, and so
I'm hesitant to give you any
firm answers. Um, but there has
been, it has been noted that
regularly charging at a fast
charger up to 100% as opposed to
stopping at 80 or 85%, um, can
accelerate battery degradation,
but it is unclear to what
extent.
And the research is still uh
ongoing.
Thank you. Um, just commenting
on, I think the discussion
before level 1, level 2
chargers, having them at
businesses, um.
I think folks who are, you know,
renters or
Live in apartments. I think in
some cases they will kind of be
using these. I mean, if I go to
the gym and I'm working out for
an hour, hour and a half, and I
can just plug in and even though
I'm only getting a few miles, I
think it's kind of to that just
like.
Being able to plug in overnight
at home, uh, on that level one
charger. I just want to let
folks know, um, there, there are
want to confirm there's plenty
of apps even on your vehicle as
you get close, um, even my car
knows like when I'm near home
when I'm low, it's basically I
need me to go back to my house
and charge.
Um
Used to be at the charge point,
I think Shell has one now.
They're even operating the
chargers outside the roundhouse.
Um.
You can see right now one's
busy, one's available. So a lot
of that's there.
On the apps. Now, the question
about the accuracy and if
they're down or not.
Um, that'll be on there as well.
And so sometimes my frustration
is not that I don't have the
information. It's sometimes that
the chargers are down.
That, that can be a frustration.
Um
And so, uh, thank you for the
presentation. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you, Senator
Pope. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Miss Kelov.
I'm from a rural part of the
state and the concern.
In our communities.
Obviously, range anxiety would
be one of them, but
Are you aware that the
construction industries division
has mandated.
That 5%.
Of public parking spaces.
A newly constructed.
have to have
Charging stations installed.
With another 5% that would have
provisions.
For a charging station now
believe I saw,
In your presentation that the
subsidies.
For 33 stations in Santa Fe.
For about $100,000 per station.
What is the total cost of that
station in.
Including
All in
With
Subsidies and whatever other
investment has to be added to
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Scott, um, on the
construction industry commission
piece, uh, I was not involved
with that effort, uh, but WRA is
government affairs manager and
my colleague Tammy Feeblelkorn
was, and so she would be better
suited to answer your questions,
and I can have her get in touch
with you. Um, and then to the
other part of your question
about the cost.
of an EV charger, I will note
that for the Santa Fe example,
those were, uh, level 3 DC fast
chargers, um, and then for the
EV readiness and uh the other
requirements within the building
code, those do not require level
3 chargers, uh, those just
require level 2 chargers and the
ability to be able to install a
level 2 charger, um, and so a
level 2 charger can be
installed.
Depending, it really depends on
a variety of factors such as,
uh, how much conduit they have
to run, uh, where the electrical
panel is and how far that is
from the spot where uh the level
2 charger is going to be
installed, but
Those can be very inexpensive,
uh, those can be like $500 like
really what you're paying for
there is materials and then the
cost of labor, and so those are
significantly less expensive
than a level 3 charger and I
think it's important not to
conflate those two.
Oh, Madam Chair.
And Miss Kelo the in, in the
circumstance that I'm
referencing.
There was a mandate.
Yeah.
13 charging stations installed.
And 13 provisions for 13 more,
so there's 26.
Yeah
Uh, Level 2 charger by the math
that I've
Looked at
Requires about 50 amps of
service.
So
There's over 1000 amps of
electrical capacity there at 240
volts, and that's, that's
non-trivial, so.
In the circumstance.
Where there are no electric
vehicles in those communities.
How
How does the any capital
recovery mechanism work.
That is, who's going to put
That equipment in when there's
When there's 2 vehicles in the
whole community.
That might require them.
I mean that money.
Will, will never.
Yeah, at least
In the lifetime of that.
piece of equipment that money
will not be recovered.
From the energy that it
provides.
in
And my rural communities largely
view this as a waste of dollars.
So who will be responsible.
Yeah.
That expenditure.
And who will be responsible for
the operations and the
maintenance and the fact that
the copper thieves will sweep
through their weakly removing
everything of value.
So
Without them, I don't see a
private sector profit motive.
And in these circumstances and
wonder about how effective this
mandate is going to be.
Uh, you can understand the
concern.
Of the folks in my communities
that that travel long distances
and we, we frankly don't buy
many electric vehicles, which is
the subject of my next question.
That is the automobile dealers.
Uh, not just in my community,
but in Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
Or
Representing to me that the
market penetration of these
vehicles.
It is about 5%.
With a mandate
Just in the next few years.
Or that penetration to be 43%,
they consider that to be
completely
Unreasonable, would you?
Would you address
Thank you,
Madam Chair and Representative
Scott, I think you brought up
some really substantive topics,
and I don't know how much
justice I can do them and uh a
very concise answer, knowing
that we're already over time.
Um, I cannot speak to the
specific example that you're
citing about the land use code
with the construction industries
commission, um, however, I will
say that for that land use code
that is a requirement, uh, that
is born by the property owner or
the property developer, and so
it is their responsibility to
comply with that code, um, and I
will, I will also say that um
this was a public process before
the construction industries
commission, um, and I certainly
hope that uh rural voices were
represented in that process in
developing this policy, uh, but
I don't know if I can speak to
it any further.
And then on the auto dealer
portion. I was involved in the
advanced clean cars to
rulemaking, which is the rule
that you are referring to, um,
and I would like to clarify that
that is a requirement that
applies to manufacturers, not
dealers, and so each auto
manufacturer has to meet certain
percentages of EV sales in New
Mexico, um, as well as in all
the other.
states that have adopted those
rules, but they have significant
flexibility in doing so, they
are able to buy sell trade
credits, they are able to bank
credits. They are able to earn
credits for plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles that they
sell, um, and also, for example,
if there is a dealer in a rural
community where there is not as
much appetite for EVs that
dealer is not beholden to that
percentage requirement.
Um, but should work with their
auto manufacturer to ensure that
they are getting vehicles that
are appropriate for their
clientele, um, and the auto
manufacturer will take that into
consideration in considering how
to comply in the entire state.
And so I think this has
unfortunately been misconstrued
as something for each dealer
needs to meet these regulations,
and that is simply untrue.
If Me chair.
Miss Kalo while it's not while
the process you describe is
accurate.
That manufacturer having to
Having to build.
Almost half of its vehicle.
La is electric vehicles or
In lieu of that.
purchase carbon credits.
Whose costs it added to those
vehicles.
Certainly
will serve to increase.
The cost
Of all vehicles.
Particularly fossil fuel powered
vehicles, the New Mexico
consumers.
I don't think this policy.
is well thought through.
And, and I'm going to do
everything I can legislatively.
To try to dial that back.
Something
That is a bit more realistic.
Thank you.
Madam Chairman, thank you, Ms.
Capitol for answers.
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
just ended with, um, I have an
EV. I've had it for almost a
year, the charging has gone from
pretty good to amazing, there
isn't anywhere in the state that
I've gone this year and I've
gone everywhere, even hatch this
time and uh.
Um, Kabaa like, um, that I can't
charge and it did it at the
beginning, you had to give all
this information. Now you can
just use your credit card and
and everything is fast. Um,
there was one where I had to
call every time I went out
there, but this last time I was
driving to different parts of
the state, I didn't have to. So
now I can get anywhere in New
Mexico, have a place to charge,
and a lot of them are free. I
was up at the end of the
mountain Guides on Monday and
Tuesday, and it was free. So we
have good, good charging. It's
getting better and better.
better. Um, I do think level 2
is good, um.
During the session, I live in a
house that doesn't have a
charging station, the capital
has a charging to just outside
of it, I can leave my car
overnight, it's ready the next
day, and, and so every level we
have it, there's a reason for
it. I was at a conference a
couple months ago and um.
We are doing a lot better than a
lot of states, and we are
pushing this, and we, because we
know I think the big picture,
why we need electric vehicles.
Climate change is real. We see
it everywhere. Um, I was up in
Riidoso, there's another fire
there, flooding in, in, in um
Roswell, but you know, we have
to do what it takes to fight
climate change any way we can,
and this is just one of the
things we need. So I thank you
for your presentation. Thank you
for everything you do, um, I
believe totally in in electric
charging and.
in electric vehicles, so, um,
that's why we have this today to
be in light.
Thank you, madam chair.
We are ready for our next
presentation.
The next one is Public Service
Company of New Mexico projected
needs for electricity
infrastructure and demand
capacity for Mr. Williamson.
Madam Chair, members of the
science, technology and
telecommunications Committee.
My name is John Williamson. I
manage P&M's transportation
electrification department.
Pim's transportation,
electrification departments,
primary responsibilities.
Are related to administering
PM's transportation
electrification program.
I'm very grateful for the
opportunity to be here today.
And I'm very excited to share
with you the work that PNM is
doing to support customers who
are
Seeking to electrify their modes
of transportation and to install
EV charging infrastructure at
their homes and at their
businesses.
As I'm sure everyone is aware,
PNM is um
New Mexico's largest
investor-owned electric utility,
we serve more than 530,000
retail customers across the
state of New Mexico.
To do that, we own, operate and
maintain more than 15,000 miles
of transmission and distribution
lines across the state.
Today our generation portfolio
is 61% renewable.
And we are committed to
transitioning to 100% carbon
free energy by 2040.
And finally, P&M's 2024 to 2026
transportation electrification
program optimistically aims.
To provide more than $22 million
in infrastructure incentives for
electrical vehicle charging
infrastructure.
Um, moving on to slide 3.
Um
Whenever
Um
Whenever I consider uh new
technology adoptions, there's
two primary things that I'd like
to take into consideration. Um,
the first one is a leading
indicator, which is percent of
market share. This refers to the
number of new vehicles purchased
that are electric vehicles are
lagging indicator but also very
important to keep in mind is the
number of vehicles in operation.
This chart shows the national
average of new EV market share,
um, from 2018 to 2024. And uh
the the orange line
represents the national average
across, across those years. I
mean, you'll notice that in
2020.
2022.
Um
To the average market share was
7% in 2023, that rose to 9.4%,
and it is flattened somewhat in
2024 at 9.7%. What I'd like to
point out here is that the
market share in New Mexico looks
very similar. So if you look at
the shape of those curves,
they're very similar. albeit
somewhat uh lower in number and
what this says to me is that New
Mexico is very much in alignment
with the national trends. Um,
there are some primary
considerations that are driving
uh flattening and in market
share.
which I've listed there on the
slide.
um high upfront cost represent a
significant barrier for adoption
for many, uh,
Americans, but also many New
Mexicans, um, limited access to
charging infrastructure, of
course, um, supply chain
challenges both in terms of the
vehicle manufacturer's
capabilities to produce these
vehicles and then also in terms
of
equipment, uh, EBSC
manufacturers or electric
vehicle supply equipment, the EV
charger installers and being
able to access and install that
equipment.
finally competition from hybrid
models also represents a
significant challenge to the
adoption of electric vehicles,
um, lack of model and make
variety. So for example,
customers who might prefer to
have a certain type or size of
vehicle and that currently is
not available as an electric
model. And then finally consumer
familiarity and perception with
moving on to the next slide, um,
I hope you'll forgive me. I know
that this slide does look a
little bit busy. I'd like to
spend a little bit of time, uh,
really discussing, uh, the, the
very top, um, box P&M's
transportation electrification
program, we like to say is
established on four basic
pillars or four legs, kind of
like a chair.
Um, the first pillar, of course,
is infrastructure incentives,
and this represents the bulk of
P&M's focus, uh, in terms of the
investments being made through
the transportation. And so I'd
like to talk a little bit about
what that means. So
infrastructure incentives from
Pen's perspectives are um
financial, um,
financial rebates to help offset
some of the capital costs that
consumers might bear uh in the
installation of EV charging
infrastructure. There's a
variety of different categories,
and I'm happy to talk about each
and every one of them for the
sake of brevity and and to kind
of get us back on track. I'll
I'll try to keep it brief. Um,
when we think about EV charging
infrastructure, we think about
two primary categories. The
first one is residential
customer EV charging
infrastructure. So this is folks
primarily who live in single
family homes or who have access
to an enclosed garage with
electrical infrastructure, who
seek to install.
you'd be charging infrastructure
at their primary residence for
such customers PM does provide
an EV a level 2 charger purchase
rebate, uh, and we're also very
proud to be able to offer um
rebates to help offset the
installation costs for those
rebates, um, for market rate
customers to give you guys an
idea of scale, um, PNM provides
up to $500 towards the purchase
of a qualifying level 2 charger
and up to 1,05 structure.
Those are market rate customers
for income customers, which are
defined by statute as customers
with an adjusted household gross
income of 200% of federal
poverty limit or less. Pinna
provides up to $750 towards the
purchase of a level 2 charger,
and up to $3500.
In addition to those two,
PNM is also very proud to have
launched today, um, the low
income or the income qualified
EV purchase rebate. So this is
um designed to help offset some
of the barriers that many of our
income qualified customers have
expressed in terms of being able
to access these vehicles. And so
PNM is providing up to $4000 to
income qualified customers
towards the purchase of a
qualifying electric vehicle, um,
really the requirement there is
just that the vehicle's purchase
price is $55,000 or less.
Which is intended to be in
alignment with both state and
federal policy in terms of the
MSRPs, um, in addition to the EV
purchase rebate, PNM is also
very excited to be the first
electric utility in the in the
in the United States of America
to be able to provide an e-bike
incentive, so PNM is providing
up to $250 towards residential
customers who purchase a
qualifying electric bicycle, um,
and for income qualified
customers um for non-residential
charging infrastructure, PMM
also provides rebates. Um, so we
think about these in a few
different categories.
So, um, when I think about
charging infrastructure, I
primarily think in terms of the
use case. And so the first use
case, of course, and as Miss
Kapolo referenced um is a
significant challenge
consideration is multi-family
properties, um, many consumers
who have purchased an EB who
have access to EV charging
infrastructure at home,
reference that they would be
very likely to buy NEV for their
next vehicle for customers who
do not have EV charging
infrastructure at home, that
statistic is almost flipped
100%, and they indicate that
they would be very much less
likely to buy an EV.
At home. And so to my mind, what
that means is that it is
critically important that we
provide EV charging
infrastructure for all New
Mexicans at the, at their
primary residence whenever
possible. And so that is the
reason that PNM provides up to
$5000 towards the installation,
uh, up to $5000 per port towards
the installation of EV charging
infrastructure, multi-family
properties, um, for scale, uh or
for income qualified so for
projects that are are located at
income qualified multi-family
properties. that number climbs
to $10,000. We want to make sure
that those
Um, those properties have
sufficient incentive to offset
the capital costs needed to
install that infrastructure.
The second category that I think
is really important is workplace
charging. Um, the second, uh, so
most vehicles spend the bulk of
their lives parked at customer's
primary residences. The 2nd
longest duration that those
vehicles are parked is usually
at the workplace, and that's why
PNM also provides incentives for
workplaces that seek to install
UV charging infrastructure for
their employees. Uh, this
Uh, the rebates are very much
the same. They're $5000 per port
um for level two, chargers.
The next category is fleet
charging, so we rep uh we
recognize PM recognizes that a
significant number of EV
adoptions so far across the
United States, but also
especially in New Mexico has
been private um EV purchases.
However, businesses and
government fleets represent
significant opportunities for
greenhouse gas reductions and
the adoption of EVs.
That that's OK. Oh, there it
goes. Um, and so PNM has also uh
level 2 charger rebates and DC
fast charger rebates um for
businesses that seek to install
EV charging infrastructure to
support their fleet vehicle
electrification targets.
Uh, and then finally, um,
I'm also recognizes that many
New Mexicans and and acquire
access to EV charging
infrastructure that's publicly
accessible.
Madam.
OK.
Um
Ah
Public access to charging. And
so PNM provides up to $5000 per
charge report for publicly
accessible level 2 chargers in
our service territory and um up
to $50,000 to offset the
installation costs for public DC
fast charging infrastructure.
Um, one thing that I haven't
noted yet, but I think is very
important is that from an
infrastructure perspective, the,
the, um,
The greatest impediment to EV
charger installations are what
we consider the make ready
costs, and so from the
utilities' perspective, this
includes
Utility line extension costs, so
any of those costs for which a
customer might normally be
responsible to bring new power
to a location and then make
ready costs between the PNM
meter and the base of the
charger itself. So when I
reference um
Non-residential EV charger
rebates, primarily what I'm
referring to are those costs,
right? So those are the eligible
costs, anything that the
customer would normally bear to
bring that service in up to the
base of the charger itself. It's
an important consideration. We,
um, as Ms Capolo mentioned,
there are several different
business models for, uh,
EV charging infrastructure. We
wanted to make sure that those
dollars were going to local
companies and to offset the
installation costs. Um, I'll,
I'll highlight very quickly a
little bit, um, so you also
recognizes that the cost of
electricity can for some
customers represent a barrier to
adoption and so for that we have
offered the residential EV
charging rate, uh, it's also
affectionately referred to as
the whole MEB rate or the web
rate, and what this does is it
provides customers with a lower
base cost of electricity uh for
their.
entire home, but primarily to to
um to incentivize them to charge
their EVs between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
This represents an advantage for
the grid. It helps increase the
utilization of our distribution
system, while also providing
those customers with a lower
cost of electricity to charge
their vehicles during the
overnight hours when it's parked
at their primary service
address.
The second rate, the 3 FEB
charging station pilot rate is
the non-residential version of
that rate, it is eligible for
any EV charging stations, which
are separately metered and do
not contain any square footage.
Um, what that means is that um
for those charging stations like
Electrify America or for Francis
Energy, and these are volumetric
rates that don't have a demand
charge component. It helps the
site hosts, the network
providers, and the customers
better understand the cost of
electricity and therefore how
much they need to charge to
recuperate their.
operations maintenance and
installation costs. Um, I'm not
going to belabor market
transformation. I have uh two
slides at the end to talk about
this more as I think it's a
really critical point. Um, but I
will spend a little bit of time
talking about education outreach
and marketing, as I referenced a
couple of slides ago, one of the
primary impediments to the
adoption of electric vehicles is
um
Consumer perception and
familiarity with the technology.
And so PNM is actively working
with partners across the
community and educational
institutions to help educate
customers on the benefits of.
electric vehicles.
Uh, moving on to slide 5,
Ensuring equitable access to
transportation electrification
is critical, and PNM's
transportation electrification
program has been designed to
support EV charger
infrastructure.
Her income qualified customers
and to support EV charger
projects in underserved areas.
Um, I am very proud to report,
uh,
Publicly for the first time that
55% of the infrastructure
incentives for the 2022 to 2023
transportation electrification
program were distributed
directly to those um projects
which are intended to benefit
income qualified customers and
those living in underserved
areas.
for the 2024 to 2026 program,
which is the one that is
currently available for
customers to participate with
25% of the infrastructure
incentive budget is earmarked or
carved out for income qualified
customers and projects in
underserved areas.
Um, we are also very proud to
have worked closely with 4th on
what's called the Affordable
mobility platform, and it is a
car share program in Albuquerque
and Santa Fe, which provides
access to NEV and EV charging
infrastructure for customers
living in um in affordable
housing uh multi-family
properties.
We also work with low income
community organizations across
our service area to help ensure
that low-income customers are
also made aware of the benefits
of electric transportation, as
well as the capability.
Moving on to the next slide. Um,
so slide number 6, just to
provide a little bit of context
about the state of EV charging
infrastructure in the state of
New Mexico. So I pulled this
from Atlas Hub, which is a
policy organization that uh that
does a lot of work related to
transportation, electrification.
Um, this information is current
as of last night. Today in New
Mexico, there are 803 EV charger
ports located across 332
locations. Um, PM is very proud
to have supported or to provide
an infrastructure incentives to
72.
those EV charger ports, uh, and
I'd like to highlight that we
have 92 additional EV charger
ports in the pipeline. Um, so
those have not yet been
energized or at least we have
not been able to inspect them
and confirm that they meet the
performance requirements for
participation in the program,
but we are very excited to
continue to push the adoption of
EV charger infrastructure.
PM continues to engage
organizations across various
market segments to actively
encourage additional EV charger
projects across her service
area.
Um, finally moving on to slide
number 7 PNM's distribution
engineering teams are actively
engaged with and seek to
understand the impacts of EV
charging on distribution systems
and to incorporate those plans
into the areas that we serve.
In addition to incorporating our
distribution, engineering and
planning departments and the
work that we're doing on PNM's
integrated resource planning and
load forecasting teams have also
incorporated EV adoption
forecasts and the corresponding
energy requirements for those
forecasts and to
Our generation capacity planning
for both existing and future
integrated resource plans. So
PNM takes very seriously the
energy requirements of the EV
adoption, and we are seeking to
ensure that we are able to
provide reliable and affordable
service for all EV drivers as
well as all of our other
customers.
Moving on to slide number 8, so
I didn't talk about market
transformation, um, but I would
like to spend the next two
slides doing so, because in my
mind, this represents both the
unique opportunity for um for
consumers but also for electric
utilities and for all other
drivers or I'm sorry, all over
the utility customers regardless
of whether or not they choose to
adopt an electric vehicle.
So
Right now, PNM is in the process
of reviewing vendor proposals
for an active managed charging
program. Active man and charging
programs represent an
opportunity for uh for electric
utilities to work with EV
drivers in their service
territory to manage their EV
charging loads and requirements
to ensure that we are both
providing those customers with
the energy that they need, the
fuel that they need for their
vehicles, um, but also to do
that in a way that's both
beneficial for the grid and for
other customers. So if you look
at the chart on the right hand
side and my apologies that it's,
it's a little small. Um, this
was from
a report that was recently
released by the Smart Electric
Power Alliance on the state of
managed charging in 2024.
Um, what this shows is 3
different scenarios. So the top
bar graph represents a 48 hour
period. There's 53 EVs on a
distribution circuit, and if
left to their own devices, this
is what the charging load in
terms of electrical capacity
looks like um when consumers are
just kind of plug in and charge
it at their um at at at uh at.
Their leisure is not quite the
right way to put it.
Um, the second one, so the one
in the middle represents what we
call, uh, what we consider time
of use or passively manage
charging, and so, um, one of the
uh
Characteristics of a program
like Pin and Toho EV rate is
that it tends to create what's
called a snapback timer, uh.
peak load or coincident peak.
And so what we see is that a lot
of customers will delay their
charging requirements until the
time when uh electricity pricing
drops, and then we'll have a
secondary system peak on that
distribution infrastructure, and
you'll notice that the peak for
that is, is a lot higher
actually than the, than the
chart above it. And so it can
create some unexpected and
unintended problems. Um, the
final chart there on the bottom
is really what manage charging
represents to you know the the
opportunity that represents to
both the utility and the
customers. So when uh
drivers and utilities work
together to ensure that EV
charging is managed
appropriately and within the
constraints available by the
grid, and what we can do is
manage the efficient use of that
infrastructure to ensure both
that customers have the energy
that they need for their for
their vehicles and that the
P&M's distribution or the
electric utilities distribution
system, um, is, is well
utilized. This represents lots
of opportunities for consumers
because what it does is it
increases the efficient use of
the system.
The um.
The cost of those facilities
onto a greater number of um of
Uh, you'd be charging loads,
right, and what it and what it
does is it makes sure that we
right size the investments that
the ranking and the distribution
system. Um, but a lot of
utilities have done historically
is plan for the worst case
scenario and what this
information and what these types
of programs allow is for us to
to plan for the efficient use of
our of our infrastructure.
Moving on to my last slide,
slide number 9. this is also
another program that is
currently in development.
Many
Uh, PM recognizes that many
fleet vehicles are ideal for
electrification, as they have
regular and predictable duty
cycles and electric power trains
represent reduced operations and
maintenance costs for many use
cases. PNM's Fleet Advisory
Services pilot program is
expected to launch in January of
2025. Uh, we're currently doing
active recruitment, so if any of
you guys know, uh, business
fleets we're we're looking for
as many of them as we can find,
um, but participants can expect
to receive a fleet
electrification potential study.
So what this means is that we
will
worked very closely with the
fleet operator to understand
their current fleet composition,
and to provide them with a very
realistic, uh,
Understanding of the vehicles or
the assets in their fleet that
are eligible for electrification
today, uh, what those um new
vehicles would cost, uh, and
then what the total cost of
ownership would be for the for
the use of those assets over
their lifetime. And then
finally, of course, um, the
third thing that those customers
or participants can expect to
receive is an EV charging
infrastructure needs analysis.
So, and, and in order to ensure
that those customers, um, and
their fleet vehicles are able to
meet the duty requirements for
their business.
We want to make sure that the,
the charging infrastructure
that's installed is both um is
realistically kind of portrayed
them. And so um we're very
excited to launch this program.
We think that there will be
significant opportunities both
for PNM to take and learning and
to better understand how to meet
these new electrical needs in
the future and how to work best
with customers to ensure both
that were making the proper
investments in our distribution
infrastructure and that we're be
able to serve our customers
accordingly.
So
Madam Chair, that concludes my
presentation and I stand you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Mr. Williamson, and I appreciate
the, the good things that PNM is
doing in this area, particularly
the time of use rates for lower
income, I think it was called
the whole home.
Program or whatever and those
types of things that that helped
to shift the load and the equity
programs, uh, when you started
off, you indicated that the
current energy mix on PNM you
said was 60% renewable.
Um
I don't think that's accurate. I
think because that 60% includes
35%.
Nuclear, which is not renewable
but isn't carbon free, and so
it's important we, we make those
distinctions when people are
listening in.
So it's about 60% carbon-free
right now, not 60% renewable.
Um, is that accurate?
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you very much. I, I think um we
can certainly provide that, but
yes, that's a very good point.
OK, just wanted to make sure
because, you know, that's an
important distinction between
renewable and carbon-free as far
as when we're working towards
getting to 100%, uh, carbon free
energy, yeah, that we, we make
sure we make those distinctions.
I do have a question or two,
Madam Cherries.
How do the manage load systems
that that chart where it moved
across the graph.
Is that directed by the owner or
do they plug in and there's an
automated system that when the
rates drop, it charges, I, I
know on my house, you know, I
can plug in and it then start. I
put the clothes in the dryer,
the dryer starts when the rates
go down. Is that what this
system is doing, or does this
require direct input from the
owner.
Uh, so Madam chair, Senator,
that's a great question. And
thank you for asking it. Um.
So it's a, it's a very
collaborative process, the way
that these programs are meant to
work and there's different
models in the field right now
and we're currently evaluating
those models and and which
vendor we want to select, um,
ideally in active managed
charging program takes into
consideration the driver's
preferences. So typically what
will happen is an EV driver can
say, I would like for my vehicle
to be charged up to 80% um by 1
time. And so those are the
primary inputs that the driver
has access to to provide PNM or
to the
The electric utility, and then
the rest of it is managed by the
utility to ensure the efficient
use of the infrastructure, um,
of course, uh, vehicles are
transportation technologies
first. And so there are
opportunities, of course, for EV
drivers to say, you know, this
is my normal schedule. Um, I
really need to charge my
vehicle, uh,
at a different time today
because I have different
requirements right for my life
either, maybe there's something
out of the ordinary or what have
you. And so it's really designed
to ensure that customers have
the energy in their vehicles
that they need at the time, but
to make sure that we're also
supporting.
The, the, the grid
appropriately. I hope that
answers your question.
Yes, Madam Chair, and let me
make sure I understand that.
So if I've got my electric
vehicle, I come home, I plug it
in, but it's not actually
charging it.
Until
3 o'clock in the morning, for
instance, but it knows I need to
have 85% charged by 6 o'clock in
the morning when I'm off to
work, but I could come home,
plug it in and say, but I need
85% by 10 o'clock tonight and
it's going to charge it then,
but it may be charging me at at
a higher rate because of time of
use. Is that accurate?
Madam Chair, Senator, that um
it's almost like I could
override the system that says at
3 a.m. if I've got a specific
need today. Absolutely, yeah, so
most vehicles are plugged in
roughly at most TVs are plugged
in somewhere between.
8 and 12 hours a day, but they
really only actively charge for
2 hours. And so what most
utilities that are seeking to
utilize these types of programs
is to do is to manage when those
two hours are to ensure um that
those benefits are, are given to
the customer and to the utility.
I would just like to highlight
that there's lots of different
inputs, right? So, um, some of
the different considerations
that we're taking in as we
evaluate those vendor proposals
or are things like real-time
wholesale pricing, um, the
availability of renewable energy
pricing or renewable energy at
that given time.
Uh, and then, of course, with
the driver's needs and
preferences are and then any
sort of localized distribution
constraints that might exist on
that infrastructure itself.
Thank you and Madam Chair, thank
you. I, I really appreciate
programs like that where it
could be set up automatically,
whereas an owner, I don't have
to be watching what the
renewable load is and that
there's extra capacity on the,
you know, that I ought to do it
now or something like that. Um,
kind of my last question.
You talked about, Madam Chair,
and Mr. Williamson, the PNM
fleet program type of things is
PNM electrifying its fleet.
Madam
Madam Chair and Senator, yes,
sir, um, absolutely, the short
answer to that is that PNM is,
is electrifying our fleet um
right now, we have targets to
electrify 25% of all new light
duty vehicle purchases, uh, the,
so on that slide, the vehicle
there is one of P&M's light duty
or medium duty bucket trucks
that vehicle is located in Las
Vegas, New Mexico, and it is
fully electric. So both the
powertrain uh and the auxiliary
power.
both electric.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Williamson, the
A load management that you've
described in that.
In several charts.
Requires I would presume a very
smart meter.
To accomplish those objectives.
Oh what
would be the cost.
Of those meters.
To the consumers.
And
And would they have
Uh
Sufficient economic incentives
to
Yeah,
Purchase that equipment.
Absent
Subsidies
Madam Jared Representative
Scott, that's a great question.
Um, there are different models
available for um for how active
managed charging works right now
PNM is considering two different
models. So the first one is um
we communicate directly with the
vehicle itself. And so this is,
uh, it's called Telemanics and
it bypasses the need for smart
infrastructure for for smart
meter infrastructure, um,
While some programs do rely on
smart meters to enable manage
charging. Um, what we find is
that, you know, a lot of times,
um, the communication stops at
the meter itself and so it
doesn't necessarily allow us to
get to that particular asset to
to to manipulate its behavior.
And so what I would say is that
um there are not any, uh, at
least in the programs that we're
evaluating today, um, there are
not any additional costs that
the consumers would need to bear
to enable participation in that
program.
So senators.
To
Described his clothes dryer
coming on when the
And
That wouldn't be communicating
with the vehicle. I'd be
communicating.
With one of the smart meters, is
that accurate?
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Scott. So I, I think what uh in
please correct me if I misstate
this, but I, I think what the
senator was referencing was a
timer on his, on his dryer. And
so he has the ability to program
that asset, particularly to
begin operating at a time when
it's most advantageous, uh,
given the current electricity
rates.
And so EV drivers today have the
same capabilities and capacities
most customers who participate
in the whole home rate, um,
right now, what they do is they
program their vehicle to begin
charging at a time that's
convenient for them and is
within the EV charging window.
Uh, and so when they get home
from work, they put their
vehicle in, and then their car
begins charging automatically
based off of that program, uh,
and it doesn't require any
further action either from the,
the customer can usually set
that one time and, and it, it
doesn't have to be manipulated
regularly.
It
Ma I'm sure you might have a
little bit more insight as you
drive an EV, but my
understanding is that a lot of
those can also be manipulated
from the the native applications
that many consumers have on
there. And,
Madam Chair, Miss Williamson.
I believe you, I heard you
represent that you had subsidies
available for $5000.
He installation for a home
charging system was that
accurate?
Madam Chair Representative
Scott, um, so the $5000
installation rebate refers more
to the level 2 chargers for
non-residential participants.
And so for um for uh locations
like multi-families, so
multi-family properties tend to
have two different types of
meters, um, both the residential
meter, which the tenant will pay
and it refers mostly to what's
inside that uh particular unit.
And then there's also going to
be commercial, um,
Commercial meters and so these
might operate things like the
laundry, uh, the laundry room,
the gym, uh, the security gate
and and such things. And so
typically speaking, multi-family
properties will install level 2
charger as an amenity that's
available to, to, to many
Of the residents there and so
it's on what we consider to be a
house or a commercial meter. And
so those are the, that's what
the $5000 is, um, for
residential customers who
install a qualifying level 2
charger, the, the rebate is up
to $500 towards the purchase of
that charger and to give you an
idea, uh, if you were to search
Amazon right now for level 2
charger, you could probably
purchase one anywhere between
300 and $800 and so for
consumers who are primarily
motivated by costs, they can get
one essentially at no cost. Uh,
the installation rebate.
for market rate participants or
$1500.
up to and so that helps offset
the installation costs should
the the customer have to uh uh
complete significant electrical
wiring or a panel upgrade.
Oh, madam chair, Mr. Williamson,
basically these
would add somewhere.
Around 50 amps of demand
requirements to
Typical home is that accurate or
would we talk about more than
that.
Madame Cherry and his guy. I, I
think that's a fairly safe, um,
assumption I've seen level 2
chargers at residential
properties anywhere between 30
and uh and believe it or not,
ADMs depending on the available
capacity and the charging
requirements of the of the
driver.
And
Oh, Madam Chair, Mr. Williams,
you are familiar, I believe I
mentioned it with respect.
To commercial properties.
Uh, with the previous presenter,
but you're familiar with that
mandate.
That now all new homes.
Um, uh, equipped.
You serve
Oh
Level 2 chargers.
And
And the concern.
With
Again, folks in my community,
this
This adds
Fair
For the cost of a new home.
is that new home construction
also qualify for the rebates
you've.
You've described
Madam Chair Ripper Scott, thank
you. That's a great question.
Um,
I don't have data in front of
me, but um my understanding is
that uh the most affordable time
to install that EV charger
infrastructure or the, the
circuits to serve that
infrastructure would be at the
time that new home was
constructed.
Throughout the regulatory
process for PNM's 2024 to 2026
transportation electrification
program we did propose
incentives to help offset some
of those installation costs. Um,
we estimated that $150 would be
sufficient to most new property
developers to install that
infrastructure to serve, um, so
I recognize that that might be a
significant burden to some
consumers, but, but I, um.
My understanding is that that
would be a lot more affordable
than having to to retroactively
upgrade some of that
infrastructure and possibly have
to upgrade the the electrical
panel itself.
Uh, Madam Chair, Miss Williams,
and I'm aware of significantly
higher estimates than 150 bucks.
In New Mexico has been all
about.
Affordable housing.
Which we don't have near enough.
And these mandates would seem to
be adding.
Or maybe subtracting.
From the affordability of the
housing market if this new
construction.
If all of this has to come with.
With the charging
Thank you, madam, and thank you,
sir.
Um, I thank you to, um, I have
the 3 cents per kilowatt hour
charge, and that's great, the
rate, um, um, I think helping
the customers, um, I've, I've
been part of the rebate so
system and it's pretty easy to
do. It's, it's out there. I just
look on your website, everybody
can see what's out there, so
presentation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you so much.
committee, um, Indian Affairs is
saying goodbye to um Senator
Rodriguez and Senator Alice,
Representative Allison, and
they've invited us to go, starts
at noon, so.
We're done for now. We're
breaking for lunch, yes. All
right, and we'll be back at one
o'clock.
We're gonna get started on a
couple of legislators across the
hall, um.
All right, next is our first
presenter after.
Now.
route.
Good afternoon. Um,
of the committee, chairwoman.
I'm honored to be here with you
today. I'm the new kid on the
blog with him about.
60 days.
Before that, I was the city
manager of the town house and
extremely prior to that, um,
I was, I spent 10 years with one
of probably the most progressive
loss in New Mexico.
So I built Kit Carson's
broadband network.
Towards the end of my tenure
with the kids.
So not a stranger to
electrification.
Um
bit of a newcomer to
electrification of the state of
New Mexico.
With that, I am looking
Uh, it's a little bit on the
first, uh, page, uh, we did a
New Mexico energy profile.
are just some quick tidbit facts
in 2022, uh, New Mexico was the
nation's 2nd largest crude oil
production state after Texas,
the state accounted for more
than 13% total.
2022, New Mexico was among the
top 10 natural gas producing
states, 7th.
for 6% of the nation's total
natural gas gross withdrawals.
The end of 2021, you Maico had
almost 6% of the US.
natural gas reserves.
At the end of 2021 in New Mexico
had almost 3% of the nation's
estimated.
Cover vocal reserves, 10th
largest among the states.
State accounted for almost 2% of
the total US.
co.
In 2022, New Mexico ranked 9th
in the.
and electricity generation from
wind power.
35% in Mexico's total.
electricity net generation came
from wind.
2022
5 times the share of contributed
in 20 Mexico is one of 15 states
that produce natural gas from
coal beds in 2021, the state was
second only to Colorado and
Colbay.
that methane production and
accounted for 26% of the
nation's.
So next slide.
New Mexico electric vehicle
program holds.
One is to establish an
electrified and alternative fuel
transportation system.
a system that is convenient,
affordable, reliable, equitable,
accessible, and safe.
Establish a path the US to
create nationwide network of at
least 5,500,000 EV chargers by
the year 2030.
improved networks for vehicles
using hydrogen, propane and
natural gas.
And increase EV adoption.
New Mexico residents.
I want to say that the
Department of Transportation is
not in the electrification
business from the standpoint of
creating revenue or generating
revenue from electrification or
or electric charging stations.
We are to act as the vehicle to.
Our next slide
New Mexico EV infrastructure
project funding sources.
Uh, 2021 infrastructure
investment and Jobs Act, which
is the IIJA.
appointment is 38.3 million.
Uh, in fiscal year 22, uh, we
had 5.681 million.
And
by 2023, 8.176.
FY 24 8.176 FY 25, which is the
upcoming 8.176 and 2.
26 is also 80.
was the 2021 regular legislative
session capital appropriation of
1.2 million.
2021 special session American
rescue plan, which was the art
of wins.
10 million.
2024 charging and filling
infrastructure was the CFI grant
at 67.7 million.
2024 legislative session capital
appropriation was 15.
on
Our electrical vehicle
infrastructure projects and you
see the map that's generated
there. These are all.
charging
patients that have been deployed
by the state of New Mexico.
So the idea is to provide
drivers with a convenient,
reliable, affordable, accessible
and equitable charging
experience.
Meeted goals for statewide
electrification network.
Support economic development
opportunities for rural parts of
the state.
Mexico designated 8.
AFCs, which are alternative
field corridor.
including the state's 3
interstates, like 10, I-40 and
I-25 and 5 additional US
highways, US Highway 60, US 70.
160 US 285 and US 380 totaling
almost 2200 center miles.
on our deployment strategy.
issue RFPs for private and
public partnerships, contract
with private entities in a way
that makes sufficient use of
funds to ensure maximal
deployment at the most efficient
unit cost.
of satisfy state and federal
procurement requirements satisfy
match requirements established
5-year O&M performance period.
Requires site location
agreements, after analytics on
charger use.
So EV charger growth, anxieties
and misconceptions.
There's a lot of anxieties and
misconceptions such as range,
cost, and access and those
anxieties are real.
That's where we're trying to
close so we need to work with
New Mexico Auto Dealers
Association to support adoption
of ZEV transition for agencies.
Tracking rebates and incentives
from federal, state, utility
providers.
also tracking the data on
registration.
Uh, strategic.
Zero emissions vehicle. Yes,
sorry.
NCV can encompass multiple.
It's electric saw our next slide
overcoming challenges and much
like the uh
Uh, presenters that presented
before us.
Uh supply chain continues to be
an issue.
So that encompasses
semiconductors, uh, especially
those associated with DCAS
chargers. Those are unlimited
supply.
materials which are shortages of
the central materials such as
copper, lithium, and aluminum.
A production of cables,
connectors, and batteries.
Transformers and great
equipment.
Uh, there's limited availability
of transformers.
workforce development and I
think going back to the
Transformers.
Um
We're sitting right now at about
Uh, 58 weeks on availability.
Transformers, and that's
actually shortened from about
120 weeks previous uh line
extensions, which can be costly,
um.
So that's associated with
installation costs.
permitting an approval process
or sometimes subject to local.
Governance, local
municipalities, and then our
own.
Department of Transportation
right
can be
Uh, utility coordination
challenges.
Great capacity in rural areas
and you'll see us highlight grid
capacity and.
several of the bullet points
below him.
Environmental and community
impacts.
Co op and utility partnerships,
and we saw
presentation from P and just a
little bit earlier. So it's how
they uh
Prioritize uh their business
models.
Uh, looking at regulatory
measures and again, greater
capacity associated with those
utilities.
sharing disputes, tariff and
restructure issues.
And then there's the great
reliance piece, which
increased demand on the grid.
load management.
capacity constraints and rural
areas, especially rural areas.
challenges with home charging in
denser.
The future program consideration
are unfunded gaps.
And that's what even now with
our corridors.
The equity and justice 40 for
disadvantaged community
participation.
supply chain issues around
electric components.
which is the Build America Buy
America Act.
futility and cooperative delays
14 month delay on a robust
workforce for EV infrastructure
installation and maintenance and
car technicians.
Announces with competitive
grants.
Access to high yield.
High level bridge for electric.
electrical connectivity.
statewide broadband connectivity
for charging station network,
especially in our more.
So some federal compliance
challenges, uh, complex
reporting and documentation
requirements, the Nevy uh
reporting and requirement puts
us at roughly about a 50 mile
requirement in range, New Mexico
is a pretty big state.
Trying to cover some of those
gaps, uh.
again,
As mentioned in previous
presentations, is trying to put
those EV charging stations in
safe areas and areas that have
access to grocery, access to uh
some type of service.
has been challenging.
And then chargers must be
installed with 1 mile of the
designated highway corridor.
sight must have at least 450 kW
fast chargers that can charge
multiple vehicles.
Multiple charging ports.
must comply and meet ADA, uh.
Guidelines.
rural and remote areas often
lack suitable sites within 50
miles, posing challenges for
compliance, and some 50 mile
intervals fall and load.
Traffic zones for the ROI and
then recurring funding strategy
for EV chargers.
Lastly, P3 partnerships
subscription and or membership
models, utility and energy
agreements, grant recycling and
revolving.
And so moving on to the uh.
America.
So Mexico, New Mexico is a
member of the Rock America.
REC West, RUC America has funded
over 24 research projects
splitting the feasibility of
road usage charging.
usage charge is a transportation
funding model where all drivers
are assessed a fee based on the
number of.
miles they drive.
Rather than how much gas they
consume.
today we're in very early stages
at the state of New Mexico
looking at this, uh, other
states, and I believe there's 2,
Utah and Nevada that have
adopted models.
They are uh
approaching their eating
So moving on.
What options are being
considered for recording.
road usage.
time permits similar to a
vehicle registration fee, the
participant purchases unlimited
road use for a specific period
of time.
Mileage permits the participant
prepays to drive a certain
number of milesometer charged
the participant pace of feet per
mile based on periodic odometer
readings.
Automated mileage reporting
without general location data.
vehicles have equipment that
measure and report mileage.
Automatically to an account
manager.
Either provided by a state
agency or private company.
The account manager
periodically, monthly or qua.
orderly.
Sends the motorist an invoice
for the.
Virtual.
Automated mileage reporting with
general location data.
vehicles
report mileage traveled to a
third party account manager,
which invoices the participant.
equipment also provides general
location data so the
participating is not charged for
travel out of state or.
private rooms.
These options include a vehicle
telematics, smartphone apps, and
plug-in devices for the vehicles
onboard diagnostics data board.
So this is the uh
Long term state road fund
outlook.
There's 4 major state road fund
revenue sources, which is the
gasoline weight distance,
special fuel.
vehicle registration.
you see is from the time period
2005.
2050, the modeling shows the
decline on.
respective fuel sources and the
Um
distance
Special film.
So over the next 5 years, state
road fund revenues are expected
to grow at an annual average
rate of 1.2%, slowly shrinking
thereafter.
short-term growth mainly driven
by commercial vehicle revenue
sources and is tied to overall
economic activity.
Future long-term revenue
expectations being pulled down
by declining revenues from
gasoline and diesel taxes based
on assumption around fuel
economy standards and national
trends towards increased.
option of electric vehicles.
caveats.
That's our presentation, so
thank you.
that I
She's, she's a
She's here, she's, she's back
up. She's more of support
um, it's like he's expecting me
uh road li public works
Committee for the last 10 years,
and we've been talking about
this to of.
we can address.
Uh
So
Share with us what they're
doing.
I don't, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I don't have the
exact details of what the what
programs those two states have
rolled out. Those are the two
states that I know of, um.
I get in my short term period in
April, you're welcome to speak
on this as well too, um.
Those are the two states that I
know have adopted some form.
of
Recoup mechanism
vehicles, um, as, as you
mentioned, uh, representative,
the concerns uh with DOT is that
with a larger weight
displacement on EV vehicles,
which means a higher level of
wear on the roads.
Especially as we start looking
towards the future of what
Semi truck or transportation
looks like, even in the even in
school buses and and uh public
transit.
As we make these uh
changes so faster we on roads,
and I know our DOT engineers
have been talking about that
substantially and you mentioned.
And the, the
gap
funding that we received today.
So
We need to place a lot of
emphasis and thought as to how
we can I'm happy to get the
information for you.
No, no, I appreciate that. I, I
could probably just do it here
or we're done and.
read about what they have done.
Um
Yeah, I
I personally
Yeah
about doing something that is
based off of miles.
Reading an odometer
something on your vehicle.
All of the wild and my daughter
are not in New Mexico.
Utah, Colorado, Arizona. So,
There's also the concern of Big
Brother knowing where I'm going
all the time.
So
What I have
towards, I think is a is a a
compromise and until someone
comes up with something better
is, uh, adding additional fee to
the vehicle registration every
year.
accounts for essentially what I
would have paid in gasoline tax,
and I think we've passed
something similar.
last year or two,
$100 or $120.
somewhere between 90 and 120, I
think it's up.
Personal vehicle.
Not sure about and.
Semi trucks that'll be, that'll
be just us to.
looking at
How can we make sure we still
have roads when we no longer are
getting the gasoline tanks.
It
your hand
So
When it comes to
mentioned several times. I don't
think it makes sense for
Representative Scott to go and
get a
Uh electric pickup right now,
because you could
drive to his neighbor's house
and run out of, you know, the.
And that's facetious, right,
but.
Um
I, I drive maybe 100 I'm sure
I'm guessing.
That's a lot less than what a
rural.
Let's say
Battery technology is gonna
continue to advance.
And I
and I
I really love
We have
So it's not like we don't need
to do anything much.
And
we can plan, we can think about
how to.
Executed properly.
Hampshire and
Representative Harper, um, so
yeah, so we, um,
Really work hard on
strategically placing REV
chargers.
So in every phase one, those are
federal funds.
National and um those 940.
Um
And from this heat map you can
see, um, we've identified
alternative.
corridors.
We don't have um
US 550 as designated alternative
fuel cars.
So strategically look at it.
Um, we're looking at
Many different ociation of
counties.
Um
mountain in its advantaged
community.
We are, it also makes sense kind
of.
Level 2 or level 3 chargers so
you can have your fast to their
apartment, they're bringing
charges, they need to go to the
grocery store.
their level
Um,
Chair representative.
one of the biggest issues I
think that we face, and this is
just us as a state as a whole,
and I, I come from a rural area.
I live, still live in Taos
today, and I think uh it's done
a phenomenal job of shoring up
capacity, but it still doesn't
underscore the fact that even
within that territory. There's a
lot of line miles that are aged.
ag g ing infrastructure and
whether or not there's the
capacity to carry, uh,
specific case in point today is
that we have a Tesla station in
Springer.
Uh, that's trying to get
deployed, and there's not enough
substation capacity, so you're
looking at about $1.2 million
worth of upgrade.
To accommodate charging station.
So I think that's something that
uh
also needs to be considered as
we start looking at how we fund.
It's one thing to deploy
chargers, it's a whole other
thing, the weather.
and the line, uh.
areas have capacity to support.
Type of
So right now it's a fine dance
and um.
You know
my early days with Kit Carson
when we were.
adopting broadband, it seemed
like a Herculean effort because
we were fighting everybody that
didn't believe.
should be
event
Yeah you fast forward to the
pandemic when uh education and
need
Uh
connectivity at home was was
paramount. Uh.
You fast forward 10 years later
and it was probably one of the.
decisions that that community
made
And as I look at electrification
today, it's, it's kind of the
elephant in the room, so to
speak, when.
Looking at
Uh, a lot of anxieties as we
went over.
in the slide.
I think that anxiety if you
equate it back almost to the
Y2K.
Right, when, when everybody had
this anxiety of.
And, uh, you know, I, I think as
common as it is today, uh.
With regards to even charging
your laptop or charging your
cell phone. I still face those
same anxieties. I travel quite a
bit across the state now with
New Mexico Department of
Transportation and
Several occasions I left my
charger at home from my phone.
And uh you talk about anxiety,
right? Being in a rural part of
New Mexico with uh
1% battery on your cell phone.
That same anxiety exists today
as we correlate it with
electrical vehicles.
And uh I, I think I'm a
proponent of not one type of of
renewable.
I'm a huge believer in the need
to reduce carbon emissions.
And that's by any means. So
whether we adopt hydrogen,
whether it's a mix of EV.
And I leave that to our our our.
Nationals in the auto industry.
I think they're they're the
innovators and they're the ones
that are really pushing the
envelope and and.
If you've ever read the book Who
Killed the Electric Car.
Uh, you fast forward to today
and every automaker now.
some version of an electric
vehicle.
Peter built one of the nation's
largest.
transportation, uh.
diesel companies who just
invested over half a billion
dollars in E.
Technology. I
I think the train left the
station.
I
Happy to be part of a state that
is
thinking, uh, and, and reading
and
You know, we travel a lot and
engaged with a lot of other
states that are way far behind
with
The state of New Mexico is
doing.
I know we have a ways to go, but
I think um.
TV today.
is what
was 10 years
I think we will
You, we're just gonna take 1 2nd
to pass our minutes because it's
back.
So I
I know you have rhythm in motion
of
that I'm sure I move that we
talk, right.
Thank you.
Um
Yeah, so, so thank you, ma'am
chair and thank you for that
answer. I think I'll just, I'll
just conclude by
Saying I
The the
When you look at an electric
engine versus internal
combustion engine.
It's
It's hard to find an advantage
of internal combustion. So many.
actually the electric engine
was.
Like motor was invented before.
reason we drive
Ford.
vehicle, you would have to have
a semi-trailer for the battery.
It could have moved about 10 ft.
Um
So these advancements in battery
technology.
Allowed us to now use these
great.
Electric motors.
So, as you look at where
batteries are going to be.
you know, it looks awesome.
But
hoping we're not putting the
a little bit in front of the
horse, because if all of a
sudden
You and
Denver, I stopped in Las Vegas
and it was like nothing else
until you get to Colorado.
So spring.
You're having to spend
$5.
celebrate the.
Juice to the charging station,
right? So.
So I just
I just urge us to be cautious,
it would be like right now.
During your broadband effort if
we decided we needed to.
Copper everywhere.
Right.
Uh
uh representative, you're
absolutely right, because when
I, when I embarked on building
broadband for Kit Carson
Electric.
uh
Cooling data room.
That was roughly 20 by 20 by the
time the project ended.
data room that was 6 by 6.
The advancement of technology.
Severely reduced. I, I think
those are the pains of early
adoption and, and.
Leading edge technology being at
the forefront of some of this
stuff.
Uh
I still think at the end of the
day.
we gain out of electrification.
You, you
If its light capacity builds, if
we can use uh federal funds to
help our local electric co ops
through grants to do that, which
we
actually been at the forefront
of being able to enable.
To do line extension and
upgrades, then I think it
benefits us all. And I, and I
think I, I, I, I look.
get that through the lens of.
In the areas of like the Permian
Basin, I think our oil country
oil rich areas are still looking
for electrification for
different reasons. It's more
efficiency in running their fuel
pumps.
And I think part of that, uh,
is, is just
Cos it doesn't matter what part
of the state of New Mexico you
live in.
Whether you drive an EV or you
drive a.
If you don't have reliable
electricity. Nothing's going to
work. Your pumps aren't going to
power, you can't power the
routers that need broadband, and
you definitely.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Has there been any study?
Performed anywhere with respect
to
And I know it's, it's.
Probably way premature given the
market penetration.
of electric vehicles, but
typically they would be much
heavier.
For the same size vehicle.
Correct.
Which would
One would presume.
Increase the wear and tear on
our.
Highways, do we know?
We have any kind of projection
of what that.
Going to look like, uh, Madam
Chair Representative Scott, we
have started to not we, but I
think the industry as a whole
displacement and vehicle weight
has started um again in speaking
with our NMDOT engineers, that's
something that is weighing
heavily on their minds as to
what road degradation looks
like, so what used to be.
10 or 15 year old may now be a
5-year road.
And so how we look at that uh in
terms of recoup on the gasoline
tax and being able to fund these
endeavors and I, I look at it,
especially coming out of a rural
community where potholes are a
norm.
Uh, even on our, uh, New Mexico
highways, um.
Even more so on on city owned
streets, it becomes more and
more challenging, and, and yet
we're starting to see more and
more EV vehicles show up and I
take Taos as a prime example
because.
Through the efforts of the co
op, they've done a great job of
enabling probably a higher level
of saturation of EV chargers in
that part of the state, uh, then
probably anywhere else, even,
even in the in the metro areas
or or next to Albuquerque, at
least.
And so
Firsthand as the city manager
for the last 2.5 years at the
city, that was something that I
saw and, and what's interesting
about it is that New Mexico is a
state which is receiving a lot
of transplants, um, that aren't
registering their vehicles in
the state of New Mexico. If I
drive through Taos today.
There's probably half the EV
vehicles driving around have
Texas, California, Oklahoma
plates on them.
And if we're not capturing that.
By some way, some mechanism, and
how are we able to satisfy the
needs of our major thoroughfare.
and so
Again, being that EV is so new,
I think we're just barely.
And Madam Chair, Mr. Gonzalez
today.
I heard you say.
Somewhere in your presentation,
yeah.
We were going, we were pursuing.
At this point, electrification
at any and a, a cost benefit.
Analysis.
Of these programs.
short,
certainly does for the consumer.
Because
You know, folks have to be
incentivized. They have to,
there have to be subsidies out
there.
Yeah.
For those
For those vehicles to move off a
lot.
In a poor state.
If
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Gonzalez in
a poor state.
If these programs are going to
increase.
The course to our consumers.
Without some commensurate
increase in a particularly.
Do not see that.
just
I
For obvious reasons
So
Electrification at any cost is
an appropriate policy, and I'll
use your example of
Of Kit Carson.
As I understand it, Carson's got
some of the most.
Expensive electricity in the
state.
Ezakov, not just.
E
And electrification of.
Mr. Green Energy.
Movement in general.
So
For members of the committee, we
need to keep in mind.
That there is no free lunch.
And to the extent that these
Technologies are not as
efficient.
As what's out there and proven.
Reliable
For 100 years.
Yeah
We need to be cautious about
jumping headlong into this
because we may thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, sir.
Chairwoman and representative um
a multitude of of points and
facets, I think.
Uh, as, uh, who has.
What I guess I would call a
there's a high level of need,
what the cost implications of
not you that subsidies will be
needed and again, you know.
Not to keep taking it back to
broadband, but when I started,
it was something that was uh
high uh megabit speeds delivered
to the most affluent of I think
the end goal was to make sure
that we put broadband in the
hands of every single person
that was within our community,
and I think as we look towards
the future, and again, not, not
in one basket with, with
electrification.
I still believe that we need to
and I think the state is doing a
great job and doing our part to
moving the needle, uh, to a more
carbon-free environment, and,
and that's not just for today,
that's for future generations.
And uh I think there's windfall
benefit across all sectors. I'm
not saying that one sector has
to get done away with by any
means, that's inclusive of our
of our uh oil and natural gas
industry, it plays a vital and
integral part within our state
and
Especially as it as it as it
keys to our budgets. um, but I
think there could be more useful
purpose of those resources as
opposed to how we're, how we're
recognizing their use today.
And so, uh, you know, like I
think the Carson example is one
by which at a time when uh
inflation was rising, uh, kids's
rates dropped by 25%. And that
was a statewide, and that was an
arbitrary decision to build.
Solar capacity that was 100%
that community today is powered
100% today by daytime solar.
Uh, the co op today, I believe
has about 30 megawatts of their
88 megawatt load on battery
backup and storage, so as they
continue to progress, and they
just received a federal grant to
do hydrogen fees.
about $96 million. So I think.
More co-ops throughout the state
of the of New Mexico with the
amount of sunshine days that we
have.
their job in providing for their
constituency too, I think
electrification.
is as equal to broadband in
which it's a right to every New
Mexican, and it comes as a right
uh to be affordable, reliable. I
think at the end of the day
when, when we walk in our homes,
uh, we want the lights to turn
on. So when we hit that switch,
the reliability falls within
that switch, and I think a lot
of consumers myself included,
um, sometimes have pains with
rate adoption or rate increases,
never really understanding that
that and then the second
question.
Homes that don't have a er a
panel.
And they all be upgraded to 200
amp or does it depend on how
Old neighborhood is in the
infrastructure.
And interior representative
Harper, those are fair
questions. Engineering is
required for.
Requirement of the utility.
Um
Probably not necessary in most
cases.
But it's a requirement. So
during that.
During part of that, TM's gonna
look throughout.
in the panel to do and and I'm
sorry, the second part of your
question.
Um, yeah, Madam Chair, Mr. Shaw
was.
Can any home be upgraded to 200
amps.
Yeah.
I'm sure
Yes, almost 95, really run into.
Someone with a 100 amp panel.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Shaw, um.
And then I want to uh thank you
for your comments regarding, we
don't need to build.
Charters every 50 miles. I
totally agree with that.
I, I think you're right. Um,
I've been to lots of hotels that
have EV chargers.
I think more businesses that do
that.
Um
That makes way more sense uh to
me.
Um
Thanks to the just the last
thing I'll mention, Madam Chair,
uh, this is just a
Maybe a comment from from uh
Senator Souls talking about the
uh cyber truck.
And uh just how ugly it is. Um,
uh.
Yeah, I
I think
Yeah, beauty is in the eye of
the beholder.
Um.
No, but, um, what I find
fascinating is
Elon Musk is having us folks by.
Rev one of his Mars rover.
Everything Musk does is about
Mars.
Everything
Tesla
Is there oil on Mars?
I don't know.
Probably not.
So all transportation on Mars is
going to be electric.
It's a boring company.
Right?
Digging tunnels and putting
loops under Las Vegas.
have to live underground.
On Mars
Because of radiation.
Those that you look at the
diameter of those tunnels, they
happen to fit on a rocket.
Right?
So these there's gonna be
building tunnels in Mars for us
to live under, right?
Uh, even, even Starlink, right?
The constellation that we're all
gonna get our cell phone from
eventually.
Cell phone service from.
Do you think we want to take
hundreds of tons of fiber to
Mars.
No, we're gonna set
OK. So a car drives by. You put
these along a highway, cars
driving by stimulating
turbulence. This thing starts
throwing out electricity like
crazy. We can put those in these
charging ups. They're small.
They're not like a windmill.
They're very attractive. They're
hexagonal.
Right? It's, it's, it's an early
stage company. They've proven
this technology, they're now
trying to get, get it, they
haven't manufactured, they won't
be available now for about, for
about a year.
I'm working very hard and I'm
very close to getting them to
base their US operations in New
Mexico.
But that's going to be a huge
opportunity to charge batteries
with something like
Wind that really turbulence.
OK, you'll be able to put these,
first of all, these things work
24/7, because the wind blows all
the time. OK, you can put it in
a city like New York City and
that wind that goes through the.
between the buildings it's gonna
just create win and when we have
plenty of one here to ground
level winds, not high off the
ground.
So there's, there's new stuff,
technology coming that's gonna
have dramatic impact.
On the future of Avis. So our
big single installation is in
Georgia.
We are very active in the state
of Georgia. Georgia through
Georgia Power, which is much
like PNM.
Um, is, is very aggressive in
installing EVs and encouraging
EVs.
Um, part of the reason for that
is not, does not relate to
almost none of it in their case
relates to trying to save the
environment.
They're looking at it as an
economic opportunity.
Because by having all this EV
capability and electrical power.
OK, they can attract companies
to move there.
Much like we did in Los Lunas,
you know, with the, with the
data centers.
OK, that, that ends up being
able to to provide green power
to companies turns out to be a
huge benefit in attracting
companies to location in
Georgia, Tennessee have been
very successful, uh, with, with
that kind of approach.
Um
The key to Georgia was not.
EVs
It was attracting companies. It
was economic development
opportunity.
Right, and they're outrageously
successful at it.
So what's happening? What, what
do we do for New Mexico. A,
we've got to stop thinking about
the EV world of yesterday.
As we try and roll out the world
of tomorrow.
Or shooting in a moving target.
If we shoot where the target is
today, we're going to miss.
And that's what we're doing, I'm
afraid.
We've got to shoot for
the target's going to be.
One of the biggest users of, of
EV equipment in the country or
the oil companies.
They're just trying to reduce
their own costs.
They, they're very supportive.
They just haven't invested in
the industry yet, but they have
invested uh in, in themselves.
Decarbonization is going to be
crucial.
And we have, you haven't heard
anybody or I haven't heard
anybody in New Mexico talk much
about industrial.
Decarbonization.
We talked about EVs, but we
don't talk about industrial
decarbonization and even more
important for New Mexico. We
don't talk about agricultural.
Decarbonization there's huge
opportunity.
In in both of these spaces, and
again, I don't think we've
addressed it yet because
We're focusing on cars.
But if you look at uh the 11 of
the gentlemen this morning
talked about Peterbilt.
Um, the, the, the Mercedes
division, the big truck
division, um.
Can't remember what it is, but
they, they, they're, they're all
the EVs, so we had
We had a demonstration in
Georgia at, at, at.
At the
Second largest port.
The port of Savannah is the 2nd
largest port in the United
States.
We had a demonstration at, at a
site that they that we put in
there that will ultimately be.
20 light duty vehicles and 10.
And chargers for heavy duty
vehicles, semis.
We brought in a demonstration
and they sold 2 semis, electric
semis, at that demonstration
while we did this demonstration
at the port of Savannah. What
are we doing in Santa Teresa?
Who's thinking about charging.
tractor trailers in New Mexico.
They were a huge component of
the, of the, the pollution that
comes out of Mexico.
But everybody is coming, all the
major truck manufacturers are
coming out with electric semis.
Teslas is, I don't know if
they're selling it yet, but
they've certainly announced that
others are selling it too. We
have, we have a huge opportunity
if we installed significant
charging capacity at Santa
Teresa. I've tried, I've talked
probably 6 or 8 different people
at Santa Teresa. No one's in
charge.
I don't know who to talk to. I
haven't been able to figure it
out.
On and or cause we would, we
would go to Senate 3 cents,
start installing chargers. I
again, I don't, I don't know how
to do it, but that's, that's my
frustration.
We are focusing heavily on
agricultural charging.
Industrial charging. We're at 7
ports around the country. Some
of, some of that uh is for dr
equipment, just how do you move
stuff around the port?
OK, um, some of it is, is like,
uh, a 60 ton forklift.
OK, those should be electrified.
It's cheaper and they last
longer.
Uh,
so Pors are, ports are a major
opportunity for us, uh, and,
and, and so we're, we're, we're
doing everything we can to be
able to, to, to meet.
Um, the requirements of those.
places that you don't normally
think of.
Um
New Mexico has a real
opportunity.
Because while we hear about
California doing a lot in this
space that it it they're not
doing it right and they're
already stuck with an installed
base that's that's partially
obsolete.
We haven't done much yet. We
really do have an opportunity to
lead the country, but we have to
take risks.
You can't predict the future.
You can get guidance.
But you have to be willing to
take risks and maybe make some
mistakes, you hope don't want to
make core mistakes, but you can
make mistakes on the periphery
and not have it impact you.
Um
CNM is, is, is good at at
The incentives that they're
creating.
They're they're doing a terrific
job.
I think El Paso Electric for the
whole southern that the cruises
and the other part of the states
is doing an OK job.
Doesn't have as much incentive
as PNM does.
Uh, but they're interested.
We've talked to both.
Um
There's a lot that needs to be
done. I don't know exactly what
it is to be done.
But there are opportunities if
we can can come up with a long
term vision and then probably
create a public-private
partnership rather than rather
than letting bureaucrats make
decisions.
Because the bureaucrats, I've
had just personally in the
various businesses that I do.
I've had too many experiences
with the legislature does his
job, passes.
Uh, a law and the bureaucrats
end up changing it, so it's not
as effective.
So to me, we got to get it out
of the hands of of the
bureaucrats if we're really
going to to to do it properly.
That's my personal bias.
That you guys have to deal with
every day more so than I do.
Um, so, so that's my theme.
Um
We, we
The important takeaway here is.
Don't target the past.
Margaret, where we're going to
be.
Form private doesn't have to do
with us, but form, you know.
Public-private partnerships and
make it really happen.
And it's got to be driven not
because not for environmental
reasons. There aren't enough
people who are
environmentalists.
Who will buy the EVs because it
saves the planet.
They'll buy it because it's fun
to drive because they save
money.
And so we have to position it.
In that way, the farmers,
they'll buy the agricultural
equipment because they're going
to save money.
And, and they do.
And that's why Peter built and,
and, and
International harvest or they
still around and others like
those those big companies,
they're all creating electric
versions of their, of their
heavy equipment.
Um
And, and, and again, pay
attention to other than just
cars.
Um, we can see what other states
have done. We can see what it
looked like again, especially
look at Georgia, Tennessee,
North Carolina, they're way
ahead of the West.
OK. California has done it
oddly, but and and not really
successfully, um.
And crazy expensively.
But if you look at those
southeastern states.
You're you're gonna find that
there's significant.
Opportunity to copy and learn
from what they've done.
Uh, fleet management is going to
be important.
OK.
Help, help companies that have
fleets.
To to convert.
So, so those are my
General observations and and and
advice and I'm happy to take any
questions if anyone has any.
Represented Scott.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Rose.
Do you believe that this
technology
Will ever exist.
Without the need to consume
taxpayer dollars. Yes. Oh,
without question, and at what
point does that occur?
And what energy density.
Of battery technology does that
occur?
In most industries.
Mm
There's a, there's a period
where they are created and then
grow.
And
The establishment that's in
place will always say you can go
back to the railroads.
We always say we don't need
that.
Because what we have is OK.
Um
And I don't know exactly where
the critical mass is.
That where when we convert from
Uh, I
To
TV
Uh, but it's all gonna be
driven.
As Representative Harper said
earlier, it's all going to be
driven by battery technology.
US representative or Scott
earlier
about the weight of the
vehicles.
And, and that's going to be
impacted by battery technology
too.
Um, and, and also what, what
hasn't been recognized here is
that there's now a
That there's been a dramatic not
obvious change in the technology
of tires.
That are used on EVs.
And they are now.
Not where we need to be yet, but
they're having significant
impact on reducing this new tire
technology on reducing the
impact on, on the, on the
highways of these heavier,
heavier vehicles. So I'm sorry,
I can't answer your question
exactly.
Um, but
It, it, the
I know the technology space is
changing so dramatically and,
and it's not gonna be too long,
10 years.
Oh
Madam Chair, sir, I
I have to disagree. I've heard.
This technology compared.
To the electronics right right.
Revolution, if you will.
What was Moore's law that
processing power doubled every.
3 years
7 years, 2 or 3, I think, yeah.
3 years I think and that
circumstance is not in evidence
with battery technology, and in
fact,
Those improvements have actually
started.
Plateau
Now right now we are having.
The pay consumers.
To adopt this technology.
Sooner or later.
That process has to stop.
These have to be able to stand
up.
In, in the court.
Of competition and be
competitive and nobody.
It's
That's made any presentations
today.
Will make any pre we'll make
any.
Representation that that day is
coming.
Everybody
That's more money.
Matt, uh, Madam Chair
representative Scott, I could
give you an example of a company
right now. It's based in New
Mexico that's gonna change it.
It's a company called Flow
Aluminum.
And what they're doing is using
aluminum, aluminum, and carbon
dioxide.
To make batteries
They're lightweight.
And they have more energy
density.
At this point they've
demonstrated that they work and
their challenge right now is to
scale up manufacturing, but the,
the potential opportunity there
is outrageous.
Well, what's required?
At least from what I've read.
is we need to go.
Uh
Maybe not an order of magnitude
improvement, but certainly a 3
to 4 x order of improvement.
Or this stuff to be economically
viable.
And right now
Nobody is predicting that that's
on the horizon in a 5-year, 10
year, or 15-year period.
So
Yeah.
One of these days, one of these
days.
This body
We'll have to recognize.
That that technology needs to be
able to compete.
And needs to be able to compete.
Without taxpayer dollars on it.
Madam Chair Representative
Scott, I agree completely.
You'll see that in 2026, Toyota
has announced they're going to
introduce a car with 750 mile
range using new battery
technology.
2026, only two years away, 1
year and a half, maybe. I don't
know the timing, but it's
coming.
And, and yes, it's not out there
yet.
All right, but it and you're
absolutely right, it should not
need taxpayer dollars. It needs
taxpayer dollars to launch.
To do this research.
And to create the market
opportunity, but it doesn't, it
won't need it forever, Madam
Chair, we've been launching
this.
stuff now for 15 years.
Yeah.
Or maybe longer.
Perhaps it's time for it to fly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, sir, for your answers very
informative.
Representative Harper.
chair and uh
Doctor Rose, thank you for your
presentation. Um, and I'll, and
I'll just first thank uh
Representative Scott for his,
his comments. Um, I, I can maybe
speak a little bit to it, um,
because I've been
Studying this for the last
couple of years before deciding
to buy a car or not, but
Um, the energy density for our
best batteries right now.
It is about 100 times less.
And the energy density of
gasoline.
Right, so when you think about
the size of your gas tank in
your car versus the size of an
EV and the respective range,
right? That kind of makes sense.
And that's really kind of the
I'll say the, the, the opening
threshold energy density that
has allowed electric vehicles to
become a thing.
Um
And, and I also say, um,
Uh, you know, as a dabbling
electrochemist, um,
We really need a eureka moment
in energy storage technology.
Batteries today are essentially
what Volta invented back in the
1800s, we just have better
materials.
Um, but they essentially do the
The exact same thing. So, so a
eureka moment will eventually
happen.
Um, uh, but
I guess I, I don't think we
quite need that eureka moment to
get to the point where we don't
need to fund, uh, subsidize it.
Um, and I really appreciate what
the tax committee did, um,
Last year with the
New Mexico incentives.
So we now have in New Mexico.
EV incentive charger and fast
charger, um, incentive. They
actually phase.
Out
Over
About a decade, um, so the
first.
Um, you.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, that, that
may be true, but I love how we
structured it, um, because that
makes sense to me, like right
now, solar panels.
Um
Of significantly lowered in
cost, and it now makes sense to
buy them outright. You'll get a
return on your investment in
about 10 years.
So do we really need to be
continuing incentivizing those
it's probably about time to
start phasing those out.
Um, but I appreciate that we
built.
Our state EV tax credit that
way.
Um, that it, that it phases out,
um, and then maybe another quick
comment, um, just talking about
the weight of the vehicles.
Um
I'm
Fascinated, you know, the, the
car that I got.
weighs 10 pounds more than the
BMW 3 series that I could go and
buy right now.
So they're
Yeah, they're, they're heavy,
but it's not like they're.
Like twice the
The weight of a car, uh, a
regular ice car going down the
road.
Um
So, anyway, just a
Couple of thoughts, um.
So, uh, Madam Chair and Doctor
Ross, thank you for your, your,
your presentation. I guess just
maybe one conceptual question.
I, I love that you are saying we
need to be
Looking at where we want to be
in the future and not trying to
Make up for the past or be, you
know, target where we're at
right now.
Um, I feel like we often do that
here, not on purpose. We're just
trying to do the best we, we
can, um.
I, I think one example of that
is broadband or
We're, we're spending a lot of
money putting fiber in the
ground and in 5 years, we're all
going to be getting our internet
and cell phone coverage from
satellite, um.
So, we probably could buy every
New Mexican a
Subscription and a broadband
satellite for less than the
price of we're spending on
fiber.
Um,
But that said, kind of where I,
I know this is a hard question
to answer because I'm asking you
to look in the crystal ball.
But as policymakers, as we're
looking at trying to roll out
this infrastructure in the best
way possible.
Realizing there's real needs,
health care and education that
makes up the biggest portion of
our state budget.
Um, what
Counsel would you have as we try
to roll out smartly.
Um, this new infrastructure.
I, I think
What I would do
Is not focus as much.
On, on the consumer.
I, I'd focus on.
Corporate electrification.
It's easier
It's easier to understand.
Where
Um, where the impact can be.
It's easier to talk to the
people, they don't get
emotional.
OK, they just fundamentally look
at
The numbers
And, and
And so if you started with.
The agricultural of farmers.
And some of the
manufacturing companies and got
them to electrify.
The consumer will follow.
Instead of trying to get this
massive emotional consumer
group.
Aligned to move in the same
direction.
So I think that's what I
Fascinating.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Nix is
Representative a comment that he
and others, you know, he's not
alone, so I'm not, you know, I'm
not picking on him.
Um, bring up this issue about
how much we're investing in.
like, you know, electrifying the
the country and um points to the
fact, well, we're not self,
they're not self sustaining yet,
and you know, when is are they
going to be self sustaining and
all these kinds of points, all
legitimate points, but.
And if we were just purely
thinking of this as a
capitalistic endeavor, you'd
say, OK, well, you know, show us
the beef, it's, it's a
capitalistic, but it's not just
a capitalistic endeavor.
So we shouldn't be analyzing it
just like it's a capitalistic
endeavor. We are working on
trying to save the planet, you
know, and I like.
Sorry to be a little dramatic
with that, but we know that we
need to lower our our carbon
emissions, that's clear.
Most of us, um.
And so we're investing in
lowering our carbon emissions,
not just a capitalistic
endeavor, um, and I'd also point
out, you know, the, the oil and
gas industry get all kinds of
subsidies from us, I mean, you
know, just we had that
controversy with the stripper
wells, who should pay for
cleaning up the, you know, the
messes that they what we invest
in those guys all the time.
And so you know, I to say that
we're just doing this with
regard to electrification is,
you know, only talking about
half of the story or or just one
segment of the story, so, you
know, keep in mind there's a
public policy we're pursuing
pursuing besides propping up an
industry, it is helping the
planet and we're trying to get
them, get us all moving in that
direction, and I'm pleased to
see that there's much more buy
in to that as a concept, and
maybe there was even 5 years
ago, so all of that's good. So I
just.
That's my kind of reply when
they say, well, show me when
they're gonna be
self-sustaining. Well, OK, we
need to think about that, but
you know, in the interim, we
need to keep pushing it, so
that's all I have to say. Thank
you. Thank you for listening,
presenter.
Thank you, Representative. I was
gonna say the same thing, but
different words, but I, I had to
do that on probably nicer,
probably nicer
thing on Tuesday when we were
talking about renewables, but
same, his partner, um, anyway,
thank you, um, I have to tell
you these two gentlemen, last
two presenters I met during my
installation of my home charger
and um when we discussed um
charging at uminrock. I, I just
got my car and and I charged it
here and it was like 30 cents a
k.
And then I went to different
charging station, and it was
just crazy more and um nothing I
was expecting cause it was all
new and uh so I called his
company and like I said, you
know, why is it we're trying to
get people to use EVs and your
charging station is so expensive
and it's his um person came on
and then it let it led me to
speaking to him. So that's why
he's here because he has these
great ideas and he's brilliant
and uh Mr. um Rose and the Rose,
right?
in the back also guided me to
get shots, OK, these two guys,
um, they have been part of my
life in this electric vehicle
struggle, but um adventure,
yeah, journey, OK, but thank you
both. I appreciate you both
coming and we've learned a lot
from both of you and um this is
a new area we have to get better
at, and I think we will, and um.
Whatever we do, we have to like
representative Chandler said
it's about our planet and our
kids and our grandkids and our
future, and this is just one pig
in that, in
um, movement, so thank you so
much. I appreciate you. Thank
you.
person
All right.
last presenter.
Um, New Mexico alternative fuels
strategies, making the most of
the federal tax credit.
Program.
Um, welcome.
My Halloween costume is bad
ninja.
Oh.
Takes me a minute to get
settled. I had shoulder surgery
on Monday. Well, not this
Monday, Friday.
Well, thank you for being here
and whenever you're ready.
Sure
Um, we're gonna attempt to, this
is an animated, uh, PowerPoint
and so we're gonna attempt to.
Not that exciting.
Um,
I'm gonna follow along here so I
can hopefully see what you're
seeing. Um, so my name is Pucker
and I'm the director of the
Energy Conservation and
Management division over at
Ener, um.
We tweaked our acronym slightly
because we're so much more
public now, so instead of ECMD,
you're gonna start to see ecam a
lot more, and that's just our.
Hope to be recognizable on the
side of a bus as we have to do a
lot more outreach.
Um, and a couple of comments
before I plunge in on what we're
doing on the state side, um,
from the prior presentations,
um, we are about to try to
develop a transportation
decarbonization roadmap to bring
together a lot of these
disparate voices that you've
been hearing.
Um, modeling off of a building
decarbonization roadmap that we
completed this summer.
Um, I don't know if any of your
presenters have mentioned smart
grids or um grid management or
the batteries that EVs bring,
but.
Put that in the room. Um,
gasoline sales don't make profit
either. They make their money
off of the Doritos, as we all
know.
Um, we are about to enter into a
partnership possibly with Flow
Aluminum also, and that's
another conversation and again
to representative Scott's
question about the Chargers, I
would.
Point out that I think the issue
is less about battery density
and more about a charging
network. In other words, if you
look at your cell phone, you
don't really think about the
charging density of your cell
phone, you think about, well,
where's the nearest plug?
Until plugs are as ubiquitous
for cars as they are for cell
phones. I think it's a charging
challenge that last a battery
challenges. Um, all right.
Next
I'm gonna say next slide, I'm
just gonna say next. So we are
in the middle of a just
transition strategy over at
ECAM, um, there's lots of
support available right now in
the form of loans, grants from
the IRA, grants from the BIL,
which primarily is what my
division does is pursue and then
flow through the.
On division, but primarily, um,
and tax credits and some other
financing. So we have this, this
cornucopia of opportunities and
we're trying to be strategic
about how to deploy them. So
we're generally thinking in two
phases. Um, the first phase is
funded mostly by grants. These
are mostly federal grants, the
targets in the household world
is the low income households and
in the business world, it's in
supporting newer technology, as
we discussed, um, and the goal
of phase one is to really, by
the time we've spent down on the
grant money to wind up with a
buff workforce and a really fat
slowing, flowing supply chain in
New Mexico.
Next
See if this works.
Good. And then phase two, I will
be funded more out of loans and
tax incentives, um, and some
other, you know, interest rate
buydowns and some of the
creative financing, the target,
uh, households is more moderate
income, the target in the
business and industry world is
more about expansion and
implementation of the new tech
and the goal for phase 2 is a
wider distribution and something
that we as a state can sustain
fiscally prudently for decades.
Um
And next, you may notice the
phases.
Can and will and already are
overlapping a little bit.
Um, next,
So challenges New Mexico faces
in terms of EV adoption, and
I'll just preface this by saying
I know that you're, you're
focusing on EVs today, um.
There is sort of two
conversations. One is about EVs,
the other sort of moving about
moving cars, there's another
conversation which is really
about moving people. And they're
not always the same here in New
Mexico in a rural state, yes,
moving people usually equates to
moving cars, but not always.
Um, but if we're going to
restrict the conversation to
just cars, some of the
challenges we face, um, next.
is we have a we're a poorer
state. We have lower incomes and
so that's a smaller market for
new cars.
Um, so next.
Solution that we can look at is
to focus also on the used
secondary market for EBs as you
did with the smartly crafted EV
tax credit or clean car tax
credit. Next.
You're fast. Thank you.
There's also what we call
newness hesitant hesitancy.
Obviously it's a new technology.
There's lots of questions, a car
is has to be reliable and
central to someone's household,
so how do we get over the
newness hesitancy, uh, next.
Um, and we are hoping to as eCAM
as a state agency, be a provider
of neutral, reliable, factual
information, no spin, we're not
in the game to make money one
way or the other. And we have
launched a new website, Clean
Energy.nm.gov, which is.
Our one stop shop, um.
Re-clearing house website, um,
funded in part by an
appropriation from the
legislature. Thank you very
much, um, which is to help New
Mexicans navigate.
All of this, including EVs.
Um, next.
Obviously there's a a range
challenge we just talked about
this with high windshield miles
in New Mexico and a solution for
that could be next.
Chargers, charges, chargers, and
sign it to the chargers.
Um, next slide
Continuing some of the
challenges that we face in New
Mexico with the adoption is
next.
Uh, service, so as you know, EVs
require less service, but they
still require some service every
now and then or something goes
awry, um.
But, yes.
They require less service, but
it can be far to the nearest
dealership and we also may have
a loss of auto shop jobs. I'm
sure you've seen.
Pretty much in every small town
in New Mexico, there is an auto
body parts or an auto mechanic
shop, and we want to make sure
as we do this transition that we
take care of those folks in
those jobs in those small
businesses and don't leave them
out.
Um, so solutions next is uh
supporting dealers and also
really focusing on the workforce
transition, which you'll hear
more about later.
Um, next
Another challenge is, as you
heard about our grid edge is not
ready, uh, flowing that many
electrons all the way to the end
of the grid to the end of a
cul-de-sac, something that our
grid is not ready for. I
actually just testified this
morning at a PRC hearing about
this very topic, um, and so
that.
Things we could do would be to
support grid modernization
efforts, which this legislature
has done, um, via legislation
and the PRC and some of the
other um statutes that you've
put in place, um, next, yes,
being proactive with the grid
build out, um, and thinking
about the rates that we that
we're charging for customers,
and I'm just added a little note
here. Let's not forget our
co-ops in this whole
conversation.
Um, in our favor here in New
Mexico in terms of the EV
transition, um, we do have,
yeah.
High home ownership, even among
low income proportionately to
other states, which does lend
itself to at-home charging, even
though that's.
Um
Not going to be the solution for
everyone.
And next.
Yes, so home charging is a real
option. Also in our favor.
liquor. It's low electricity
rates in New Mexico compared to
other states, um, meaning next,
you all is cheaper than gas. I
drove here in my electric car
and I participate in P&M's
overnight charging program and I
commute back and forth from
Albuquerque and I fill it up
every night for $3.
Um, so what we're doing in this
office next is focusing on those
two things on the home charging,
especially also including
multifamily and the
Cost of ownership is cheaper.
OK.
Moving on, we have lots of
resources, as you know, and I'll
walk you through some of them,
some of them came from you also.
I'll know what they are and I'll
go quickly, but some of them are
from the IRA or the BIL, um.
Yes, so I'll walk through, uh,
this is just that we have about
35 different programs over um
e-camp, 2 more I got added this
morning and we won 2 grants
already this week.
Um
And this is the subsection of
programs that are connected in
some way to EVs that can be to
Evie's directly and clean cars
directly and also to the grid
and the charging that's needed,
um.
So we have
N
Um
Uh, aloneon of a federal energy
efficiency revolving loan fund,
um, which can include.
Uh, upgrades for your home
panels, that's 5.4 million and
we hope to revolve that fund
many, many times over, so it'll
be 5.4, 10.8.
162 etc.
Uh, you're eligible if you are a
homeowner or a building owner,
so it's fairly broad, um, and
then going to workforce, we have
ongoing sustainable education
for advanced buildings, uh,
federal grant. This is to, uh,
train folks like my friend Bob
back here and upgraded um.
Building codes that is up and
running in those classes are
available right now.
Um, next, please.
Um, then we have acronym City.
We have EECBG, the energy
efficiency and conservation
block grants. Um, this is
federal funding for large
variety of energy efficiency
improvement. Again, it can be
used to help.
Uh, buildings upgrade their
panels for EV charging,
including municipal projects,
government projects, and
multi-family as well. It's
fairly broad.
Um, that's 1.7 million, it's
already allocated, uh, hopefully
we'll get another batch of it.
And then it's allocated cuz we
bundled it with the C grant
coming from this legislature of
10 million, um, and you know
what that is about, um, and
where you that also will help
upgrade the buildings so that
they can charge more. Um, next.
Both of those are allocated and
out the door and the need is
high, so hopefully you'll will
consider a second round of seed,
perhaps.
Um, next, yeah, 3 or 4, there's
now on the grid side of things,
this is a federal grant which we
supplied a match for, um, we
supply about 1.7 million a year
depending on the legislature and
uh the feds matched that at
about 7 million. So if we invest
1.7, they give us 7 and change.
Up till now we've accumulated
about 14 million, and this is to
help the utilities upgrade the
grid, um, not only to make it
buff for EVs, but also to do.
things like prevent wildfires.
Um, next,
Allocated around were rounds 2
and 3 are.
Uh
In process.
Um, and then these are.
These two grants, sister grants
are the federal home rebates
programs. This is a really great
grant program. They total about
87 million total, and it is for
discounts at the register for
low income folk to do home
efficiency and home
electrification, and that can
include upgrades for EVs, um,
next.
Very proud that we were the
first state to apply for both
programs, and we were the first
state to launch retail. Um, we
launched in Lowe's on September
3rd and yesterday added Home
Depot and there's more retailers
coming down the line, so we
should be very proud. um, this
means New Mexicans can apply
online at that website that I
mentioned, they wind up with the
coupon on their cell phone, they
can pick out their, their
insulation or their electrical
wiring for their EP, go to the
register it loads and get.
800
$16,008,000 off what they're
purchasing.
They're significant.
Um, next
Upcoming, uh, EV related grants,
these are in the pipeline. These
are both.
Uh, workforce grants to trek
grants. One is Formula what is
competitive. They're both
training for residential energy
contractors like our friends,
bullfrog friends, um, the first
is for 1.5 million, the second
is for 2 million. They do the
same thing and help train our
workforce to do all its
installation.
Next
Uh, then this is an existing tax
credit. I'm moving into tax
credits now, so we're moving
into phase two. You all are
familiar with this one. It's up
and running right now, the state
sustainable building tax credit.
It's really too tax credits in
11 is for energy conserving
products like heat pump, um, he
pump water heaters, etc. and the
other is for commercial
renovation or new construction
projects, and EV readiness is.
Uh allowable in both of those.
Next, please, thank you.
Um, and then the, oh.
Mm
OK.
Ended up hold that red freight,
hold that, that didn't appear
here. It's going to appear on
the next one. The next.
Yes. And then the EB tax credit,
I don't think I need to spend
time going over that other than,
uh, we opened the portal. My
office is the one administering
that, and we opened the portal a
few weeks ago, um, and the red.
Uh, lettering was supposed to be
on here. We've got 63
applications already that we are
approving out the door. It's
about.
40-ish cars and.
In the teens amount of chargers.
No level 3 chargers yet.
But it is $25,000 tax credit for
level 3 charges.
Um
Oh, there it is.
Those are old.
It's every day it's updated, so
it's up to about 60 applications
now.
Um
I will note that if you go to
next.
Oh, yes, so we in collaboration
with Thaksin Rev and with MVD,
we innovated a way to do that
transfer of that text credit
effectively at the point of sale
in the dealership. So if
The car dealer is willing, they
can effectively offer and on the
hood discount. Um, I'm very
proud of that work that we did
with the agencies. I think it's
really important because going
back to different incomes and
who can afford a car. This opens
up, um, EV affordability to
moderate and lower income
households as well because they
don't have to front the money
and then wait for tax time.
Um, next
And next
And this may open the door, this
structure may open the door, um,
to kind of other point of sale
discounts in the future via a
tax credit mechanism, um, if we
so choose. And I think that's
pretty important. Next.
Yes.
OK, and then you are aware next.
Of the federal tax credit, which
can be stacked with our state
tax credit for EVs.
Not gonna spend time on that
one, you know it. Um, and next,
moving on to my last sort of,
well, last financing side is
other financing, um, there is a
need for to help folks when they
have to front money, so when
they, um.
Might be eligible for a tax
credit but can't afford it
upfront. They could their way to
get a green loan or something
similar. So my office is
actively issued an RFP to
partner with a sort of green
financial entity to help the
whole spectrum, everyone from
individual homeowners all the
way up to commercial fleets and
everything in between, because
we don't exactly have a green
bank per se in the city of New
Mexico at the, at the moment,
and we really could use some
help with green financing.
Um, and they could do other
things like offer low interest
loans, interest rate buydowns,
loan loss reserves, addition.
Um
Next
This has taken a lot of
collaboration and I won't read
the list, but we work, my office
works actively with all those
other agencies and as well as a
lot of non-government folk as
well and doing this transition
to decarbonized fleet.
Next
And we have 3 strategies, um, I
spoke about our outreach and
marketing about slightly
changing our name to Ecam so
that it's a little easier for
customers to remember and find
us since we are so much more.
Front facing now, um, #2 is we
are looking at an RFP right now
to bring on a fleet of what
we're calling energy coaches to
help anyone, whether it's a
homeowner or a business, um,
navigate what they can do when
they should do it, what order
they should do it in, and how
are the different ways that they
could pay for it. So it's a
different answer if you are a
low income New Mexican in
Clovis, or if you are a, you
know, battery recycling plant.
in Carlsbad, very different,
what you're eligible for.
Um, and number 3, I talked about
the website, um, which is up and
running at the moment.
Um, next, that's just the.
The page on the website of the
Clean car incentives and
rebates. This is where
constituents go to apply for the
clean car tax credit and also
all of the other programs I just
talked about are here.
And next
I just want to point out this
has taken a lot of growth, so
this is my staff growth, um,
from last year to this year, we
went from.
27 to 44. Most of those are, are
big chunk of them are funded out
of federal grants and which are
only going to last for 3 or 4
years, so we might fall off a
cliff soon.
Something I'm thinking about.
Um, and next, I'll just leave
you with this slide of the
growth in what we have been
managing dollars under
management from my agency from
last year to this year, um,
next.
We're current, depending on how
you count, we're currently
managing about $776 million in
some form of green incentive.
And that concludes my
presentation.
Thank you. Do we have any
questions?
Charity leader Chasey, thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
very much. I'm sorry I missed
part of this. I'm.
I'm attending two committees.
You were looking for someone to
help finance, and I'm wondering.
Because I've heard of their
work, but I don't know exactly
the scope of it, the green
chamber of commerce. Would that
be a, a likely partner here.
Um, chair, Senator, Green
chambers of commerce are
absolutely allies, um, they tend
to focus on businesses that are
doing green or sustainable work
or how to help businesses do
work in green or sustainable
ways, um, what we need is a
source of capital that can front
money, make green loans to say a
a New Mexican who needs a loan
to buy an EV, um, but maybe they
could get it out of a much lower
interest rate because the goal
of a green bank, of course, is
not to.
Just make pure profit, their
goal is perhaps to lower carbon
emissions or uh help clean
indoor air or things like that.
I see. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Madam Chair.
Um, uh, Representative Harper.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Msta, thank you for coming and
presenting um.
I, I really liked seeing kind of
the entire portfolio, uh, uh.
Instead of just little pieces
here and there, yeah, um.
Yeah, and, and my answer my this
might already answer my, my
first question, but, uh, Madam
Chair and Mr.
Usually our tax credits are
managed by TRD.
Not through
A nerd
Um, so can you maybe just talk a
little bit about that. I mean,
obviously there's some thought
to which department would manage
these.
Sure, Chair and Representative,
it's, they're still managed by
TRD, however, per statute, um.
Emner is under direction to
certify that the purchase meets
the requirements in law, so we
take a look at the purchase, you
know, is it an EV? Does it meet
the requirements laid out in the
statute. So we look at the whole
transaction. And if it is
eligible, then, then we issue a
certificate that that, um,
taxpayer could then take two TRD
and file alongside their taxes
and get the tax credit at that
time.
Yeah, it's a two-step.
process.
Yeah, I'm sure and, and my,
yeah, thank you, but.
Usually for a a tax credit.
And any individual business
doesn't stop by Emner first and
then go to TRD. They usually go
straight to TRD.
Um
When I, I'm talking about our
entire tax code, but there seems
to be a subset where the first
stop is M nerd and it I'm
guessing these are all um
environmental related.
OK. Yeah, representative, that's
correct, um, we have about 10
tax credits at the moment that
that it follow that pattern, and
I believe there are tax credits
in the state of New Mexico that
follow that pattern, for
example, the film tax credits
make a stop at the film office
through EDB, uh, to be certified
and to have all the fine print
checked.
Before it rolls over to TRD.
Yeah, thank you, ma'am.
Ja and must there for that, um.
And then, uh, maybe just a
clarifying question here for the
sustainable building tax credit
there are several things listed
here. At the bottom is, you
know, making a home or building
electric vehicle ready?
Mhm. Can you maybe talk about
the difference between that and
like installing a charger like
what what what's the difference
or the
representative, it essentially
means, uh,
Installing wiring behind the
wall that is sturdy enough so
that someone could subsequently
come and install a charger.
Basically exactly the same as
what is done to create a dryer
plug. Yeah.
OK.
Um
So, so Madam Chairman there, so
it'd be.
to say that, um.
You know, if someone is putting
in the wire as part of an
installation.
That portion could be eligible
for the sustainable building tax
credit.
Chair and representative, that's
correct.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Mr.
OK, now, um,
You
There is a nice new website.
And there's been about 25
applications for cars and
fighter chargers.
60
60
This was written a few days ago.
So now.
So
So I am one of each.
Um, so I sat down a couple of
weeks ago.
On a Saturday
Thinking I needed about a half
hour to apply for both these
credits.
Three frustrating hours later, I
was done.
And
2 days ago, I got my first
rejection notice.
And I'm a
PhD pretty capable of filling
out forms, um.
So I'm actually pretty concerned
with
How that that's been rolling
out.
Um
And, and I even pulled up the
statue just to make sure that
the website wasn't asking for
things that were not in the
statute.
Um, like, for example, the the
charge, uh, the, the car.
One asks for a copy of the
window sticker.
Um
You know, it has all the specs
of the car, right? Well,
Tesla doesn't do window
stickers.
So I put a little statement
there it says Tesla doesn't do
well no stickers. Uploaded that
in the place that mandated that
I upload a Windows sticker
before I could click next.
Um
And my charger was rejected
because
The spec that I uploaded, didn't
include.
What kind of connector it was
and the serial number of the
charger.
And
And I'm
Went through the statute and
sure enough it asked us to put
the serial number of that
charger and I'm just.
They can some.
One that is not as
Capable is just gonna get super
frustrated and we're gonna have
a bunch of people that are not
taking advantage.
How can you have the serial
number if you haven't bought it
or did you buy it? Madam Chair,
I bought it. It's installed.
It's OK. Yeah, but I thought
this was OK.
Yeah
I'm used to.
Right. Chair and representative,
I appreciate your, your feedback
and then welcome it. This is new
for all of us, including
everything all the way down from
writing the statute to doing the
rules to our IT department,
which is that this is new for
everyone and I'm hiring new
staff to do it, so I appreciate
your feedback and if I can chat
with you afterwards to get
specifics, I would, I would
appreciate that. And of course
we're always, we're in the
position of trying to interpret
what you all have said in
statute and be fair, um.
Following the letter of the law,
and hopefully the spirit of of.
I don't know if it's generosity
or stinginess, which you would
like us to execute your
legislation, um, but that is
always the the conversation,
yes. Thank you for your
feedback. Yeah.
Um, Madam Chair and Mrs. Dett,
thank you for, for the offer to
help, um, yeah,
it's brand new. It's only been
live for 3 weeks, so I'm sure
there's hiccups. I appreciate
you, guinea pigging one or two
of them for us. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Thank you for your presentation.
Actually, uh, Representative, I
didn't have a problem, but just
to say I only have a master's.
I'm sorry, but
just.
Just joking. No, but I didn't I
don't know. Well, plus I had.
Back there, help, um.
So, uh
comes
As far as the heat pumps.
Are those, are those
Pretty, um
Easy to get through as far as
all the paperwork and everything
as far as getting a heat pump
and so it just says
installation, so you buy it and
then the installation is what's
given the chair I have about 15
different ways to help pay for
heat pumps, are you referring to
the sustainable building tax
credit or the here and her
rebates or sustainability
depending on it,
it's the cornucopia right now,
um.
