For your inner meeting here
today. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Brantley, thank you. I apologize
for that. OK.
All right, so, um, whenever
you're ready, we're gonna talk
about Spaceport America update.
Yeah, Madam Chair, thank you
very much. Um, our director of,
uh, uh, business development is
like coming up the stairs or the
elevator any minute. So could we
maybe wait for just a few
minutes?
Yes, we can. OK, thank you, and
I'll start then.
I'll go look for him.
Charging.
Mhm somebody's coming up, so he
asked if we could wait a second,
there he is.
He thanks he wasn't.
Hm
Oh yes, Stacy,
the one, yeah.
Sorry, we can get it later.
Here it comes.
t.
Mar
Heart attack. Thank you.
Mm
9 to 10.
You're right,
I was wrong that's for the one
at the end.
La.
That's a big. Yeah.
All right, whenever you're
ready, thank you. All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Scott McLaughlin. I'm
the executive director of
Spaceport America, uh, the
Mexico Space Port Authority, and
beside me is my uh director of
business development, Francisco
Peres.
So we have a, a presentation,
um, pretty comprehensive. I'll
try and go fast, but if you need
to ask questions, please go
ahead.
And I'm happy to take questions
at the end, of course. So, uh,
the first page or just some
activities that the space
partner last year on the left is
intuitive machines. This was a
company that came to the
spaceport and tested laser
technology for landing on the
moon, which they did later on
this year. It was the first
American object back on the moon
and since the Apollo days, in
the middle we've got Virgin
Galactic and on the right are
the Thunderbirds, which I'll
talk about more.
So, uh, I'm gonna give you an
activity review. We'll talk
about uh the capital projects
and, uh, and, um, then we'll go
over the um budget and then
business development.
On page
Um, for, here are some of the
activity. I'm sorry, I can't
control the slides, uh, but.
OK, so on page 4, let me run
over just a few of these things.
You'll see it's a pretty full um
list of things from the last
year, of course, Virgin Galactic
flu on June 8th. This was their
7th, uh, uh, commercial flight
in less than a year. I think it
was something on order 11.5
months.
Uh, we'll talk more about that.
We've been ramping up STEM
tours, so we've had a lot of
groups out at the spaceport, um,
high school, middle school. We
also visit middle schools in the
area, especially Las Cruces.
We've become a site for UAV
testing, so we've had quite a
few UAVs. It's because of the
restricted airspace of White
Sands missile range, so we work
closely with them. Um, over the
years, we've also done car
testing, so we have a company,
an electric car company that
we've been doing testing with,
so they've been using the
runway, they've done battery
testing.
So that's been an ongoing thing.
Uh, we're continuing to be a
site for uh photos and videos
and movies. We had at least one
of those, those are are good
revenue producers and and good
economic development in the
area.
Um, we're in the final process
of our master plan, so hopefully
next time I see you or or which
will probably be during the
legislative session. Some of you
I'll be able to discuss the
master plan. We're we're still
in kind of the final draft.
Um, a very significant thing is
the high altitude platform
systems, the, the haps, and we
have 3 developers out there, uh,
who have been testing this year
and for the first time we had
two of them in the air at the
same time, and part of the
reason that's significant is
because of the amount of work we
have to do with White Sands to
do that. We also work with White
Sands and the FAA because what
will happen is once they become
certified of a high enough
level, they're going to um
transition through the NAS, the
National Airspace System, get a
Above 60,000 ft and continue
testing above the black range.
Uh, and that's all been
carefully done with the FAA, and
they have to be certified
vehicles, but the, the plan is
that they will eventually become
what's called type certified and
at least one of those companies
is thinking of doing the
manufacturing in New Mexico, and
so I'll show you a picture of
that. These are actually
becoming more important.
In terms of their function,
because of what's happening in
space right now. There's some
something in the order of 7000
satellites in space right now,
and there's a significant
question about congestion and
what happens if uh satellites,
if there's a debris field, if we
get into a conflict and the
satellites are destroyed by the
Russians or somebody, and so
these HAP systems are now
becoming a focus of the
military. So 3 of the 3
companies we have there, 2 are
funded by the military, by DOD.
Um, see, skipping ahead, we, we
have the US Thunderbirds are
going to come back this year, so
this will be the 4th year, and
they're looking like they're
going to continue testing with
uh doing their winter training
with us for maybe 4 or 5 more
years. So, um, this, they also
extended a week, so they'll be
here an extra week so we'll get
that economic impact even
longer. I'll show you a picture
of our cellular telephone, so we
have a provider that leased land
and put in a cellular telephone.
Um, a big thing over the last 2
or 3 years, you've probably
heard me talk about New Mexico
space
with, with Doctor Paets we've
also extended our partnerships
with the Borderplex and the
middle Rio Grandeomic
Development Agency and others,
and what we're trying to do is
just cover a lot of territory.
Every time one of us goes to a
conference or a show, uh, we
bring the other person's
brochures. We also pass on leads
back and forth. So basically
working together to try and
build the whole economic area.
Uh, another thing is the CMMS,
the computerized maintenance
management software, so, um, if
you look at the spaceport, we,
we own and run the water utility
we own and run, you know,
maintain the roads, the fiber
optic, and the buildings that
are there. So by having a CMMS
we're now getting in a position
where I'll be able to come back
to you hopefully in a year and
tell you what it costs to
actually run the spaceport a
year in terms of the
maintenance, deferred
maintenance, and future
maintenance. That's something we
really don't have right now.
It's been kind of a
Uh, fix it when her breaks kind
of thing, but what I'm trying to
do is get my director of site
operations to give me a plan and
to do that, you have to catalog
everything. You have to figure
out where you are and it's
maintenance cycle. It's in the
use life cycle. So that's a big
thing for understanding the true
cost of the spaceport.
We did finish a vertical launch
rail, uh, which now again, Dr.
Piers is working to, to bring in
customers. Um, last year, uh,
the legislature voted for
a refurbishment of the GTS roof.
This is the large hangar, the
gateway to space hangar, so
we're in the process of of uh a
design RFP and then an actual
construction RFP. That was a big
enough roof and a high enough
dollar amount that GSD
recommended we, we cut it into a
phases. One is designed, one is
implementation.
Uh, I'll talk about, uh, the
meetings we've had with the
Regional Spaceport district, the
tax district, um, the Stark
Building, I'll talk about
reverse osmosis system. This was
the water quality out there is
not great. We're, you know,
we're not in a river valley.
We're in a substance valley and
the water is not great, so it's
been tearing up our fire trucks
and and other plumbing in the
site. So we're now going to have
a site-wide reverse osmosis
system. And um uh also last
year, um, the legislature
allowed me one more, uh, full
time.
Equivalent, so I could have a
capital improvements manager and
that is significantly picked up
in terms of our ability to spend
the capital improvement money
we've got from you, so, uh,
we're having an open house
September 8th. You are all
invited, um, and we're also
starting our FI23 economic
impact report. So I don't think
I'll have that by the session,
but I'll have it be able to talk
about next year.
So moving on to page 5, I think
everybody's interested in in
Virgin Galactic, of course, so
I, I recommend two sites, you'll
see the underlying sites there.
One is their normal investors
site and the one on the bottom,
their business model, Virgin
Galactic recently um
released a video on the business
model that works for the number
of carrier aircraft, the number
of spaceships and and
spaceports. They've said for a
long time now that their intent
is to move into other space
ports, so this business model
and capital
Its how the company works from a
high level, and I think it's
really worth watching.
Uh, the picture in the upper
right is the final, what they
call the delta final assembly
building in Mesa, Arizona. So
they, uh, you might remember
them talking about the Delta
class vehicles. So these were
vehicles based on the current
design, but designed to be made
much easier to maintain and
inspected and whereas the
current vehicle can fly about
every 3 weeks, this vehicle will
be able to fly every 3 days or
so, so, um, so the, the, they
call it the final assembly
building because a lot of the
parts are made in
various parts of the country and
then they're brought together
there. So, uh,
The plan for the new Delta
spaceships and is that sometime
in about a year, hopefully less
than a year, the one, the first
of those vehicles, the first of
the spaceships will be carrier
from Arizona to Spaceport. Um,
that will be a test in of
itself, and then it will undergo
testing here at the spaceport um
to kind of get recertified both
with Virgin Galactic's operating
safety plan and with the FAA.
And then the second spaceship
will arrive sometime also and in
the next maybe 6.
16 to 18 months. Then in FI 26,
or calendar year 26, I should
say that the intent is that they
would begin commercial
operations again, so, uh, so
we're in kind of a pause right
now with their operations. Um,
they're still doing other things
on site. They still have
employees, plenty of employees
in in the area. Um, the white,
the White Knight 2 carry
aircraft is still in the area
that they're working on and and
doing some work, getting ready
for it to be able to fly a
mission every 2 or 3 days also,
so, and the bottom right.
is a little piece of that
economic model where you, where
the plan is to have two
spaceships, one carrier
aircraft, which equates to 125
flights a year and 750
customers.
Uh, one kind of rule of thumb
and talking to VG is for every
one of their paying customers,
they get 10 to 20 friends and
family if they're just a paying
customer to fly. It's, it
sometimes is more if uh or less,
but also they have a payloads,
scientists who show up, they
also show up with 10 or 15
people. And if you were to do
that math, we're talking and,
you know, um, thousands, tens of
thousands of people who will be
in the Las Cruces truth or
consequences area per year. Um,
so this is a big
In terms of the total number of
room nights if you do some quick
math.
Um, the next page is.
Uh, also something that VGA
announced, which was their
expansion. So what they've
discovered in operating, this is
a picture of the southern part
of the runway. And if you look
at the runway, um, this is the
gray area.
Um, there's a what we call a
hammerhead or a turnaround. That
turnaround is where they've done
operations for fueling the
spaceship and, and then they
take the astronauts out and put
them in, and that's where they
take off from down the runway.
One of the problems though is
they do that outdoors. And so if
a little quick thunder shower
moves in or they get lightning
in the area, then they have to
stop operations. So they've
realized to be able to guarantee
that they can fly and do it in a
safe manner. They're going to
build what they call a launch
hanger, so that you'll see a
picture of three positions.
The one to the furthest to the
left is the one that they have,
we have signed a letter of
intent with. So that LOI is
stating that that area now is
reserved for them and we're now
in negotiations with him for a
lease, and that lease includes a
very significant amount of
acreage um to cover what's
called the hazard area for their
operations. Um, and they, they
have a hanger design that I
think they're probably at about
60% in terms of the design,
maybe a little higher, and they
will build that hangar with
their own money and
And so we expect to sign a lease
with them sometime in the, I
think the next 6 to 9 months and
then they will construct that
hangar so that will be their
hanger, uh, lease, so that's
going to be increased revenue
for us and and we're not
building to form the state of
New Mexico is not building for
them. They're building that
hangar. And the LOI also
includes the potential for two
mar hangers. That's why you see
two more hangers there.
So, um, big, big, big
development for us and, uh,
again, it's an inc it'll be an
increased revenue once it gets
up on operations. The other
thing to keep in mind is once VG
is operating literally 2 or 3
times over 7 or 10 day period is
they will have to staff up. So
although they did announce a
cutback last December, we expect
in the next 1 to 18 months there
will be a significant increase
to be able to handle both the
training of the astronauts,
maintaining two spaceships.
Uh, continuously. So this will,
again, why we're in a pause
right now, we expect big things
coming in the future.
So moving on, uh, page 7, here's
one of the Haps flyers.
Uh, this was a recent flight in
June. This is the size of a
football field, believe it or
not, the, the earlier design was
261 ft. This one is 300 ft
across and uh this is the one
that we're talking to about
potentially manufacturing in, in
New Mexico and you see a little
pod there in the middle that
that's surveillance pod, a
communications pod. So when
these things are in operation,
the idea is that they fly
between 60,000 80,000 ft
continuously for six months at a
time.
So Senator, I think what you're
going to start getting these
phone calls sometime next year
about weird things in the sky
hanging out for a long time. Um,
but, um, we, we've, we've gotten
some of that. This has 10
electric motors and then each of
the very large pods carries
batteries, so it's one of the
odder designs, but um they had a
good successful flying season
and they'll be back in March to
do more of that.
Moving on, here's a, on page 8,
here's a post from Instagram for
the US Thunderbirds. So, uh, um,
and you can see in the bottom
left, you can see a picture of
the runway. So this is one of
the things they put out to their
probably hundreds of thousands
if not millions of followers,
and they talk about being in New
Mexico. Um, they really like the
airspace. They really like the
spaceport as a place to train,
uh, Virgin Galactic has been
great to work with in terms of
figuring out how to schedule uh
around there, the needs of
virgin Galactic.
And the needs of the
Thunderbirds, but as you might
imagine, the Thunderbirds drink
a lot of fuel, and we have, you
know, our own fuel depot there.
So besides the, the temporary
rent and the in a huge economic
impact it's about 80 people for
3 weeks is what this will be in
the area. We get a lot of
revenue off the fuel as well,
so.
Uh, moving on, just a quick look
at our, uh, here's with the cell
tower, we also have put in a
what's called a low power FM.
So, uh, Low Power FM is like
when you're driving by a
national park and it tells you
to tune to a radio station, um,
or sometimes they're used for
safety reasons. And so what we
did is we, we were able to get a
license from the FCC and so this
uh this uh station, this radio
station which is 96.9. We will
use for a continuous broadcast.
you know, welcome to Spaceport
America, but during Virgin
Galactic flights during the
Spaceport America Cup or during
any safety event will take over
the broadcast and instruct
people where to go. And uh so
that was a big, a big safety
improvement for us. If you go
forward one more page to page
10, you'll see the cell phone
tower and um there is, there are
no, there is no cell phone tower
in the entire basin there, the,
the closest cell phone tower is
on top of the Cabao Mountains to
the west. So, uh, a provider
came to us. We had been conte
trying to build our own tower
for a long time, but luckily a
provider came to us and said he
wanted to build a tower and he
would get carriers. So the first
carrier will be Verizon. We hope
either late this year or early
next year, and then after that,
what we hope T-Mobile will join
in. So this is gonna give uh
probably 5G internet service to
everybody in the basin there and
will give us a huge safety
margin in terms of being able to
handle large crowds and and
making sure everybody can get on
the cell phone. There, there are
plenty of areas out there where
ranchers
and hunters and our people
cannot get good cell phone
coverage, but this will light up
the whole valley.
On page 11, we had uh I think it
was the 6th or 5th Spaceport
America Cup. Um, this again was,
uh, every year is the big, the
bigger than the year before, so
this year was 1800 students from
around the world. Um, one thing
to keep in mind though is over
6000 participate, so there's at
least 66,000 people who become
familiar with Spaceport America
and become familiar with New
Mexico and um so it's a big
marketing for us, every one of
these people is a
customer and they go on to work
for companies that are going to
be customers.
We continued with the chili cup,
which was a special prize we we
made up for the local schools,
uh, between MSU, UTEP, New
Mexico Tech, and UNM and UNM won
this year. So, uh, we're talking
about me going somewhere to give
a special presentation to him
and uh we might do it on
aerospace day at the Capitol or
we might do something else, but
um it is competitive of those
four schools, they really do
want to win that.
So, uh,
OK, moving on.
And on page 12, you can see the
sponsors, so the, the putting on
the Spaceport America Cup is
expensive, and we get a lot of
sponsors now and what they're
doing is they're either
advertising their product to the
aerospace engineers or they're
recruiting those same engineers.
So, again, besides the 6000
people who become familiar with
New Mexico and Spaceport
America, these people are these
companies are also becoming
familiar, so.
All right, I'll move on to
capital improvements, uh, so
page 14.
So besides the ICIP requests
that we make and we also, uh,
when the spaceport was created,
there is a tax district, the
Spaceport America Regional
Spaceport District or what I
like to call just the regional
spaceport district.
So these are the, the uh tax,
GRT tax to pay off the bonds and
then of the excess pledged
revenue if, if the bond payment
has been successfully made that
year and there's excess pledged
revenue, then by statute the
Spaceport America, Spaceport
America gets to spend that
money. So, unfortunately, the,
the tax district has kind of
been slow to act in the last 3
years, so the money built up,
but finally this year they
released the $13.9 million and
uh for these three
Projects
And I'll talk about those uh
now. So on the next page, on
page 15.
So this is the spaceport
technology and reception center,
so the, the genesis of the stark
actually goes back something on
an order of 5 or 6 years and it
was two buildings were approved
by the legislature through the
ICIP. One was called an IT
center and another one is called
a reception center. When I took
over, I wanted to combine those.
I didn't understand why we were
having two separate buildings.
So we combine those and we put
them up front. Unfortunately,
that was during COVID times and
the construction costs went way
up, so
we thought was going to be a
$1000 building is now closer to
an $18 million building. So we
have the original $1000 from um
from the ICIP and then we got 8
million more from the tax
district, and I do have a
request in for 4 million more
for the ICIP um to kind of round
it off and to take care of any
other um issues with that
building. What it's going to be
built at the very front of the
spaceport and we'll provide a
stem area. Um, we have a, we
have cult
Environmental mitigation that is
currently inside of the gateway
to space where Virgin Galactic
operates. We would like to move
that out and put it more
accessible to the public in this
building, and we will have a
large room, something on the
order of this size to be able to
lease out for any meetings, host
any legislative meetings, but we
intend to make revenue on this
building too, so it will be a
revenue generator. It also be
the very first thing the cus
customers and the general public
see it's not designed to be a
visit.
Senator, Senator per se. We're,
we're not trying to turn it into
a visitor center where people
come there all the time. That's
why we call it a reception
center. This is where you're
going to get a badge or where
Virgin Galactic can come and
meet a customer, um,
Or a vendor and have a
conversation or when we like the
Habs fires I showed you,
sometimes they have 60 people on
site for one of their big
events, so we would lease them
part of this building so they'd
be able to do things in there.
This, this has a small kitchen.
It's not designed to be an like
an industrial kitchen, but it's
designed to be enough that that
plus a food truck and you might
be able to uh keep people fed
over a 24 hour period or a
couple of 24 hour periods
because that's what happens when
the, the haps, uh, planes fly is
that there is.
Usually for days on end
sometimes. Um, this building,
we're trying to, uh, if, if we
can afford it, put a roof deck,
so that would also be part of it
that when you show up on site,
you'll be able to go upstairs
and get a really good view of
the whole site, so, um, but
we're, we're almost there. Like
I said, we're only asking for 4
million more, and we did get the
tax district to fund us $8
million so the local community
is helping us as well.
Moving on to the next page 16,
uh, you know, we're, uh, we, we
deal with companies that are
always very early stage and
they're also moving very quick
and so what we've come to
understand is that our
facilities need to be as ready
to go as we can make them for
them to show up. So this is an
extension of road and utilities
all the way around the north
part of the runway. um, so we
can start accessing the east
side of the runway. So again,
this was paid for by the tax
district, so we're gonna.
get that going here pretty
quick.
And uh moving on to the next
page, page 17, the same thing
except it's now for the southern
part of the runway. So this
covers a part of the extension
needed for the Virgin Galactic
hangar, as well as the new
hangar we're building, so I
didn't mark it very well, but
on, on the lower right, um,
there's just a, a gray spot. So
that is a hanger that we have
funded. I'll show you a picture
of that in a minute. Uh, $100
hanger. Our current hangar that
we own, uh, small
is
At least about 90% of the time
now. So we get phone calls and
have conversations where we
don't have room to uh have a new
customer come who doesn't want
to be there permanently but
wants to come and go. So this
hanger on the the right side
will be that. And if you go to
the next page, page 18, you can
see what that looks like.
Um, so it's about a $200 hanger
and, and about $8 million worth
of concrete and infrastructure
that goes around that hangar.
Uh, but this is an example, um,
the, um,
Uh, US Air Force Thunderbirds
will probably use this, we'll
probably move them down there.
They, when they operate, they
need to be able to change out an
F-16 engine literally overnight,
so they want a closed space and
so a hanger to do that.
So,
OK, moving on to page 19 again
with our uh with our new uh
project manager we're much
better organized. We're spending
the money that you have so
graciously given us. And so here
is a quick snapshot of all the
projects we have ongoing right
now.
And I'm happy to talk about all
of them, some of them I have
talked about, but that's um
about 24 million, uh, that's
ongoing right now.
And then the next page is the
planned projects or projects
that were uh prioritizing some
uh the top 5 there, I believe,
are the ones we asked for in the
ICIP.
Um, but making sure we have a
plan going forward and, and once
the master plan I mentioned is
out, we'll blend our priorities
with what the recommendations
are from our contractor in terms
of a master plan.
All right, I'll move on to
budget.
So page 22.
So with, with VG's move toward
the Delta vehicles, one of the
things they announced now a
couple of different times was
that they're taking a pause in
their operations and their
flight operations, their space
operations. So as part of an
agreement we have with Virgin
Galactic, it goes back to 2018,
They can elect to reduce their
user, uh, what are called user
fees, so they elected to do that
and that will begin in the
middle of September, so
That will go from 188,000 to
50,000 and for this year, then
that turns into about 1.3
million for this year.
Um, what I am proposing, uh, we
haven't turned in our budget
yet. I think it's due today or
tomorrow, um, but what I'm
proposing is to split the the
delta of that, the, the red ink
that that creates with um the
legislature, and we will cover
half of that with our current
fund balance and we would ask
for the other half to be covered
by the legislature. That will
get us through uh this year and
it could get us through next
year, depending on when Virgin
Galactic leases the new space.
And when they begin operations
and the user fee goes back up.
Unfortunately, we can't predict
exactly when that will happen,
so that's why we're kind of
proposing that the legislator
help us a little bit, but that
will absorb also half of that
cost.
Um, for the general fund for FI
26, the guidance I've heard is
that we can ask for 3%, so of
course we have done that. I
think the 3% last year or even
the 3% this year doesn't quite
cover inflation, but our revenue
has been going up steadily, so
we're able to absorb that, um,
of course, I would be happy to
have more than 3%, but that's
what we're planning to ask for.
Um, and then a, a big request,
even though we're in kind of a
pause is for a STEM and
workforce coordinator. So my
goal with that is to hire a
certified teacher. I, I have a
classified position that I
found.
And I want to make that person
solely responsible for doing
our, our workforce and STEM
development, and that means
working with all of our
customers like Virgin Galactic,
the other folks working with the
local school districts, but
especially finding ways to
extend to the rest of the state.
We have a real hard time, you
know, helping folks in farming
in or Clovis in terms of their
high schools and doing any
outreach. Um, so this would
allow a person to start focusing
on curriculum and outreach
activities that might include
them.
Coming to the spaceport or it
might include us going there,
but the coordination and
logistics of doing that is
basically eating up almost 80%
of one of my employees' time.
Um, I'd like to get that
employee back working on the
other things they need to work
on and have this person be the
outreach coordinator. And the,
and the reason I wanted to be a
certified teacher is someone who
understands how the public
schools work and can interact
with other teachers to make sure
they're seeing eye to eye on how
to, how to, um, you know,
inspire.
These kids, um, so this is an
ask. I know it's another
full-time equivalent at a time
when maybe it looks like we're
not moving forward, but we're
moving forward actually pretty
fast and uh this will help us a
lot and I think help the
students in New Mexico a lot.
So on page 23, I have uh the
actuals from FY 24 going up to
the request for FI 26, um.
The line that's marked operating
revenue is, uh, actually the
customer revenue. It's listed in
the, the, the system in Santa Fe
is operating revenue because
that's the way most agencies
will look at it, but for us it's
actually our customer revenue.
And um the, you can see that uh
FY 25 drops over FY 25, uh,
because of the drop with VG but
FY 26, it starts to build up
again. Um, and
You should be getting quite a
bit higher after that. We, we
have several companies that were
trying to get signed in terms of
a lease and some of them are
here on a temporary basis, but
there's others that were waiting
for the state land office to to
finish up on a negotiation.
We've been a very long
negotiation with them on
updating the, the original lease
that goes back to 2006.
Unfortunately, this has been
taking a very long time. So we
have some sub leases that have
been sitting now for over a year
that we haven't been able to get
through the state land office
and we have a couple more that
are, that we're waiting to send
basically. Um, though, that will
help with the revenue and, and
being agile and quick has been
something we've been trying to
focus on our business director
then trying to focus on and this
has been a bit of a problem in
trying to get things through,
but I think we're close and so
we expect FI26 to actually
be a really good year if Fiji
stays on schedule, they will at
lease the new hangar. They'll be
starting operations at some
point that year and we will have
other tenants to sign that, that
ought to put us on the order of
I think 9 tenants, 9 permanent
tenants.
So, um,
OK, I think that's it for now.
Uh, so moving on to.
24, I think I'll let Dr.
Paes talk about business
development.
I chair members of the
subcommittee. How are you? My
name is Francisco Paares. I am
the director of business
development for Spaceport
America and in page 25, if, if
you'll allow me to, to walk you
a little bit through some of the
activity that we have going at
the spaceport. We're currently
in negotiations for a new solar
power data center that is going
to be locating at the spaceport,
potentially serving customers at
this pace for in itself but also
serving customers and in that
new movement that is related to
the, to the AI uh of things. So
the, the, there's a strong
interest on.
This company and locating at the
spaceport currently. So we,
we're currently in negotiations
with them. We also have ongoing
testing of a new drone air
glider that is serving um
agricultural purposes. So they
actually are testing currently
at our vertical launch area and
they constantly testing on it.
Uh, we're trying to convince
them to have a permanent basis,
they stay there for a long, long
period of time. So to have a
permanent basis at the spaceport
and it's a very interesting
technology that is applied for
agricultural operations and
And they're they're testing
right there at the spaceport.
We're also in plans, we're in
discussions with an additional
satellite communications ground
station that that will enhance
the connectivity and positioning
of the spaceport specifically
for space-related technologies
and, and this, this company is,
is, is highly interested in
locating at the spaceport as
well. Uh, so we have, besides
that, uh we have the continuous
work to get our uh re-entry
license from the FAA and
actually I have prepared a slide
uh that I work with our
aerospace team to discuss a
little bit.
Of the opportunities that that
is going to be opening for the
space program in itself. Uh, of
course, we continue to work with
our partners with the commercial
space Flight Federation, uh, for
specifically for, for grants for
spaceports and we're we're,
we're looking at finding some
additional funding from the
federal side uh to support some
of the infrastructure that we
can have at the spaceport where
in early stages on that one. Of
course, we continue to have the
site visits from companies as
well as we're working to try to
get a horizontal launch
developer at the spaceport and
besides that, we
you need to do our business
development efforts by attending
some of the big conferences in
the aerospace industry in our
country, right? We, we will
attend a space come in in
January in Florida. We will also
be attending the space symposium
in Colorado next year as we have
been attending it and in the
past several years, as well as
UAB conferences that have, have
been going on and of course the
continuous work that, that, that
Scott has been putting out for
doing orbital launches at inland
spaceports, which in our case we
would be perfectly positioned to
do it.
Uh, but, but Scott is, is, is,
is pushing strongly to convince
and catch momentum on on this
specific aspect. On your page
26, you have some pictures right
there on, on that first picture
on the upper left corner, you
can see the GSA Capitol Hill
summit with spaceports and Scott
had a presence in there on the
upper right corner you can see
precision AI, the air lighter,
and you can see that there's
people working at the space for
looking at at the at the drones,
looking at all of those and
located right there. There's
also
Picture of the national, the ASA
National Convention on 2024 and
our last exhibit on the last
bottom picture portion in which
we had at SpaceC this past
January. Again, we'll be
attending on January as well and
then on, on slide 27, and that's
the slide that we have prepared
for the orbital re-entry
license. So as we have been
mentioning to you, we were
working to develop our
application to the FAA and it is
pretty much ready and we will be
submitting that in September of
2024, so next month. Next month
We will be submitting this
application to the reentry to
the FAA and it usually takes
about 6 months to hear back from
them, specifically on, on the,
on, on the re-entry license.
Now the interest from a lot of
companies has been uh before it
was just sending things to
space, but with the microgravity
aspects that you can have once
it is orbiting in space once you
can actually have some types of
manufacturing and different
types of, so there's growing
interest about having re-entry
uh of different vehicles.
That are in space into uh the
the mainland, right, or the
United States right now most of
the reentries happen over the
sea, but depending on the
payload, you may want to have
them come into inland
spaceports. So what our re-entry
license would allow us to do is
for um winged or guided vehicles
to be able to land into a runway
or in other areas of the
spaceport and potentially be
able to capture on that market
specifically at Spaceport
America. So it is.
It is something that we're very
excited about because there's
not a lot of places that are
inland that have a re-entry
license that would just
basically make it um, correct me
if I'm wrong, Alabama and
Spaceport America, if I'm not
mistaken, right? Um, so, so that
those would be basically the two
only places inland that would be
allowing to do some, some things
like this. And uh just as an
example, we put a couple of
pictures right there. So the
picture on the bottom right, you
can see that is the dream
chaser, um, from Sierra space
that is a wing vehicle that
potentially
He could come in right from,
from orbit into our our runway.
Uh, the picture on the left,
that's, that's the star liner
from, from Boeing which it had
some, some issues as you
probably know, having some a
couple of astronauts being up
there, um, but that has landed
in White Sands missile range in
the past, but that is an
example, just as an example of
some of the different uh things
that would be doing the
reentries uh from, from orbit
into, into the spaceport. So
we're very excited about this
because of the opportunities
that it opens for us, right? We
may not be having or.
launches of the space for
currently, but all of the orbit
launches that are happening at
Cape Canaveral and some of the
other places, some of those need
a place to re-enter over the
land, and we will be having
those works ahead of that. So
we're we're excited about that
and I think that the last it's
up, that's, that's yours.
Madam Chair, one more page, just
a few examples of the things we
do. And so, um, be very happy to
stand for questions now, and
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you for your presentation.
Our first question will come
from Senator Souls. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
First, it's exciting having the,
the thunderbirds there are the
planes going to be located out
there regular, I mean, they'll
be housed there overnight and
stuff in the hangars, or are
they gonna be flying in from Las
Cruces or TRC airport on a daily
basis and also where are those
pilots going to be? Are they
staying in Las Cruces and
bussing up, you tell me a little
bit about logistics of that,
Madam Chair, and Senator Salz.
Yeah, they were, um, the planes
will be there continuously. They
actually bring in a C-130 full
of equipment and I think 2 or 3
semis they set up, uh, they
bring in about 70 ground support
people these are the mechanics,
uh,
the, even the, the announcer. So
when they practice on the center
line of the runway, they set up,
eventually they set up their
announcer and he says, you know,
welcome, blah blah blah, you
know, we're at the US
Thunderbirds, and then they have
a show, you know, it's all
choreographed with music and so
all of that
gets done at the spaceport. Um,
I don't think they have a bus,
but they stay, they, they've
stayed in TRC and they stayed in
Las Cruces. I think that
enlisted folks that like Oscars
better, a little more to do, um,
but they'll be here continuously
for that time. So, and the
planes will be continuously at
the spaceport. They they, they
have two scheduled flights, one
in the morning and one in the
afternoon that we work out with
White Sands. Those are flights
where they fly in formation and
in between that, if a pilot has
a little bit of
Trouble, he may go up with a
senior person he or she may go
up with a senior person and they
will practice those maneuvers.
This, this is a great
partnership with the US Army
White Sands missile range
because obviously these are both
DOD related, so we also get
great partnership with White
Sands, but does that answer your
question? Yes, thank you. I
recently saw the is it the Blue
Angels movie or whatever that
documents the whole year and
their initial training, they do
it out in California, I guess,
so it's great having that here.
I don't think
Most of New Mexico has any idea
that this is going on here. I
mean, we talked lots yesterday,
lots of our tours and the stuff
happening here at New Mexico
Tech. We don't do a good enough
job of promoting the amazing
things that are happening here
in New Mexico on a regular basis
and I realized this isn't the
show, but this is getting ready
for the show that the rest of
the country gets to see.
Uh, kind of the second one is
more comments about the
Spaceport America and Cup.
The by summer interns got to go
to the the full day stuff over
at the convention center in Las
Cruces, thousands of students
all excited about rocketry and
everything going on and all
through town, they were in the
stores buying their snacks and
stuff to take out with them. I
mean it was a huge economic
benefit for the city of Las
Cruces. I mean, I had to have
been 1000.
A hotel room that nights easily,
um, as well as getting to show
off again the stuff in New
Mexico and disappointed that
there was very little coverage
in the newspaper or radio or or
other places promoting this
world class event from around
the world of all the people and
the different groups and teams
that are there. Uh, we talked
yesterday, the VLA is the world
best is here in New Mexico, and
a lot of people don't even know
about it, that we've got to do a
better job of all of that. Um.
Can the last question though, if
you want to comment about a more
on the space Cup type of stuff,
but what an amazing thing that
is.
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chairwoman and
Senator Soulz, yeah, we, we try
very hard to get uh the
newspapers interested, but this
day and age right now, um, you,
we just can't always guarantee
interest, uh, so we're working
harder on the PR for that, um,
and we, this is the 2nd year
since after COVID, we've gotten
back into getting the spaceport
America Cup running with our
partner, the experimental
sounding Rocket Association. So
I think we're at a real good
steady state. Hopefully this
year we'll we'll do a
job of trying to encourage high
especially high school students
to come to that day at the
convention center and come out
and watch rockets fly.
And then just going back to this
uh Thunderbirds real quick
because it's their winter
training, they actually don't
want a lot of publicity on the
front end of the, of their
activity. And when they, when
they finally did that Instagram
post, they were kind of ready
for it. And we do have a, a
viewing lot and so people
started figuring out on their
own when the best time to come
out there, but my plan is to
work with their their public
affairs person this year to say
look, we want to advertise that
you're here. We don't want you
to put on a show for him, but,
you know, when you have
F-16 go over you at 400 miles an
hour full afterburner. That's
pretty cool. And we want some of
the local people to be able to
experience that. So we'll see
what happens, but I agree with
you that it'd be it'd be great
to advertise a little more, but
like a lot of our customers,
they, they come out there
because of the privacy. So we
don't get a chance to talk about
them as much as we would like.
So thank you, Senator.
Thank you. And kind of the last
one that may fall into one of
those, you didn't mention or
talk about spin launch, which is
a major player out there, big
building, very impressive to see
how are they doing, what's going
on with down at the southern
part with spin lunch.
So, um, Madam Chair and Senator
Soz, uh, spin launch seems to
have gone into a pause
themselves while they look for
additional funding. I think like
a lot of companies, the market,
um, you know, has been sensitive
to with inflationary pressures
to investments. Uh, so we
haven't seen them. They're
continuing to, however, pay
their lease and to be um good,
um, you know, good, good
tenants, but we have not seen
them come out testing again yet.
Our understanding is that still
is the plan that they've been
looking for, uh, you know, this
site is a suborbital site. It's
designed so they can get to Mach
5 inside of the chamber before
they release something and then
the idea is if it's small
enough, it would, it would get
to space, it would get to 50 to
60 miles up, so that would test
all the hardware, both of their
system and and whatever they
launched, but it's one third the
size of what they want to put in
an equatorial site, so we know
they've been looking at a site
in Guam. We've heard that
they've talked to people in
Australia, which wouldn't be
equator.
But it's, it's a place where
they could launch that
unfortunately because of their
They're, uh, the way they design
is, they, unlike some of the
other people we've been talking
to for inland orbital launch
where you could design something
that safely lands. They don't
have enough margins so when they
launch something, they need to
be able to shed parts and stages
they go up, so they, they're
gonna have to launch over an
ocean or a very uh deserted area
like parts of Australia. So
they're still active, Senator,
but we have not seen them doing
testing lately.
Thank you. I, I, Madam Chair,
this committee, I think it was
last year or the year before,
went out there and, you know,
they were very big on all the
new customers that they hadn't
even dreamed of who wanted to be
able to test things because of
the speeds they could get to,
and I just hadn't heard whether
there was more going on or
whether, you know, sometimes,
you know, and in your field,
clearly there are a lot of
companies that sell a lot of
vaporware. They sell a lot of
ideas that don't always come to
fruition, but they've got a big
thing there that that's been
proven technology.
and just curious how that was
moving forward. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator next to Senator Padilla.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
and I always love visiting your
site. I've visited it and seen
the evolution over the years, my
12 years here, and it just, it's
amazing, uh, very impressed with
your work and, um, so I just had
a question on page 25 of the
presentation, the first bullet
on the solar power data center.
Is it, uh, Madam Chair, is it
100% solar powered?
Madam Chair, Senator Senator,
um, it's what the way data
centers, uh, typically when when
they want to use alternative
power, typically what they do is
they also have batteries, so
they want to be able to handle
their peak load as much as
possible with solar, and then
they have the batteries to get
them through so they can keep
their, their electrical charges.
So I don't know if, if they are,
I don't know if they can
completely support probably for
brief amount of times they can
completely support the
operations with so.
But the, the rest of the time
it's, it's kind of an up and
down thing where they're they're
deriving the solar to be able to
save energy costs. So this is
the, the first, uh, uh, of that
kind of system that we're, we've
been talking to and they're
talking about also expanding in
other parts of the space part.
I, I can let, um, Doctor I just
talk about him in a minute, but
the one of the things we found,
uh, you know, we, we've learned
and we know about all the
spaceports. There's no, you
know, it's
that airports only make money
off of parking in the food
court. I don't know if anybody's
ever heard that. Um, but in
other words, you need to have a
diversified revenue source. So
this is part of our
diversification to try and
create economic impact and to
use land in the spaceport that
probably wouldn't be used for
aerospace operations anyway. So
this is the first of that kind
also the uh the downlink, uh,
the, the, the satellite ground
stations. So do you have
anything to add?
Hello, yeah, I think the only
thing I would also, sorry, uh,
madam chair, uh, Senator Pala, I
think the only thing that I
would add is that in as industry
has been evolving, I think that
multiple other industries have
started to merge a little bit
more in terms of the
communication that, that data
On drones, for instance, and
having more independence and
autonomy, so, so it is, it is
amazing to me at least from the
development perspective, how the
interest of companies such as
this one to locate at the
spaceport because they see space
as as an additional um what,
what do you call ancillary
industry, right, as part of the
aerospace ancillary industries,
it's, it's so relevant. I think
that, that just the, the
evolution of how those are
integrating and how they will be
integrating in the in the future
is, is.
Amazing to me. Uh thank you, uh,
Mr. Chair, and so on, on that
just one more question and then
and then I'll be done, um, on
that same point.
Uh, so is there a, uh, so what
are the specs you already have a
specked out data center that's
going to go in as a solar, and
actually even before you answer
that one, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chairman, um, so I think it's
terrific what you just said
about, you know, there's so much
open land there that what else
are you going to use it for
anyway? So you might as well
build out, build out some solar
arrays and, and share the power
load, um, and if you can bring
in batteries that are
substantially enough for the
type of work that you do there,
I say go guns, go get it done,
you know. But is there, are
there any spec
On what this data center might
be in terms of capacity and what
it'll be used for. Madam Chair,
and Senator, so our
understanding is that it's has
to do with artificial
intelligence and that they will
be using Nvidia chips, so you,
it's been kind of this explosion
over the last year. Artificial
intelligence has been around for
a while and chat GPT 3. I think
it's been around for several
years, but when they evolved to
chat chat GPT 4.
And uh the competitors to that
also evolved in terms of the
self-learning, self-teaching
algorithms, things that really
exploded and
Um, the amount of, uh, the
amount of use for AI if you
notice a lot of times now
depending on what browser you
use when you do a search, you're
not doing, you're not doing a
normal linear search where it's
just looking for keywords for
you, you can actually type in a
sentence, AI will look at that
sentence, try and understand
what you're really asking, and
then it will go out, it will
write a paragraph for you and
bring it back. That is, that is
incredible and that, but that
like, like Francisco says this
to all industries now, the
ability to fly things to test
things, um, and so there's,
there's almost an explosion of
of a need for data centers and
so our understanding for this
data center is it would be AI,
artificial intelligence, and
also what's called high power
computing, which both are can be
used on site with our other
customers. That's part of the
reason we're excited that they
would have that incredibly low
latency and you know, delay on
site.
And understanding it would be in
terms of the consume power it'd
be about 2 megawatts, and which
is a very substantial load and
um and that they would use the
solar for that. So it's not a
small data center, but it's not
as big as some of the other ones
I think on Facebook and things
you've probably heard about, but
it's again, it's a start for us
to generate a little extra
revenue and jobs in the area.
Thank you. No, I think that's
absolutely terrific and um I
think it's gonna open up another
way to make the spaceport.
Um, have other uh swim lanes
that you can go into to generate
revenue for that, that uh
currently cost center, which
could potentially become a
profit center at some point. So
I appreciate that. Thank you
very much and, and, uh, Madam
Chair, I just wanted to say I
was wondering whose district,
um, the Space Force was in, and
then of course I saw the De
Mexico 4H state conference site
visit, and I knew exactly whose
district this was in. So thank
you, Senator Brantley for
overlooking this uh this uh very
big part of New Mexico.
And just doing, keep doing a
good job there.
Thank you, Senator. Um, we have
about 3 more minutes if we stay
on schedule and 3 people to
speak, so if we could keep the
answers concise. Um, next is a
representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, if I
may, Madam Chair, I'd like to go
to page 25 as well on the
business development. Uh,
yesterday we heard about um.
Some of the presentations,
especially at the VLA, was
documenting the large number of
uh space equipment, if you will,
that's currently orbiting in
space and that is no longer
being used and so, uh, when
you're talking about, uh,
describing the um.
You're working on getting the
FAA orbital re-entry license.
Describe what that means. Is
that going to, are you going to
be receiving
The outdated equipment such as
those things or what is this
designed to receive and then I
have a second question to just
follow up.
OK, Madam Chair, and a
representative. So, uh, the, the
orbital debris is a problem.
Unfortunately, there's no one
entity that is in charge of
trying to reduce debris that the
Europeans and a few agencies in
the United States are working
hard to do that. They will
deorbit it and most of it will
burn up and won't come back to a
spaceport because it's, it's
unpowered most of it and is
uncontrollable to the most
thing, but the type of vehicles
we're trying to bring back are
the vehicles that Francisco
talked about which are going to
start doing manufacturing.
In space, um, they're going to
send up a capsule, we'll do drug
manufacturing or material
manufacturing, and after 6 weeks
or something, it will land
again, and that will become a
continuous process. They launch
a capsule that does
manufacturing of lands. They
launch another capsule. Um, the
other one is the Dream Chaser,
the winged vehicle, which part
of what's happening with Boeing,
the Boeing capsule that's stuck
up there that does land at White
Sands and has landed there
twice, is NASA is now starting
to look back at the dream chaser
as a crude vehicle. So we would
want to become first an
alternative site to bring back
any, any, uh, the vehicle itself
or people, um, and then as a
long term project that's what,
and we have an MOA with them. We
are working with them and
they're part of our, our license
to the FAA. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and one
quick question, I hope, um or a
response would be about the um
When this takes place, will you
who or what agencies entities
will be involved in recovery
when they do reach the ground.
So, Madam Chair and
representative, um, you know,
that we're in the, we're now in
the era of commercial space. If
you were watching the news, you
would have seen that SpaceX was
just about to launch a
completely private mission to go
on a polar orbit and have the
first non-governmental spacewalk
ever. Um, so that we're in this
era where 80% of what's going
on, 80 to 90% is non-federal
governmental. So when you say
what entities will involve, um,
it could be NASA, it could be
DOD, or it could be purely
commercial, um, these
Capsules that are going to be
doing the manufacturing. One
already launched and landed as
a, as a test mission in Utah.
Those are just commercial
entities. They're all licensed
by the FAA, um, so they can't do
anything without FA's
permission, but there it's a
commercial profit-making
enterprise.
All right. Thank you so much for
that response. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
N Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks
for the presentation. Is it am I
saying it right,
Doctor Haates?
Yeah, I can see that you're
getting expanding the business
development, so that's terrific.
Uh 4 quick questions, uh, Madam
Chair, first question has space
for the new military division,
rented any space or establish
themselves at Spaceport America
in any way.
Madam Chair, Representative
Garrett, um, we have been in
very informal conversations with
the US Space Force. They, the,
what is, what has happened with
the Space Force is they have
been procuring launches, and
this goes back before when they
were still the Air Force. They
went from a mode and they were
in a mode where they would buy
the rocket and they own the
rocket and they flew the rocket
with their mission with the,
with SpaceX and now Blue Origin
soon to have reusable rockets,
the space.
Force and NASA and others are
simply buying a ride to simply a
taxi for their payloads. Their
focus had been to try and
increase the cadence at Cape
Canaveral, which is now is a
rocket launch about every 3
days. Unfortunately, that took
their, their perspective away
from looking at other places to
launch.
What has happened though with me
and other uh many other folks,
uh, much higher than me in the
in the federal government
saying, look, if we have a
hurricane hit Florida or we have
an earthquake in Vandenberg.
Where are we going to launch
from? And they don't have an
answer. The answer is now
starting to be we need to, we
need to improve the launch
technology such that we can
safely launch from a site like
Spaceport America. So we're
actually going to have a visit
later on this year with a group
from the FAA who is looking at
and we're hoping that we'll be
soon talking to the Space Force
for the same reason.
Thank you, thank you. Uh, my
second question, the spaceport
technology and reception center,
the star is that inside the
property or outside? In other
words, do you have to go through
security to use that building or
not?
Yes, Madam Chair,
Representative, there's two
levels of security inside the
spaceport. One is just the outer
fence where the guards are, and
then there's one more layer that
we call the area aviation
operations area. That's where
we're trying to keep the public
out of. That's where Virgin
Galactic operates and most of
our horizontal launch area
customers. So this will be right
next to the, the front desk, the
front gate, so you will have to
go through security. You have to
show a little bit, um, a badge
you pretty much have to have a
reason to be there either on a
tour.
Or you're a vendor or a
customer, but we keep it right,
this building would be right up
front, so that's where the
school buses will go. That's
where vendors will go. So it's
kind of security light, whereas
right now we have to move people
all the way into the AOA
aviation operations area, we
don't like to do that, so that's
why it's a big improvement on
the site operations.
Thank you, that's great. And
then two more questions. First
of all, has Virgin Galactic
finished their astronaut center.
They were gonna build quarters
for the astronauts and their
families. What's the progress on
that?
So, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, my understanding
is that's currently being
deferred, just like the, the
operations on site that so they
can focus best on getting the
delta class spaceships up and
running and build that cadence.
I think that still could be in
in their plans, but right now
they're very focused on the
manufacturing and getting those
ships up and operating.
Thank you. My final question is,
what's up with the state land
office and the subleases. Is, is
there a specific obstacle?
I mean, that's something that.
It's important.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative, so we, we, what
we, it's, this is, uh, we, we
understood that uh after COVID,
that with, with the previous
director that we had a few
payments that were late and
behind with the state land
office that seemed to help open
a can of worms because the
original lease, if you go back
and look at it, there's probably
some legal improvements that
need to be made, um, uh,
they're, uh, with that previous
land commissioner and I
I think, I think the state land
office has rightfully had to do
that with our lease and other
leases. But unfortunately, it's
just turned into a very
protracted negotiation that um
and again, they have, we've had
a couple of subleases that we
sent to them, uh, uh, something
on order 16 months ago, um, and
they have not reviewed. And so
it's uh I don't, I don't know, I
don't know how to answer the
question about why that delay is
occurring on their side. It's
been very frustrating.
On our side though.
Thank you. That's it, Madam
Chair.
Our last question will come from
Senator Branntley. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I too share
Senator Sewell's excitement and
enthusiasm for the Thunderbirds,
his probably because he's a
pilot. Mine, um, just, just
cause of the proximity there,
but I, I also want to echo the
concerns that even I didn't
realize that they were returning
and this was going to be a
continued project. And so I
would say to you, if it's in
January again, I don't even
think we can, we can even attend
it because we'll be in session,
but I do again want to echo that
I think it's important that you
You are getting your story out
because as, as, um, supporters
of Spaceport America, one of our
greatest challenges is, um,
combating, uh, you know,
misconceptions of what's
happening there, even within,
within the legislator ourselves,
right? That nothing's happening
out there. There hasn't been any
activity that we are making
investments for a single tenant
only and not others, and it's
simply just not the truth. And
so I would say at a minimum to
please invite those who have a
direct impact on the success of
Spaceport.
to attend high profile events
there just so that they can see
for themselves that there's a
lot of activity out there.
Legislators, your local
authorities, you know, we get
GRT from Donana and Sierra. I
haven't even seen this in local
papers. This is exciting for
rural communities is just to
continue to promote that there
really is um activity happening
out there at Spaceport,
especially with legislators
because it's so important that
we continue to make investments.
And so they need to certainly
see a return on that. My quick
question was going to be just
that.
is how can it's clear that when
it comes to capital outlay, you
guys have made significant
progress. It was only 2 years
ago that we just had the, the
state had invested millions and
millions of dollars, and it just
wasn't getting on the ground.
You came to us and said we need
a facilities manager to kind of
oversee this capital outlay and
you have made great progress. So
for that, thank you. The
question is, is that you're
continuing to see some other
delays. How can the legislators
help you with 2.1, the state
land lease.
I, uh, Representative Garrett,
the real answer is there's no
excuse for this, and it's
costing, you know, the state,
the legislators made massive
investments in Spaceport. We
can't seem to move state land
office. It's costing economic
development. It's costing us
money every day. At this point,
would you please send an email
to legislators just clear just
clearly giving us an explanation
of what the delay is. I, I offer
my own time to step in to see if
we can expedite stuff. It's
clearly sitting
Someone's desk. This is systemic
across New Mexico for months and
months and months and months to
just try to move projects and
it's unacceptable there. I would
also then like to refer to page
10. You're saying on the cell
phone tower and our tenants out
there have been very critical of
New Mexico saying our cell
phones need to work at Spaceport
if you want us to come in here
and invest. You said you're
waiting on final electrical.
What, what does that mean and
who can we help push?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
thank you very much for the
questions. Um, on the spaceport,
appreciate your help in the
state land office, um, by the
way, um, on the cell tower, it's
just, uh, we've, uh, because of
the COVID, you know,
transformers turned into a 24
month or longer delay. So in, in
getting the electrical installed
and getting that panel and
getting it powered up, that's,
it's, there's nothing we can do
about it. We've done everything
we can to uh order ahead of time
when we order a transformer when
we try and get the
one, but it will, it should
happen this fall or very early
in 2026. And as far as the
carrier, the carriers have a
very particular revenue model,
um, and that includes their
capital outlay themselves, so
we're we're in this kind of gray
area where a little past the
middle of the year where a
company like Verizon is trying
to decide whether they should
finish the capital outlay for
this year or start, you know,
finish it in calendar year 26,
so.
We're hoping they get that
installed literally next 2 or 3
months. If not, it should be
installed beginning of the year.
So I appreciate an offer for
help, but I don't, I think we're
OK with just kind of normal
business practices for cell
phone towers. OK, thank you,
Madam Chair. If you would please
follow up with an email that
state land office so that we can
get moving on that. Thank you. I
appreciate your time. Thank you,
Francisco as well.
All right. um, thank you for
your presentation. Uh let me
just get a, a hands. How many
people have not been to the
spaceport in this committee.
Not been?
OK.
OK. All right. So I was thinking
maybe next year, but thank you
for your presentation and um
look forward to hearing from you
again. See you.
Right, our next presenter is
Doctor Karen Carson, artificial
intelligence use in the
provision of medical service
benefits and ethical concerns.
Whenever you're ready. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
I really want to go to the space
port now. I haven't been.
And I want to take my kids.
So I'm Doctor Karen Carson and I
am pleased to present to you
some information about
artificial intelligence use in
the provision of medicine,
benefits and regulatory
concerns.
And as a little background, I am
not an informatics or computer
specialist. I'm a practicing
pediatrician from Roswell, New
Mexico, and I've become involved
and interested in the regulatory
aspects of artificial
intelligence and medicine in my
role as chair of the New Mexico
Medical Board.
So I'm gonna start my
presentation with concept and
terminology definitions, and I'm
gonna go a little quickly. I
think this is probably review
for you. But all of these terms
are important and relevant to
artificial intelligence use in
medicine. They include natural
language processing, which
analyzes and processes free text
and structured language data.
Computer vision that uses visual
data input to analyze and
interpret images or videos.
Machine learning, which enables
programs to learn from data by
identifying patterns and then
improving performance through
experience.
An example could be software
that learns to read X-rays and
other scans. Then we have deep
learning, and that has the
capability of autonomously
learning crucial features for
prediction with minimal human
intervention.
Deep neural networks.
are layers of weighted
interconnected nodes that are
trained. They have the capacity
to learn from mistakes and
adjust their course over time to
solve problems.
Artificial neural networks have
architecture inspired by the
human brain.
As an iterative mechanism and
that enables a model to assign a
varying degree of importance to
different parts of the input.
And this is used widely in
natural language processing
tasks like sentiment analysis
where the relationship between
words in a sentence is
important.
And when this is combined with
recurrent neural networks, it
forms the backbone of
Transformer or foundation
models, and these are the
central component of chat
technologies.
Large language models are
designed to understand and
generate like a human. There's a
vast amount of data that is
required to train them.
Generative pre-trained
transformer or GPT-4 is the most
well-known large language model
with natural language generation
capability, and it has been
trained on over 1.75 or 1.75
trillion parameters.
And these models use deep
learning to break down data and
identify patterns and
statistical relationships
between the bits of data at many
levels.
But large language models do not
have human understanding. They
lack awareness, common sense,
and the ability to reason about
the world beyond the data they
have been trained on.
So there can be inability to
determine the relationships or
patterns that the AI has
identified when we ask a
question or determine how
specific outputs are generated
based upon those relationships
and this is referred to as the
black box problem.
And then finally we have
autonomous agents that perform
tasks and make decisions
independently without human
intervention. They perceived
their surroundings through
sensors. They reason about them
and take action to achieve their
goals. This would be like a
self-driving car.
The next slide that I have here,
the next handout.
are the multiple AI applications
that are used in healthcare and
practitioners and health systems
and patients are already using
these on a day to day basis. So
we have computer vision systems
that are used to analyze medical
images, and this could be
something like an X-ray study,
which is sent to a radiologist
with a note from the system that
prompts that there's an
irregularity noted in a portion
of the study and directs the
attention to the irregularity.
Another example is an app called
First Derm where a user can up
a photo that is then matched to
an image database, and that will
return the name of the skin
condition.
Natural language processing
systems are used to review
clinical notes and voice
recognition is used to support
clinical documentation. So we
have AI scribes like Fried that
are an example of that.
Practitioners can also use
predictive algorithms and
advanced data analytics to
forecast clinical trends such as
whether a patient with high
blood pressure is also at risk
of developing chronic kidney
disease.
And chatbox are available and
they provide patient education,
reminders, scheduling, and
triage. And then finally we have
robots that have AI AI
capabilities, and they're
available to assist clinical
staff with non-patient facing
tasks like diligent robots is
one of those.
And on my next handout we
Talk about natural language
processing and computer vision
and this works together to
facilitate analysis of texts and
images, and other qualitative
data to optimize workflows and
patient engagement. So this
could be automated analysis of
retinal images to detect
diabetic retinopathy, such as
the IRAI screening system.
This could be detection of
abnormalities on X-rays with
diagnostic recommendations.
And could also be sentiment
analysis of patient feedback to
identify care experience
improvements, extraction of
social determinants of health
from clinical notes, automated
coding of medical procedures
from clinical documentation and
chatbots, which can provide
reminders and and education to
patients.
Machine learning and neural
networks can enable detection of
complex data patterns to inform
clinical decision makings and
medical making and medical
discoveries. This can help
predict patient outcomes and
trajectories using large
electronic health record data
sets. They can optimize hospital
logistics like bed assignments
and operating room schedules and
also provide clinical support
systems with updated treatment
recommendations to clinicians.
The next slide we talk about
reinforcement learning, and this
is a framework for iterative
improvement of targeted tasks
such as optimizing sepsis and
ventilator sittings settings for
critically ill patients. So
these networks learn and form a
memory and then
And then will improve the
regimen. So it can improve a
chemotherapy regimen, can
personalize glucose control for
diabetic patients, and it can
optimize stroke rehabilitation
strategies based on the patient
outcome.
The next slide, um, is from the
AMA and it's a table that
summarizes the tasks in medicine
that artificial intelligence
could perform using capabilities
of identification, translation,
summarization, prediction, and
suggestion.
And these AI tools offer great
promise for better care
experiences for both patients
and clinicians.
So before we move on to
regulatory concerns. I'm going
to talk about artificial
intelligence specifically for
use in mental health treatments
as I was informed this might be
a special interest to you. So
artificial intelligence has many
treatment possibilities in the
field of mental health. This
includes genetic predisposition
analysis, past treatment
responses, behavioral patterns
and real-time physiologic data
that customizes treatment plans
to individual patients. In
addiction
Treatment, artificial
intelligence can continuously
observe and analyze a patient's
behavior patterns, triggers,
stressors, and substance use,
and this proactive approach
could allow for timely
interventions and modification
of treatment strategies.
Algorithms can also continuously
analyze patient progress and
adjust treatment plans in real
time.
Machine learning algorithms that
use predictive and analytics can
sift through vast patient data,
including medical histories,
diagnostic tests, clinical
notes, and look at patterns that
may suggest a mental health
condition.
Doctor Joel Stoddard at Colorado
Children's Hospital is using AI
to review data from child and
adolescent mental health
questionnaires that they've been
giving to their patients for
years and they are using, um,
these charts and this data to
create models that could predict
future suicidal thoughts and
behaviors and possibly intervene
prior to a suicidal or a suicide
attempt.
So artificial intelligence uses
natural language processing
techniques that can be really
helpful in mental health
disorders. Sentiment analysis
can identify nuanced changes in
an individual's emotional
condition by looking at social
media posts or a diary.
Voice analysis can review
alterations in speech patterns
that might serve as indicators
of anxiety or depression and
facial expression analysis
coupled with computer vision can
provide insights into an
individual's emotional state. It
can predict microexpressions and
subtle changes that might
indicate underlying
psychological conditions.
We have predictive models that
consider a wide range of
factors. So genetics,
environmental factors, lifestyle
choices, and social determinants
of health and correlations and
pattern and data are then
identified, and these can be
used to identify an individuals
at risk of developing mental
health condition.
And it user displays concerning
behaviors, the model may prompt
a mental health coach to offer
assistance.
Ginger, uh, and now has merged
with Headspace and that is uh
one of the kind of tools that
that is doing this kind of thing
right now. Um, these models can
also use AI to analyze genetic
and chemical data sets to
identify.
Potential drug candidates for
mental health conditions or
other conditions and whether
these treatments might be might
be effective for this
individual. Um, IBM's Watson for
Drug Discovery has halted sales,
but there are others out there,
including one called Keystone
Mab that's doing this.
And additionally, they will
integrate this uh their
technology with wearable
technology and mobile health
apps.
Finally, we have virtual
therapists and chatbots, and
they have the ability to address
a critical gap in mental health
care access. Chatbots can engage
in empathetic conversations.
They offer coping strategies and
they can conduct users to
helplines or human therapists.
They're also discreet and
provides stigma-free platforms
for individuals to engage with
mental health support. And they
can also provide therapy for
children with autism spectrum
disorder using facial
recognition technology.
to adjust interactions.
There's a slide with AI tools,
chatbox, chatbot based therapy.
And these are just a few
examples of chatbot based
therapy tools. We have robot,
and that provides cognitive
behavioral-based therapy for
depression, anxiety and an
anxiety, using a combination of
cognitive behavioral therapy,
mindfulness, positive psychology
to help users improve their
mental health.
And robot has now partnered with
the United Kingdom National
Health Service.
Talk space.
Connects patients with licensed
therapists through videos,
texts, and audio messaging and
uses artificial intelligence to
match patients with therapists
best suited to their needs.
BetterHelp also uses artificial
intelligence to match patients
with therapists and includes
other therapeutic approaches,
including cognitive behavioral
therapy and psychodynamic
therapy.
On the next page, we talk about
smart mental health tools, and
these can use facial and voice
analysis to provide real-time
feedback to therapists. This can
predict disease protect
progression and treatment
outcomes by analyzing patient
data and can support clinicians
using AI to refine personalized
treatment plans.
AI can analyze keyboard
interactions during teletherapy,
providing therapists with
insights into emotional states.
So mindstrong, which is now
defunct, um, would monitor how a
patient taps scrolls and types,
and it can look for indicators
of stress, depression, or other
or other mental health factors.
And then we're all aware of our
smart watches that are equipped
with AI algorithms that monitor
changes in sleep patterns,
physical activity, and heart
rate, which may give us insight
into
Mental health.
There are quite a few emotional
health apps, and these are just
a a very few, few examples, and
these apps can provide tools and
resource adjuncts to
cognitive-based therapy and
dialectical behavior therapy,
and they can provide
personalized content tailored to
the user for daily inspiration
and support can offer guided
meditation, games and activities
designed to improve moods and
well-being.
The next slide, there's a quote
here, and I think all of these
uses are amazing and as a
practitioner and as a patient, I
want to use all of this, but we
have to understand the inherent
risks, and I think this quote
from Stephen Hawking, which
Doctor Duity Sain Graham
referenced in a recent UNM EO
presentation about AI is
significant.
Dr. Hawkings said computers will
overtake humans with AI at some
point within the next 100 years.
When that happens, we need to
make sure the computers have
Goals aligned with ours.
And so I'm going to move on to a
graph.
And as we examine regulatory
accountability in the practice
of medicine. We need to remember
that regulatory boards do not
regulate tools or technology. On
the licensee that uses these
tools.
And so this is a figure from the
Federation of State Medical
Boards, and it illustrates that
as AI tools perform functions
that more closely model the
practice of medicine, the risk
to patients of their application
generally increases. The
appropriate level of regulatory
scrutiny and accountability to
the regulatory by the licensee
using the tool should increase
commensurately.
On the next slide is a list of
regulatory challenges related to
the rise of large language
models.
And
And we can see the concerns are
many. There can be lack of
information regarding the
training data set, and methods,
bias can be created at multiple
steps, including data
collection, training,
development, and deployment. And
practitioners are concerned
about medical malpractice and
liability.
False responses or
hallucinations can occur, and
over reliance on artificial
intelligence models that may
malfunction or predict or
provide incorrect information as
possible. So we can't afford to
lose human expertise in
medicine.
We must ensure that artificial
intelligence tools are monitored
over time for performance
accuracy, and validity.
On the next page is a summary of
the safe, secure, and
trustworthy development and use
of artificial intelligence
executive order 14,110, which in
October of 2023 directed over 50
federal entities to engage in
more than 100 specific actions
to implement guidance across 8
overarching policy areas. And
these include safety and
security, innovation and
competition, workers support,
consumer protection, privacy,
federal use of artificial
intelligence and international.
leadership
On August 1st of 2024, the
European Union artificial
intelligence Act entered into
force, and there's a link to it
on your slides, on your
handouts. And the EU at
There's a pyramid here placed AI
systems into four risk
categories ranging from
unacceptable risk, which
includes AI systems that would
use subliminal manipulation or
social scoring high risk that
have the potential to cause
significant harm if they fail or
are misused.
And limited risk systems that
may have the risk of manipulate
manipulation or deceit, such as
chatbots or emotion recognition
recognition systems, and then
minimal risk systems like spam
filters.
The next illustration is a much
more detailed example of the
risk-based systems in the EU AI
Act and has definitions,
requirements, and examples. For
medical-based systems, a higher
risk system might include
assistant X-ray diagnosis or
emergency triage, while clinical
data management while still
considered to have systemic
risk, is slightly lowered with
regard to regulatory
requirements in the EUAI Act
pyramid.
In the United States, on the
next page, the FDA regulates
artificial intelligence and
machine learning medical
devices.
This is called AIML based
software as a medical device. It
is different than
Software in a medical device.
And so this is referred to as
SAMD. As of August 7th, 2024,
there are 950 artificial
intelligence and machine
learning medical devices
authorized by the FDA.
And the FDA states that their
vision is that with
appropriately tailored total
product lifestyle based
regulatory oversight, AIML based
software as a medical device
will deliver safe and effective
software functionality that
improves the quality of care
that patients receive.
However, many health-related
chatbots powered by generative
AI, including most of those
mental health apps that you just
saw are not regulated by the
FDA. This is because these apps
don't explicitly claim to
diagnose or treat medical
conditions.
So at a mental health app may
provide an incorrect crisis
phone line number.
Robot, which we talked about, it
uses thousands of structured
scripts written by company,
staffers and researchers, and
when it was reviewed for a um
research paper, it told a
reviewer that put in that she
wanted to climb a cliff and jump
off of it. It replied to her,
it's so wonderful that you are
taking care of both your mental
and physical health.
The FDA reviews these medical
devices through an appropriate
pre-market pathway, and I'm not
going to go into those.
But the traditional paradigm of
medical device regulation was
not designed for adaptive
artificial intelligence and
machine learning technologies.
And as you can see, there have
been multiple discussion papers
and action plans presented over
the last few years with recent
guidance published in March
2024, representing the FDA's
coordinated approach to
artificial intelligence in
alignment with other centers.
In June of 2024, there were
guiding principles regarding
transparency for machine
learning enabled medical devices
that was released.
I'm going to move on to health
and human services.
And in March of 2024, the
Department of Health and Human
Services through the Office of
the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology,
published the Health Data
Technology and interoperability
final rule, which included
federal requirements for
artificial intelligence and
machine learning predictive
software and healthcare and the
ONC.
stated this rule had two primary
policies regarding predictive
decisions support interventions.
And a predictive decision
support intervention is when the
AI may inform the practitioner
that this is what you might want
to do here.
And so number one was to enhance
transparency and 2, to promote
the development and use of AI
and healthcare that is fair,
appropriate, valid, effective
and safe, and they used faves as
the uh acronym there. The ONC is
clear that it is not testing or
approving decisions support
interventions, rather the ONC is
enabling users to have
information to determine whether
they're predictive DSI is fair,
appropriate, valid, effective,
and safe.
And these requirements are
conceptually parallel to other
efforts to enhance consumer
information like nutrition
labels or vehicle history
reports.
And so for these policies, ONC
requires that users of certified
health information technology
must be able to access complete
and up to-date technical and
performance information referred
to a source attributes for
predictive DSIs that are made
available to them. The rule
requires the developments,
developers of certified health
IT apply risk management and
governance practices to
predictive DSIs supplied in
their health IT and the rules
specifies that risk management
practices
Must cover topics including
validity, reliability,
robustness, fairness,
intelligibility, safety,
security, and privacy.
The ONC has prioritized these
requirements.
And developers of certified
health IT will need to meet them
by January 1 of 2025.
The next, the next page in the
handout states navigating the
responsible and ethical
incorporation of artificial
intelligence into clinical
practice and in April of 2024,
the Federation of State Medical
Boards released this policy
statement, and I've included in
the executive summary here for
you, and there's a link to the
complete statement at the bottom
of the handout.
On the next page is the really
important part of the statement
is the recommendation of the
Federation of State Medical
Boards is that artificial
intelligence governance for
medicine should be anchored in
ethics. Medical boards should
focus on governing the use of AI
through established ethical
principles, including respect
for patient autonomy,
non-maleficence, beneficence,
and justice that have served as
the foundation of professional
expectations and demonstrated
applicability.
In a variety of situations
regardless of treatment,
modalities, or technology
involved.
So when I googled AI, I use
Google AI last night to check on
how many states have enacted
laws about AI and as of July
2024, 28 states have enacted
laws and some say that states
are emerging as the main
regulators of AI.
And so on the next page is a map
of state health-related AI
legislative activity that is
current to June of 2024.
And as you can see, Utah,
Colorado, and other states have
passed bills directly related to
health care or that may
implicate health care.
I'm gonna start with the Utah
artificial intelligence Policy
Act, and this went into effect
May 1st of 2024. And it imposes
disclosure requirements to
protect consumers.
Utah requires that those
regulated occupations must
prominently disclose that a
consumer is interacting with
generative generative AI or
materials created by generative
AI at the beginning of any
communication.
Utah's AI law is a proactive
measure aimed at ensuring the
safe and ethical use of AI and
healthcare.
However, the need for thorough
evaluations and validations of
AI tools can be time consuming
and costly for healthcare
providers, and this may
potentially slow down the
adoption of beneficial AI
technology.
Liability for generative AI
output is of high concern to
clinicians, and it is likely
that the courts will become
increasingly involved as we
navigate these regulatory
frameworks.
On the next page.
Colorado, consumer protections
for artificial intelligence.
requiring disclosures and limits
on artificial intelligence used
in high risk areas.
And requiring use of reasonable
care to protect consumers from
any known or reasonable
foreseeable risks of algorithmic
discrimination in a high-risk
system.
Those who deploy AI systems in
Colorado will need to adopt a
reasonable risk management
program.
The effective date is on or
after February 1 of 2026.
Georgia amended their law to
prohibit insurance coverage
decisions from being solely
based on AI or automated
decision tools. The same
requirements were set out for
health care, where healthcare
decisions should not be made
solely on the basis of AI or
automated decision tools, and
these decisions should be
meaningfully reviewed with the
authority to override the
decision where necessary.
Georgia also required the
Georgia.
A medical board to adopt rules
and regulations governing and
establishing the standards
necessary to implement these
requirements.
On the next page, Massachusetts
requires that mental health
professionals who desire to use
artificial intelligence to
provide mental health services
must seek approval from the
relevant licensing board and
must disclose the use of AI to
their patients. They must also
provide options to receive
treatment from a human instead.
Illinois amended their Safe
Patients Limit Act prohibiting
certain healthcare facilities
from adopting policies that
substitute independent nursing
judgments from a registered
nurse for decisions or
recommendations made by
algorithms, artificial
intelligence or machine
learning.
And then we have California's
physician makes decisions at
that proposes that a healthcare
service plan shall ensure that a
licensed physician supervises
the use of artificialial
intelligence decision-making
tools when these are used to
inform decisions to approve,
modify, or deny requests by
providers for authorization
prior to or concurrent with the
provision of healthcare services
to enroll and this is currently
going through, it hasn't yet.
I want to move on to a.
Uh, summary of physician
sentiments of artificial
intelligence where the AMA asked
physician members questions
about AI and its role in
healthcare.
And 65% of those polled saw an
advantage to artificial
intelligence. The greatest
enthusiasm around AI tools were
those that help reduce
administrative burden, including
documentation and prior
authorizations. Physicians were
most concerned about data
privacy and medical malpractice
liability for errors of
artificial intelligence models.
Physicians were also concerned
about safety and efficacy and
believed AI programs need to be
proven to be as good as or.
to traditional care.
On the next page,
I asked the question of what
problems are clinicians trying
to solve in New Mexico with
artificial intelligence, and the
answer is mostly administrative
and non-clinical tasks. At this
time, systems are in place that
use artificial intelligence to
text patients for vaccine
reminders, lab screenings, and
medication reminders. There is
the ability to schedule online
for clinic appointments, lab
draws, radiology, and health
maintenance screenings.
Practitioners want to decrease
administrative time and AI helps
with completing prior
authorization requests, can help
with referrals to specialty care
and lab sites and are able to
provide continuity of care by
scheduling with the same
provider.
AI can also provide chart
summaries for improved care and
can act as a virtual scribe for
practitioners, minimizing their
charting time and improving
medical record keeping.
And with that, it can provide
robust coding and billing
systems, improving payment to
practitioners.
Doctor Duity Saran Graham
reported that at UNM uh
hospitals, they are working with
technology vendors to develop
chat GPT like tools to assist
healthcare professionals and
accessing medical knowledge and
is partnering with Synchronous
to add AI tools to the state's
health information exchange,
virtual AI scribes using
generative AI technology will be
piloted at UNM clinics this
year. Doctor Jason Mitchell from
Presbyterian Hospitals reports
they are piloting the use of AI
tools to address and close care
gaps, provide practitioners with
ambient dictation tools such as
scribes and are piloting AI
completion of administrative
tasks such as prior
authorizations.
And so in conclusion, artificial
intelligence has tremendous
promise. We know it will advance
the standard of care and
clinicians who carefully embrace
artificial intelligence tools
will provide better care to
their patients.
It can improve patient access by
shifting administrative tasks
away from the clinician and
hopefully increase empathy shown
to patients in spite of our
pervasive healthcare provider
shortages.
We must, however, balance the
potential benefits of AI with
robust and legal and regulatory
measures in order to protect
both the patient and the
practitioner.
And so the key regulatory points
that I ask you to remember
regarding artificial
intelligence include education,
medical practitioners need to
learn safe and effective use of
artificial intelligence. We also
need to ensure that consumers of
health care driven by artificial
intelligence receive guidance.
We need to define accountability
and we need to be clear where
the responsibility and liability
lies with regard to the use of
artificial intelligence. The New
Mexico Medical Board and other
regulatory agencies license
people, not machines, and we
have to remember that the
practice of medicine is by a
professional licensed clinician.
As the use of artificial
intelligence in many areas of
healthcare becomes more
ubiquitous and even required in
some healthcare practices,
liability and responsibility for
AI errors cannot be set solely
on the shoulders of the
practitioner.
Our highest regulatory risk is
clinical decision making and the
standard of care needs to be
followed.
And we need to understand how
companies are defining
benchmarks. We need transparency
and we need key metrics.
And finally, we have to protect
our patients. We have to ensure
consent, which is informed, and
we have to require data privacy.
We have to constantly monitor
for equity bias.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
Take any questions you may have.
Thank you for your presentation.
The first question is from
Senator Rodriguez. Thank you,
Madam Chairman. Good morning to
um
To this wonderful physician who
is doing great work. I
appreciate you. Um, I have one,
at least one question first, um,
Madam Chairman, I, it caught my
eye on page, uh, where are the
pages? I can't see the little
pages said yes, but either way,
it's where this round orange.
Where it says RL reinforcement
learning around the picture with
that round circle there. OK. And
it's um
It's on the first bullet, it
says optimizing sepsis care and
ventilator settings for
critically ill patients. The
first thing that crossed my mind
is.
Uh, in what way do you foresee
being able to use AI, for
example, people on ventilators,
which would be we call
intubation uh for various, um,
critical conditions, and we
mostly see those uh patients as
patients who have a not to put
it mildly, not a very good
chance of survival because
they're in a, they're getting
assistance to breathe already
through ventilators. So tell me
how you foresee being able to do
that. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Madam Chair, Senator, members of
the committee, thank you.
What reinforced learning will do
with something like this is a
software application that would
be present in the actual
ventilator that would read the
patient response to the
ventilator setting and if the
ventilator was say, putting in
too much air, it would increase
it, but if it was putting in too
little, it would decrease it.
Currently, what happens is we
will uh look at the patient.
We might get some blood work to
see what the lab work looks
like, and then we would increase
your decrease the patient
ventilator settings based on
what we thought should happen
because of the blood work. But
the
Artificial intelligence could
actually look at that and do
that and.
Instant time almost.
I see.
Uh thank you for that, Doctor
Carson. So basically, once you
follow that through the machine,
the ventilator, then you would
be able to um.
To follow, I'm trying to
visualize this, to follow the
readings of other uh areas in
the body, um, by virtue of the
fact that just say too much air,
um, too much pressure in the
lungs or whatever it may be,
then how are you gonna monitor
the rest of the body based on
this impact. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair and senator
and members of the committee. So
again, this is talking about
real reinforcement learning, and
I don't know exactly what the
these
systems, it seems, can do what
the what these systems do as far
as reinforcement learning is
look at the trend over time.
And as the trend is returning
saying, I think it might be
easier to talk about glucose
control or sugars if the um the
machine is constantly seeing a
higher sugar level, it will
automatically increase your
insulin that is being given and
over time it might learn that it
will have to increase or
decrease the medication that it
is giving or like we talked
about with.
later settings, the amount of
air that it is giving, um,
possibly for if we're talking
maybe about the heart, the
amount of fluid that's been
given to a patient based on how
the heart is beating at that
time. Thank you, thank you for
that. Uh, so, Madam Chairman,
I'll be brief here, um, but I
guess going back to what you
mentioned that, uh, in your
words that uh we hope we never
have to replace the human aspect
of this. It it's a great tool,
but um.
I, I'm a little bit apprehensive
because take for example
something like this we're
looking at a machine that's
gonna monitor glucose or, or the
amount of oxygen going into a
body when a person is intubated,
OK? And so when just say
glucose, go back to that when
more insulin, for example, is
injected into your system
because your glucose went up and
it's all done by machine because
of the readings that go up and
down, my main concern here is
that I hope there's a human.
More than one human body and
physician out there following
those changes because the
machine can be injecting
insulin, but is it gonna, is it
going to monitor the, the
insulin was in fact absorbed and
not sitting there in the blood
and you know what I'm saying
that just all those things that
we know, it's confusing and, and
complicated and you can't tell
right now. I understand, because
we're just in the initiation of
all of this, but I'm with you. I
hope we always have, um, human,
the human.
that we need and um and, and I
hope that we continue to, to use
AI and all these uh new uh new
systems to try and help people
that have a serious illnesses,
but thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Doctor Carson. Thank
you, Senator. Next is
Representative Arnan.
And
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Doctor Carson for
that presentation. I was just
wondering about um the
chat-based therapy, uh, apps
that are available. Is there any
disclaimer requirements for
those apps?
To like
Say like when you download it on
your phone, it says, you know,
this is, should not be used to
replace the mental health
professional but should be used
in conjunction. Is there any
regulation on that at all at
this, at this time?
Madam Chair and representative
members of the committee,
there, there is not currently a
law that I could find that says
that there has to be a
disclaimer. Most of these have a
very small disclaimer in their
use acceptance when you download
it and sometimes all those words
down there, it has a little
disclaimer and these are kind of
the same kind of disclaimers
that might be on your vitamin
that you take that says this is
not intended to treat a medical
disorder or, you know, use
caution, um, and so those are,
those are the disclaimers that
are present and um there are,
there are more than 20,000
mental health apps out there
right now. um, when, uh, when
the research looked at these
just recently one of the papers
that I looked at found more than
20,000 and so I think it's very
hard until we
Get into some legal battles with
these two actually clearly put
those disclaimers at the
forefront.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Dr. Carson, for that
response. Yeah, that was my
concern, really. I think there
are a lot of really good um
practical application potentials
for AI in the medical field like
assisting doctors and diagnoses
and recognizing patterns over
time that maybe, you know, the
human eye doesn't catch right
away or doesn't have the medical
history immediately available,
um, so like.
Robot-assisted professionals,
sure, great, but when it's just
patient and robot, like you
mentioned that example of, you
know, a chatbot giving wholly
unhelpful advice when somebody
uh talked about wanting to um
harm themselves. So yeah, it's
just something that we need to
think about going forward, how
we can um protect people.
Because 20,000 apps, oh my
goodness, that's like.
It's like the kind of the
vagueness that you get like you
mentioned with supplements. I
mean, there's just, there's not
enough regulation in either
field, so just, um, I'm
rambling, food for thought.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
And our new, it's that close.
Thank you. Um, next is
Representative of Madrid.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Doctor Carlson, can I, I'm
gonna ask the first question, do
we have any of these, uh, starts
established here in New Mexico?
Of AI in the way of the medical,
like what you're suggesting. Do
you know of any here in the
state?
Set up Madam Chair,
Representative members of the
committee, do you mean, um,
start up like companies.
Yeah, I don't know the answer to
that. OK, I really find this
fascinating because it was
almost a year to date that I've
met a gentleman in in um
In Las Cruces at a naggy
football game and doc uh Senator
Soulz, can you help me? You
know, the, the big bank building
there in Masco is the biggest
one.
Uh, what was it called before?
It was this first national or
something? OK. The reason I'm
saying
Yeah, there's, you met that
gentleman too?
There's a gentleman that came up
to me and I kind of felt we fell
into each other.
And he talked about all of this.
And he's in the Las Cruces right
now, so I'm gonna ask if I can
get permission to give this to
him because the concerns and
interests were exactly on point
and, and the fact of the matter
is, um, he came from out of
state and set up here, and I
think he did 40 million in the
first year and the way he was
talking it was in a very basic
elementary way of getting it
introduced in the state of New
Mexico, and it does serve a real
function for our rural parts of
the state that
have uh doctors that don't have
that availability to doctors. So
there is some availability and I
think the biggest uh takeaway
from him was the fact that we
talk about our, our parts of the
state with indigenous as this is
in the south, and there's just a
hard demand for doctors and most
of all, even a good doctor can't
do an assessment without the
compilation of the medications
and the reactions and the blood
pressure.
And he says, that's the basis of
where I would like to start, he
says, but it's gotten to be such
a wildfire that uh he was
wanting us to give him more
assistance because he, he could
see this really gravitating
throughout the state and other,
other states. I really got to
say to the, to the body that why
we have our reservations of not
having human contact.
We're already experiencing that.
By not having the medical
assistance. So that's a
component.
That I hate to say, I wish we
did have, but we're in a, in a
supply and demand issue in our
state with mental health now a
bigger part of it, and I don't
know how that can work, but I do
know that in his analogies of
what he did on a principle, he
was buying floors of this place
because the demand was
relatively easy to, to get
people to understand, especially
in the hardest parts where there
is no doctors. Uh, I think it is
to the body's interest that we
move on.
this,
uh,
Kind of quickly cause I think we
could pioneer something like
this because we're a great model
state for it. And with a lot of
oversight from the body.
On both sides, but I would hope
and encourage the body that we
must consider that we're right
now in the reverse. We don't
have enough doctors. We don't
have enough assistance even in
um
CNA's registered nurses. All of
this is basically those parts of
the job that does nothing more
than compile this patient by
patient and has its notes that
when a patient has an issue,
it'll kick it right into
straight to a doctor, her
primary doctor or his primary
doctor. So, would you agree in
some of the thoughts I've said
that it is a viable.
Candidacy. I know the oversight,
uh, you brought us a lot of good
examples from others, and that's
what I think I would like to see
what he has to say about some of
this, but I think he's already
established in here. Um, I hope
you guys can work together. And
I'm sorry I don't remember his
name off top, but if I get it
this week and I'll, I'll make
sure to get in, get you guys in
contact with each other. Thank
you, Madam Chair. She has a
response please. Oh, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair, representative,
yes, I, I completely agree and I
am totally.
For AI in medicine and helping.
Patients and practitioners. I
think it's going to be great,
but again, my concern is that we
still have a human who's
overseeing the the final care
and.
We talked about um this about AI
and these kind of issues, um,
what happens like happened at my
clinic last week when the power
went down, somebody hit the pole
and then there's no AI and we
couldn't do our medical records.
It was we couldn't access
anything, but it was OK because
we could still see patients, but
if you're in a small community
and the only thing that's
driving your healthcare system
is maybe.
Um,
You know, somebody that has a
high school education that's
tapping something into the AI
bot, um, and somebody comes in.
In distress then we're harming
people, so we want to continue
to have that ability to have.
High, highly trained clinicians
to have humans practice medicine
and use AI as the tool. It's a
great tool and practice to the
top of our license.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
think that's very, very true,
and the token of, as he
indicated, all of these
AIs were attached to a human
doctor. So that was the
immediate flag that when the
patient was going awry, the
doctor was notified, and at that
point the doctor stepped back in
and overtook and, and, and made
immediately and I think it's
about a response time, um.
When we look at response times
as a state in our ambula care
and stuff, we do pretty good in,
in.
Urban areas, but the world has
nothing. So just say old elderly
person that may have a need.
They can program it in there to
remind them to, to take their
meds and it's in the basic
elementaries that even myself, I
take meds all day and I forget
sometimes. Did I take it already
or did I miss it? And I'll know
a couple of hours later, but
those are the couple of hours
that become critical and, and
decision making that was just,
you know, the lack of or the
the.
factors that come in, so I, I
would really encourage that we
look at this strongly in the
coming.
You and propose some legislation
as well to us as it was said
yesterday for what we could do
begin to start setting this up
with. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you,
doctor.
Thank you, Madam Cherry. Thank
you, Doctor Carson for this
presentation.
Um, uh, my, the, the gist of my
question has one of my questions
has been responded to and I
appreciate your responses on on
how humans will be remain a part
of this process. Please clarify.
For me though, if you would, um,
Madam Chair, my question is,
correct me if I'm wrong, but the
AI information that's gathered
and the potential treatment
that's identified from this data
that's gathered is based on an
individual, not me, for example,
I mean, it's based on me uh as a
diabetic.
It is not the diabetic patient,
it is not based on a general,
um, I can't think of a better
way to put it, but, uh, uh,
based on the information
gathered over a group of
individuals, say, Native
American female within this age
range, it is, that is not it, it
is actually based on me, the
patient, is that correct? Is my
understanding correct?
Madam Chair, representative
members of the committee, there
can be two different types of
data and AI use, so there can be
data that is just tailored just
to you where it is completely
looked at, only using your
information and making
predictions or treatment
algorithms based on what your
data shows, but
The larger models are based and
based on data that's fed into
it, and that is where we get
into what's called bias issues
because a lot of that data that
is fed in can come from even a a
they can come from scientific
journals that are even peer
reviewed and considered very
good journals, but they didn't
look at Native American women
when they did their studies.
They looked at
White males in their 50s and so
the data that was read in and
that the artificial intelligence
is producing and the
recommendation is not tailored
to the Native American woman. It
is tailored to the 50 year old
white male. And so those are
and, and that's where we end up
with those biases and the um
many of the AI AI algorithms
have been
Found to have bias um for um,
for instance,
Because of some of the lower
socioeconomic, um.
Issues, so, um, with um
some a Native American perhaps
they don't seek as much health
care so when an AI algorithm is
looking at the number of Native
Americans that seek healthcare
and the number of um you know,
Albuquerque, um.
Citizens that seek health care,
it says the Native Americans
must be healthier because they
don't seek a lot of healthcare
and the people that live in
Albuquerque need more support,
so it will actually give a
higher support rating to the
person from Albuquerque, then
maybe the Native American from
the reservation because of that.
That bias that it sees because
it doesn't understand that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Doctor Carson for
your response, because that's
where um my concern was
building, uh speaking of Native
Americans specifically in many
surveys and um other tools, uh,
instruments that are being used
to gather information often
we're identified as other,
um.
It just is, we, we're accustomed
to that and the concern is in
giving this in and having this
um incorrect, um,
Uh
Designation as um Albuquerqueans
have been healthier versus
Native Americans.
It also comes into and I, I, I
think you can apply this in many
places, but the concern that I
have is isn't that we don't seek
care in this example, it was not
seeking that we don't seek care.
It's about the accessibility to
care and the opportunity to
access care whether it's even
providers or health plans or um
medical deserts as, as, as we've
heard, so um thank you for that
response.
Um, I'm sure I'll have more
questions later on, but uh for
the moment, I appreciate the
response. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
N Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
a quick question. Doctor Carson,
which isn't really that quick in
a sense. I'm concerned about the
impact of the future training of
our medical professionals. What,
when you trained, I think you
trained at UNM. What year did
you have a body to dissect and
was it you working alone or with
the
Ha
Madam Chair and Representative,
I am graduated.
In 1997, so I did have a um a
kid we did still had cadaver
labs and I trained with, um, 3
other students. So there were 4
of us that each were able to
have a cadaver, so our lab was
quite large, um, I would say
there were probably 30 cadavers,
um, and so, yes, it, it has
changed, um, and
Maybe some or some for the worse
and some for the better, I'm
sure, and I, I think the most
important thing with artificial
intelligence is the education is
that we have to make sure that
our newly trained doctors that
are doctors that are in training
understand what this is and how
to use it and how to.
Get information from it and
understand whether that
information like we talked about
is biased or how it could be
wrong and then to be able to use
it in the right manner.
Right, cause Madam Chair, I'm
just concerned that the human
touch.
I mean, I had to learn to give
myself fertility shots. I
practiced on an orange. It's
very different, giving yourself
a shot or a human being and so
just I think we have to really
watch that training involves the
real body because I think we all
have doctors, uh, that still
touch us and it's totally
different than a doctor that
sits just with the computer
looking at tests. Just my
comment and concern as we go
forward.
All right, I believe that that's
all the questions. Thank you for
educating us in on um AI and
medicine. We get questions, I
get questions all the time on
where is it good, where is it
not? Um, my brother's a doctor
and he's starting to believe um
in, in using AI and um seeing
the benefits of it. But um thank
you again for coming down here
and educating us. Appreciate
Adam chair members of the
committee. Thank you for having
me. I appreciate it and I will,
um, I don't know if you need to
reach me, Mark. It's stated you
needed, um, do you want me to?
Send you, you can send them my
email. Would that be easiest?
OK. If you have any questions,
feel free to reach out. Thank
you again. Yes.
All right. Our last topic is
water data act update, um, many
of you, I don't know how many of
you have heard about the Water
Diet Act, but this is something
I think the whole legislature
needs to hear about and know
where we're at and how important
water is, and we have the most
important person in the room is
Stacy. She knows everything, so
if you have questions, she is
ready, um, uh, she's been here
for 2 days with water, so I know
she's just gonna.
Do, do well, thank, thank you,
Stacy.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I beg
to differ that I don't know. I
don't know everything actually.
So happy to talk about water
data and it's an honor to be
here with you all committee
members.
Um, handouts coming around and
we have slides.
Maybe I'll give it a minute.
To get there. Um, for now, I'll
go ahead and start with
introducing myself. I am uh the
associate director for
hydrogeology programs at the New
Mexico Bureau of Geology, um,
the
Background on me is I was born
in Nebraska, grew up in Ohio,
and have lived in New Mexico for
more than half of my life now,
so I consider myself mostly New
Mexican. Um, the Bureau of
Geology is the State Geologic
survey, uh, we're, we're a
non-regulatory state agency here
in New Mexico Tech over around
the corner of campus with a
little water feature out front.
Nice mineral museum. Feel free
to stop by on your way out
today, um, we're, we're under
New Mexico.
Tech and that means we're under
the higher education section of
the state budget and not the
executive branch directly.
I'm going to proceed with my
slides cause you have them on
paper, I believe, in your hands.
Um, I'm on slide 2. So just to
kind of introduce you to the
Water Data Act, uh, this was
legislation that passed, so the
presentation has
This on the front.
Yes, well, maybe.
Ha
A big blue block at the very
bottom on the front page.
Do you have the sites?
Senator Souls has it.
They should have each of your
handouts. OK, so the handouts
include, I'll just review that
real quick, um, the presentation
which has
I think
14 slides.
They all have a blue bar at the
top.
There's also the water data
plan, which I will talk about
here momentarily.
And there's a one pager um save
the date. So I'm talking about
right now going through slides.
Like this. OK.
So
The Water Data Act was
legislation passed in 2019. Um,
the primary sponsors on this
bill, there were many of them,
but the primary sponsors were um
representative Melanie Stansbury
and Representative Miguel
Armstrong. They got the ball
rolling and then others joined
in, um, the, the legislation
involved as it does over the
year or the, I think it was a 60
day session that year. Um, in
the end, it came out that uh 5
agencies are listed as directing
agencies, the Bureau of Ge
named as the convening agency
working with the Interstate
stream Commission Office of the
State Engineer, the Environment
Department and Energy Minerals
in Natural resources and the
main goal of the Water Data Act
is that New Mexico's agencies
will um do better at sharing our
water data, integrating that
data, and, and managing it in
the agencies individually. New
Mexico is the 2nd state in the
country to adopt legislation to
have uh open and
are accessible water data just
behind California and since then
there's been another state,
Oregon, that has adopted a water
data uh legislation as well. Uh,
the photo on the bottom of slide
2 is um from our first meeting
with the um directing agencies.
There's only a few of the agency
leaders that have remained.
Since then, but the the the
inevitable process of state
government. OK, on the slide 3,
just kind of like the high level
points that I want to get across
to you guys today, some of the
successes of the Water Data Act.
Um, I, I think.
Overall, like I see this work as
turning a big ship. We have been
doing our water data in the same
way for decades, and we're
starting to shift how we do
that. So we have had about 5
years now working on this where
we started to turn that ship
around and do things in a
different way. And that
involves, you know, kind of
different mindset in the
agencies about how we consider
our data and that it is no
longer OK to just keep that data
on paper and shove it in a box
under your desk. We need to make
that.
more accessible and more
transparent. So that's kind of
an example of what's going on
under the hood for some of this.
Um, there's been a tremendous
improvement in interagency
coordination. So those 5
directing agencies as well as
many others are now
communicating on a regular basis
through numerous venues that we
help coordinate um to, to make
it so that they're talking at
least and also learning from
each other in different data
management, um, lessons learned
and applications that
We have tried or have had
successes or failures with. Um,
we have been really improving
the data literacy of our state
agencies, so people are more
aware of what modern data
management looks like, um, all
of the agencies, I'm happy to
report, um, have now started
utilizing uh APIs. This was a
word thrown out in 2019 and a
bunch of people looked at us
like, what? So API is an
application programming
interface. It's basically the
Language that computers speak
talking to each other. And so
APIs are now in place at each of
the 5 directing agencies that
didn't exist prior to 2019. So
this is a massive improvement as
well. Most of the state agencies
that are in the water Data Act
have improved the funding toward
staffing and, and data tools
that they need. So, um, I'll
talk a little bit more about
that, but that's a, uh, in the,
when the legislation passed,
there was no funding for it. Um,
and so.
That has a, an improvement right
there just to have funding at
some of these agencies. And then
we're also seeing um
Kind of the, the end goal of all
of this is that data are more
integrated so that you don't
have to go and search at the
Environment Department for water
quality data and then go over to
the Bureau of Geology for water
quality data. You go to a place
where you get all of the data on
water quality and you don't have
to go and search into every
agency's um portal for, for
data. So that's also starting to
happen now as well. Um, one
thing I want to explain real
quickly on this slide is that
the um the Water Data Act is the
legislation which is
You know, the statute that
drives us to do this work, um,
we consider ourselves the water
data initiative, which is the
group of people, including other
federal, um, local, regional
data providers, the group of us
that are working together to
make data improvements. So the
initiative is also used, and
you'll see that um coming up on,
on slides along the way.
Onto slide 4, I just wanted to
highlight some of the uh
The topics that are listed in
the Water Data Act itself. The
big thing was in 2019, there was
a lot to do by January 1st of
2020. Um, we had to identify a
whole bunch of data, uh,
information and tools that are
needed for water management and
planning developed some initial
data standards, uh, set up a
data portal and also identify
any of the data that's available
or unavailable, and that came
out as a report in January of
2020. Um, numerous
Slides here have a link, a URL
to our website, which is New
Mexicowaterdata.org and all of
our reports and information are
found under the resources tab.
Um, so, and just to move on to
slide 5 in 2019, kind of our
kickoff event.
was a water data workshop which
we hosted here in New Mexico
Tech in October, and we
basically invited anyone who's
interested in learning more
about water data in New Mexico
to come and join us and, and
talk about how we want to see
the future of water data in New
Mexico. Um, the, the event
basically got, we got 80 people
together for that event and we
worked through several different
data challenges. I think it
really highlighted just how hard
it is to get water to to answer
a
question. So we had questions
around, say, um, uh, what is a,
you know, a particular water
system, what are the water
quality features of that water
system and people really had a
hard time digging in to find
some of that data. Um, so this,
this meeting was a really
important lesson for us and I
think for some of our agencies
to, to learn how we can, you
know, what, where people want to
find data and how they want to
see it in the future.
Um,
On slide 6 there's other
features that are listed in the
statute.
Uh, water research is to be
anything that's done on water
research that's paid for with
state funding is the intent of
the statute is to that that data
is to comply with the Water Data
Act, the data standards and best
practices that we've identified.
Also that the um state agencies
are encouraged to collaborate
with regional data providers and
national data efforts, so that
has um kind of been driving a
lot of our uh coordination with
local groups as well as um
national.
Uh, groups like the USGS uh EPA
and Bureau of Reclamation, for
example, um, and then item C on
this slide 6, the agencies are
to develop and submit a plan
that goes to the governor's
office and appropriate interim
legislative committees that
details things like the water
data and information needs for
the state, goals, targets,
metrics and actions as well as
budgetary resources. And so
lucky you that you scheduled
your committee just to.
The end of August because that
plan is just now finished. Um,
that plan has to be done every
year by September 1st, which is
this weekend, so now you all
have a copy fresh off the
printers of the water data plan
for this year. We'll also be
emailing this to your committee
as well as several other water
related committees and the
governor's office, uh, this
afternoon and tomorrow before
September 1st. So that plan is
statutorily required. Thank you
for receiving it.
Planning your committee at this
date. We've done this every year
since 2020, um, and so all of
the previous plans are, are
online. um there's interesting
information in each of them each
year is a little different, um,
2021, for example, highlights
some of the uh policies that may
The uh worth looking into to
improve how water data works in
New Mexico.
OK.
Onto slide 8 from this year's
plan, I just wanted to highlight
some of that funding improvement
that I mentioned. Um, so there's
a, a bar graph that I think
really displays nicely how um
New Mexico's state agencies have
improved funding, so
At the Bureau of Geology, we
have a goal of $750,000 of
recurring funding on the next
slide I'll explain what that
goes for. We have achieved
500,000 in recurring the
opposite state engineer and
interstate stream commission,
their budget is lumped together,
um, and their goal is to get to
about 1.2 million. They are at
410,000, so they have a little
ways to go. Energy, minerals and
natural resources has um
basically filled their capacity.
They, their goal
to get to about $470,000 of
recurring funding and they have
now achieved that. Um, and then
the Environment Department has
yet to receive state funding
specifically for the water Data
Act, um, and so their target is
just over $1000 of recurring
funding. So now we're seeing
it's about 1.38 million in state
funding to support water data at
the 5 directing agencies, um,
that is a really, I think, an
impressive achievement.
For for the state agencies over
the last 5 years to be able to,
to get to that point.
Um, and I also should highlight
that it is up to the agencies to
put in that budget request. So
we have over the last few years
put in a budget request through
higher education to make the
water data act um more funded at
our agency, these other agencies
have to get that through the
governor's office to be able to
even ask for that funding. So
that's um an important aspect of
this. They have a target, they
may or may not be able to
officially request that funding.
Um, on slide 9 is kind of a
graphical, uh, interface that
shows basically what that
funding is intended to work
toward, um, and then in terms of
total FTEs, the um number of
little bodies there is the total
FTEs and the blue filled ones
are the ones that are now
funded, uh, so you can see that
there's a significant um
Kind of staffing need at the
Office of the State Engineer and
Interstate Stream Commission,
for example, um, some of the
things that they need funding
for in terms of recurring costs,
all of these agencies need
staffing, uh, various data
integration database maintenance
software, um, tools of, and then
for non-recurring costs,
sometimes it's just getting
things over a hump, getting
things into a database, um, or
going through a digitization
process getting those paper data
into a format that can be now
machine readable.
Um, so that's highlighting, um,
I think what's
Just kind of a snapshot of
what's in the water data plan.
There's a lot more detail in the
appendix.
section of the water data plan
that describes um what the
agencies have accomplished in
the past year as well as their
goals for next year. So I'd
encourage you to um read through
that at your um leisure.
And um.
Learn a little bit more about
what the agencies are doing.
I think we're on slide 10 now,
looking at the governance image,
so this just kind of helps, I
think, put together how we're
coordinating this effort, so the
centerpiece of this is the
implementation team. Um, the
Bureau of Geology being the
convening agency of this, uh, we
have a team of people that are
managed by Rachel Hobbs, who's
sitting in the audience right
back here in the burgundy shirt.
Um, Rachel is the water data
program manager for the Bureau
of Geology and
She's really the coordinator of
all of the different agencies,
points of contacts, and, and um
the team of people that are
doing the data integration at
the Bureau of Geology. Um, so
the, the implementation team is
kind of moving things along,
working with these other um
working groups. So, um, up on
the top right, the executive
steering committee is comprised
of the agency leadership and
their, their CIOs or their IT
directors. Uh, the idea there is
that we speak once a
He at least with the agency
leadership to make sure that
they're understanding what's
going on with the Water Data Act
and how their agencies is
performing in terms of the
overall goals that they have set
for themselves.
The um down to the bottom right
corner, the data users working
groups are basically called upon
as needed. So if we've developed
a new application and we want to
get some feedback on how that
works for normal people. This is
a group that we pulled together
and ask for some direct input.
Um, the bottom left corner, the
technical working group is state
agency staff, a lot of times
it's people in the IT department
or in their GIS groups, some of
the um program managers at the
different state agencies.
As well as different regional
groups, so some of the counties
and municipalities participate
in this technical working group.
And the idea here is to, is to
share knowledge, to, to learn
from each other as well as um
once in a while we have out of
state or um in-state presenters
give a highlight of some of the
successes that they've had and
things that are working for them
on how they're improving their
water data. Um, that working
group has just shifted from
monthly meetings to quarterly
meetings, um, so they're meeting
on a regular basis that
Um, and then up at the top left
corner, the directing agencies'
team is also meeting on a
quarterly basis. This is the
group of people that's like each
agency has a point of contact so
that we have a direct person in
that agency that works between
different data.
Collectors data users in the
agency as well as up the chain
um to their leadership to make
sure that everyone's on the same
page with what the agencies
tasks are related to water data
and where to go for, for more
information. That point of
contact is a really important
person. And so there's a team of
people there that meet quarterly
as well.
And to slide 11, which isn't
numbered, I'm afraid, but um I
just wanted to kind of highlight
the that topic I mentioned at
the beginning that we are seeing
a real improvement in
coordination between agencies.
So just having these quarterly
meetings where people get
together and talk about what
they're doing on water data has
really helped build more
cohesiveness between some of
these state agencies. Um,
additionally, we host a big
annual meeting, um, chair,
chairwoman.
Sena was there at our annual
meeting this year and I really
appreciate that attendance. We
had over 150 people attend an
annual meeting of about 15
people came from out of state to
learn, to see what we're doing
in New Mexico. New Mexico is
basically leading the way in
terms of how um states can can
achieve this sort of data
modernization effort. Um, we had
a lot of presentations and good
discussions at that annual
meeting. We also have done a
technology adoption program
working just
With the directing agencies, so
we give their teams a chance to
get together and talk about
water data. And then as I
mentioned the different working
groups, um,
The other thing I think is
really been a learning
experience for several of us
working on water data in New
Mexico is being able to go to
national meetings. We've been
invited to a number of high
level national uh workshops
where they're, they're inviting
us because they want to learn
what we're doing and how we're
doing it, um, here in New Mexico
so that they can do the same in
their states. And so, um I think
that's a really impressive
accomplishment for our state to
have this uh kind of level of
Um,
I don't know, just high level uh
appreciation around the country
for the work that we're doing.
Um, slide 12 is um kind of some
of the terms that maybe we're a
little foreign to our agencies
previously, um, so terms like
fair, which is findable, uh,
accessible, interoperable,
reusable. These are features
that we really need to be
thinking about when we're
dealing with any data, but
especially with our water data
here in New Mexico so that we
can be um making sure that
people know where to find it and
that anything that we collect,
say, getting a water sample from
a
monitoring well and a water
level measurement at that well,
that data is useful for a
specific purpose for satisfying
their quarterly report and
compliance to the Environment
Department, but it's also
reusable for aquifer mapping,
and that's the kind of thing
that we're aiming to, to work
from. So taking any particular
data always has other reusable
features. So really trying to um
make sure people understand that
feature.
Um, so a lot of these terms are,
I think, just kind of common
sense, uh, but really important
for us to uh acknowledge that
these weren't common prior to
2019, prior to the Water Data
Act, and so people are really
improving how we're managing and
appreciating data.
Um, onto slide 13.
The, um, we have a couple of
different ways that we're, we're
getting data together. Um, one
of the easiest entry points
right now is our data catalog
and there's a URL link and it's
all findable from our website
directly. Um, this is a place
where we are listing data and
metadata that describe the data,
um, that, that people can start
with to, to see, do we know
where your data is? This is that
findable feature that we're
talking about with fair data,
um, a lot of these data.
Features are like Excel
spreadsheets, some of them are
links to other websites. This is
just the first entry point for
us to, to make sure that we know
where New Mexico's water data
is. Um, the goal is then to take
those data and make sure that
they're available through an API
that can then be integrated with
other similar data. And so, um,
the previous conversation and
the um uh doctor talking about
uh artificial intelligence that
may be something that we can do
once we have
Integrated data and really start
working through it and finding
the errors or cleaning the data
or, or even doing some more
detailed mapping, um, using the
data once it's been integrated
through an API.
So on the slide 14, there's a uh
artistic rendition of what water
data integration can look like,
um, up at the top of the image,
the idea here is that there are
numerous data sources. There's
um regional data providers. An
example of that is Bernalio
County collecting a whole lot of
water level data. There's state
data from the different state
agencies. There's research data
at our universities, um, and
other kind of smaller group
citizen science included. And
then there's federal data
they're being collected, and
each of those data sources have
a place that they put the data,
ideally not in a shoebox, but in
a database or in a spreadsheet
that's machine readable and
electronically available. Then
that data can be ported to the
data catalog so that we know
that it's there. And then from
that data catalog, some of those
are directly available through
an API from the data catalog.
Others are say in a geo database
that's in an Ezri RGIS.
platform those also have an API
endpoint and we can pull that
through that API and start to
put it together with other
similar data. And so as you get
to the kind of center point of
this image, there's a currently
a beaver dam is our schematic
right now. That is the place
where all of these APIs come
together and are able to be
integrated so that we're lining
up data features of similar
nature, um, all of our
groundwater level data, for
example, are all in the same.
units, we may have to do a
transformation to switch the
coordinates to the right
coordinate systems so that they
all line up together. Um, water
quality features might be um
have to have a little
transformation there too where
the units have to line up,
things like that can be put
together through once it's in an
API put that together into this
federated data model and then
the output of that is a unified
data set that can be used for
features like dashboards so we
can quickly see what is the
trend, um, or what are the, what
is the
An analysis that we need to
address in a particular region.
Um, and so a lot of our energy
right now is focused on this,
this bottom half where we're
integrating data features and
building the um visuals and
analytical tools. Um, I just
want to quickly highlight a
couple of successes now at each
of the agencies, um, slide 15 is
talking about some of the
environment department's
improvements on water data. Um,
this agency hasn't received
state funding for water data.
But they have been able to use
other grants and um funding.
Avenues within the agency to
actually make massive
improvements in how they're
doing water data. So, um, some
of their EPA grants, for
example, have a requirement to
make data publicly available, so
they're using that to help them
make it available for New Mexico
water data. Um, their
groundwater Quality Bureau, one
example right there is that they
have been receiving quarterly
reports from monitoring wells
across the state, and they have
all been put into files on a
shelf and so they are now going
through a process of digitizing
that and so they've they've made
massively
this year towards digitizing
paper data. Um, there's also a
uh new development there with a
water quality permitting
application database that's
gonna help them um manage water.
So groundwater discharge permits
in particular, and the water
quality features that are coming
from those, um, and they've also
set up an API interface where um
people have different um
categories, the data providers
and the data users can, can
access, can put data in and can
also get data back out uh
through an API uh that's
directly available, that's what
the screenshot is on slide 15.
On Slade 16 energy minerals and
natural Resources Department.
This is the agency that has now
2 funded positions. They have
made a big leap ahead this year
in setting up an API that's now
uh useful for looking at any
water quality data related to
coal mines, so most of our coal
mines are no longer active, but
there was water quality data
collected there. And so we're
able to reuse that data for
other applications now directly
available through this API. This
isn't public, it's now, it's in
a
Beta review process, but it will
be available by the end of this
year. The other data set that's
coming through this is related
to the oil and gas, um.
Wells and the water that's
coming out of those and so
there's a new data features
coming available from Enerd in
that category as well.
Slide 17 is related to the
office of the State engineer and
Interstate stream commissions,
um, improvements. They have uh
basically Ezri is a um kind of a
proprietary interface, but they
created an open data portal
using that uh software so that
anybody can go pull data through
um related to, uh, they have
some of their water rights, um.
The the the the uh points of
diversion features listed in
this data portal. Um, there's a
whole lot of other features in
there that um we're now able to
access directly using an API.
Um, one of the things I wanted
to also highlight is, so we got
a grant at the Bureau of Geology
about 3 years ago from the
Bureau of Reclamation through
Water Smart program, uh, and
that federal money helped us
start a project with Pecos
Valley Artesian Conservancy
District. So the local um
Water, um, kind of working with
the state engineer's office,
they regulate the groundwater
use in the Pagos Valley, um,
that project, uh, basically
launched an effort that while
PVACD was working to improve
their data, working with us, it
was also um pushed to the office
of the State Engineer in their
district office to also improve
how their data were being
managed. And so what's happening
down there is now the state
engineer's office, the, the
water master in particular has a
tablet
that they can go out and collect
meter readings on the on the
wells that they're their
oversight is um required for,
and then it can send a direct
message to the PVACD when
there's an error or a glitch in
the meter or something like
that. So now it's not required
that somebody has to pick up a
phone and say, hey, this thing's
not working. Oh, where are you?
I don't know, it's just well
over here off of this road, like
now it's electronically
happening, it's geospatial,
it's, it's working in a much
more efficient way. Um, it's
still
Kind of, we're working through
some of the features, but uh
it's massively impressive to me
that in 3 years these two
organizations are now working in
a much more like advanced
digital format.
Um, just a couple more slides,
uh, slide 18 is just to
highlight some of the work that
we've done at the Bureau of
Geology in particular, you know,
our role is
Convening the water data
initiative and working on the
integration of multiple data
sets, but we also have our own
water data that we collect and
have to make available. So, um,
we have been, um, alongside of
working on this kind of the, the
beaver dam integration effort we
have uh data features so when we
go out and do a regional
hydrogeology study and collect
water level measurements or
collect a bunch of water quality
samples or recharged age of the
groundwater, that data is also
made
so that others can reuse that
through um some of our portals
and so there's a couple of
screenshots there you can use a
map tool to go and find where we
have data, select those regions
and pull that data down. This is
helping us to get ready for what
we need to be doing in terms of
aquifer characterization for New
Mexico. So I um I'm excited that
the Water Data Act passed 5
years ago and now we can utilize
that to more quickly and
efficiently um map our aquifers
and um
Kind of launched the next phase
of aquifer characterization will
more quickly move through the
figuring out where the data gaps
are because we have that.
Ready to go through the water
Data Act efforts.
Um, our last slide here is just
acknowledging there is so much
work that happens. I am um
just honored to be presenting on
behalf of this group. There is a
lot of people at each of the
state agencies the points of
contacts and their team members
that are helping to make the
water data more accessible for
us to use, um, people who really
care about making sure their
data is useful. Um, we've got a
lot of data providers, um.
City of Albuquerque Water
Authority, the Berlio County,
uh, EBID MRGCD. There's, if you
look through the data catalog,
it's an impressive number of
regional data providers that are
also participating and want to
make sure that their data is
accessible, um, the funding for
this, though state funding has
been increasing. We've also been
able to get grants from, from
the Bureau of Reclamation, for
example, and philanthropic
contributions from Healy
Foundation, Thornberg
Foundation, and the Water
Foundation, who all care to see
that New Mexico is moving
forward
Um, in a, in a positive way on
this, and there's a lot of other
collaborators that aren't listed
here, but I just really want to
acknowledge and appreciate you
all as well for the support that
we've had uh for the Water Data
Act. So that's all I have, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you for your presentation.
Any questions?
OK.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Stacy. I think all of us who I'm
over here.
You see me here, you see me
there. Um, thank you, and as I
went to my first water, um,
event, anyone who hasn't been to
the New Mexico Water leadership.
It's fabulous, and that's what
my question is.
So now we're getting a handle on
the data.
But data can be used very
selectively by the divide the
diverse people we have produced
water situations. We have wells
that are drying up. What is the
role of your agency in pointing
out issues. Do you do any of
that?
Who, you know, as legislators,
that's part of our
responsibility, but.
How do you do that or do you do
that?
Yes, um, Madam Chair,
Representative, the, I, I think
that is, so we're not
regulatory. We, we don't have
the capacity to say, oh, you
need to do this, go get a meter
on your wall. That's not our
job. But the, I think it is in
our role and also within the
role of the Water Data Act to
highlight where there are data
gaps and to highlight where
there's problem.
I would say, you know,
Problem areas in terms of we're
not doing enough, and that has
been something that we have
definitely been highlighting the
presentation I gave on Tuesday
for the Water and Natural
Resources Committee. Um, I tried
to highlight that we're not
monitoring our groundwater in
enough places at a high enough
frequency to see some of those
trends where we're seeing
declining groundwater levels or
aquifers beginning to dry up.
There's places where we do have
high density, but there's a lot
of rural communities that are
not monitored at all. So
absolutely
That's within the realm of what
we should be doing and it's
something I, I hope we can
continue to highlight through
the water leaders workshops.
Thank you for reminding me about
that, April 14th to 16th, you
have to save the date in your
hand. Yes.
Thank you, and, and I think our
struggle as legislators is some
of us were at that committee,
most of us weren't, and getting
the word out there and just what
was pointed out with the
spaceport, the constant um.
Message through the media, you
know, now we have all this
online media which frankly is
one of my best sources now
because they're those on there's
like 4 to 6 online media
agencies that are doing those
kind of deep dives into issues
and increasingly being effective
and actually reaching
legislators. So just keep
reaching out with that to all of
us, but, but thank you for
everything because as, as you're
giving the presentation.
You know, I'm at the 5 points on
the Chalma River that we
visited, and then um
representative Herrera all of a
sudden the Chama River
overflowed, and they fixed it,
it rained again a week later,
they fixed it again and so it
really brought the three
dimensional experiential thing
that is so powerful in line with
the data, so thank you for
everything you and everybody who
works with you does.
Thank you, Representative. Next
is Representative Little.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Um, I was at the session
you had in um uh out at Ghost
Ranch and was uh really excited
about being able to see it from
that.
Perspective, um, and, uh.
have been, I have been in the
past, Madam Chair, involved in
some very periphery, um, uh,
events related to tribal waters
use, and that's where my
question is going, uh, I was
pleased to see that there was
representation there by
leadership and representatives
of the tribal leaders, but can
you please tell me, um, Madam
Chair, I'm interested in finding
out the composition of the
tribal stakeholders in the task
force, um.
Perhaps uh where in the process
or in these entities, they play
a role and on this task force
are there permanent seats that
are uh identified for tribal
stakeholders. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Little, that's a uh
Continued issue that we are
working to improve on the
there has been attempts and
invitations issued numerous
times to participate. We, we
had, um, at the water workshop
in May of this year, we had a
number of of tribal
representatives that attended um
in terms of their data
representation in the work that
we're doing, um, because what
we're our, our idea is to have
the data be completely open and
trans.
Parent and accessible for
everyone to use. There's been
some, some resistance there. Um,
one way that we're working on,
um,
Kind of trying to to work this
out is working with we're doing
some interviews right now with,
with tribal entities to get a
sense of like how they would
like to participate. What, what
level of comfort might they have
in working with us. Um, one idea
is to have, um, within some of
our data tools, what we can do
is, is perhaps have their data
viewed along with other data
where their data isn't actually
held by us but by them, and then
they can compare to
See what's happening in the
surrounding regions around them,
to know just a little bit more
about what, what is the
composition, what is the context
of water issues in that, in that
particular region. Um, I'd be
really open to working with you
or others on building that that
um direct connection and um
Kind of setting up a couple of
seats where we can work more
directly because it has been for
us a little bit of a challenge
to get a regular attendee to, to
join us and there are a lot of,
um, I think EPA funded platforms
where data are the topic, um,
and, and we do get invited to
attend and give presentations
there. It just hasn't made a a
full connection with our state
effort.
At this point yet, so, um,
definitely a place where I
would.
I like to grow the program for
sure.
Uh, thank you so much for that
response, Madam Chair, um, I
think, uh appreciate the
response and I think that the
acknowledgment about the data
sovereignty issues are, um, uh.
are real and something to be uh
a challenge to uh resolve, uh,
or to find some agreement on and
I'd be happy to help uh to do
what I can, um, when I, you
know, when I have the
opportunity to do so, but, um.
I think that that is a really
key as they are the primary.
Uh, um.
Oh, I just lost the thought, um.
Senior paramount, um.
Owners of the water here. So,
um, think you have those uh
rather have the um designation,
um, as such. So thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I appreciate the
information.
Thank you, Representative. Next
is Senator Lopez, I mean
Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and
good morning, Tracy. Good to see
you. Um, I remember seeing you
the last time at the Water
leaders uh workshop, where were
we in Las Cruces? Yeah, they
call thank you for your great
work. I learned a lot and I
realized how much more I need to
learn, but, um, you know, one of
the things that I saw firsthand
in your presentations was the
fact that we are truly so
dependent on data collection,
accurate and.
Always adequate, not only
accurate, but enough of it to be
able to make informed decisions
about our water. And so I guess
we always knew how necessary
that was, but when I saw you
present it and you, you depicted
it really well on the screens
and so I thought, wow, you know,
this, this is really big. We
need to have this, but just a
quick question, Madam Chairman,
and then I'll I'll move on, but
uh Tracy, how are you or are you
collaborating to get this data
and enough of it.
How do you, how are you
collaborating with state
departments, for example, say
the state engineer's office,
Interstate streams Commission,
um, energy and minerals, um, and
others, I don't know who else I
had here, but uh to leverage
more data uh that we need. Uh,
can you tell me briefly about
that? Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Yup. No, thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and Senator, the, I think
that the data.
collaboration between the
agencies. This is definitely
been improving over the years.
It used to be where I had to
call up the Environment
department and ask them to send
me a spreadsheet of all of their
public water systems and how do
I get to this? We're now at a
point where I know where to go,
people know where to go to find
those sorts of data. Um, and I
think that the um
Kind of upcoming collaborations,
basically highlighting the point
that you're making about data,
data gaps and not having enough
data, we have been responding to
the governor's 50-year water
action plan which highlights the
need for improved water
monitoring in particular, um,
our ideas to establish at least
100 new monitoring sites that
are dedicated for monitoring
the, the monitoring that we do
now.
In terms of like water quality
monitoring for permits, those
are dedicated monitoring wells,
but many, many, many of the
other sites that we monitor
groundwater levels, and to some
extent water quality are just
reused wells. There's somebody's
domestic well or their
irrigation well. Um, those data
are not gonna be perfect because
they're not necessarily drilled
for the purpose of monitoring.
They may not go all the way into
the aquifer. They may not have
um screened intervals at the
right zones to actually capture
what the aquifer looks like, so
we're
Really hoping to, and, and we
are um currently collaborating
with the Office of the State
Engineer and the Interstate
Stream Commission to highlight
places where we need to um add
some of these monitoring sites
and then go out and and drill
those wells for the purpose of
monitoring, uh, so that we know
exactly what's going on, and
they may be wells that are
drilled at multiple zones so
that we're tracking multiple
different aquifers and
different.
Steps, um,
And so
Yeah, and we go back and forth
with those agencies very, very
frequently as we're looking at
groundwater level trends as
we're mapping the aquifers, uh,
we, there are many gaps that
we're identifying that we're
working to improve on, so I
think that's.
Also an area to continue to
improve on, um, but also stuff
that we've, we've worked on in
the last 5 years, I think is
solidified those connections and
relationships so we, we know
where the data are right now for
the most part.
Thank you. And that's was my
main point. Thank you for
explaining that because you know
where the data is, but it seems
like there needs to be quite a
bit of uh of collaboration and
offering to help from the state
level, state departments, and so
on back to you and vice versa,
just so that you can all uh
collaborate and, and work
together where, where we can do
it, uh, not after we realize we
need it, but prior to and so um
thank you so much for all that
you do consider.
And your uh limited resources
many times. I got to see that
too. So thanks again and Madam
Chairman, that's all I have for
now. OK.
Thank you, um, for, um, Senator,
um, I have a, I just, I don't
have any questions cause I think
um over the last year and a
half, I've learned so much. um,
when I first started coming to
these things, I didn't even know
what a sia was, so I have
learned so much, um, and, and I
think Monday and Tuesday, um,
things started to click and come
together, so I'm very happy, but
and I just want to thank you and
um I think you kind of bring
everyone together, um, there's
so many people who work on water
in our state, and they work so
hard and what.
is so important, so we need to
just continue to fund you and
give you everything you need.
I'll try to do that as much as I
can do, but I wanted everyone to
hear this who who doesn't
normally hear about water and,
and what's happening around our
state. Um, I want to make, put a
plug in for this. A few of us
went to this um this year, and
it was wonderful and we learned,
I know I learned so much, um,
but all the things you do, if
you could keep us involved, the
legislature in the meetings you
have just so we can keep
learning and and push.
For
Your knees and water needs and
the state's needs. But again,
thank you for everything. Um, I
appreciate you coming on this
4th day of being here. Um, um,
and, and I appreciate everything
you do. Thank you.
Um, on the schedule, we have no
more, we have no public
comments, so Mark wants to talk
a little bit, if you don't mind.
OK.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Is a director, uh.
Timmons was talking about all
the wonderful things and how
other states and the federal
government are coming to New
Mexico to learn about our data
act uh processes. It reminded me
that Representative Garrett had
asked for a listing or to
highlight things where where New
Mexico ends up number one and
something. And I wanted to make
sure everyone on the committee
knew that uh this year NCSL
awarded our website, the online
democracy Award.
It is a national award given
out.
For making democracy usable in a
user friendly and outstanding in
an outstanding way, and they
particularly highlighted the ADA
uh accessibility of our website.
This is the 2nd time that we've
won that award, by the way, so
your LIS team, your IT team for
LCS is doing an outstanding job.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you all again for coming
and staying, and we are
adjourned.
