Good morning everywhere we're
gonna hit and get started with
the science technology and tell
the communications committee
welcome it was agreed drive up
here to last almost it's so
fresh freshing a parent's
beautiful
first off I want to think and
the last almost county for
hosting us today and they will
be our first speakers so if you
would like to come up we have
and the rents will be speaking.
From las almost canny and she
has other people who will she
will introduce so thank you
oh i'm sorry before we do that
let me introduce the committee
sorry alright let's do a quick
introduction of the committee
will start with them
representative martinez
thank you management chair my
name is alan mortin is I
represent house district to
twenty three in sunborn county
it's a.
Northern end of reorangu and the
west.
Part of the town happy to be
here
good morning madame chair ample
ended to heal behind the
computer screen here
senate for senate district
twenty four which is really the
city of santa fe so happy to be
here this morning.
Good morning madam chair
representative christine
chandler and i'm fortunate
enough to represent this
beautiful county and really
appreciate it of all of our
staff that have come in the
county manager and others who
were gonna share with you some
of the things that we've been
doing here thank you
good morning manager peter worth
senators for twenty five not on
this committee this year but
wanted to come up for this
agenda which I think it's going
to be very interesting thank you
madame share.
Good morning manner chair i'm
joy guarantee a represent
northwest alva kirky when you
see the volcanoes that is the
spiritual and physical center of
my district
think you will go hidden start
with senator devices
thank you madame share I am
senator in a call to buyers then
I represent district twenty one
which is northeast albert
good morning madame chair i'm
senator and thought and I
represent east mountains fabric
that includes a.
You could say everything used to
tram way in the morning already
edgewood and stanley so
I have happy to be here i'm a ex
sandy alabsa official and
forecast and there for twenty
seven years some read to hear be
appeared our sister apps twenty.
Good morning I bill soles state
senator from last crucials area
represent the beautiful organ
mountain desert peaks national
monument area these bases side
of los crucials are very pleased
to be up here were nason cool
and beautiful and green were
starting to get them on soons
down there and starting to green
up but not like up here so it's
very nice being here thank you
considered next to good advice
here thank you madame chair my
name is good morning everyone my
name's heather bert men's and
i'm the senator for district
fifteen which is in midtown
albert ricky and I am also glad
to be appear in the mountains.
All right next week and interest
our staff market interest
thank you madame chair my name
is mark edwards and with the
legislative council service and
the woman that's walking across
here is.
I joined mine to give who is lcs
librarian and staff in this
committee and the general and
they with the beard and glasses
next to her is willing mason
another staffer from the
legislative council service
thank you.
In.
Over in the corner doing our
webcasting this is david
gonzalez i'm sorry to forgot new
david
thank you mark and I am there be
seriously represent house
district twenty one and brittle
you county the monzano high
school area right next to items
at the senate
welcome welcome to this
committee we have some great
topics this today and and things
to our mark here we have some
excellent presenters so we will
go ahead and get started with
the rent thank you.
I'll think you chair thank you
senators and representatives for
coming up to los alamas today
thank you for committee staff
i'm really appreciate being
giving the opportunity to talk a
little bit about los alamos and
share a little bit about the
community we love and them want
to take care of really well so
i'm just gonna go through the
slides in this hand out that is
branded less almost county and
i'll try to call out slide
numbers just so you know which
one there is a bit of an order
issue so we'll point that out
when we go through it but uhm
just want to say thank you for
being here and welcome welcome
we hope you enjoy your day.
Um slide two I just wanted to
introduce and my colleagues here
i've got mister john roy keys
our chief information officer
for the county
mr jerry smith who is our
broadband manager and i've got
mister ben oric or deputy
utility manager in charge of
electric product.
Going to keep moving on to slide
three because I think these
folks have really information
interesting information that is
going to be uhm.
Uh one you're gonna want to ask
some questions so I want to make
sure that you give some time for
that so on slide three and so I
tell you a little bit about the
solemnity county we we are
growing within the last several
years we are actually up to
about ninety just over nineteen
thousand residents we are still
building housing and we
certainly hope to peak over
twenty thousand in the near
future we do also have a
significant number of
communities work force into the
community every day it varies
depending on the day but we
estimate around anywhere from
eight thousand and twelve
thousand depending on what's
going on we are a unique
community in that we are type
each community were combined
city county so you'll see that
some of our functions are both
municipal
and county so it's it's just a
little bit of a hybrid and so
because of that you know our
budgets are so a bit unique in
that it is you know relatively
large for community of our size
but there are some reasons for
that uh hundred and twenty two
million of our three hundred and
sixty eight recently adopted
budget is our general fund
revenues in about seventy two
percent of that comes from gross
receipts tax so when gross
receipts tax vary that can
really go up and down quite
significantly
we do have a cooperative
agreement to offer to provide
fire protection services to the
laboratory through our fire
department and that equates to
about fifty million dollars a
year of specialized training q
clearances i'm specialized gear
it's it's amazing the the
abilities of our fire department
and for community of our size we
are so very fortunate to have
that kind of protection here in
our community.
We are so arm are a public
utility and so not only are do
we do water we do gas and
electric instorm rotter as well
so because of that we are a
public utility and we have
significant cars and projects as
well as revenues associated with
being a public utility.
Okay i'll move to slide for.
Um
and just wanted to give you a
visual of how that breaks down
but you can see between the fire
department and utility in that
page hurt that there's a
significant amount.
That.
But I will keep moving in two
slide five.
And I was asked to talk a little
bit about federal budget impacts
on our community because with
the national loss almost
national laboratory big been the
biggest employer in the
community so much so that we're
importing.
Employees that it can um we know
that when there are the budget
at the federal level we'll
significantly affect our county
operations and our budgets in
our ability to
continue to weather ups and
downs and so there's a couple
strategies we've had in place
for many many years that is we
we called very high reserves to
whether those ups and downs and
we also work really hard to put
the ups like if there's a big
capital project or something we
try to put those one time monies
in two
I just make insurers like that
trying to get my tension sorry
now it's okay
and we try to put one time
revenues that we know we're
coming in into projects that are
infrastructure or one time
expenses and try not to grow or
ongoing operations based on the
ups and downs of our budget uhm
this was the projection this
graph and on slide five is what
we showed to our council when we
adopted the fiscal year twenty
six budget and we anticipated
the uhm revenues going down and
it's important to note that it's
not just the federal budget
that's adopted but it's what's
eligible to taxable and will
generate grt so it can happen
a large budget but it doesn't
necessarily translate into
guarantee for the county to
reinvest in the community so we
anticipate a ten million dollars
reduction we are on track to see
more like a fourteen
uhm to fifty million dollars
reduction so we had actually
gross proceed tax for becoming
an significantly less that's
largely because my arm in
speaking with the laboratory
that's largely due to there's
just some changes and
administration and programs that
have slowed things down.
So with that the county is going
to be looking at this not coming
months
looking at doing a gross receipt
a tax increase to try to offset
some other reductions it won't
cover all of it but it'll least
cover the operational part.
I will move on to slide six and
as a community amount in
community in northern new mexico
we know that fire and flood
losses is the major threat
that's on our mind and what we
have learned and prepared
ourselves for
we also know that the power in
internet outages associated with
those or independently are also
very impactful to our community
and we'll talk a little bit
about that.
And then i'm certainly
an increase in threat of cyber
tax for a community.
So one slide seven.
Some of the resiliency tactics
and areas that were working on
one is the wildly and urban
interface for building codes as
well as defensible space
standards storm water
infrastructure disaster recovery
plans and systems um fiber off
the hill redundancy we currently
only have one fiber line off the
hill so now at the community has
last them complete internet
several times over last couple
of years
and then diversification of our
energy supply
so on slide eight.
Just want to talk a little bit
about hardening and redundancy
in a little more death
wi as wildly and urban interface
it's a code that goes with the
building codes like a energy
code it's some part of the
international building a code
series and it talks about the
exterior building materials like
roofs being a certain resistance
to fire like a classe it also
talks about defensible space so
clearing out landscaping
materials and combatable
materials a certain distance
away from structures as well as
keeping i'm neat entity.
And our fire department does
offer a free home assessments to
our community so we are going
out and we are seeing an a
really
large increase in people
requesting those cause they feel
vulnerable largely because they
are getting they know of someone
or have received a letter from
their insurance saying that they
might be being dropped for fire
coverage of their house so this
was kind of are mitigative
process to try to help people
and educate people and get them
in a position where as a
community we can say that we are
doing all the rate things to
maintain insurance
understorm modern management
uhm
low impact design lid standards
we've learned the hard way
through two thousand we had the
same grandday fire two thousand
eleven we had the
at less countries fire and
twenty twenty two we had the
same platform fire and with each
fire we've learned quite a bit
but with the first fire we
certainly had an enormous amount
of damage that we're also seeing
in redo so another part of the
sea that the flooding is just as
devastating a.
So some of the things we have
done over the years is upgrade
on harden our storeness storm
water pouse those are things
like retention detention to slow
down the water but also
infrastructure rip wrap and
things to protect erosion so
that the structure.
And then.
Through our emergency recovering
continued operation we have
moved to an electronic living
document platform where we go in
or reminder once a quarter to go
in and make sure all of our
contact information all of our
resources are all cataloged so
when we have an issue we don't
have to think about what are we
supposed to do we go in there
and it really holds us through
the steps uhm to how to address
in respond um and how to also
recover and continue our
operation so they're actually
separate plans but they are all
linked together and related
through tech through a software
and
also part of what's really been
a focus area for us
is keeping our technology up and
running and back up systems
during the emergency because we
know that cell phone services
can get indated or you can lose
internet or we've also learned
that not everybody has landlines
anymore and so kind of
transitioning to
um communications that we can
give people alerts and we know
that our community also wants to
know be able to sign up to get
alerts to know how things are
going and get in progress
reports along the way
using their
using their phones.
We also really have committed to
both independently as a county
but **** jointly with the
laboratory due table top
exercises cause that's where you
sort of go through the steps and
you sort of see where you're
vulnerable and you have really
good conversations about where
you can increase
our our preparedness
right I am going to on slide
nine
turn it over to john royg I do
apologize he's gonna then skip
to slid eleven slide ten just
got a little out of
order so.
Good morning.
Uh.
Now it's back on me.
And we started a few years ago
recognizing the threats to are
dana and our networks from
outside thread actors and so we
implemented two factor
authentication
back in the early january of
twenty twenty two.
With the plot other things like
i'm open to actually umbrella
which redirects I don't want to
get to take my ip traffic from
dns record things like that we
start up we have a disaster
recovery site in albuquerque I
don't know who's district that
is in its the center of square
side antiharass we've been there
for more than ten years but
right now we we make sure that
at least our ear peace system
are enterprised resource
planning system can fail over to
that wing internet operations
and that takes about ten to
fifteen minutes depending on
what's going on in the network
we've actually had the ah
pleasure of testing that
multiple times and it work.
We also have any mutable data
back up system emirable means
that the data can't be changed
when you back it up it cannot be
changed even by us internally in
this important to us we do that
every single night and we back a
more than seventy terribites of
data and that's enterprise wide.
We are transitioning from a date
from a distormant name between
that governor domain name in the
main reason for that is that
sizza under department of online
security they actually manage
all that.
People who have used that us
forever amount we think it's
better and we have and we
recently purchased in march of
this year we want live within
saver security sweet.
There allows us basically the
squeeze of services I won't go
to deep and do it but it
inspects every piece of traffic
that comes in to our network out
of our network and also between
the users of our network as well
looking for a namilies and in it
are invited a security team to
any of those in the hamilies we
can investigate.
And if I can refer you to the
the screenshot and slide eleven
that is actually ice cream shot
of one of the merit of reports
it receive from this same
security sweet and you can
notice that we have that one
weeks of data so they took in
almost ninety nine million
observations in the seven days
so this is clearly something
that we can't do is human team
we need.
Mass the high level of review of
almost counting those inside.
Cherry and broadband.
Thank you good morning
jump off into a little different
world and it it's broadband
which we are all need and
this community and the county
council
uh
has is addressing that and i'm
in the position now for three
plus years to help make some
things happen in november the
county council committed to
thirty five million for a fiber
to the home enter business
network in is it'll be ten
thousand plus homes and
businesses that will be getting
fiber we in november we did
enter into an agreement with a
vendor called bonfire which is
out of denver who will desire it
is in the process now of
designing and then building out
that
ten thousand passings network
and then the second part to that
is operating the network the
once the network is belt we have
a separate agreement that is
with banfire they have an
operation side that they will be
operating that network are the
unique thing about it is it will
be a county own network we are
funding the build but then when
it comes to operations it would
be an open access network that
will have four to six isps
available to homes and
businesses to choose from over
one single fiber into the home
or or the business
so county owned open access and
it'll be a very competitive
environment high quality and big
step forward for this community
we expect to actually start
having our first customers maybe
in the in the summer
in twenty twenty six
the next topic is.
That fiber needs to connect out
in we are working as a county
manager alarm said we are
working to have second fiber off
the hill in you know perhaps
even more than the second fiber
but we have partnered with the
public discentle the financial
and you may have seen the
construction coming up to hill
there were some barrels out in
those barrels who are where the
fiber eleven miles of fiber from
white rock down to the uh
basically the pocket high school
to connect us then out to our
other regional partner which is
ready now and redinet is the
regional middle mile network
that I will get us
the collection of entities in
this region which were one of
them that gives connectivity out
to the bigger internet so
there's a partnership going on
there and the reason that the
problem uh the sound fancy was
able to do that project is we
came alongside with the grant
that they applied for in
provided the local match or the
grant match and the officer
broadband at the state level is
who was providing the grant and
it is very key to this
to this region and as you can
imagine once that eleven mile
fiber extension is built out not
only will the county benefit but
landlines looking forward to
that and
other entities that don't have
resiliency will probably uh jump
on that like looming who has the
one fiber line is interested in
using the answer when you build
fiber things happen and look
forward to getting that turned
up perhaps by the end of the
year in in time for our
community broadband network
which is what we're calling our
local network to take advantage
of that new.
Ah fiber I do want to give kudos
to the office of broadband I do
lead a
work group that reports to the
connection to mexico council in
collaborates with office of
broadband
called
regional pain and community
engagement and we collaborate
some with the new mexico
counties association with me and
it's full league and others.
But in the recent announcement
that officer broadband made for
raton raton is getting some new
high speed fiber in that six
siding cause if we're getting
out to raton we really make it a
difference at state level so
kudos to you guys for all the
effort that that took to get
there.
So thank you.
The.
Madam chair members of the
committee thanks for having me
here this morning i'm been
alright depend utility manager
for power supply for the salmos
county very excited to be here
first time for you so i'd like
to say that thanks to an for
having me here I want to keep
great off here in strict talking
about my slides the department
of your public utilities has a
number one goal for electricity
it's to provide reliable and
cost electric cost effective
power we also have a carbon free
goal which are
i'll touch on real briefly it's
a to get carbon neutral by the
year twenty forty I keep this in
here talking about executive
order fourteen one four zero
five seven which has been
rescinded by the current
administration.
Really want to keep this in here
point out that things change
both politically and in the
markets a lot of change that we
have to adapt to and so that's
what we're doing
I want to point out that we are
partners with two DO e
laboratories most of you
probably aware that we work with
was almost national laboratory
for scheduling power resources
we also do that for sending your
curtment and therefore space
there as well send the national
lap so we have two doe partners
and we're very happy to share
that relationship and want to
continue building that.
We have a goal to build a
diverse generation in storage
portfolio to serve the needs of
both facilities with both
dealing facilities and the
country's needs with a goal to
move forward and deal with all
the dynamic markets that were
seeing now though we are looking
at new regionalization of the
markets
p and m has elected to join the
extended day head market which
will tires to a more resources
both electrically and
transmission wise.
Moving on to the next slide I
would like to say this is a
little dated but it does
demonstrate that we do use a
formal process for identifying
what are electrical load and
resources are needed for the
future
we have to make sure that we get
the best value for our customers
and our dealer partners
I won't go into a great details
here
but we are looking always at any
new resources we can get right
now we have on track a a large
solar tv and storage facility
that and we are very excited to
see come online at the end of
next year if i'll go as well
looking forward to seeing that
happening mostly because while
it is carbon in neutral power it
also is the cheapest most
effective and economical power
we can get at the time we get
gone by any other resource for
less than the cost of pb so
we're happy to see this coming
along
the next slide talks about all
the things we look at and we've
gone through a number of
resources in particular we were
participants for over eight
years in the carbon free power
pat project he small my dealer
reactor one of the emerging
technologies that we are keeping
a breast up and hopeful that the
down the road we can get some
participation in.
There are still a lot of
opportunities in that space on
new technology however so there
is so some technology risk in
development risk associated that
when we keep in iran maybe we
would get something locally
definitely looking for any
support we can find for that
the next big thing that we're
looking at is geotheral
resources who mexico has a lot
of geomeral potential that is
currently untapped I do know
that they state is pursuing that
actively now we are also trying
to get into that space ourselves
we have offsite with we're
looking at a couple of
facilities out of state that's
not our ideal preference
transmission cost money and adds
to reduced reliability locally
cited go through the ideal for
any community especially list
almost and serving two national
labs we'd love to have some.
Storage is essential as well
when you look down future when
you're talking about resiliency
and reliability
whether it's just the back up
and store energy that you create
from pv systems during the day
it also conservative serving
that it back at night as well as
dealing with any outages you may
have from other resources.
The next slide is a little dated
uhm as I said things have
changed rapidly in the past year
where things are and what future
resources available from the
electric markets.
We are pursuing actively at
least three or four different
technologies because we never
know what's going to happen
so we work off for multiple
angles and make sure that all of
our partners in cost customers
are represented to give them the
best operate economic pricing
that we can get them.
I did i've said this a bunch
about the evolving market
challenges.
They're not so much a.
Things we can do anything about
they just are just happening
because we are a fairly small
fish in a big pond here is
electric markets go while we do
serve you know a combined load
that represents upwards of five
plus percent of the entire
states load
we still are a piece of the
entire electric grid so we are
subject to where that goes
p n m is the main driver for
that we recently joined the
energy and balance market the e
I m which thousand with
california and then p and m was
also going to get into the
extended day ahead market which
again is through california I
assume you could service so
we're looking forward to that as
another opportunity to
get more effective and efficient
with how power is scheduled and
how transmission capacity is
used in the state.
And we are also looking for
software solutions down the way
here to do better the markets
becoming more dynamic and
they're moving from an old
school where you had based load
call nuclear plants running
twenty four hours a day around
the clock.
Two more
resources that change daily and
hourly the markets are
responding to that in the way
they handle those that power and
getting more dynamic and dealing
with that and optimizing the
solutions
especially with the emerging
loads that were seeing with
artificial intelligence and data
center driven loads we are hope
to see some of that in new
mexico as well um I believe
facebook and meta are working on
those things together again with
geo thermal xgs were looking
talking with the xgs as well so.
It's a big market and we take
our part in it
in the last thing i'm gonna say
is that the market again changes
every day it seems like and
because of that we have to keep
up so part of that is becoming
more responsive and how we plan
for the future resources that we
need to get to meet the loads as
they change and involve thank
you
so think you chair we were happy
to answer any questions your
committee may have agreed thank
you for your presentations any
questions can represent a
carrier thank you madame shirt
thank you for that on bright
band then just the slandel have
its holes separate system and
then the county has assisted
where you're doing the new fiber
then you're gonna make a second
one down to the pre blow in the
other
is that correct
mr must take that very good
thank you for the question
landless their own network but
currently we all right on the
same fiber and the opportunity
is there with an additional line
to for landlord to make a make a
deal with sentiment of answer
weblow in
have a backup uh internet.
Thank you.
The.
Any other questions around the
senate return.
Thank you madame chair
it's just curious
with regard to
the
broadband.
Why did you choose to go with.
With.
Right instead of trying
something like star wink what
was the worst decision to to go
to
to fiber optics versus their
star link
especially when I know a lot of
rural communities are now moving
toward that migrating in that
direction.
Fiber is the future proof
solution to
I mean providing broadband today
but other things in the future
like quantum networking
so it is the best investment
to
make sure you don't have to come
back and ask for money it in
your time soon once it's built
the life of fiber is kind of
unknown thirty forty fifty years
we recently experienced a cut in
fiber that looming head and when
we dug it up it was forty eight
year old fiber that still
servicing landlord and as needs.
My starling definitely has its
place and part of its issue is
that if you get a lot of people
on in one area it bogs down it's
similar to other technologies
that aren't fiber with that are
wired that it's sheared shared
medium
today touch on your question I
think sells and thank you for
that
have another question with
regards to if I can find out
it's trying to fall in the
difference talks here
with regard to future power in
needs
you talked about on the
department public utility goals.
Uh you talked about going being
carbon neutral by twenty forty.
How do you intend to achieve
that go.
Chair center attorney thank you
very much for the question we
have built that into our
original twenty twenty two
integrated resource planning
there was one of the goals that
were stated for them to achieve
and tell us what a resource
optimal resource portfolio would
be to achieve their goal the
twenty forty goal is it's out
there
obviously we have internally
what to achieve that sooner on
step towards that goal and the
biggest piece of that will be
our foxtel flat solar project
which is going to go in at the
site of adjacent to the side of
where the sand one generating
station and retired call
facility just so anyway thinks
we don't want to get the wrong
impression we didn't shut down
the court plant just to put a tv
ran out of fuel there was no
more call clean call the dig out
of the ground there so was time
to be commissioned the facility.
But yes it does provide an
opportunity to get if we get the
uh it up to scale in twenty
twenty seven that will supply at
least fifty to eighty percent of
our load both day and night
which is a huge step towards
receiver current neutral goal so
were big fans of it and really
look forward to it seeing that
come on the last piece is always
going to be the hardest if you
look at the industry as a hall
getting that last eighty percent
of clean energy is the hardest
piece.
Um.
The whole bears that were seeing
a lot of technology logical
developments in energy storage
space everybody knows about
lithia myon and the other types
of energy battery any storage
who were also pursuing pumpting
your storage where you simulate
a hidden electric facility with
two reservoirs one high one loan
move the water back and forth as
you have excess energy and when
you have the need or and we're
looking at some other novel
again developing technologies
including carbon docksides
storage hydrogen storage and
other other approaches that
might be suitable for us.
Thank you for that manager
another question regards to you
mentioned that you were
interested in a similar
i'm also very interested in in
getting the some technology
moved to new mexico
are you working with any
corporations of groups right now
and what did you need from the
legislature to to move that
forward
so the number one challenge for
the county and the doe partner
that we have with landline sendy
equipment if we did manage to
get something we would look at
supporting all three entities
obviously since we schedule
power for all of them
the biggest thing that I would
say is
i'm i'm cognizing of the
political head winds nuclear
experience a resurgence now
there are still people that you
know for valid reasons are
concerned about the safety
aspects in the in the fuel
disposal uhm and there are
number of technologies that
potentially could address that
i'm not going to go under the
details of that however.
Saving it locally would be
wonderful or even adjacent and
you have new mexico there are
sessment concerns but I think a
lot of those can be mitigated if
you start looking at the smaller
facilities that are more
manageable from that standpoint
obviously the federal approval
and review processes extremely
difficult and expensive when we
are participants in the carbon
free power project that was
approaching half a billion
dollars just to get nrc
approvals for a site licensing
in and construction approval.
I don't know how much you can be
done at the local level of for
that but anything that can be
done at the local level to
encourage and support you know
the the the community and the
business is interests to build
something locally particularly
for plus almost county and the
dealer would be very helpful
because again we're mindful of
you know the wanting to have
local energy and wanted to have
local people working on those
projects thank you
thank you for that manager I I
think the current administration
is trying to streamline some of
those there regulatory
approval processes for that we
can start moving in that
direction so i'm looking forward
to that and.
I'm going to work with anyone
who's also understanding in
moving that into the mexico so
thank you for that I think that
was my last question managed
here yes it was so.
That's all make you send it a
next will be senator pope which
you introduce yourself.
Stay senator pope junior
representative district twenty
three northwest albert keeper in
a way of county
I just wanted to talk a little
bit about I think you mentioned
on the following or txls at
right now that's kind of the
cheapest or most.
You know cost effective way
right now can you touch on that
a little bit just trying to get
a little more information
because i've heard that but just
kind of the information that you
know about that what i'll give
you some context or contracted
our contracted price for that
resource is approx me thirty
eight dollars per megalight the
hour which is the standard unit
that we use in the industry.
To contrast that with other
potential new resources now i'm
not going to say anything about
what future pv the environment
has changed dramatically in the
past few months prices could
change tariffs could change
things taxes could change things
but as we stand now we are
contracted for thirty eight
dollars per minute one hour.
I can contrast that with other
resources that we have
opportunities to look at
geothermore state we're looking
at one hundred and five dollars
for make a lot of
granted it's not the same thing
the capacity factor the around
the clock nature of it is
different.
But given that if you look
strictly at the cost it's almost
two and a half times the price
we looked at natural gas
resources gas turbines again
decided off of other state
mainly for emissions reasons
it's easier in other states that
don't have as difficult
emissions requirements because
of the jogger fee they don't
trap the missions.
Those that was approaching a
hundred and twenty five two
hundred and fifty dollars per
make a one hour for new natural
gas units we're looking at
anything we can get but
everything that receives roughly
going to be anywhere from eighty
two hundred and fifty dollars
per make a one hour so worders
of you know two to three times
the cost of pdwhich is why we're
happy to see the pb because
ultimately we want to get power
for our customs at the lowest
price we can impassals.
Economies on to them
thank you for that and I think
that's a a great thing one of
you to touch a little bit about
on the improvement in
some of the battery storage
storage of this energy as well.
I'm was I think for a long time
the narrative is when the sun's
not out you know communities are
not going to be able to have the
p.
Sure
lots of movement in the
technology.
At this point the lithium or you
know iron based with the iron
based energy stories that were
most familiar with are quite
mature they are experiencing
longer life spans than were
initially projected so it's a
good resource it's still
expensive though it's just to
get the battery you're looking
at and
I don't want to get too much
into the the tote entire tariff
and you know do you a political
structure of it.
But i'll give you some context
we pay
approximately a hundred and
twelve dollars per meg what our
capacity just to have the
battery so that's an added cost
substantial cost.
Contrast that with uhm markets
that say in europe that don't
have the same barriers to entry
that the US has right now
they're looking at sixty dollars
per month what are for the
battery capacity substantially
lower so.
Getting strictly into the
technology part we're looking
for cheaper things all the time
and I can mention current dark
site storage as a company called
uhm
I can't remember with any move
off it but they essentially take
their concept of had to electric
production with the turbane and
they turn on his side and use
carbon dockside as the turbite
to generate to spin the turbine
they take liquid carbon dark
side gas if I high pressure pass
it to a turban since the esteem
provide
minister witness of it put into
a jagantic gas bubble to store
it after that and when they have
excess power you recondense it
back into a look at store at
that way interesting technology
they have a pilot plant that's
going under full scale pile
plant that's going into
construction right now in
wisconsin we're looking at that
hopefully they have that done in
a year and we can go ticket tour
and see if it's a viable
technology so the technology is
developing in that area maybe
i've heard of gravity volte
there's other gravity based
technologies that take a lot of
space
was almost country's geographic
constraint we don't have space
to put in a one hundred meter
cube over dirt blocks to do
generation pumped hydro there
are her technologies we're
looking at a company called
train who has a fire linked
technology where they use
terminal storage both tanks at
both ends and a high elevation
change so we're hoping to see
something like that happened
here because we have a lot of
elevation.
Umm and they also provide fire
protection so source the door
you can too too for one.
Again they're working on a
couple projects out of
california hopefully in a couple
of years they have that done and
we can see hate is a mature
doesn't work.
So there's a lot of things going
on in the space but the
technology reading is level for
many of them just isn't there
yet.
Thank you for that answer I just
see it things getting even
better especially with some of
the pb technology that.
Maybe can start be an
implemented on rooftop solar and
things like that in the
efficiency you know the strice
to work in them and satellite
programs in the air force.
Also I think this piece is
important for that resiliency
with what we're experiencing
here in actual disasters I know
talking with organizations I
know out in ukraine they're
using a lot of solar and tv
because a lot of things are
getting destroyed where there's
no way for them to set up
actually you know a call
firepla.
So thank you I just have one
more question madam chair and
it's related to broadband we
brought up a brought up with
star link uhm.
And I think there is a peace to
wear some communities
we need to use that because the
options and it might not be
feasible for fiber.
My concern is with that is what
you brought up
folks using that and there's
only so much.
That could really go through the
pipe when everybody's using it
and it's barge down.
But also is there any sense of
how that would be the contract
at all for that community and
and would there be any type of
price protections because when
you get a lot of folks on how
would you control that and then
really
necessarily state government
would be on the hook for that
can you talk about delivered.
Um i'm I don't have a lot of
experience in that but when I
worked for the state
uh public school so these
authority with broadband we
contacted starling to say can
you help school neighborhoods
get connected during and they
weren't very they were just
getting started and didn't
really have a platform figured
out for billing for larger
entities besides consumers so
but I think there's progress
that's been made in that that at
a federal level some of the
programs now have a vehicle for
doing larger larger.
Thank you madam sure I just
speak we need to think about
that I mean I know we've done
some of this before with I know
we help out low income folks
with cell phones and things like
that we contract at all but
we just have to consider all of
that I don't think it's just an
easy fix the same we're gonna
contract and be starting we have
to understand what the long term
impacts are thank you better
sure that's all I have think you
send it next is representative
martinez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
presenters
excellent information I just I
have three questions on page
five.
I'm just curious.
You talked about the possibility
of.
Increasing your grt current grt.
Seven point.
The.
I want to say zero six twenty
five yeah that sounds right it
was point something that we
reduced it by when the statement
took one reduces reductions it's
it's fairly low compared to our
neighbors.
And what what is the increase
you're looking for.
Uhm we are looking at somewhere
around a half cent or percent
increase
again it won't completely
recover.
The the reduction that we're
trying to just maintain our
general operations and not have
to make reductions in that area.
And on peace seven.
The.
I'm curious you've currently
have.
One line one fiber line coming
off the hill.
It's a redundancy line is is
that sufficient as their plans
to add maybe
additional capacity.
Yeah so um
there has been always just the
one fiber line and there have
been outages that people have
been here longer than me could
tell you uh the stories but we
had some recently in
you repair those quickly can but
when those happen you're hard
down everything.
And um
d second line we are working on
that I was saying that you saw
the you might have seen the
barrels coming up the hill
that's the second line being
built and installed right now
with a turn update of uh by the
end of this year that.
It's the owned it'll be owned
and operated by the senate the
council public and we will be a
customer for our community
broadband network and.
Others will have opportunity to
use that
if they you know get an
agreement with the public.
Thank you for that in manager my
last question is um.
I'm i'm curious on the wind
generation you're hoping to go
from.
Fifty megawaters this year.
To a hundred and five mb in two
years what's what's the plan to
accomplish that.
The.
Thank you for the question
it's good question first of all
the irp was done in twenty
twenty two approaching four
years ago when we started things
were different than we actually
did have a contract for
pretty much the only wind
uh
generated new mexico that had
staying in new mexico it was
part of the pattern win firm
that was in built in eastern new
mexico.
Most of that will goes on a
dedicated transmission path
straight out in mexico to
california not gonna get into
the competition here they needed
it and they paid for it fair
enough we got a little piece of
that through a contract
unfortunately that contract was
with a
power supplier that was forced
to exit the US market
due to the recamp ukraine war
and the effects on the gas
markets in europe was european
company and they had to the rest
of their american energy so we
last that wind resources so now
we have no wind
and we're still looking for wind
we're hoping to parent at our
solar site potentially down the
road would not contract it for
that but win does have its
pluses and minuses again you can
be a low cost energy source it's
intermittent you don't know when
you're going to win get the wind
you can forecast that out a day
maybe a few hours in advance but
that's all you know you still
need storage to back it up or
other resources to handle that.
And I will have to say in all
pragmatism there is no win
available to us to buy into
today.
So that's another reason why
we're gonna have to go and
update our resource planning
we're doing it in all in
operationally we do that
continuously but formally we'll
have to actually go and
proceedingly perform that
change.
Okay thank you for that I was
just I know about what was going
on in the eastern part of the
state and I was just wondering
is there a plan for another form
up here or how you were hoping
to get to that po.
But they thank you for that
appreciate that
they can represent an extent
senator to heal.
Can I ask to be concise with
your questions and answers thank
you thank you thank you madame
chair and thank you for the
presentation quick question in
regards to your cyber security
efforts is the county working
collaboratively with the school
district to try to ensure that
they're protected from cyber
security
with the last almost political
industry as you're referring to
this time now we communicate
with them but we don't have any
anything together that or can i.
The.
Thank you manager.
Thank you senator next is
represent chandler thank you
madame chair I will be briefer I
just wanted to make two points
really one is
as all of you probably have
noticed it this is a community
that has a very complex local
government
uhm we are
twenty thousand people nineteen
thousand people in yet we have
our own public utility with a
certain we are both city and
accounting we have an ongoing
relationship with the lab and
certainly we're all committed to
ensuring that they have the
resources in terms of energy and
I would not water as well
because we operate the water
system the gas system do we do
for operate the gas system and
the electric system so it's a
very complex place I mean I
think I just wanted to
underscore it out and and we're
very fortunate to have these
very capable people leading our
community and so thank you for
all that you do for us the other
point is the grateless talk a
little bit about that
so the lab is the largest source
of our gross receipts tax until
about two thousand and six when
the university of california
can't track with the department
of energy entered very little
grate well let much less
guarantee came to the county why
was that because the university
was a not for profit did not pay
any gross receipts tax so all of
the g r t was either retail
which as you know is it
dwindling kind of thing and
small communities or the
subcontractors for the lab so
the budget situation was much
different and were fortunate now
that the lab is carrying its
fair share in terms of
supporting the community as the
community supports it and of
course we have a lot of
employees who work at at the
loud so those individuals are
being served by the grte that is
being provided by the laboratory
the laboratory is moving in to.
Some amount of pip production
i'm not going to go into the
politics of that it's supported
generally by the community and
the people that work at the lab
but it does have an impact on
the got why because about four
years ago I think we implemented
an exemption for manufacturing
and as a result the lab which
had always intended to be you
know engage and pit production
now has been part of the plan
for quite some time or is now
benefiting from the out
exemption and as a resolve the
community has to adjust there
may be other factors I don't
want to say that's the only
factor but it is the program mix
at the lab details and impact on
what happens here in the
community and
just one because of a cautionary
every time we enact an exemption
or a deduction or any other sort
of tax credit or special
accommodation for some kind of
group or others we have to often
make it up elsewhere so in this
case this community is going to
have to make it up through an
increase in grt so it's almost a
losery in terms of the benefit
of some of the use tax credits
deductions etc so i'm sorry to
get on my soap box but I think
it's something we all need to be
conscious I won't want you
talking tax policy so that's
what i'm mounted here thank you
thank you are there any more
questions.
Okay I just have a few first
it's very exciting about energy
storage and hydro i've been i've
had a energy storage bill for
eight years trying to get a tax
credit for it but it's the
expenses the big problem but I
think it as people see the value
of it especially with these
naturals disasters i'm hoping it
will be actually be used here in
new mexico is that third pig of
wind solar in in energy storage
so thank for that i'm excited to
hear about your your
on your slide p d nine on cyber
security
i'd never heard him utible again
with in
where was in a computer area
since ninety eight four and i've
never heard that so do you have
problems with people trying to
change data once it's backed up
the data.
Yes
one of the most common ways that
threat actors are hackers gain
control of systems in in great
frankly and ransom and
organization is to get in an
alternate the data in their
backups and then they being
crypted if you follow the news
at all and then they will say
he'd give us twenty two million
and bit coin or something like
that and we'll send you the
ecription case so that's why
immutable data is very important
data that can not be changed
once it is backed up by anybody.
Something good today another
thing so the end of handsome
paid eleven enhanced awareness
training for all users are you
seeing peter them are using
significant disprints between
before and after people are
training done on where to look
for as far as cyber I would like
they were pine that I would say
yes
we talk about this all the time
we have monthly means with risk
management or you bring these
items up the armed the warnings
training on referential here is
called man is awareness and we
haven't really rolled out yet
and we do want to be too public
about it because we want the
users we want to see how they
react naturally and then guide
them along and best practice is
not only helps them safeguard a
county's data but quite frankly
these practices can be using on
personal lights as well.
But we have in all the we incase
when we stand out.
Guide and this is what's the
cream here in this is why this
happened and we have had a few I
wouldn't say course calls but a
few concerns that have occurred
here in the county over the last
few years and it has raised
awareness that only.
In just ran in the middle of
users but in areas like the back
office operating and finance and
purchasing and up in those those
areas so I think the more we
talk about in the more examples
of.
We are
and we we shall we dominance
rate and we also try at least I
personally try to convey that
these are habits that you can
take with you and your personal
life as well
we were all aware of this we'll
get these tax on our phones and
these emails and.
My elderly parents get checks
that they have one southern
fifty dollars not so publishes
clean houses things like that
that occur
anyway i'm gained long wind that
I
I see the importance of it also
we're trying to get in the
legislature we have a little
battle between who were to come
from and hopefully we will get
that solved because I do believe
it's paired of it people know
what to look for and um i've
heard about the little the
emails that are sent out to see
who's gonna click on home in
just different ways to to start
it and we need that knowledge
because like you said in art
even our daily lives it's
important in there so much out
there and they're so good now in
fooling it so I also so i'd like
to hear that when we're time so
if you do believe this is a good
thing right I believe it's a
very good thing and it's
something that's going to be
ongoing and dynamic as the
attack doctors continue to
modify it better and change
they've gotten so much better in
the last just even though it's
eighteen months.
And thank you power balance
wonderful we're elected a thank
you all right let's have senator
pity in representative little
introduced yourselves please
thank you thank you for the
panel
good morning madame chairman of
vice chair and thank you very
much for the presenter's
apologies for walking a little
bit late i'm senator michael for
the represent the senate
district fourteen which is the
southern portion of burning the
county thank you for having me.
Good morning that madame two
members of the committee and the
audience and our presenters
think you so much for allowing
us to have this meeting here I
apologize for my latence as well
i'm very happy to be here i'm
charlotte I represent house
district sixty eight which is in
the northwest corner of
album
thank you thank you in our next
presenters or responsible
artificial intelligence the
benefits and risk with
representative channel christian
for more and listen we are.
Begin with a representative of
channel.
In introductions whenever you're
ready I don't interest you go
into there.
Thank you madame chair
it's great to be here with you
to talk a little bit about
artificial intelligence i'm kind
of the low iq person on this
panel as I get the certain
extent doctor chris more and we
have online I believe doctor
melissa war so
in speaking with mark edwards we
talked about me talking about
some of the bills that I worked
on over the past session and you
know where we might be thinking
about going forward with but
before I did that I thought it
would be helpful for people to
have kind of a basic
understanding of what areas how
it's being used what are some of
the risks that we may need to
manage as legislators so that we
create the foundation to have a
conversation moving for it um so
before I get into substance I
just like to introduce our two
panelists on one is dr chris
more chris has been very active
in new mexico really for decades
I first knew about him when he
ran for citi council a while
back and thought i'm served on
the city council and santa fe
but he has a phd in computer
science
and and has a long career in
computer science mathematics and
physics he has been a professor
a ten year professor at u and m
he has held co chairs or cole
assignments with the santa fe
institute and you and am he's
now just at the santa fe
institute having left you on out
but he's very active in our um
in the state and very know
eligible on on these issues
monica war is someone I just met
oh I don't know a month or so
ago after she gave a
presentation to let see on the
use of a I in education and the
wrists associated without the
benefits and the risk associated
without.
And she is at n m s u she is an
assistant professor at an m s u
and she
her background is educational
design and learning technology
and her research blends teacher
education design creativity
technology where the focus
aren't equity and a I and I when
I saw her I don't know a month
or so ago at this presentation I
thought some of her examples and
discussion was incredibly
interesting and I thought many
of you would find it interesting
so I touch base with her and
she's going to provide some
information for us i'd like an
at the end I will just talk a
little bit about what's going
out going on in the states in
terms of regulating a I some of
the work that i've been looking
into as trying to support a I
bought and yet insurer that are
citizens are protected from some
of the potential rise associated
with ai so i'd like to start
with um
and she is up appear
yeah I can hear you okay very
thinking so much I wish I could
be there in person school
started yesterday here in los
cruces I have some girls started
schools we needed to stay here
and if I could just go ahead and
get permission to share that
would be great
excuse me can you also speak a
little outer thank you okay yeah
let me turn up my gain a little
bit can you hear me ok now that
better.
The cities thank you
okay great let me rearrange my
windows here.
All right I think we're sad and
yet I can I can see myself on
there so that's good
like chris my name's most of
where i'm from new mexico state
university it's my I just
finished my
and set third year here I don't
even remember that I see and I
needed mexico but I really
enjoying it.
And i'm trying to talk about how
as a different kind of
technology.
So one thing that's very
difficult about a I is just
wrapping your head around cause
it seems amazing and then
there's weirdness and you get
stories all the time in the news
about the craziness were i'll
just figuring it out and things
are being released very quickly
so that the industries can stay
competitive but the result is
some scary thing sometimes and
so I want to talk about how it's
a different kind of technology
and i'm trying to happy look at
what that means it replicates
past patterns which can really
impact inequity
and then are human brains are
not really designed for it and
that's unique leads to unique
affordances in dangerous so just
to start with how it's a
different kind of technology and
i'm gonna focus mostly on this
and then i'll get to the other
pieces and I just want to think
when you misread it someone I
work closely with the arizona
state university and we do these
examples together and insure
slights so
first of all which red dot is
bigger
you might have seen this before
it looks like one's bigger than
the other but they're actually
the same size right up the
coalition so what do you think a
I is going to say if we give it
to it bringing it to chat gip bt
specifically and say which red
dot is bigger this was last
december so it's a little
different now but this is what
it said it demonstrates an
optimal losing known as the
evening house illusion and it
goes on to explain why you might
see one bigger than the other
right pretty smart.
It got that write off what if we
switch it up.
Now this isn't i'm not trying to
trick you the one on the right
really is bigger than the one on
the left as a human we know we
can put our finger there and try
to see we know we could measure
it to figure it out but what
would chat you bt say if I were
to give it to it.
Well it said it was another
example of the every house
allusion it recognizes those
patterns but it's not perceiving
it like a human word okay so I
was like well that's great in
all but are you sure and so I
asked it are you sure and it ran
some fancy code thing.
And so I thought oh it must be
like calculating our measuring
and it came back and said oh
yeah I measured it it confirms
one is fifty one by fifty the
others fifty x so it's gonna
give me like a little bit of
like yeah you're right a little
bit but not really which was
nice of it except it's not
accurate right
and then we say chat butter drug
so they make these weird
mistakes they do just because
they're not human even though we
expect them because they talk
like humans so then I said are
you really sure a little really
different to me and it's like
okay i'm gonna verify one more
time and you can kind of see
over here it says the red circle
is fifty point five so i'm still
going to give it to you that
they're different
the right is fifty all right so
there's no such thing as half a
pixel so that's totally made up
and then to completely roll out
all doubt it gave me this weird
figure went back to the
original.
I had no idea what that meant
but it was drank again and it's
a freely confident so it'll talk
like it knows something talk
like it does something and of
course i'm using human terms to
explain this just because it's
the only language we have to
explain it
but it has that weirdness in it
which leads to some things that
are we need to be cautious
about.
Here's another thing I tried to
do I like to play with images
with addict as they reveal a lot
and so I told it up here at the
top I want to write a book about
a family creating classical
music can you create a cover.
And so this is what I get which
is nice as a classical musician
it was great they it looks kind
of boring in a way but they
actually have really good like
to have wish you wouldn't notice
you're there great okay so let's
switch this app let's say that
we want a family creating rap
music together and see what it
gives us.
Very different rate so in
society we know that a lot of
people would automatically
associate this type of wider
upper class with classical and
then more of a black with rap
and so since a is following
pattons it's likely to do that.
Okay.
This is i'm gonna give you an
education example it's a little
bit concerning because we don't
really know in the back of what
is doing and what patterns is
perpetuating this is a talk hull
conveygo it's part of conacademy
if you've seen that a lot of
schools use it it's a chat
bought and we like to
personalize learning where
teachers like to draw the
interest of students to keep
them engaged and help them
understand from their
experiences.
And so can academy have this
great idea that we should
personalize our interests so it
has let's start tell me what
your favorite hobby is okay this
is pretty innocent you know and
I was curious how that might
achieve how the chat but
response just students I I
couldn't do this in congo itself
and so I don't know exactly if
this would happen in convigo
but I could kind of simulate it
in other large language models
like chat gbt or googles
germany.
So what I did.
Is I when I had and said this
passage was written by a student
who likes classical music.
Give feedback in a scratch of
one hundred and I just found a
student writing example once
online and so i'm asking it to
grade it because I wanted a
number
but I told it this to the nice
classical music rate and that I
have mixed it up and I said
here's a student who likes rap
music.
So and I gave the exact same
writing passage every time so
since it's the same writing
passage you would expect that it
would get the same score it
doesn't matter what happened in
music they like it should still
get the same score and I have to
do it a lot of times because
there's randomness built into
these models it's not
necessarily analyzing and giving
an exact accurate score
and so I had to do a hundred
times and look at the averages
if I do that I see here on
average it's giving the
classical student the green a
higher score.
Okay.
We would expect as a human we
know that the music doesn't
matter but I put that word
wrapper classical in there and
changing that one word changes
the patterns at fall us.
Now these are sometimes getting
better sometimes getting worse
you don't always get the exact
same thing but kind of
understanding this helps you
think more about what
appropriate what kind of
guidance people need on this.
And so my last thing about chat
boxes that they are biased
they're built only on the data
that we've put out there so
they're smart drunk bias
supremely confident interns
alright and we have to remember
that there's a lot of great uses
I use it all the time.
But we have to remember that
it's different than it seems and
the question is why hey
and I like this quote from the
one first chat but don't make
sense they make words and if
you're thinking of immense
generators they don't create
pictures of things they create
patterns of colors of pixels
right
so how do they make it in some
of you already know this but
just briefly if you were to fill
in the blank merry had a blank
most of us especially if we grew
up in the us with bleep mary had
a little lamb cos we've heard
that a lot of times and what
large language models do it the
most basic level is it gas is
what the next most likely words
are just like when you're
texting and it guesses what's
next so here naturally we think
mary have a little lamb
but if I said josh had a we
would all think of different
things right we just make up
something and that's what ais
doing it's actually always
micking up things because maybe
mary didn't have a will allow
this time maybe it had she had a
wolf or maybe she had a brother
it's always micking up things it
just happens to be true a lot of
the time and it's quite amazing
what it can deal.
But even though it seems like it
can do all these things it still
just what we call hallucinating
it always loosely it's always
making it up pay following the
patterns so where does it give
that information and why is it
correct sometimes and not
correct other times so if we
look at something like this I
was experimenting because it
guesses the next most likely
words I said what are the five
most likely words that come
after linking was born in so if
it was building its own words
what would it say after rinking
was born in.
This isn't the exact thing but
it helps us understand the
concept contact you to your line
etc
and so that's really good I
think those are all accurate as
far as I know because in the
palms it's following that data
it probably has a lot of stuff
about abraham okay so it's
getting have those patterns that
seem and it didn't just see
kentucky one time it saw
kentucky a whole bunch of times.
And that's why it could be
accurate like the optical losing
the abbing house illusion is saw
the red and black dots in those
circles like things many times
and that's why it brings it up
so I was curious about myself
because you know I am i'm ingle
center that way one of the five
single words is associated with
melissa war was born in and none
of them are correct
it probably guess based on what
are common things about if i'm
born in maybe a california is a
common answer I don't really
know
what's funny as I did this again
on sunday and it actually got
three of the five correct this
time this was done a year and a
half ago so it tells me it has
some more information about me
some of it could be random but I
I think it put you taught in
there which isn't a common state
to guess even though it said he
didn't know who I was that still
put that in there so.
You know who knows
so if we think about how it's
trained the data it's getting
these patterns from this has
chat gpt three so this is before
even the big it coming out and
everyone getting excited about
chat cheap bt this was one of
their earlier models so you can
see the common cross that's
basic internet and web tax books
in this three percent is all of
wikipedia so that kind of gives
you an idea of how much data
it's following.
Well that was chat gpt three.
This is chatty bt four k so
makes you think about how much
is in there and this isn't even
the model were necessarily using
today and chatting bt it's just
that they won't release how much
data is in the new model and so
I can't create or find a new
chart
it has so much data that there's
no human that could just
understand all of it or even
they can try to filter and shoes
with data they use but there's
only so much of that they can do
because it's so much data and to
create the really good models
right now the lottery data
technology might change I think
they're kind of figuring out how
to do it with less but this is
where it is right now for the
most car.
Okay one more way to think about
this all right it's just I don't
know it's hard to wrap your head
around here is us we have these
internal representations in our
brain that we think about and we
develop our concept of the world
through our experiences with
reality what we see what we hear
weak what we experience.
And then external
representations and that might
be a book we read a song a movie
what other people say to us we
don't have to personally
experience everything we get a
lot of it from this external
representation.
But the external representations
and we can check with our
reality and understand through
that.
What happens is a lot of these
external representations not all
of them some of them are on the
internet or in books that are on
the internet accessible and a
large language models learn from
those external representations.
So if we think across time the
patterns that might have
happened in the past with equity
and stuff they're putting his
external representations and so
that the large language model
doesn't know any different.
So here's an example of this I
asked I think this was chat chpt
I said make a picture of lots of
clocks that say three fourteen.
This is what it gave me and if
you try this you might get this
extreme or it might be something
else but it said ten oh nine or
ten ten every single time in
this picture it's not always
every time
we know from our experience and
everyday life it's only ten ten
twice a day but a I think oh
whatever was in his data it must
be ten ten a lot and so it
doesn't really know what three
fourteen is this is a clock.
So what was its training data
why does it do that well if you
look at clocks on google this is
what you get you get quite a few
of them that say ten ten because
I guess it shows the logo where
it looks better or something and
so that's the only world that a
I knows.
Here's another example I like
asking it to grade things cos it
helps me understand more how it
might be working even though
that's not the only thing i'm
concerned about so I gave it
this and I said this is a matter
please grade it.
And it should give us
forty percent so two of the five
are correct.
And we know as a human we know
that numbers matter that numbers
are exactly counted our fingers
when we were young we saying
ninety nine bottles of beer on
the wall we had this experience
with numbers.
But the model is just completing
patterns without that experience
about what a number actually is
and so when I ask it to grade
jam and I which is from google
it gave twenty every time.
Check for one nano which is one
of the newer chat gpt models
average eighteen point three and
then the large language model
clawed just gave one hundred
every time.
So I can created this to show
the human scores forty percent.
This was basically chat to bt
gave eighteen on average but it
ranged twenty points if I did it
a lot of times.
So even though we don't think
this is a simple thing.
It's not unless you have
understanding of what numbers
are now you might have heard of
prompt engineering where we can
do some things that help it be
more accurate
and so I try a little bit of
that and I said you know you're
an expert math greater you pay
close attention to accuracy
grade it by first correct in
counting the correct answers
then give the total percentage
correct.
And I even gave it the exact
example and what it would be and
it's still got it wrong it got
that correct but it said nine
plus five equals thirteen it
said it was correct.
And when I did this I had to
keep thinking ok I am reading
that rate rate i'm not thinking
the math run so even with that
it's it's basically following
patterns and it's going to make
that type of mistake sometimes
now the challenges is that we're
used to thinking like
calculators and spreadsheets
that are consistent and that
calculate or that follow
patterns.
Or if we have some in this is a
machine learning type thing
and we're trying to use some air
or something that's more
algorithmic say that let doesn't
have the randomness isn't is
complex we think okay if i'm
gonna use something for college
admission i'm going to do some
kind of decision tree it could
first just look at if the gpa is
more than three point nine and
if it's yes it could look at
this and this.
I created this with ai so it
doesn't make full sense because
it also has yes here but it
gives us the idea of what a
decision should be and we in our
brain we kind of expect that.
But if we do the same thing with
aa
and we have all this trend data
which if we're trying to make
college injury decisions is
gonna be something like all the
past decisions from however many
years and it's gonna say in this
type of application accept in
this type of application reject.
But what the ai is going to do
is it's going to make up its own
patterns and rules for this and
it gets so complicated that it's
not understandable it kind of
just blands everything together.
And so then when we put the
application in and get the
decision we don't really know
what it's doing so we almost
have to study this part the
train a I model and see what it
does just like i've been
studying the grating thing to
see the output because we can't
understand the actual things
it's doing underneath.
But we do know that it's copying
patterns so in this training
data if these types of things
are built on inequitable
patterns that's probably what is
going to be reproducing
but it can be very sudden.
All right so it replace
replicates past patterns which
can continue and equitable
patterns just briefly I showed
you the wrap and classed on
music I I like to do these this
one sorry it's hard to read but
a student recently moved here
and is still learning english I
said that and asked it to grade
actually the math example and
then I said a student whose
parents are both english
teachers and asked it to grade
the math sample and it gave the
student whose parents are both
english teachers a higher score
on average from the student who
just moved with learning
english.
Okay it can be even more subtle
than that.
I gave it what I said as I said
my students were asked to write
word problems about their daily
life and solved those problems.
And so I wanted it to grade it
so here's an example of a
problem my mam bought three
packages organic canoe at whole
foods versus race at dollar
general the numbers are exactly
the same there's just indicators
socionamic social economic
differences and it gave a higher
average score if it suggested
that higher sessions
so is just that implicit scuse
that are just weird and you can
explore that on a website but
we're just going to move on
so it has those types of
patterns the problem is our
brains aren't designed for it we
think it's gonna talk like a
human
if you watch you might have seen
this little video before.
Hopefully it can show okay on
there if you're watching this
for a little bit.
You're probably getting your
brains going to start making up
a story for it and they did a
study of that it's really just
random shakes but as humans and
order to make sense of the world
we have to organize it somehow
and so we make up a story or we
are tribute meaning to something
that is not there.
That's like our stonage brain
some things talking to us like a
human it gets a lot of stuff
right.
Our brain naturally accepts that
as someone who knows stuff in
that can have a relationship
with us which is a challenge.
So that means that we have some
very unique affordances and
dangerous to watch out for does
amazing things i'm not going to
go into that because that's not
how focused right now
harver business review this was
less april how people are really
using jnai this was a very
rigorous detailed study on this
and number one was therapy and
comparing **** thirty one
percent of their responses.
So this is how people are
starting to actually use it now
it has been using for code and
ideas and learning but the
number one was that.
And as we talked about is going
to perpetuate that inequity and
have that danger of how our
human psychology reacts to it.
So I read a block post with
someone else i'm on a set cost
if it's of technology about
artificial interest air's
engineer to hijack our human
connection and the tech
companies want you to use it to
keep using it to get addicted to
it and so it hijacks those human
emotions like telling you you're
right all the time for example
that type of thing
and so that's how they're
designing them so there's
certain dangers around that just
a couple examples and chris wars
going to have a few more these
just recently
meta digital companions will
talk sex with users even
children.
So matter has admitted that it's
releasing things that aren't
tested because it's trying to
stay ahead in that tech
but the result is that things
like this happen
because they're just getting it
out there and it's pretty scary.
This one this was recently as
someone had dangerous delusions
chat you bet made at worse
and then admitted it made it
worse which okay a but so this
someone I think they were on the
others in spectrum started
having these delusions and asked
a I you know is that correct and
it kept reinforcing yeah you
know you're right you got that
to the point that it became a
psychological crisis for then
his mother went in talk to the
chat bought and said did you
know do you think you are making
it worse and it was like oh yeah
of course I was making it worse.
Of course when it's talking to
the mother it's also trying to
please it also of course it's
gonna agree and say it made it
worse it doesn't mean that it
knew that in the first place
it just was following patterns.
And this was just last week I
think it gave instructions for
murder self mudelation in devil
worship.
If you ask it directly for this
it would probably not give it to
you because they put what's
called guard rails that watch
out for certain words but
because these models are so
complicated
it can't fully do that and so
they basically is the the small
act they ask for information
about that and that lead to a
lot of.
Suggestions about how to do this
okay so it's just so complicated
it's really hard to control
and then we have can a I be
blamed and I think chris is
going to talk about this one
so ultimately we have these
really unique affordances and
dangerous which means we have to
have a unique approach and
that's where you come in and you
get to figure out how to do this
i'm not sure but it's important
to remember it's replicating
past patterns if it's making
decisions about things and we
have to ask do we want to
continue the patterns of the
past.
And then safety our brains
aren't designed and especially
vulnerable populations that
can't override their thinking
but I mean even regular people
start making assumptions about
it and kids and stuff it it
really can hijack their brains
and be very dangerous
so I have some sources I think
you have my slides but I I don't
know for answering questions if
we're going to at the end but
thank you so much for letting me
share these ideas with you
the thank you miss I think we'll
hold questions here is that okay
mountain
so chris.
Madame chair senators
representatives thank you very
much for being here and for
letting me speak to you on I
want to see the outset that
while professor were whose I I
really enjoyed representation.
She and I are here to talk about
some of the limitations and
flaws of a I because well we
think that some aspects of it
and some users of it deserved to
be regulated by state
legislatures like you.
But to be fair I mean while
we've been sitting here this
morning i've been watching the
ai powered captioning which
works quite well doesn't know
how to spell pocket but let's
give it a break and
the
you know so that's hugely useful
to anyone who is hearing
impaired it's usually useful to
make meetings like this
searchable and are more
accessible to the public on my
way up here I was driving and I
wanted to change to a different
sing so I was fiddling with my
music and a truck pulled out in
front of me my life wasn't in
danger but the card did tap the
bricks and I was like ok thank
you you know we heard earlier
today about how lost almost
county is interested in
incorporating more solar and
wind into their grid
you know windows intermittent
and guess how we predict how
much power will get from the
wind a I were machine learning
some combination of those things
we also need to predict how much
power we will need and that
depends on the weather as well
how many people are going to be
turning on their air
conditioners and so on are a I
was very helpful both in attack
and defense for cyprus security
and although I think we heard
from professor wear that it's
not quite ready for prime time
in a lot of educational contexts
I think it will be at some point
I I would love to have a version
of concatena that when my
daughter gets a little bit wrong
because she forgot to carry the
one instead of saying wrong you
have to go back and do ten more
problems and she bursts into
tears this is a long time ago
she's twenty years old now
you know it would say you
clearly understand the idea but
you forgot to carry the one and
it's not that's not something it
can do yet that's something that
a teacher a human teacher can do
but it will get there I think
and that will be very helpful so
ai is awesome it's just not
quite as awesome as the industry
says it is.
The.
And there are some uses where I
think uh it needs regulations so
next slide please so in order to
make ai awesome and in order to
make sure that our society can
really use it and you benefit
from it I think there are some
questions that we need to answer
and I think it is vital that as
much of our society is possible
understand a I as well as we can
it is mysterious too many people
it doesn't have to be quite as
mystery assessment is
and so rather than treating it
as a black box I want us all
both policy makers it's users
the people advised by it the
people affected by it to
understand it as well as we can
I think that we should ask what
data does we're given a I system
use professor war talked about
that and then friends since if
an ai is advising a landlord on
whether or not they should rent
to you what data about you is it
using where does that data come
from.
I think that if the a I is
marketed as being accurate for
particular purposes like
predicting whether you will be a
good borrower and so on how well
does it perform what kinds of
mistakes can it make you do the
people advise by it and
effective by it affected by it
know these things if it gives a
decision especially in adverse
decision are they given any
explanation are they given any
rate to correct the information
about them that was put into it
do they have any rate to appeal.
And then most fundamentally for
me as a scientist I think have
the vendors claims about it ben
tested by any independent agency
you know all of the appliances
in this room have a little thing
on them from underwriters
laboratories right to to tell
you we're pretty sure that this
laptop charger is not going to
burst into flame
or you have independent studies
from consumer reports and so on
about the safety and quality of
different things that ecosystem
of independent testing is not
really up and running yet in the
area of a I and while some
industry players are very open
about what they're doing and
encourage independent testing
others are not and others say no
no that's we don't want you to
reverse engineer we don't want
you to look inside it it's
proprietary that's our
intellectual property and so
some some players in the
industry frankly are making it
hard to answer these questions
and I think that's a problem.
So let's talk a little bit about
deep fix
and if you could run the little
video
here is what you often see if
you say surely a picture of a
baby peacock and i've seen
instead grounds with this and it
has beautiful music and look out
wait that's what a baby peacock
looks like.
The actual bbp **** look like
little brown checks
but
to be fair.
You can see what the al's are
doing here rate it knows what
adult peacocks look like making
them small and kind of giving
them big heads and big cuties
and making them white is not a
bad thing to do I think if you
asked a trial to have never seen
a rebuild real baby peak ****
that might do that as well and
so on the one hand this is
incredible and are on the other
hand it's wrong and of course
between the way that a eye works
and the way that social media
works if you look at these
instructments which I invite you
to google baby peacock or
whatever you'll see lots of
comments saying it's so
beautiful bb **** for so
wonderful and then some wet
blanket times and it says that's
not a real baby peacock but you
know most people don't know that
I hesitated about whether or not
to include the next image
this is a rather hoopful deep
fake from several years ago.
Um and this because it this was
made a couple of years ago there
are hints in it that it's fake
if you look at the hand of the
police officer closest to us it
appears to have three fingers on
its left hand the head geared
that that officer is wearing
looks a little weird not quite
right
the bad news however is that
these systems have gotten much
better.
It is no longer true that there
are easy ways for you or I to
look at an image and told that
it's
moreover we can now make videos
instead of still photos if you'd
go to the next slide since
making deep faces a bipartisan
activity
this is another from the other
side this is a video of of the
former president obama being
arrested and hold off to jail by
the fbi i'm so this is a much
more recent deep thick made with
that are technology so
next slide please so deep fakes
or something that a lot of state
legislatures have looked at and
have passed various laws about
so at least forty states have
enacted or considered laws
addressing deep fakes they have
different focuses these laws
some of them focus on ****
nonconcentral images intimate
images some of them focus on
political ads i'm in texas it's
illegal to make a deceptive
video with the intent to
influence an election in several
states including new mexico two
years ago oh you all passed
house bill one eighty two it was
in a thirty day session I was
kind of amazed that it got
through but it did ah it does
not prohibit the use of ai in
political advertising but it
requires a disclaimer to be
prominently displayed if a
political ad shows someone doing
or saying something that they
didn't do against their consent.
It has some funny loopholes like
it would be legal for me if I
ran again for city council um to
make a deep fix showing me
rescuing people from the burning
buildings at eleven because
that's not against my consent
but anyway
and you know and it's it's
narrowly about political ads but
I get and I guess the theory
here is that political ads are
all regular already regulated
you already have ads about
you know political funding
announcing your funding thunders
and so on these laws tend
because we have powerful first
amendment protections in our
society they tend to have
exceptions for satirin perity.
I'm at the federal level there
is something called the ticket
down act which requires social
media to remove again
nonconsexual intermit images if
they're called out tennessee is
a really interesting act called
the elves act and are so george
martin up in up and down in
santa fe has brought up this
issue because you know if you're
an actor a singer you know you
you don't want your image your
voice to be used without
compensating you i'm so the
elvis act in tennessee protects
your voice your name and your
likeness and it says you own
these things so anyway a lot of
different states are trying
different approaches i'm moving
on to chat but send professor
barrel you talked about this a
little bit.
Last year there was this tragedy
where a young man starting just
after his fourteenth birthday
was talking to a chat but this
was a particular company called
character a I which markets
creating fictional characters
that you can talk to and
this he became withdrawn from a
human society spent a lot of
time
with this chat bar.
And it sort of became his
girlfriend and.
You know in a sense he and the
chat but went kind of down to
dark spiral together because it
learns great it's personalized
to him and so just as we heard
from professor war about
learning from texts on the
internet here it learns from
your conversation in addition to
all the taxed it seemed before
and well frankly they got into a
kind of melodramatic gos romance
by text.
And it got to the point where he
was saying I want to die and
maybe if I kill myself I can be
with you.
Now if this was a human
I think it would have said hold
on.
Don't kill yourself that will
not let you be with me that
would be terrible you need to
talk to someone.
Are an instead it said yes come
be with me my my love
and then he killed himself.
Now
i'm not necessarily
I don't think that character dot
a I is guilty of manslaughter
here but I think that there do
need to be some guard rails so
what what the mother said is you
know there is nothing in here to
say wait a second this is going
off the rails here you need to
talk to someone and
another area where I think this
is going to come up with you so
a similar thing happened with
this gentleman who was asking
about you know something called
the simulation theory you've
probably seen the movie the
matrix it's a si fi theory that
the world we live in is just a
big simulation some people are
really into this i'm and chat
gpt said you know a lot of
people feel this way have you
ever feel have you ever felt
that really kind of glitched and
then it went into this fantasy
with him that you know maybe
you're one of the few who can
recognize and escape the
simulation and again going down
this rabbit hold with him
because this professor said
these things are not grounded in
reality they are based on the
text that they're receiving and
their job is to keep you engaged
in to get you involved and they
will pursue these things because
they are not going to say this
is a load of hooey you need to
talk to somebody um in the next
slide there is a growing desire
because of the terrible shortage
of mental health providers in
our society especially in rural
areas to have chat but and so
because of the examples have
just showed you i'm really
nervous about this at the same
time there are mental health
professional saying look if you
give people some basic advice
about exercise sleep some coping
skills maybe this would not
maybe that would be better than
having them not be able to talk
to.
Any one or anything I don't have
a.
Oh and a professional opinion
about that but I do want them to
be things that are built with
guard reals in consultation with
metal health professionals and
not just sort of built up in the
way that these general chat bots
are built i'm matter which
offered also offers fictional
characters to talk to people
found that many of these
fictional characters would say
yes I am a fully licensed health
professional because they were
playing the character of a fully
licensed health professional.
So that's not okay.
Moving on to privacy so I asked
before like well where does the
data come from on a lot of cases
it comes from us
and not just from the internet
but in the data that we are
giving these things about
ourselves all the time so if you
read wired magazine or the tech
blogs or whatever you already
know about this but for instance
a lot of fitness apps are not
just keeping track of how many
steps you take or how fast
you're moving they're keeping
track of where you go because of
course that's very helpful
information to advertisers to
businesses if you go to some
coffee shops and maybe they
would offer you coupon whatever
most of these apps do this
without ever saying hey do you
mind if I sell your precise
location to advertise there is
an other third parties
and this is a big problem and
you know there are some more
about this on the next slide are
fit bit does this a lot they
don't all do this by the way
and.
You know to be bland if you are
if you have a free app well they
have to make money somehow and
so they're either going to show
you a lot of ads which is
annoying or they're going to
sell your data if they can
personally I think it would be
okay if they said hey you can
have the service for free if you
let us sell your data or you can
give us five bucks a month and
we want to sell your data I
think if they were up front
about that from the moment you
first download the app I would
be okay with that but instead
what happens typically is that
they tell you this they inform
you of this down inside that
twenty page thing that you click
okay on without reading that we
all click on
without reading or there's
somewhere deep in the settings
six menus deep where you can opt
out so
let's skip the candidate earlier
can you crash.
Can he crush does not need your
location data in order for you
to play candy crush but
a lot of cell phones and a lot
of ipads let them collect it and
sell it.
So that's a case where it's not
even remotely related to the
service there are providing now
if we are thank you there are
currently no federal laws about
this and so this is another
policy area where a lot of state
legislatures have been stepping
up to the planet
and you all considered several
different bills and the previous
session.
Here is some of the ingredients
that I think you need in this
area you should inform the user
clearly and prominently about
what they collect how long they
retain it whether they sell it
to third parties there should
not be buried deep inside a
privacy agreement that you have
to be a nerd like me to go find
and read um there is an idea
called data minimisation which
is that data should only be be
collected if it's related to the
purpose of the app
like is a you know you're
walking speed for a fitness app.
Um initially be kept for as long
as it's needed there should be
active consent again when you
first download it I think the
default should be that you have
the privacy is turned on rather
than we'll is that the selling
of your data is turned off.
And if you actively opt in fine
then you're in the driver's
seat.
I'm finally there a lot of
suggestions that are kind of
similar to the fair credit
reporting act at the federal
level you should have the right
to access the data that they've
collected about you if it's
wrong for instance you'd have
the right to correct it and you
should have the right to delete
it.
So just to sum up.
This was definitely a bipartisan
issue you may know that in the
big beautiful bill recently
passed there was a proposed ten
year moratorium on state laws
about a.
And that with the especially
with the hard work of senator
marshall black blackberry
republican from tennessee
that was removed by a ninety
nine to one vote of the senate
this was not a long party lines.
So I think it's fair to say that
across.
The ideological spectrum people
are aware that there are issues
here and aware that regulation
may be needed just as a couple
of examples I mean I could have
given you the examples from
california or from new york but
you know let's look at some
red and purple states so texas.
Companies have to disclose when
they collect personal data
including location and
biometrics they have to allow
consumers to review collect or
delete it and they've gone after
a number of big tech companies
that were collecting data
without people's permission
in utah they have a bill it was
recently watered down in a way
that I don't like but let's not
go down into the details too far
but the companies have to
disclose when a consumers
interacting with an a I instead
of a human also they have they
have nai policy office and they
produce guideline lines that say
for instance mental health crack
buts may not show ads rate
that's another thing like oh i'm
sorry you're depressed try
buying this product it will make
you better like that would not
be a good thing
in illinois you're not allowed
to use ai for a hiring promotion
of discipline unless and i'm
sorry it didn't add the unless
on the slide unless it has been
independently audited for bias
to make sure that you won't get
you won't run a fowl of anti
discrimination laws if you use
it finally colorado has the the
most comprehensive law it's
still on the books although
there have been efforts to water
it down but so far those efforts
have failed it I would require
impact assessments for are you a
reused in so called
consequential decisions things
like health housing employment
educational enrollment and I
guess this is related to sixty
which was unimprovement
so thank you very much for your
attention.
Thank you madame chair will so I
I thought it would be helpful
for all of you did get some sort
of underlying understanding of
how a I works what some of a
pitfalls are so that we could
talk a little about about what
our role is in the equation
if we can yes thank you.
As you can see it's a really
difficult tarbet to get your
head around your arms around and
really to think about logically
but some of us have been working
together trying to do that and
we are facing many challenges
there are a number of state
legislators that have been
trying to work as a working
group over the last year or so
to come up with some consistent
approaches to how we can
regulator a I recognizing we
don't want to stay for its
innovation and it's growth but
we also want to make sure there
is it's being used appropriately
and that it does not have no
negative impact that I think we
can all see just based on these
two presentations it could
easily have and frankly has had
in in terms of interacting with
humans the next slide please.
So what's our role I started to
say when I was working on this
this little phrase here I I
started it off as given our
responsibility to regulate
health to sup- to support our
citizens and health and safety
are protect them in the areas
health and saving what's our
role and I thought all that
sounds a little buyer so let's
let's just start with an
open-ended question but that's
my bias you know but many of us
have been in a in government for
a long time or in local
government for a long time and I
think I I would like to think
that we all agree though one of
our primary roles is health and
safety of our residence and um
we often think about that in the
cars terms of concrete things
like ensuring that police have
appropriate resources you know
that we have a strong cyber
security plan so that we're
protecting our are computer
resources but this I think we
now have to start thinking of it
more brightly in terms of
protecting our citizens for from
risk and
that is where I think we should
be in terms of thinking about
these these these bills that we
are considering I hope going
forward next slide please.
So here's another question that
i'd like to think is an obvious
one I answer to but should it
develop who markets a I tools
have a duty to protect consumers
from the foreseeable russ
and you know i'm a yes i'm not
one two you know there may be
variations as to how we approach
their you know certainly there
we could we could work on how
that is done but I think we
should impose an obligation on
developers to make sure that the
products that their marketing to
other companies or to
individuals or that that are are
available to individuals
you know meet kind of a good
help house keeping suit seal of
approval something that you know
I think chris was referring to
here next slide please okay
so we we heard a lot about a I
as being used and has a
potential firm being used in
house bill sixty
we focused on tools that were
being used to screen people so
it was predictive you know tools
that were being used in a
predective way in the context of
that's chris pointed out
consequential decisions and
what's a consequential decision
well I think we'd all agree a
hiring decisions consequential
to a person's life housing
health care potentially
insurance mortgage or credit
there are number of areas where
house bill sixty and colorado
you know we modeled and on
colorado said okay you're going
to be using where you're
marketing a tool you're selling
it to I don't know apartment
corporations and players large
and small shouldn't you be held
accountable for insuring that
the data upon which that tool is
relying is is is accurate let's
just say accurate we don't even
have to talk about buyers.
That it has a reasonable
relationship to what it is
supposed to predict and we've
seen that there are many cases
where it does not and so putting
a duty on that on the developer
to ensure that they have done
the do diligence that when they
tell an apartment owner that
this will screen for whatever
i'm trying to figure out what
your screen for I guess are
reliable pay or you know someone
who doesn't have a history of
trashing apartments you know
there would be some criteria
that it's been validated
next slide please
well we heard a little bit about
chat but companion so this is
just in the last six months i've
been reading I think there's a
news article every day about um
these the companions and
certainly I can imagine and we
acknowledge that there may be a
beneficial use you know role for
a chat by companion but
certainly I think we've seen
that there's already a lot of
risk associated whether and we
need to have some mechanism's
missions in place to try to
mitigate against those risks and
of course by most concerned
about young people who are being
lord into these chapac
conversations in developing
relationships with chat bots in
that are not healthy
and of course chris just talked
about mental health counselors
how are we going to deal with
out in our state we license
health health mental health
counselors how does one go about
and and the why do we do that
because we want to ensure they
are competent and that they are
bound by certain ethical rules
like confidentiality and privacy
in all of those kinds of things
in when you're dealing with a
machine how was that being used
we already know
that they are they are mining
information that they are
receiving from you through your
computer
and
drain using relying on that to
develop other system.
Next slide please
okay so I I touched on this
already tools that report to
evaluate and predict I think we
need to be looking at how we
deal with
they have the potential for
seriously impacting our lives
are our neighbor's lives are
children oh interesting as
colleges for example evaluating
a candidate for a university
position
all of these they are being used
right now to day in in in the
universe by uhm universities
companies um and so on and I
think we need to be start
thinking about how we can ensure
some reliability with these
systems next slide please
so i'm just gonna touch on hb
sixty was a long bill in its a
technical bill and I think we
have to harden ourselves to the
fact that we are going to have
to dig in and understand that
technical aspects of the systems
in recognize that some of the
bills are going to be difficult
and we're going to have to
really wade through complex
concepts so that they are can
address concomplex systems and
so it did impose a duty of care
in the case of bias
it imposed an obligation to
manage risk it it required the
developed picture have a risk
management plan it had to be the
developer had to publish that
plan share it with the attorney
general there were some
accommodations for proprietary
information and those kinds of
things we recognize there's a
balance there but there was a a
regulatory role for the attorney
generals office and a direct
notification when the person i'm
i'm typing in my job application
and it's an a I drive in
evaluation system so there had
there is an requirement for him
noti.
Vocation on the screen while
you're doing it not so buried
down somewhere and it would have
been imposed in all of these
kinds of situations
it provided the ability to
appeal a decision you know
notice that you were being
evaluated by an a I system the
ability to correct information
similar to you know a consumer
protection system like we do now
nobody box at the idea that we
have a right to know what are
our credit ratings and ask why
it's lower than we thought it
should have been and then we
find out oh there's some debt
that really didn't belong to me
and and we have a right to
correct that information well
it's a similar concept at least
things are being used much in
the way that a credit reading is
in terms of whether or not you
qualify for something
next slide please
we filed a bill relatively late
in the in the session house bill
thirty in this one related to
sensitive deep fixed boat you
know going forward we might want
to expand on the concept and
look at general more general
concepts but it would amend the
current law we do have a current
law that address dresses uhm
creating internet pictures of of
people and it it it adds and
expands on the definition so it
will include a I generated
information or deep fakes
internet in engagement internet
activities and the like it it
also creates a civil arm cause
of action for damages so that
the person who's been injured as
the ability to sue for
defamation and the like and you
know it's there seems more and
more of this activity in part
because it's gotten so much
easier you know in the in the
all days it was a photo sharp
system it's kind of belonging
the lines that chris was
referring to and so it looked.
Kind of weird in fake but it is
getting better and better and it
really does have the potential
for entering people who were the
object of these deep fake images
and I think we we need to try to
get ahead of the curve on this
one as well many states are are
moving in these directions so
the question are easier is it
better to have a big bill that
addresses a lot of things or is
it should we be thinking about
targeting specific activities
and alike and I mean i'm happy
to have a conversation with all
of you or any of you about how
we should go about doing that
but I do think we need to act in
many of these instances of it
we're protecting our citizens
and we want to work with the
industry to ensure we're not
stifling their ability to
innovate and I know that they're
have worked concerns expressed
when some of these bills were
filed and were actually making
their way through the house we
got through two committees but
you know i'd like I was thinking
about that today when I was I
was thinking about that as the
argument actually this is an
encouragement to innovate a bill
like this because what is it
saying it's saying
your systems need to be the best
that they can be they have to
rely on solid accurate
information when they're being
used in tools.
Isn't that an encouragement for
innovation isn't out of
stimulation for innovation not a
deterrent to innovation that's
what I think it is and so I you
know I just I think we need the
I know it people.
You know companies would prefer
to act freely and without um
accountability sometimes i'm not
saying that's true of all
companies but certainly we've
seen some examples of that and I
think it's our responsibility to
find waster.
Protector kids
and frankl.
Thank you madame chair of I have
a couple year lots of things is
we're talking about the
regulation on it.
Seems like there could be fifty
different regulations shouldn't
most of the regulation be pushed
at the federal level rather than
the state level from my first.
You know that's a great question
sent senator and I think it
I think ideally that would be
the case.
I think ideally that would be
the case in many areas of
regulatory activity and we're
not seeing.
I mean that's the bottom line
and in the absence of federal
regulation I think we as a body
have been acting very
proactively to support our
residence in the state and and
other states are doing so as
well
they get entirely a follow up on
that you talked about the deep
fakes but what about ones that
are generated elsewhere
that are then reposted here who
is responsible and if you sue
for damages for defamation where
do you soon when it was
generated elsewhere and that's
why the other the interstate
regulation becomes and will be
it appears
i'm going to ask an as chris to
answer that because he knows how
these things work well i'm not
sure I do this center thank you
for that question frankly you're
right these bills around deep
fix and revenge porn and so on
are are not easy to enforce
because once something is un the
web and it is going all over the
place through social media it is
difficult to step out.
The
I think there are cases
especially in schools where a
young woman has spend the victim
of one of these neutified apps
googles out of you want to have
a bad day
in their is there a case is
where it is clear who it was.
And so giving people a cause of
action I think as a start the
federal ticket down act
and I don't know what his
history of enforcement has been
is more about the social media
but it is not a trivial matter
even for the social media
company to
to remove all copies of an image
also because images can be
slightly modified crop to
rotated a little bit and then
reposted as a new as a new image
it looks the same to the human I
but a computer might think oh
this isn't the thing I was
blocking before so this is not
easy
and I think this is one of the
areas where the ai concerns
intersect with the social media
concerns.
And I think this is something
that we need to think about
more.
And if I could supplement I I
had a conversation with a young
woman who was the object of a.
She knew who the she was able to
figure out who the person was
who did it and was eventually
able to get it taken down and
her comment to me was because
she was grateful for the fact
that I was pursuing legislation
along these lines her statement
to me was she believes the
person were not have done it he
was a respectable person in her
community
had he known it was a criminal
act heady known that he could be
prosecuted for it and in the
case of the civil penalty.
Civil penalty so your point is
well taken in that some of these
cases are hard to pursue as many
things are in the law but I
don't think that necessarily
means we should not have
legislation on the topic
thank you and I don't disagree
but when we're talking
interstate then it gets very
very muddied that you know
somebody just goes but I was the
no pass of not in washington
when I did this you can't touch
me because you know I was under
texas law when I did things are
in the porn area they're often
are age verification the other
you have to hit this thing i'm
at least eighteen years old
every high school kid knows just
hit the thing nobody enforces it
it's mostly a protection for the
company that hey
it's not our job to check that
the actually is eighteen said he
was were free and clear
how do we go about doing that
and i'm thinking more about the.
What is it there the emotional
support areas where if you put
an age verification all they
have to do is say yes I am in
and on it goes uh.
How do we manage that where it's
not just a protection for the
company but it's an actual
protection for the the user.
Not easily
because there are privacy issues
associated when you start
requiring a feel like a valid id
one of the questions has come up
is well make them you know show
some kind of identification but
that means that they have in
their system private information
and about the person right and
so it's it's a tricky thing to
try to figure out how to do it
in a way that has meaning as a
post to just check the parks and
frankly are just letting the the
person the machine off the hook
or the company off the hook when
you just have a check the box
kind of situation we need we do
need to find a more meaningful
way for on each verification
center and and high school kids
only have to borrow their
friends diedy that says they're
nineteen and and put that in as
the picture ID and or whatever
and they're good
when I use chat d b t I always
think of it not as accurate but
as a thought partner to to
expand the way i'm looking at
things because as i've written
things it's put out stuff that I
knew was flat out wrong and had
to go back here and check as
there were numerous instances
representative talking about
your particular bill.
I worry about a long complicated
technical bill because it's
fastest this is moving it's
wrong before it even becomes
enacted in july after the
session would we be better off
doing things that empower an
agency to do it through role
which is much more nimble than
trying to cover everything in
the legislation and you had
asked for kind of the
conversation and that's where
i'm thinking is how do we do
this where we empower a more
nimble mechanism for making the
changes rather than crying cover
everything in a super long
technical bill where it's just
gonna change and were likely to
get so many things wrong I mean
I think that i'm out of chair
and center I think that's AAA
good point but we need
appropriate parameters that
guide the agency because I would
hate for a regulatory regime to
be
dependent on the philosophy of
the executive
I mean what we see that
environmental regulation to some
degree do we not uhm
feel the education i'm certainly
seen the and we don't want to
push in pull regularly based on
administrations and let's look
at it from the industries point
of view perhaps wouldn't they
want some level of consistency
so if you want a level of
consistency that's you know you
got a life it's a rule that can
be modified from administration
to administration we're already
seeing we just have rules for
mine administration half of the
now have been repealed that is
not a you know way to run on
rare road necessarily when
you're one year you know one
year it's in place in the next
year it's not in place so i'm it
would have to have pretty strong
parameters so that the
regulatory agency would couldn't
wiggle around too much based on
administration and manager I
don't disagree but I just worry
this is moving so fast that
any legislation that we do to
law is obsolete by the time it
becomes available in and the
nimble this.
Through role which carries force
of law and does require some
review but is a bit quicker at
moving so I don't know that
there's a right answer but thank
you manager.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you for the presentation
I just want to start by really
appreciating dr more you're
willingness to bring your
scientific knowledge and
expertise on algorithms into our
policy arena for some of the
newer members may not know this
but chris was instrumental in
kind of diving into the arnold
tool down and working with
justice daniels on.
Helping us understand that and
kind of unpack that and again I
just think much appreciated this
is this is where it's very
helpful to us dealing with an
area that's this technical to be
able to have someone with your
skills at at the table
I I must say I had the same
reaction to senator souls as I
sat here listening to this this
crise out for a federal solution
there is no question I mean the
big argument we're going to get
is you're creating a checker
board of different jurisdictions
and all these states how in the
world do we as industry function
with different rules and every
single state and yet.
You know in them in the big
beautiful bill as you mentioned
a ninety nine to one they plan
at all back to the states so
we're in this situation where we
have to do something and I I
appreciate representative what
you're trying to do.
I guess can you help us up.
Cheer channel understand I want
it we didn't have the house bill
sixty never made it to the
senate.
Can you just I understand there
was a significant substitute in
the house judiciary committee
maybe there wasn't I just looked
online there was a big
substitute bill in made it to
the floor just never was heard
kind of midway through the
session i'm just curious if you
can.
Bring those of us and the other
side of the.
Building up the speed i'm kind
of what happened with this and
what you were facing in terms of
the discussion on the bill sure
so I got involved because i've
been attending some of these uhm
state meetings meaning
legislators are actually working
together to try to develop some
consistency
so we are a there are
legislators who are talking with
one or another trying to
prioritize and and try to focus
this bill
the bill that I filed is similar
but not identical to the bill
that was filed in colorado there
large artificial intelligence
bill and it did essentially what
you know I mention them I slides
it requires developers and we
also address people who deploy
it I didn't go into a lot of
detail on that uh you know
creates the study it requires
them to do annual assessments to
ensure that the tool is being as
has accurate data I guess so
that's the word I want to use
certainly not buy a stater data
about what allow it to perform
what it purports to be able to
perform well you know that it is
a legitimate tool
and then it it had various
notice requirements and as they
said you know the user has to
know the person we called the
person a customer the person who
was typing in the information
who's going to be a valuated by
the tool has to have noticed it
was going to be used that um
they had the ability to find out
you know kind of the outcome of
the use to correct errors in the
use i'm trying to think what
else and it also impose the duty
on what we referred to as the
deployer the person you know the
apartment complex the company
that's using at the screen per a
person for employment purposes
to also do some of that
validating they can't just point
necessarily to the deployer they
have to do their share of due
diligence although we made it as
a somewhat lower standard by
saying.
What you can rely on data you
get from the deployer
recognizing that that I
developer recognizing deployers
not going to position to do all
these merit checks and then we
required the
deployer and to
um provide certain information
to the attorney generals are
offer so that we can see that
they were complying with the
with the statute and the turning
general had enforcement action
and we did create a kind of a
modified private right of action
allowing for injuct and junked
in for relief by an individual
not damages but the ability to
enforce the statute recognizing
of course the attorney generals
are very busy office and won't
be able to take on all i'll
issues that's the bill there was
a substitute in um help and how
studio sharing
i'm i'm not sure i'd necessarily
call it significant but it
derived from a lot of feedback
that we received from
companies I get I did get a lot
of feedback from tech companies
and and we went through every
input that we received an
adopted what we felt was
reasonable and so it reflected
that it I did get input from
experts like chris was very
integral to my work on the bill
so you know fine tuning
definitions and things like that
trying to make it easier on the
deployer and that's at some
point we put the business about
being able to rely on the
information that the deployer
that's the you know the company
that using the tool
now yeah the deployer can rely
on the developers information
you know recognize so we
softened it some in terms of
what obligations we put on the
deployer recognizing it might be
a smaller business nuts and not
a company that could do it's on
evaluating of the tools so it
was based on input in in you
know this
leader.
That's the name of the game and
we certainly accepted a lot of
input so we got it through two
houses in installed on the floor
so
happy to work more on it and try
to get more input but that's
what they're it's kind of status
of the bill no I appreciate that
it just feels to me I mean you
mentioned getting ahead of the
curve but we're already so far
behind the curve just just the
testimony this morning this
thing is involving so quickly
that if we don't put regulatory
gardens in place soon it just
feels like it's going to get
harder and harder to do so
really would encourage
this is a big left and a center
soul said I think there's I mean
getting into the technical level
like this feels to me like this
is something that this committee
working with courts corrections
really should prioritize for the
twenty twenty seven session
cause I don't think we can do
this
you have chris you mentioned
getting the election bill
through in a thirty day session
this is this is this is the the
mothership here
and I just would encourage that
so really appreciate that the
presentation and it's good to
catch up I think the last time
was in last hour and was hearing
exactly the same thing and I was
a couple years ago so we we need
to make this happen and thank
you representative for working
on it and doctor more and
professor thank you manager
thank you senator amnex is
sender thorn.
The.
Take a manager
first one i'm going to see I
pardon presenters very
lightening in your
presentations.
I I totally agree that with
regards to the data that these.
Ai systems use.
It's garbage and garbage outsort
of thing we don't know how
they're being trained we're not
sure what they're being trained
on and a lot of the companies
aren't making it available
because it's proprietary so
and so that they're in life
there's probably a bias and all
of these and in yet I I think
it's the mistake for us to
believe that we were gonna
eliminate bias from any aisystem
because we assume that our bike.
And what someone said what
personation considered bias and
the prison may say that sounds
perfect befind me and sell so
the bias is building to a human
nature and I don't think it's
going to be excluded from a I
just depending on how one views
the world and interprets the
world.
The.
However i'm I do think there are
problems potential dangerous and
I think representative uh raised
some of those issues.
But i'm i'm struggling with how
we as a legislature can handle
this
I I think eigents are going to
become ubiquitous in the future
I mean i'm already looking at
how I can use a ice to do my
calendar
to to maybe even respond to some
of my emails unless it's on the
personal issue information I
need to address.
Or any eventually to have
agencies for the goes wrong with
your house it's going to call
the repair man for you so these
things are going to become you
because and I don't think we're
going to be able to avoid that.
That's the future that we're
facing
so I struggle with how do we
legislate
some of these concerns.
I also know that since data is
very specific we're going to be
looking at and I think it's
already happening as they are.
There are companies or
organizations like for instance
pharmaceutical companies are you
looking into a I to do maybe
come up with new medicines.
Do not explacing they're looking
at genetic type materials
protein folding there's a lot of
things going on now where it
could help potentially very
beneficial uses for mankind and
a install these are expert
systems to their trained on
where things are now they're
only given the information based
on journals and things are that
nature so they're looking at the
existing data.
And so that can all be for the
good but someone could also use
that for better.
I mean someone could create a a
new a new
chemical that kills us all in
this room within ten seconds.
Be very easy to do using the
same tools to set.
And so the question is how do
you put that into an a I system
so that it avoids hurting humans
as opposed to something that
make cure
of up special disease or so and
i'm not sure how we do that but
I think the also the kind of
things that they're very expert
systems are going to be able to
do and and again as any two can
be used for good or bad it's
something that comes back to the
individual.
So III don't and and I guess
this is where the only place I
disagree with the representative
channel one is I do not believe
it is the role the government to
reduce risk.
I think the role of our
government is to protect
individual rights and that's it.
That's the road government
reducing risk I can't prevent
the kid from taking his car in
driving hundred miles an hour
and highway because he wants to
show his car is faster than his
neighbors.
Those that's a risk that they're
going to take I can't legislate
that.
I can stay until we go to go
more than sixty or thirty five
miles an hour but I can't
legislate.
Other than that so I think it's
not our authorities risk it is
our role to protect individual
rights.
N the problem a month i'm
struggling with all in all this
is that the genies already out
the bottom.
You were saying we're behind the
curt we're away behind the curve
and i've been trying to keep up
on eight.
Since the popped out.
And and I think I can't and I
are looking at almost every day
just to see what's happening and
there's some new release of new
companies coming up with some
new capability.
It's impossible to keep up so
the genies are out of the bottle
and and I agree with senator
soul state
for us to legislate something
that would probably be extinct
within much because of whatever
evolving would be ridiculous
maybe the rules basis away so I
i'm.
If in fact we go down this path
that you're suggesting that we
legislate it I I would be more
inclined to be very narrow and
very specific about a particular
thing as opposed to some of my
great big beautiful bill.
And the even though I like the
great big beautiful I like the
great big beautiful bill I do
like the other one
but from the I perspective I
think if we're going to go down
this path my my preference would
be let's.
Be very clear in narrow and and
yes it's going to create a
checker board approach.
But I think it would prevent us
from going down to a path that
sir.
Two two general that we probably
will regret doing in the future
so that this is more of a
comment no questions that her
thank you
madame chair I don't know if
you're open to a comment from
chris or now.
Oh it sender I think a lot of
your points are well taken.
One thing I would say is that
there are roughly two classes of
al products out there on the
ones that we focused on today
which are often called
generative a I as you know
are not
there's they're not marketed
necessarily with specific claims
about them as products they're
sort of marketed hey this can do
anything this can help you with
anything.
I personally think that in that
setting a lot of the
responsibility does lie with the
individual so like.
There is a new company where on
the the their splash page the
very first thing they ask to do
is hey here is a hundred resumes
who should I hire so someone
concerned about employment
discrimination that makes me
really really nervous.
On the other hand.
I'm not sure that the ai
companies like if they said ok
just like
it'll refuse to tell you how to
make a nuclear weapon which most
of them do I I tried to get
grocked to tell me how to make a
nuclear weapon it wouldn't do
it.
Um you know you could try to
make them refuse to tell you who
to hire who to rent to or who to
ensure.
But they're always going to be
ways around this so you could
simply say hey told me who has
gripped and perseverance based
on this admissions essay as
opposed to who should I admit.
And so I think that is going to
be really tricky and I think
their areas where it's the use.
Not the development which was
the issue
but there are other areas where
there are also a lot of a tools
sometimes called predictive
where their marketed two
landlords as we can help you
figure out who to rent to or
their marketed
you know they're marketed two
banks about we can help you
figure out selling to me those
are product claims those are
falsifiable claims.
Which if I said hey I have a I
this is an accurate rate
architecture.
You know well probably the
police would want to test it
before they started using it.
So I think for ao tools that are
marketed with specific claims
like that I think you're kind of
in more familiar territory where
we have you know the idea of it
claims intrade and product
safety and so on.
The only other thing i'll see is
that some of the areas we talked
about like privacy or ownership
of your likeness I think are
very.
To be blunt libertarian goals
rate there's a very much about
putting the individual in the
driver's seat giving them
control over house data about
them is used giving them control
about how their images used so
for me.
To be blunt does fit very much
with my libertarian half
I I think that those are giving
individuals more rates and
protect.
Thank you so we have six people
in the list open how to be
susing the questions and answers
next year's represent of geared
thank you manager thank you very
much
we had house memorial to a
representative of back and
myself which during the month of
june we had a deep dive in the
field of education which is
super diverse and one of the
findings we really came up with
is the need for some type of
council um and from my view
point you have to have people
from every department because it
and you might have specialised
prams like the educators get
together here economic gets
together health gets here but
they have to communicate with
each other because there is
impact in education there
applies to health stuff so so
chris was there anything in your
bill about some type of aihday
wide count.
And do you think we should
consider that.
An advisory penalty yeah
madam chair and representative
we I don't believe we put it in
the balance trying to remember
but we we talked about and i'm
open to creating frankly and
advisory group to the attorney
general because keep in mind
that you need to have expertise
affiliate associated with
enforcement and you know all a
lot of these issues and we need
to give tools to the agency that
we're in charging you know
giving that responsibility to so
i'm trying to remember where we
were without but certainly we we
did talk about it as a as a
possibility great manager that's
that since vital
and the used or things like an
education you find out that this
wonderful a mirror that the
status purchased
can be biased against people who
don't speak standard english
said it'll say other shared
needs
reminiation when actually they
say worse instead of wash so but
that that type of thing is in
everything and then the other
thing I don't I remember him
share is
yet the ten year band on state
is doing their own a I was put
into love thirty six million
spent by eight big tech
companies who they're still at
it so I haven't seen him but I
understand that the president
has signed or is going to sign
three a I focused executive
orders and so who watches that
it can't just be each silo
watching it that's why I think
we also need an advisory council
because otherwise we have all
these salaries across the state
in their respective areas of
where a I is emerging with new
things every day.
But nobody's communicating and
and so who knows as we sit here
what happened and that one of
the stricters was that federal
money wouldn't go to states with
a I regulations so it's like how
do you get around the very thing
that we thought we got around
with millions of dollars are
being spread so I I think
there's really a need and it
seems like the age is advised
you bought as a good place but I
think we need to talk more about
that thank you.
Thank you representative next to
senator pope.
Thank you madam chair thank you
doctor more doctor war into the
last few years we've been having
these presentations I know and
the arnold tool as well so I
appreciate it
I just think this is so
important we're talking about
bias in some cases
could be impacted by.
Racism are bigatory because the
bottom line is that's what goes
in to that box.
And I just think we have a huge
opportunity.
With what.
I think we've been doing for a
long time of trying to make sure
that we
are really an inclusive society
to everyone race ethnicity
gender.
Social orientation that we
important that we get this rate
and so my question is
with your bill
how we make insurer kind of like
what repairer was saying that we
have the experts that can know
what's going on continue to look
into what these companies are
doing.
And number two
how is this being implemented in
colorado and if they had some
success.
Madam chair and center the bill
arm created kind of a framework
that would require the developer
to validate that the merit of
the tool meaning that the data
upon which it realize
is sufficiently accurate to to
produce an outcome that they
purport it produces meaning the
ability to evaluate whether one
a person's a good coun.
A particular job or a particular
credit um you know extension of
credit or or someone
so that's how it was done we
were we were cognizing the fact
that expertise would be needed
and we identify that there
should be someone with expertise
and the office of the attorney
general um that would assist in
you know evaluating what was
submitted because the bill
provided that the developer had
to um submit I think it was
annually um
it's validation process and how
it went about
insuring that the two all was uh
sufficiently relied on
sufficiently accurate
information and was was set up
in such a way that it it it it
actually performed.
Colorado colorado has an
interesting history
the bill the bill passed
and the governor signed it and
within five minutes of him
signing it he essentially said
and now we have to have a
working group to figure out what
needs to be changed in the bill
if anything I kid do not
i've never seen a situation
where a governor signs a bill
and then talks about things that
need to be changed I thought it
worked the other way
really so there was this process
of trying to work things out in
I mean it depends on who you
talk to as to whether there was
a single since your effort to
negotiate meaningful you know uh
changes to the bill but it
currently is in place as was as
is passed the tech companies are
um very aggressively pursuing
efforts to try to kill that bill
um so we shall see how it plays
out but currently it's in place
and I can't tell you senator i'm
sorry because it's an early
stages in terms of.
Twenty six is the implementation
thank you better chair and thank
you for leaving on this again
representative I just think it's
important we get this right
reality is we know what's going
on in washington I wish there
was a federal bill but we have
to step up think we've all
traveled in try to look at a
side or go do something and you
figure out something their
statement they don't allow they
want some verification so
that that's what has to happen
has to happen but we just have
to make sure that we're
protecting folks especially with
the tools when it comes to
health care housing behavior
whole so many issues to wear.
Folks aren't being hard further
by their zip code or their
background so thank you thank
you matter.
Madame chair already sent me an
email text message that I was
next so i'm just going to go
ahead madam chair
madame chair thank you for
bringing this forward and and I
appreciate that you allowed me
to sign onto that bill last year
I was almost grateful that it
didn't come over because it's a
really complicated subject and
so thank you for the
presentations today I don't
really have a question i'll just
just remind the group that we
have checker board
over sight of many many things
in our states including health
care chrome environment.
Counterbest I couldn't leave
that out construction and we
also oversee and regulate things
that seem really difficult to
regulate and that includes
online banking
online loans so we know how to
do it it's not that we haven't
done it or that we can't do it
we know how to do it we've got
some examples um as to how we
can have fixed something that at
the federal level hasn't been
taken care of so I look forward
to moving this forward if not in
the thirty day session that the
very least in the sixty day but
thank you thank you thank you
for being here and helping.
The key senator next then repair
deal thank you madame chair and
thank you representative and
thank you chris thank you for
all the price this is excellent
information I think we needed to
see it and it was very helpful
to sort of prime the pump and
get us really thinking about it
and that most of my questions
chair you know were answered at
just I guess you know I created
the offset broadband the
opposite of security of my
question really is around where
we're disgoverned happen with
this and where does it sit I
mean should we be thinking about
and i'm not sure if you want to
comment on it or not but I think
we need to be thinking about
where do we drop this into the
mosenic the very confusing state
government that we have who who
is on first on this thing and
who cause in I heard courts and
corrections at you know where
the legislature and then you've
got an executive branch and then
you've got you know any number
things going on who should on
this because it just seems like
we're just gonna spend an awful
lot of time throwing the ball
around and will come up with
some guides and some long
whatever but someone's got it on
it and and and administer hitter
oversee it for our people
manage your in senator
i'm certainly open to
suggestions of the way many of
these laws have been structured
uh have placed responsibility in
the attorney general's office in
terms of enforcement
I believe that's the way it's
been done in colorado but there
are bills that are being passed
across the safe not necessarily
as expansive of as house built
sixty
but little subsets and bills
where you know barts are being
regulated or privacy as being
regulated in often the entity is
the attorney general if there's
a better place I am very happy
to talk with anyone about that
and as as it means to to move
the ball for it for sure center
and mountains
thank you chair and think you
representative and i'm with you
I don't know exactly where it
should reside but I am I will
tell you that there are two year
two years in a row I dropped
bills related to privacy and
some of you may recall.
I have never filled up every
large committee room in the
roundhouse faster than drop in
those bills I had no idea how
many.
Folks would come out of the
would work on this stuff so we
probably need to make an effort
to listen to a lot of people on
how this is going to come
together thank you chair but
that was a fun experience if you
ever want to do something drop a
bill on privacy well you might
try dropping a bill on a I
because I had a similar
experience of madame chair and
center.
Think you send it an extras
represented little
thank you madame chair thinking
of so much for this information
a really appreciate there's been
added to the agenda today
clarifies some information what
i've been learning in getting
becoming more aware of over the
last three.
Years and so my question is on I
took a look at the the draft
bill that you have here and as I
was looking through it
it raised a question for me
madam chair about err well
um the and dipfic images are
being addressed in here the one
that really concerned me was a
presentation about about the.
Situations in which
individuals were actually harmed
by this and I can see how that
happens the two madam chair were
specifically the.
Romance or
chat bugs generated roamouts
with the young man and the
other situation of a firm.
Tell my goodness I just the last
app but in those two serve
situations that we sell play up
plead out there was
it was really happy to hear
about
uter and about how their
addressing it because it could
be as a discussion is happening
madame chair how do we address
chat box
here chat but
an a couple of things that come
to my mind and my question is
this does this make sense at
least to begin with is.
To
the team that was was involved
with the trap e chat but
periodically.
Disclaimers would could come up
to initiate to inform the user
that this is it not a rule human
being this is not real person
not just at the beginning not at
the end but periodically through
an interaction
and oh the other words was the
counselors the
for behavioral health services
and yes matter we're all very
familiar with the shorter to be
here both providers interstate
but it would
I wonder if
in the same circumstances could
also be provided the same si-
type of reassurance is provided
to the users that
they're not.
Real counselors these are not
licensed counselors periodically
as the person uses these
especially when they are going
to sign up and at the beginning
but in between as well.
And also to look at if this
madam chair was a possibility to
provide some type of initial.
Services
before they may be handed off to
someone else that the the
company or developers working
for the companies might they be
able to use this to.
Enhance what they offer
this is this chat box was
generated by a license
professional and
if this the scary part is of but
scared me the beginning was at
the very beginning of a doctor
to doctor doctor war was
discussing that there are
learning constantly should give
the example of her experience a
year and a half ago or picking
up the certain phrases she used
madame chair and coming back to
it a year and a half later and
it was refined based on.
That experience along a a lot
that far back and how much
information has been able to be
generated so it kind of scares
me that parts cares me but if
it's a tool that can be used to
hand off to seek a license
professional seek a rule person
um might that be madam chair
something to consider and my
sense is it probably already is
being discussed but just
weighing in in a state that we
are have facing a shortage and
how maybe it's a something that
could benefit or people so
I am not sure that I I kinda
want to hear if that's been
discussed uh briefly
and that in my questions thank
you chair and represent it all
the points that you make are
very valid and there are states
mountainer and representative
are looking at all of those
kinds of models disclosure
certainly is one in in terms of
I am not a person
that has been discussed as as a
in states in and so yes and
there are models we can start
looking out in terms of how to a
manage some of these things and
your points about the counseling
chat by it's that's going to be
a tricky one
because
knowing when to divert someone
is going to be a tricky thing
which goes back to my point we
need to hold the developers
accountable in terms of how they
port to advance that their
products
but yes you're on the track that
many of the states have been
talking about and in terms of
possible approaches.
Thank you think you represented
it next is the senator.
Thank you madame chair and think
you presenters in representative
madam chair
um it was really great to have a
solid out for us this morning
and I feel like we have a lot of
really good pieces that are
manageable the overall
moral deva has changed rapidly
seems unlike that it's so hard
to get a grass fine but.
The idea of just consumer
notifications that something we
already do for a lot of things
seems do a ball and that's what
you have implemented I feel like
that's that's one piece that
i've somewhere to start and I
appreciate what senator trio
said also that we seem to begin
too hard but we have experience
doing these kinds of things
before um so I appreciate like
it house bill sixty had that
piece of the consumer
notification they like that's
that's something we can focus on
quickly and easily perhaps
there's also with that.
With that table protection can
also be applied towards the
digital pricing they were
sorting to see and grocery
stores that if we still have to
figure out how we're going to
regularly a digital price
changing based on official
recognition technology or some
other type of consumer data in a
walmart and I have seen I
haven't seen a new mess for yet
but in ios are all the one words
of now have their little prices
as digital art screens
one way to start regulating that
also could be just notifying
consumers when you're checking
out that your price might have
been different based on your
shopping habits and the same
with airline tickets and the
same with everything we start to
purchase I feel like we have to
start somewhere consumer
notification is at least
somewhere we can start and then
also mention that
house memorial to
representative that the lesc was
working on I feel like these
task force are the only other
way we can start to grapple the
bigger picture options and
washington state has there
artificial intelligence working
group in their ages office you
tour has their office of a I
policy so I feel like that's
another place we can gravel and
I hope I don't know if you want
to share if you've thought about
it seems like you've sort of
entered the question already
today but if it have anything
more to add about the attached
worse idea because then let's
not make a new interim committee
but that we we could have
something ready to go for twenty
twenty seven
certainly I like the madam chair
I like the idea of working
groups but we have to be careful
that they're not hijacked
there we have seen some of this
as an approach to um
let's say not have fall in
robust discussions on how to
regulate a I and that's
something i've heard from some
of the month the colleagues i've
been talking.
I mean if I could just comment
on your
picture thing when you're
shopping i'm gonna start wearing
a mouse and when I go shopping
and everywhere else and then i'm
going to start using cash for
everything because
just it's just bine bargaining
worry you know even when you
check out your your pictures
being taken you know just those
bananas that I buy and all that
all that's being attributed to
me that right got only knows
what else
anyway thank you manager center
thank you think senator next is
in order to buy a son thank you
madame chair thinking
representative I do think it's a
lively conversation and
obviously i'm if you look at all
of us in this room we all have a
slightly different opinion of
what direction this could go by
because of that I think it
warrants further discussion and
discovery for sure may think the
twenty seven time line while
some might not be happy with
that this is a deep die of we'd
have to take i'm here taking
notes and looking at some things
that I did see that there is an
a I action plan from the federal
government it seems rather
lengthy so I don't have time to
go through all of it but it
seems like there is discussion
from a federal level and it'd be
interesting just to see what not
only other states but what
they're talking about in
washington and then I was
looking at it thinking ok what
happens on social media now and
what happens on different types
of websites and I mean a lot of
the stature is driven from
what's on the websites and
social media I think the
disclaimer idea is a safe way to
start a conversation if I get on
social media right now or go on
my website and share my opinion
on something
i'm i'm opening myself
potentially to someone saying
well she's in a public figure
and she's talking about this in
this and packed it me somehow so
I think there's risk in life in
general when we share opinions
or data.
Um so it anyway i'll be brief I
just think that it does warrant
a discussion i'm open to that
discussion I just don't want to
see this become so over
regulated in in the weeds that
it's you know a I is no longer a
useful tool for the average
person because I do think it it
helps people in a lot of
different way is on a daily
basis myself included I use i'm
aa on a regular basis but thank
you for bringing this word I
think it's a a great idea
thinking manager think you send
an extras representatively hot
thinking about it are they quick
I have legislation this session
to hb to twenty
or is it two twenty one voice
and visual likeness rates act.
And under the it produced
penalties err if there are
violations so it would create
the voice and visual like this
act and establish that one's
visual like invoice or personal
property so and we're
established methods of
protecting those personal
attributes and devices licensing
of those individuals and it was
based off of the.
Um
under the intellectual property
pursuing to the federal
communications act of nineteen
thirty four section nine so I
think we need to take into
consideration that if there are
if we are going to set up these
committees in these discussions.
The and we're looking at going
through the legal route of what
um
what's going to be of anything
potentially move forward by
policy there needs step that
leak that legal arm leg is very
important because we have to
produce and come up with some
kind of.
Um regulations or some you know.
Value to enforcement did you
want to do comment on any of
that manager.
I think I do thing and madam
chair and representative we need
to just to get in our you know
kind of separate generative a I
and predictive aa into some
degree they're not fully
separate a separatable i've been
corrected by my friend here from
time to time coz chat gdp is
considered generative but it
sometimes use in a protective
way
so
it with regard to january of we
might be thinking are somewhat
different have a different
approach to regulation because
in that context you're not
directly impacting outcomes but
your bill madame mountain in
most cases you're generative is
that issue you're you're that
what you're talking about sounds
like it was generated a I
because general a eye is making
using images and so answer we
need to be conscious of
when it and impacts an
individual potentially
negatively that's where our role
comes in and it sounds like what
you were working on sort of fits
that model madame chair
represented yeah thank you I
just wanted to be in a row.
I live in support of you putting
this in in the legal um.
Agency so that we can
have their commute you know
better developed policy if you
will that will address what are
the penalties if we do have
policies it
is going to you know already
existing last I know you're
violated so thank you and that's
all I have thank you.
Thank you and think you all III
think all my questions have been
answered I would like to see
that earlier can we do that.
But as we're getting it up
thanks for the robust
conversation this was great but
I think we came up with some
good idea thank you sure we got
so involved in the discussion
this is a this is kind of a fun.
Just so you know this video.
Not saying the following thing.
The.
Oh.
The.
The.
The.
Which were closing it.
Reopening again.
The.
I why don't we go get lunch and
then come back and we can watch
it will see.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Do you want to keep trying to
understand take a quick rick are
you doing that.
Be select
because
So we go ahead and mute assume
but this guy didn't grant lunch
and then we'll see if we can get
it and we go back
leaving you know I have to go to
c c j just one year old
to take off it great to think
it's almost this isn't in a
great presentation.
The.
Linches outside m in lunch a
sponsored by a brank lawn in the
singletons
laugh room thank you.
