Let me make sure that
OK.
Thank
We're ready for you.
That goes all the way back to
the.
For the opportunity to.
To uh oh
Sorry about that.
Hopefully you guys can hear me
but uh but thank you.
Thank you very much. We're gonna
go to committee questions.
Representative Harper's.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Director Gibson, it's great to
see you. Thank you for making
the trip up here and uh staff as
well.
Uh, we really appreciate hearing
from
Labs, um
It's great to have Los Alamos up
here earlier this morning. We
got to uh speak with them a
little bit and.
And uh and I mentioned uh to
them, I'll share the same thing
with you, you know, it's, it's.
This is a great presentation. We
love seeing all the great things
that labs do for New Mexico.
But
The labs also do so much for the
nation.
Right? And
And uh I wish, I mentioned that
I could, I wish I could share
some of the things that the lab
does so that, you know, you have
a better perspective, but I
thought of.
It's interesting.
Right, so many folks don't know,
but part of Sandia's complexrean
Air Force Base.
is actually a little mini Intel.
You have a little microab where
we make computer chips.
And you ask yourself, well, why
does a national lab need to do
that? And they just get chips
from Intel for cheaper?
And the answer is yes, they
could.
But
Um, what I can share.
Is that
The computer chips that are made
here.
Generally go into like
satellites or into
Um
Uh, things that need to be
protected, right? And so the,
the technology in your cell
phone, the, the, the way the
chips are made and such. They're
not really.
Like you put a satellite up
there and it's getting hit by
cosmic radiation, so that stuff
is just gonna get all fried.
So there's a team of experts at
Sandia that know how to make
electronics that can handle
being hit by a stray.
Cosmic radiation.
Right? And then the other part
of that too is
Depending on how these chips are
made, if someone knows the
inside of a chip.
It's really easy to hack.
Something that's um
You know, or, or, or break
encryption.
So you don't want
You know, folks all over the
world to know exactly what's
inside these chips, so having a
uh many intel at Sandia that's
government.
Protected, controlled, you can
have, you know, encrypted.
Chips that we know are are
protected so that
Folks who want to do us harm
can, you know.
Drill into our systems. So that
that's just like one example of
probably like
thousands that I, I wish I
could, I could share, but it's
just
You know, it's a, it's a
wonderful thing to have.
You know, these
In our, in our state and of
course, another great thing
about that economic development
wise is
Um
You know, if someone, you know,
has that expertise at Intel and
they're looking for a different
job, right? They don't have to
leave the state. They can come
to the micro fab at Sandia or or
vice versa, right? I feel like
over the 12 years I've been here
when I've, I've tried to learn
how do you develop a, uh, an
economy and grow businesses.
huge factor is just having kind
of a critical mass.
Where
Where if someone wants to, you
know, gets the 7 year itch and
they want to move, they don't
have to leave the state because
there's something similar that
they can go to and so.
Sandia is awesome in that way,
um.
Uh, because, um, one of the, one
of the 5 things that, uh, man,
I'm sure that, uh, Director
Gibson mentioned at the very
beginning, um.
That's what did you call this
advanced science and technology.
Um, that's on slide 3.
Um, it's a Sandy essentially has
a mini science and engineering
university.
Um
Uh
Again on campus, you have a lot
of
Specialists in materials and
chemistry and physics.
And so you can attract a lot of
these high caliber.
Um, you know, faculty level kind
of researchers who are doing
basic science and pushing the
envelope and publishing papers
and getting R&D 100 awards.
At the same time, if you've got
a problem like,
Yeah, I've just designed this
circuit or this piece of
equipment and it's failing,
there's corrosion or whatever,
you can go to these.
Experts
And get their assistance. And
so, so again, you know,
universities, you know, if you
want.
You're mad at UNM, you don't
have to leave the state, you can
go.
Work at San. It's just it's a,
it's a wonderful thing.
Um
So, uh, manager and director
Gibson, I, I have a few
questions, uh, for you, um, the
first is I was super excited to
hear in your presentation about
a Sandia Foundation.
Um, I know that one of the last
things that Senator Do Minici
did was set up the Lano
Foundation.
Um
And that
Really is
I mean, there's there's
The money that we all get
appropriated, you know, it has
specific, you know, statements
of work and it's appropriate for
certain things. We can't just
take a bunch of that and.
And run a STEM programs or help
small businesses, right? That's
why we have
You know, and SBA and trigger is
the kind of way to do that.
So we didn't have that at
Sandia. Um, so.
Uh, Madam Chair and Greg Gibson,
can you just talk a little bit
more about kind of
Um, how that, that meeting went,
what you see, uh, the future of
that.
Um, and, and of course 300
$400,000 is a great start, but I
think
Lanel's Foundation has hundreds
of millions in it. Um, can you,
can you talk about that? Yes,
madam, madam chair and
andresentative Harper, uh see
you, thank you, uh, uh, maybe
just a couple of comments. I
really appreciate your remarks
about the Rat Heart Foundry,
that's what we call it here at
Sandia but our our our micro
fab, uh, a couple things that
I'll share about that, and then
I'll answer your question
directly. Uh, clean room
technology actually was
established at Sandia, so the
invention of the clean room back
in the late 50s or
60s was something that a sandier
researcher, uh, developed and
commercialized, right? And so it
speaks to, as we talked about
earlier, some of the evolving
technologies. That's one that
we've all benefited from greatly
over the last several decades or
so, so I just wanted to mention
that and thank you for your
comments. As it relates to our
foundation, uh, one of the
things that we're really working
to do is to create additional
opportunities for us to leverage
the employees of Sandia to
partner with others doing great
things in science and
in ways that we can't do with
appropriated dollars. And so the
seed money is really just
intended to kick off the
foundation for that activity,
uh, we've had some interactions
with the Gates Foundation and
other foundations that are
interested in doing some work,
uh, that would leverage some of
our capabilities, but no ways to
really establish partnerships or
agreements to to to make that
happen and so the foundation
will serve as a way to allow
those agreements to be
formalized and for some.
our folks to volunteer their
time and efforts to make a
difference there.
Yeah, um
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Director Gibson for that, um,
yeah, I've always just had kind
of a little envy for the uh
Lanol Foundation that we didn't
have something similar, so,
yeah, maybe humble beginnings,
but I'm hopeful that that really
can just take off and, and
really be a huge help to the.
Albuquerque, greater Albuquerque
area, kind of like the Lanau
Foundation is for northern New
Mexico.
So that's, that's great to hear
um.
Uh, and then,
Maybe, uh
Another question and then you
kind of went to this um towards
the end of your slides which I
really appreciated.
Um, yeah, slide 18.
talking about some of the ways
that
We can look at addressing some
of the challenges that we, we
are facing as a state, right, we
all wrestle with in ways that
the labs can help, very, very
grateful that Madam Chair you
and, and the leadership of labs
are looking for ways that we can
help.
Um,
but if you have
Some thoughts on, you know, as
we're wrestling with these
issues up here.
Um, things that we can do to
help. I mean, we, we'd love to
hear.
Um, I mean, if you have some
thoughts now or, or we can hear
from, from others, but what are
some things that you know when
you go darn it, I, I love the
state. I grew up in Roswell and
I, if we could just change these
couple of things, it would be so
helpful.
Let them share and, and a
representative. I think the
thing that we were talking about
on the way up here, the thing
that really stands out to me is
the lack of cohesion of effort,
right? There's, there's so many
people that are aware of these
challenges and so many people
that are doing their, uh, their
nugget or niche thing to try to
make a difference, but there
hasn't been, I believe, the, the
collaborative um
support of a couple of 23 things
to, to really focus on making a
meaningful difference. And so
one of the things that we've
talked a lot about as
leadership.
team with our foundation, also
with the Air Force at Kirtland
is that these challenges are
challenges that you navigate as
well, and why don't we partner
more directly on, on things as a
joint community to to make a
difference and so um that's what
we're hoping to make, um, you
know, a difference in the next
couple of years is, is having
one or two key initiatives that
we really commit to lean into
and uh and really get behind and
get others behind as well.
Yeah, Madam Sharector Gibson,
thank you for that. I've, I've
felt that too. It seems like
there are so many small
nonprofits all doing amazing
work.
Um
But how coordinated are we, you
know, I mean, I, I love that we
do the annual shoe on, right?
And I love that.
Um, but I know there are lots of
other organizations, they're
doing backpacks and other things
that
You know, I just, are we
coordinated? Are we?
You know, if, if we were a
little more focused, could we
have a a higher impact. So I
love hearing that. I think so.
Um
OK, and then, uh, maybe, maybe
one other question, um, ma'am
Charector Gibson, so, uh,
Uh, we've done some good things
here in the legislature to help
with the small business
assistance over the last several
years.
Um, increasing the, the dollar
amounts that can be um
essentially provided in services
to small businesses, um, we also
developed the trigger program
and, and, uh, modified it, I
think last year or the year
before to make it even better.
Um, and, you know, I was happy
to have a small part to play in
that, um.
Are there other things that we
can do for those programs or to
help the small businesses in the
state, uh.
Again, the both Los Alamos and
Sandy are just huge resources
for the.
For for New Mexico, um.
Of course, knowing we still have
the the main mission, um.
But maybe you just give me your
feelings for your thoughts on
how those programs are going,
um, and they, he tweaked or
expanded a new program, just
kind of your general thoughts,
you know, Madam Chair and the
representative Harper, I guess
the first thing I would say is I
think those programs have been a
great success and obviously
we're, we're, we're huge
proponents of them and, and uh
have participated uh in lots of
ways, uh, from a resource
perspective, I think their size
about right, like I don't I
don't know that there's a uh a
big difference that would come
from changing the dollar value
up. Uh, what I would
say though is extending the
time. I, I think one of the
programs extent it's playing the
um end in 2027 and so I think uh
I think we've proven that
they're successful. I think the,
um, and I think just building on
that by keeping them would be my
recommendation, but I will ask
the team to provide any feedback
that we have on this as well and
so we can do that too.
Awesome, I'm Chair Director
Gibson, thank you. Yeah, I was
at the uh
trigger program that had a 3 or
4 year sunset on it, yeah,
that's not so.
Yeah, uh, you, you all do such
an awesome job with the packets
that we get every year, you
know, I can flip just straight
to Sandoval County and see, you
know, what businesses have been
impacted, you know, those are
wonderful.
Having something similar like
that for trigger when, when you
come and ask for the extension
of the sunset.
Um, I think that'll go.
A really long way.
Um, so yeah, you all do a great
job.
OK, um, Madam Chair.
Thank you, madam chair. Thank
you very much for being here.
Thank you, Representative, hard
questions. I just had a quick, a
few quick questions. So you
recruit approximately 38
employees from New Mexico where
you have currently employed
about 38% of your employees are
from New Mexico, is that
correct? 38% madam chairs
apologize. 38% of our degrees
come from uh New Mexico.
Schools and so of our employees.
I don't have the number right
off the top of the head of the
population of our lab that's
native New Mexico's versus that,
but I can get that for you guys.
OK. Yeah. Um, so if a student
really wanted to come and work,
what are some of the entry level
positions that you hire. Yeah,
so I actually started at Sandia
as a student intern, so I, um, I
was in undergrad studying civil
engineering and I started as a
student intern for the last
semester of my undergrad, so we
have student intern programs for
undergrads.
We have high school, we have
high school interns as well, so
we do pay they paid positions,
um, they're hourly paid
positions and I remember when I
came through that it was a lot
more pain than I was getting
other places, right? So it's,
it's competitive pay.
Uh, we also have um we have
several educational programs. So
once you're hired into the
laboratory, uh, we have programs
where we pay for your time and
and going to college and your
tuition, uh, so long as you're
making meaningful progress
towards your degree objectives
and so we, we have those
programs, um, and then we have a
summer intern programs and so we
have year-round student intern
programs for undergrad and and
um and um high school students,
but we also have summer
internship programs where folks
can
come from lots of different uh
places in the country and New
Mexico, uh, to work at the
laboratory for a summer, uh, see
what they like, uh, if they can
endure the, the rigors of
clearances and all that fun
stuff, but uh we have that as
well, so there's lots of
different ways for for students
to get involved in a laboratory.
Excellent. Thank you.
And any other questions? Go
ahead. Yeah, madam chair, if I
can just add, um.
Back in '96.
When I was at Sila High School
with APS they had a program
where the, my, my senior year
after lunch, I could go get a,
an internship. And so I did an
internship at Sandia Labs, and
it paid like
6:25 an hour, which was like an
extra buck above minimum wage
working as a dishwasher at the
uh rearan McGaughlin Country
Club, and this was way better.
And uh and then I
I got my bachelor's at Mexico
Tech, and then, uh, finished my
master's at Purdue and then
hired on at Sandia in the uh
researching area and quickly
learned that I wasn't ever going
to get my own lab or be a, you
know, a principal investigator
without a PhD. And so Sandia, I
use the uh in-house dissertation
program and finished my PhD at
UNM with Sandia's help. Um, so
it was, it's, uh, they have lots
of great.
Great ways for a
Rio Rancho born and raised.
Get in the system.
So, um, what is the entry level.
Average, um, salary that you pay
and what degrees do you hire,
um, mostly.
Mountain chair, it really
depends on the type of, uh, job
you're hiring into. So if you're
hiring into, I'll call it a
research and development like
engineering job, uh, we have 4
levels of employees that come in
there, but an entry level, a
member of technical staff is
going to be right around
$130,000 or so, uh, at the
start, and that can progress up
um pretty significantly,
probably about 50, 60% depending
on uh their progression over the
course of a career. Uh, if
you're hiring in as a
business professionals. So say
you're hiring in as an
accountant or uh finance uh
individual, uh, your, your entry
level is going to be somewhere
between $8000 and 90,000, so
depending on what skills you're
bringing in, so that gives you a
ballpark ranges. Well, thank you
so much for coming today and
presenting. It was really
informative and
Um, that, thank you so much for
your time. Thank you all.
Appreciate it. OK.
Our staff
Let's see what
next to presenters here.
Rebecca's handing out her
handout. OK.
So next we have
of
Sherman McCorkle.
Share of the technology and
collaboration or let's say,
chair of chief executive officer
and co-founder of Sania Science
and Technology Park Development
Corporation.
Francis the executive director.
Welcome.
Is your mic on?
Sorry your mic on, make sure
that the green button is on.
There we go.
Thank you members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity of being with you.
Today
Um
purpose is to visit about.
collaboration between the
national laboratories in the
universities in New Mexico.
Let me tell you a little bit
about my background first, um.
until the late 80s, the national
laboratories.
We're not allowed to discuss any
of their.
Technology outside the fence.
through the efforts of Senator
Dienci.
The Department of Energy and the
National Nuclear Security
Administration created a tech
transfer.
portal
Balance statue to the well.
National Laboratories too in
effect moved some of their
technology outside.
Of the fence.
So it's taken many years for
that.
For that process to mature.
I work
Closely in.
Outside the fence on tech
transfer through.
40 years of working.
Both the universities.
And the National Laboratories.
To include Oak Ridge National
Laboratory in Tennessee and
Idaho National Laboratory and.
Uh
And other national laboratories.
In New Mexico.
My observation is we as a state
have not.
Take advantage.
fact that
amount of money spent on
research through the National
Laboratories.
We as a state do not benefit.
As much
we can
So I, I have
3 or 4 slides in the first one
is the Valley of Death, and this
is true.
Universally
And on the left hand side of
this is where the research
actually occurs.
So it doesn't matter if you're a
national lab or a university.
Or a commercial company.
Basic research.
has to occur first of all, and
so in New Mexico.
We have 4 federally funded
laboratories, and then we have
4.
Universities, all of them engage
in basic research.
That basic research then we
to what the the term frequently
is.
Applied research or
Research that
Cres discoveries that were not
anticipated in the research
process. We
In New Mexico do not.
The research universities in New
Mexico.
Do not currently share that
research.
So if you turn to the 2nd page.
It shows what it could look
like.
In fact
The national
Research universities and
national Research Laboratories
and universities.
Share their research with each
other.
We do not, there is the
technology research
collaborative was created by
statute in the Governor
Richardson's administration.
For the, for the singular
purpose of sharing research with
each other.
Over years, uh, the funding has
non-existed, I believe.
In the last 2 or 3 years it's
been about $100,000 a year.
Which seriously is not enough
funding to.
any,
any great gain.
If in fact we funded a
collaborative.
So that there was the
opportunity for these 8
institutions to share.
Then we would
Create the opportunity.
much more marketable technology
to exist within the
institutions.
So if you go to page 3.
example, but
If
conversations let us assume that
Los Alamos.
New Mexico State University.
Found out well.
very similar research on this
related technology.
So what we're doing is flannel
spending their money doing this,
the research.
National state spending their
money doing the research.
And they are in fact at this
stage competitors.
And
The way the current system works
is each of them.
If it was marketable, each of
them would then try to take it
to market.
And if each of them was
successful in taking it to
market, then they would be
competitors.
In the marketplace.
If we funded the opportunity for
them to create collaborative
research and collaborative
market assessment.
Joined intellectual property
agreements.
Then we would magnify
substantially.
The opportunity for success.
Technology research
collaborative statute is
authorized to do this.
Right now
Once again, there's just,
there's just not much funding.
So the next page is a
hypothetical scenario.
This is simply a narrative of
the previous page.
But it points out
How they would prepare their
proposal.
Or TRC funding in order to do
this.
They would
And jointly on
intellectual property they would
jointly own the marketing
effort.
They were jointly
jobs in New Mexico.
The last page is simply how does
it work? And I, I tried to make
this.
This is what
occurs elsewhere.
Where
The members after they exposed
their technology to each other,
they vote on what has the
greatest opportunity for
success.
And it takes it, it takes a 60%
of the vote.
To fund an award
to take it to tomorrow.
And so it would, it would
require, um,
60% of of the
uh
That would
allowed them to move forward in.
Uh, identifying the single
licensing authority.
And
in the opportunity to create
jobs.
And
In the most
Practical way I can say it.
This
of
collaboration.
In fact, the previous speaker
was interesting with uh
representative Harper.
And they were talking about the
In another situation, but the
The lack of collaboration.
This doesn't get us anywhere.
That's true.
In trying to take advantage of
the federally funded research
lab laboratory.
could be pleased to answer any
questions that anybody might
have. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your presentation
for waking us all up it's
getting a little sleep there.
No, I think you make a great
point about um collaborating, I
think that's been one of the
things that I've noticed most as
there seems to be this poverty
mindset maybe because for so
long in New Mexico's history,
we've had to do so much with so
little and there was a tendency
not to collaborate. I'll I'll go
to committee though and see if
there are any questions.
Representative Garrett, we'll
start with you. Thank you. Thank
you, doctor, thank you, and I'm
sorry I was.
And we
Somebody jumping today.
Um
I think my question also is who
are.
Rafter because we're working the
months.
Would you say that this proposal
is related to that.
I'm sure representative.
fund that
tech was talking about.
It's more of
year or two
I understand.
Mr. McCorkle is proposing that
is.
These would be grants to.
They're not companies yet,
they're kind of like
OK, and represent Harper a few
years ago led a team at San Die
to create an anthrax.
Detector system.
successfully took that to
market, but they had a little
Small detector that's gonna.
Cut the cost and, you know.
I
100, it'd be really easy and
cheap to manufacture that they
needed that seed money.
Turn that into a, I believe
that's what uh the speakers.
Referring to
It would be a different uh.
So I'm also thinking madam chair
of the bioscience Authority UM
it's a public private.
Kind of partnership which it
sounds a little bit like this.
They have university projects.
And they're taking them to work
yes, each.
in these institutions.
have their own process.
That sense they are competitors.
Nobody from my point of view.
No benefit by being
competitors
But there has to be.
A reasonable
for collaborating.
and
And
This
technology research
collaborative, once again it was
created about 20 years ago.
That statute creates that safety
area where
You can exposure technology.
Without, without fear of
negative consequences.
open, answering your question.
Yeah. It, it seems like this is.
Another
of what we need
that
That's exactly what it is.
from.
Uh
fallen man I'm sure that we do
provide the state of Mexico does
provide funding, but it's mostly
on the right hand side.
Of the valley of death, it's
after.
The intellectual property.
After the tech transfer occurs.
After a startup company is
formed.
That's where
state money mostly goes.
None of it goes to the left hand
side in creating the
collaborative technology.
Any other questions?
Thank you very much for the.
Yes, absolutely.
Like
You, you can ask I don't know
that we have an answer, but go
ahead.
OK, thank you.
This is uh
Informational presentation about
something that already exists in
statue.
And uh
The goal is to
Of the legislation by the state
of Mexico provide.
A higher level of funding to the
TRC entity.
And I think to do that we should
meet with the LFC.
Um
I'm not sure of the etiquette of
this protocol of, of that.
Um, should we speak directly to
LC or does your committee.
we already met with you.
For this interim, it's probably
a little late to get on the
agenda for LFC.
However, um,
You can definitely talk to staff
and
Staff can arrange that moving
forward.
OK.
I
Right.
Go ahead.
chair, so I, I got to spend, I
think 4 years on now let's see.
Yeah.
Incredible, but uh also a lot of
time.
Uh, but you can just look up
their phone number and call them
directly and ask to talk with
their staff.
share
your thoughts. You don't have to
have like a, a committee or a
legislator introduce you.
You can especially say that
you've talked with the science
technology.
and
That's a great way to kind of
get the ball rolling cause staff
are actually pretty sharp and
they can share some different
ideas and different thoughts
with you. You can bounce things
back and forth and get an
appetite for.
Um
You know, whether this would be
accepted positively or not, and
then, and then work with the
committee to get a hearing on
it.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, ma'am
thank you so much for being
here. Have a good evening. And
with that, um,
adjourn until the morning.
At 9 a.m. same room?
We'll be here.
