Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman, uh.
Committee members, but ladies
and gentlemen, my name is Harry
Garcia. I represent House
District 69 which covers parts
of some, some Juan McKinla
Bernardoianoro.
I've been this committee since I
started in 2016.
You know, they put me on time
out for a couple of years, so
this will be my last meeting for
now, but we might be back.
It's never the end up nothing
until it's over, so with that
being said, thanks for all the
Would work committee members,
members of the audience text for
the sport and stuff, um, I have
my, my district engineer sitting
right there. Thank you for
everything you've done.
Thank you, Mr.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I'm
state Senator David Gallego's
District 41, Eddie Lee County,
we bring you your revenue to fix
your roads of an appreciated
advisory on this committee, um,
on my day job.
I do asphalt in dirt work.
Uh, but I appreciate the
opportunity to be here to
understand where we're going
with our roads. Thank you.
Good morning, everybody. I'm
Representative Jennifer Jones
from District 32, the the
southernmost district in the
state, and it's good to be here
this morning. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Um, I'm Representative Kathleen
Cates from District 44. It's all
of Corrales, parts of Rio
Rancho, and uh parts of northern
part of Albuquerque. Thank you.
Good morning, um, Mr. Chairman,
um.
Senator Roberto Bobby Jay
Gonzalez and uh representing a
part of Los Alamos Riri was
District 6. Thank you.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, and
we're glad to be here with you
on this in the final, uh,
meeting of the, of this
committee. And uh I am
Representative Pamela Herndon. I
represent House District 28 in
the Northeast Heights, where we
have the most walkable district
in the entire state and where we
are creating what is called Move
New Mexico, a, a project where
we want to have an
affordabletrastate airline so
that people can actually move in
New Mexico.
And thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I am Anthony Ellison. I
represent Northwest New Mexico.
You don't get no further
northwest than my district.
And I appreciate all the
cooperation that the Department
of Transportation has given me.
I've
earned many friends and
I just enjoyed being on this
committee, so, uh, this is also
my last meeting as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'm state rep Joy
Garrett, Northwest Albuquerque,
home of petroglyph National
Monument and a lot of big major
roads. It's a pleasure to be
here.
Good morning. My name is Sheila
Kelleher. I'm a researcher with
the council service.
Senate District 18, which is the
Mideast Heights between Academy
and
Constitution.
Very glad to be here this
morning. Look forward to today's
discussion.
So the first item on the agenda
this morning is um
An item entitled Department of
Transportation Target Zero, and
we will hear from the uh
Esteed secretary of.
DOT Ricky Serna, and
As well as special director at
DOT Amy Whitfield.
I guess we're not gonna hear
from Ricky. He's.
But I'm sure you'll be able to
uh
Do a good job representing both
of you.
Thank you, chair. I sure hope
so.
I tell everybody this is.
So there's a PowerPoint
presentation and then that's a,
um, just a gift for you all so
that you can see some of the
things that we did over the
last.
You go ahead. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you all so
much for this time. Um, we
wanted to come to you and
present an update on Target er,
um, as you all know, Target Zero
was created by you and the rest
of the legislature in 2023 as
House Memorial 85, um, which was
introduced by Representative Art
De la Cruz and Representative
Diane Hoffman B. Hill. Um, to my
knowledge, we are the only state
who has actually put into
legislation, um, the priority of
0 fatalities traffic related
fatalities. And so we're really
excited and very proud of New
Mexico for doing that. Target
zero is an initiative that is
connected with the path that
many others across our nation
are taking. We've seen
governments and school
districts, transportation
authorities and state DOTs
adopting the philosophy that
there are 0 deaths that are
acceptable, um, from
traffic-related fatalities.
There are things that you will
see, um, that are
nationally happening, um, on
page two of the PowerPoint.
Um, so Target zero is really
something that is connected with
the road to zero coalition,
which is done by the Federal
Highway Association and the
Vision Zero Network, which is a
um national nonprofit that is
working on this.
We at Target er are highly
connected with these national um
initiatives. We are also
connected with everything that
is happening across the nation
with state DOTs with nonprofits,
and we're connected with what's
happening here in New Mexico
with the Vision Network in the
city of Albuquerque and the
Vision Network with the
Albuquerque Public Schools
District and then other things
that are happening throughout
our state. We know that we have
to be highly connected because
we want to make sure that what
we are doing.
We have learned from those who
are doing best practices and
that we are part of a network of
professionals that can support
our work and make sure that
we're doing things that really
align with how we get to 0.
And so on page 3 of the
PowerPoint presentation, you
will see that when we say target
zero, we mean 00 means 0, that
we are talking about zero
traffic related fatalities by
2050.
This is not an audacious goal.
This is not a philosophy, we
really are working towards zero
traffic fatalities here in New
Mexico. That doesn't mean that
we will have zero crashes. We
know that we will have crashes,
um, here in New Mexico, and
we're not what we are doing is
we're building a system that is
a system of redundancy and a
system that will make sure that
all layers are protected, so
that crashes do not result in
death.
I believe several months ago you
all had a presentation on the
safe system approach, and that's
what we are talking about. We
want to really look at what we
call the Swiss cheese model, so
that we know there will be
crashes, but we also know that
if we have a system of
redundancy that hits all of
these areas, areas of safe
drivers, safe road users, safe
vehicles, safe speeds, safe
roads, and great post-crash care
that
All of those systems would have
to fail in order for a crash to
result in a death.
And so if we're building up a
stronger system, we are going to
make it so that by 2050 we have
zero crash fatalities.
We want to make sure that um
when we're talking about safer
people that we're building in
good behavior and good traffic
safety culture around people in
New Mexico and those who are
visiting New Mexico. When we
talk about safer vehicles, we
want to make sure that vehicles
on New Mexico roads have the
ultimate standards that make
sure that they know how to drive
safely, that they can see things
and that they can protect
pedestrians as well as other
drivers.
We want to set speeds and drive
those speeds in ways that are
safe because momentum is what
causes death.
We also want to make sure that
we have safer roads. We already
do a really great job of making
sure that every road in New
Mexico is built to the highest
safety standards, and so we want
to also increase the ways that
we can build past those
standards.
And we want to have an amazing
post-crash care, that if we know
that about 40% of people who die
in New Mexico crashes are
actually dying on the way to
hospitals. They're dying on the
way to care. So that if we can
build a better post-crash care
system, we can save about 40% of
people who are currently dying
for without reason. So on page 5
of the presentation, you'll see
the key principles of target
zero here in New Mexico.
This really is us taking New
Mexico DOT and highlighting and
amplifying the things that we've
already been doing for multiple
years.
We really focus on safety and
human life first, knowing that
we're prioritizing safety and
well-being of individuals under
our transportation system.
We're focusing on a data-driven
approach. How do we prioritize?
How do we make sure we have
accurate data analysis and how
do we align strategies that are
coming from data-driven
approaches.
We want to make sure that we're
building a plan that identifies
the risks, implements effective
measures and tracks our progress
towards our zero fatality goal.
We want to make sure that we
have equity across our state. It
was so excited to hear
Representative Herndon about the
movability of your district. We
want to make sure that all of
New Mexico has that same
ability. We want to make sure
that we have safety improvements
across all communities in New
Mexico, that there is
walkability and other mobility
and particularly want to focus
on historically underserved or
high-risk areas and Road er um
road users.
And then we also want
accountability. We want people
in the community to be able to
hold New Mexico Department of
Transportation accountable. We
want to be able to hold other
local governments and
stakeholders accountable and
make sure that each of us is
playing our role in implementing
and creating safer roadways
throughout the state.
So I'm sure you're sitting there
wondering, that's a great
philosophy, how do we actually
get there? And so what we're
doing at Target er is to make
sure that we get to 0 deaths by
2050, by first building a very
extensive implementation plan.
In October of 2025, I hope to
come back and tell you guys all
about the implementation plan.
It's really being built with all
of the different stakeholders
with that Swiss cheese model in
mind.
We're going to operationalize
what it takes to get to zero
traffic related fatalities. We
need to know what are the
resources that we need, we need
to know how do we make sure that
all state agencies involved in
this are working together, and
we need to make sure that we can
say what are the systems that we
don't currently have that we can
build in.
We want to make sure that we're
engaging with other state
agencies, and we want to make
sure that we're determining how
to best coordinate and amplify
the safety work that is already
happening within the New Mexico
Department of Transportation.
The other thing that we're gonna
make sure that we're doing is
we're gonna build robust
standards and processes within
NMDOT that increase the safe
system approach and make sure
that we can do that Swiss cheese
model that every layer does not
fail, so that we can catch.
crashes and, and prevent deaths
along the way.
We want to conduct road safety
audits that identify root
issues.
We want to convene gatherings of
stakeholders to learn and commit
to the safe systems approach.
We want to build education and
campaigns to improve New
Mexico's traffic safety culture,
and finally we want to evaluate
and improve where is needed, the
data and the data-driven
decision making.
All of this together, the
coordinated effort, the engaging
stakeholders, the building
throughout our safe um
throughout our state. It builds
a traffic safety culture that
says no traffic related death is
acceptable, and it builds
solutions that mitigate the root
causes of traffic fatalities.
So now I just want to tell you
about some of the things that
we've already been doing. I
started in June and got the
mandate from our secretary to
get jump in right away. And so
we've been able to do a few
things already. You'll see a
quick timeline on um slide 8.
It's really talking about the
things that we've been able to
do. In June of 2024, I was hired
and got to get started right
away. We did a transportation
safety summit in August of 2024.
We started our road safety
audits.
Getting funding in September and
we just started our first one in
Santa Fe, um, last week, we did
a robust pedestrian safety month
activities in October, and we're
starting the countermeasures lab
here in November.
And so the next slides will tell
you a little bit about those
things that we've already done.
On slide 9, you'll see the New
Mexico Department of
Transportation safety plans that
we already have.
All of these plans exist in New
Mexico DOT, but they're not
coordinated in a way that we can
set robust standards. And so
we've already set up a work
group that is going to
coordinate across all of our
existing safety plans, and by
working together, we can make
sure that we set standards and
priorities that increase safety
standards and that we can
communicate those out to others
throughout the state that are
working on this mission.
We want to make sure that we are
setting a model for best
practices across New Mexico.
Next slide you'll see the
transportation safety summit,
and this is also the little
booklet that, um, we gave you on
August 27th and 28th, we held
the first transportation safety
summit. We had 295 stakeholders
registered to join us in
Albuquerque for this event.
Over 7 national speakers came in
order to provide us with
training. We had 12 traffic
safety workshops that were
provided by local experts, and
we had a half a day that was
specific to get stakeholder
input on how we could make sure
that target zero is reaching the
needs that they had. We're very
excited to have Senator Ben Ray
Lujan as our keynote speaker for
the lunch, and we also had
different, um, speakers, one
from Doctor Ian Thomas from
America Walks, and
had a lot of different local
experts from our regional
planning organizations and our
metropolitan planning
organizations as well. It was an
opportunity for us to really get
jumping on target 0 and make
sure that we were making sure
that, um, stakeholders were
involved in that.
The next one you'll see is the
kickoff that we've been doing
around education campaigns to
improve the traffic safety
culture in New Mexico.
We were able in October to
celebrate pedestrian safety
Month. I'm sure as many of you
know New Mexico is number one
for pedestrian fatalities
throughout the nation. We have
been number one since 2012, and
we believe that it is time for
us to move out of that number
one spot.
So in October, we made sure that
we launched some great traffic
safety culture, um, events. The
one in the left corner you'll
see is the partnership we did
with Albuquerque Public Schools
Vision Zero, program. They went
to multiple different middle
schools throughout the
Albuquerque Public School
District and had conversations.
Middle school is a great time
for us to really engage because
they are pre-drivers, so if we
can start talking to them about
looking out for pedestrians,
driving safe speeds.
Paying attention to the roads as
they start driving in a few
years, they're going to be ready
to be safe drivers.
We also can talk to them because
they're the ones that can have
conversations with their parents
right now.
Uh, when we went to the middle
schools, we were able to hear
from middle schoolers about how
they watch their parents texting
while driving, driving unsafe
speeds, driving without
seatbelts, and they are ready to
talk to their parents about the
dangers that that is, and how
they can, um, drive safer.
We also made sure that we were
talking about what is safe
walking.
We wanted to make sure that we
could encourage people to use
the trails that exist when
they're walking, and that we
could talk to them about how do
you walk safe using reflective
gear, all of the different road
protective behaviors. And so we
hosted a pedestrian safety day
on the rail trail right behind
the DLT and we invited all of
the state agencies, about 12
different state agencies are
right next to the rail trail,
and it's a great place where
they can just get on the rail
trail.
walk to their lunches, use the
train to commute up to Santa Fe
and then use the rail trail to
move forward.
The other thing that we did in
October, which is on slide 11 is
we had a traffic safety garden.
The traffic safety garden is an
isolated space where young
children can practice traffic
safety behaviors. And so you'll
see our secretary there with
some um young children from the
daycare that's in the um Montoya
building and showing how they
can practice outside of safe
spaces, and we built the traffic
safety garden in ways that a lot
of our
Traffic, um, does in New Mexico.
There were roundabouts, there
were areas with crosswalks and
areas without crosswalks. We had
a railroad crossing, all things
that kids can come and play with
and they're learning traffic
safety behavior from a very
young age.
On the next slide, slide 12,
you'll see the road safety
audit.
We just started our very first
one on Sarios Road last week.
Um, we were able to partner with
the city of Santa Fe to go out
and audit this area. This is a
huge area we did errios from
Siler Road to um to Luhan
Street. This is an area that has
a really hot spot for pedestrian
fatalities. So using the Federal
Highway Association and the
national consultant VHB. They
were able to walk us through the
process of odd.
what's going on in the roads?
What's happening with
pedestrians, what's happening
with cyclists, and what's
happening with motorists that
have gotten us to a spot where
this is such a hot spot.
We were able to look at ways
that we could put in, um, you
know, immediate ways of, of
solving these problems, but also
some long term goals for how the
roads might be shifted.
We looked at what are some of
the behaviors that we really
have to engage with to make sure
that we're building up better
traffic safety culture in the
area as well.
And then we also talked about
how the businesses are situated,
that might be contributing to
some of the motorist problems as
well.
We plan over the next year to do
15 of these road safety audits
throughout the state. They go
beyond what a typical road
safety audit would do, and they
really look at what are the root
causes of traffic fatalities in
those areas and that we can
start to look at that whole
entire Swiss cheese model. What
are all of the different layers
that are not being taken, um,
into consideration in this
moment.
We're going to highlight the
responses that we need to have a
comprehensive and redundant
system that prevents traffic
fatalities.
So those are just some of the
things that we've done and
wanted to make sure that you saw
how we're getting started, how
we're jumping into activities
and then just give you an
opportunity to ask any questions
about Target er and where we're
going.
Oh, thank you for your um
Excellent presentation, very
informative.
And um
First up for questions is uh
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm really on board with this
program, Target 0.
The first thing that comes to
mind, you said that you're
looking forward to zero
fatalities.
I have been complaining about
the rockfall in my district.
At the hogback just says.
The state of New Mexico and the
Navajo reservation meet.
That rock full.
At a serious fall about a couple
of years ago.
We, uh, a sheet of rock had
landed on an SUV.
Right smack in the middle, so it
folded the cab in half.
There was a driver
And a passenger that was
separated by a sheet of rock. It
could have very easily have been
a fatality.
But to this state, I have not
heard what the mitigation
results were, what the studies
were and all. It's been 6 years.
And we haven't done too much
about it, so I'd like for you to
add that to your target zero
plants.
And then your first line said
that the target zero plan
implementation.
October 2025.
Why not? January 2025.
I wait a whole year to implement
something of that you've been
working on for a while.
And then the
We're talking about safety.
Some of the roads that have been
redone in my district and
adjacent districts.
is they put a 2-inch
overlayment.
On top of existing uh pavement,
and those have been falling out.
In some areas, the road is so
bad that the major lane of
traffic in the four-lane
highways, the major lane of
traffic is the left lane,
because the right lane is so
badly torn up that people get in
the left lane, and when you're
going
The speed limit and the car
ahead of you is not.
You have to swerve back into the
right lane, the rutted.
Road to pass, uh, to get back to
your destination.
And in some areas that left lane
is being used as the main route.
Uh, I think especially in uh my
adjacent area, I think that's uh
District 6 around the Tohatchie
area. The road is really, really
in bad shape.
So
Uh, I think I questioned the two
in overlayment, maybe we need to
go.
Deeper and rebuild the road.
With as much money as we're
putting into it.
Uh, those are my two concerns,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative
Allison, thank you so much. I
will definitely look into all of
those things, um, to your
question about the
implementation plan. So we are
not waiting for the plan to get
started on activities. We're
jumping into activities that we
know we need to have. The
October 2025 plan gives all
state agencies that need to be
part of the Swiss cheese model,
all of those different layers,
gives them an opportunity to
put, give input into the plan
and think about how they will be
implemented.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Presentative
Uh, next up we have a
representative Cates, followed
by Representative Herden.
Thank you, Chair, and, and thank
you, Amy for this presentation.
This is very impressive and so
uh uh comprehensive and looking
at all the different, um, I know
that like time of day I was just
talking to my colleague Dusk is
so uh so much a danger. I
appreciate on um in your
booklet, uh, I appreciate on
page 9, alcohol-related
pedestrian fatalities and that
The conclusion is we need better
data gathering, um, oftentimes
when there's a pedestrian
fatality 40% is what you're
saying is the pedestrian is
known to have consumed alcohol.
Um, but 50% we have unknown.
Uh, conditions, so I appreciate
that you are identifying, you
know, opportunities for
improvement.
And, and, and what we're
addressing what, what I didn't
see, and you know it's not an
engineering solution is how is
an MDOT addressing this, are
they supporting um any
I don't alcohol reduction
legislature, um, or, or is it
part of your education, uh, when
you're taking the middle school
uh students out. I know this is
a
pedestrian and we also talk
about drunk driving, but it's
not in here and to get to um
that 0. I'm sure it's gonna have
to be addressed. Is this
something that in in DOT feels
that
Somebody else should be
addressing.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair
Representative Kate, we believe
that across multiple state
agencies, this should be
addressed. Uh, the New Mexico
Department of Transportation has
a long-term educational program
in DWI and we just created the
NDWI plus to also handle some of
the cannabis. And so we know
that, you know, getting
behavioral change, marketing out
there is absolutely necessary.
And so we are going to amplify
that program, um, that we've
been doing for multiple years.
But we also want to engage with
some of the other state agencies
that have something to do with
this. We want to engage with the
Department of Health around
their alcohol work, um, and
their harm reduction work as
well. Uh, we want to work with
the healthcare authority on some
of the things that they're
putting into, um, you know,
Medicaid and other insurance uh
that focuses on alcohol, uh,
recidivism, not recidivism, but
reduction, um, and then we just
wanna, you know, be engaging
with some of the other state
agencies like our public safety.
department and our economic
development department as well
on some of the things that are,
um, you know, how do you enforce
alcohol use, um, you know, when
it's being done in a wrong way
by using cars, but then also how
do we make sure that we are
incentivizing our, um, really
great craft breweries and craft
distilleries, um, to also be
supporting behavioral change as
well.
There's a lot of different
things that we can do. We're
gonna make sure that we amplify
our NDWI program, and we're
gonna make sure that other state
agencies know what they can do
to contribute.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Representative. Next
up is uh
Representative He.
Thank you, followed by Senate
state Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Madam Presenter, and I'd
like to ask you about three
things that we are looking at in
our very safe walkable district.
So the first one is we have been
talking to a vendor about street
lights on major thoroughfares
that will light up the street
anytime someone is under it and
they're walking across the
street so that we make sure that
we are reducing pedestrian
incidents. I'd like to know if
you all are familiar with that
type of lighting, and are you
thinking about putting
it in place.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, I am sure there is
someone at DOT that is familiar
with that. I am not familiar
with it. Um, we just, when we
did the road safety audit on
Serrios, we had someone there
from the Federal Highway
Association, um, that was
focused specifically on lighting
across um surreals. And so that
is something that will be
engaging in conversation around
the road safety audits. Um,
sometimes the lighting is
really, really great, but the
lighting from businesses behind
that lighting.
is giving us a problem. And so,
yeah, please.
And so, um, it's part of what
we're gonna be researching and
making sure that we're setting
standards for that. Also, deputy
secretary may want to contribute
as well.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
representative. My name is Momo.
I'm the new deputy secretary for
NMDOT. This is my 3rd week, so.
Baptismal by fire, so.
It's good to be here, but the
question is, uh, about the
pedestrian safety department has
been working on it as Amy
explained.
We are collecting all the
information, we are collecting
all the data and we are looking
at all the alternatives.
to reduce and eliminate.
Serious injuries and death on
our highways and roadways.
And this includes even the local
railways. That's why we are
working very closely.
With the entities such as Donana
County, City of Las Cruces.
And uh chat city of Roswell.
I'll also bena County.
Uh
You're correct. illumination at
some of the intersection is.
Very crucial to
enhance safety.
And that's why we're working on
the some of the programs we call
Hank.
Which is a high accident.
walking areas and uh
I think you have seen in some of
the.
Maybe as close to university has
them.
Those are the three light set
when you push the button.
He stops the traffic, so you can
cross it.
Uh, those are, we have to do a
study on it to see if it meets
the warrant.
If he has enough I mean uh
pedestrian.
the numbers are high enough that
War is the traffic, the hawk
system we were implement.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chan.
Thank you for that explanation.
I, I, that was one of the items
that was also of the three lists
that I talked about with the
blinking lights or pedestrians
crossing the street, in addition
to the illumination light that
would light up the street to
make sure that they are visible
and uh uh it it is a solar
system, and I hope that you all
will look into that also. And
finally, the third one had to do
with respect to bikes and riding
bikes in the way in which they.
sect into major thoroughfares.
We're really concerned about a
particularly if we look at
Montgomery and Tramway and the
bike lane that comes around and
the intersection of those cars.
It is extremely concerning to
the people in my district, and I
hope that that is something that
is the top of your list.
And that you don't look at that.
Is that correct? Yes, ma'am
representative safety is always
number one for us.
I mean, we won't really have no
serious injuries or fatalities
on our road.
And that's why we look at
everything. Anytime there is a
crash on our roadway, we do
investigate it. We took it, we
take it very seriously.
Because we don't
You know, look at it that
somebody made a mistake. We want
to know why.
Such action happened.
And we need to make sure the
People see each other. We see
the pedestrian, the pedestrian
sees the vehicle.
And vice versa and uh
As you all know, the cost of
building separate.
facility for bike and uh.
You know, pedestrian is always
costs a lot of money.
And we restrained with that
also, so, but
Believe me when I say that
because this is our mission
statement.
We want to create the safest.
Transportation system for all
the users.
Well, that's why the name even
right now if you're using called
vulnerable road users.
Because those are the people
that are being.
Injured by vehicle traffic, so
we want to make sure the
pedestrian and bicyclists are
safe too.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I just got
a text I just want to raise one
other item. The concern was with
respect to 30% of the fatalities
being involved, uh, including
some form of alcohol, being a
part of those fatalities. The
question is, are you going to be
working in collaboration with
the public safety department to
have regular checks to make sure
that people are not driving
while drinking. That was one,
and the second thing is to make
sure that we are
The people are wearing their
seatbelts and are we going to be
conducting regular safety
checks, and is that something
that your traffic safety bureau
will be utilizing.
Mr.
Mr. Chair Representative
Herndon, um, like, as I said, we
want to continue to amplify the
things that the New Mexico
Department of Transportation has
been doing along, um, for many,
many years. And so our traffic
safety bureau, uh, we actually
do pay law enforcement to do
blitzes on those blitzes, you
know, really helped to do, um,
enforcement around drunk driving
and also enforcement around, um,
seat belt use. And so we're
gonna continue to do those
things. I think one of the
issues that we have right
now is that there is a shortage
of law enforcement workforce.
And so we want to make sure that
we're finding new and unique
ways that we can um still
continue to do the enforcement
that we have been contributing
to all along, even though
there's a shortage of law
enforcement.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
madam presenters, Mr. Presenter.
Thank you, Representative. Next
up is uh
uh state senator um Gonzalez
followed by Representative
Jones.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman,
and, uh, first of all, you know,
thank you for the work that
you're doing and, and how it's
working.
And uh I like to probably put my
comments a little bit more into
uh
A lot of it taking it, you know,
into the personal part because
uh the reason is so.
I fought real hard to start this
committee, you know, place the
initiative to the legislative
council to get it going.
And uh it has been a battle,
believe me, it hasn't been easy
to keep it because they still
have us as a subcommittee.
Which it should be a know by
itself as standing Committee
too.
Because of the importance, but
um, I'd like to start off first
of all, is um
Uh, a few years back, we had a
presentation that I just made a
really indention to my part of
of my thinking.
And it was that.
Every license that the state
issues.
Belongs to the state.
Whether if it's a driving
license, the liquor license, uh.
Business license, they all
belong to the state.
And uh
Taking it to that, it's um.
Having a license is not an
entitlement.
It's a privilege.
And, you know, and we have gone
so far from that, uh, Mr.
Chairman and member says um.
If anyone would want to ride
with me on one of my trips up
here. You could see the number
of infractions just from Taos to
Santa Fe that happened.
And I always look at it is like,
I guess this person doesn't
really value, you know, their,
their license.
Because of so many things that
could happen, you know, by
Passing on double zone and
speeding and all kinds of
things.
And uh my comments definitely
are not on the negative side. My
comments is I'm a user of the
highway of the roads. I'm part
of it.
You know, and we all need to, to
work together with this.
And uh one of the things that uh
that I see, you know, is so as a
state.
Uh, we definitely, you know, uh,
lighting was brought up that we
definitely need to invest more
on striping.
You know, and then also, I think
it's a responsibility.
That if you drive a vehicle,
your license should be legible,
you know, it couldn't shouldn't
be to where you can't even tell
the numbers, and uh we have so
many of those, you know, in our
roads sort of um.
If something serious happened,
um, you know, you couldn't get a
number or you couldn't get a,
you know, you might get a
description of the vehicle, but
But none of them.
So, uh, in with that part, you
know, with a striping license
plates, more signs, and I think
another part that is so.
That uh, especially in certain
areas of the state.
I drivers.
We have the ones that speed.
But um, Mr. Chairman, we do have
drivers that go too slow.
And that causes anxiety for the
ones the temptation to or
passing.
Which is also dangerous, you
know.
And plus some other things that
I've been mentioned, you know,
with everything else. The other
one that uh Mr. Chairman, that
I'll bring, uh, you know, so in
education.
That is
If we do that, we have mastered.
thing
And in this conversation that
also with uh working with our
governor.
is if we start a program,
You know, workshops are fine.
One day presentations are fine.
What works is a curriculum scope
and sequence from kindergarten
to up to 12 or even higher.
And having a program.
And then at that same time, you
know, that would be the part
that you could integrate.
The beautification of our state
and try to get rid of, you know,
so much trash and so much what
goes in and uh bring that, you
know, the other areas that have
been brought up as, you know,
you don't drive and drink, you
don't drive and this.
So, uh, you know, I think this
is definitely a really, really
positive thing for our state,
and I think we could really be a
model and we could work with
this very, very hard, just some,
some of my thoughts and if it,
but also the the very important
part that uh.
That I want to bring up this, we
gotta get off of this thing of
being a Democrat and a
Republican. This is Rhodes for
everyone.
And I have tried so many
initiatives.
Or getting more funding.
to
The department
We need to support it.
You know, this thing, so we're
talking about, you know, they
will cost money. And if you
don't have the funding.
You know, it really stifles, you
know, the.
Art that you can do the, the
great progress.
And uh with that, uh, thank you
for bringing this and definitely
yeah.
I will be one that I will roll
up my sleeves very, very high to
help you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, thank you, Senator,
and uh next up we have uh
Representative Jones, followed
by Representative Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you both for your presentation
and your work. Appreciate it.
Um, and appreciate the
opportunity to advocate for
safety of my uh constituents. I,
um, represent the southernmost
district and so that the road
Highway 9 that goes along the
border for Santa Teresa all the
way across.
is in my district, and I'm
getting um a lot of complaints
about white loads that I, I
guess these um
The wind turbine blades and
Mobile homes and that sort of
thing have decided that using
Highway 9 is a lot better than
using Interstate 10.
And I've been told that there
are
Um, codes that limit the hours
that they can use this road, and
they don't follow the, they
don't follow any restrictions.
They don't even use their side
of the road. They go down the
middle of the road, I'm getting
complaints. I got one about two
weeks ago from a ranching family
who said once again they had
been run off the road. I mean,
run off the road. They, they
were lucky they their truck
didn't just, you know, that they
didn't have a terrible wreck.
And that's not anything new.
It's, it's been a real
The other other concern there is
the animus schools are right on
Highway 9, and these wide loads
are coming and going as the
school buses are trying to
leave. There've been school
buses that have been run off the
road.
I contacted the state police.
The only thing we can think of,
there's nobody down there, you
know, except the people who live
there and and uh very little law
enforcement presence, um, no
fault of theirs, it's just we're
we're lacking law enforcement.
But they're putting license
plate readers down on this road,
one near the uh near Columbus,
another near Animus.
So we can see them, you know, on
a on a on a video tape, I guess,
but, but we still, I still need
another answer to that. How can
we get these wide loads, these
people that are carrying wide
loads to you, if they have to
use those roads.
If I don't even know what the
code says. I need to know what
the code says. How can we
enforced that code so that
school buses aren't at risk.
Ranchers aren't at risk.
Um, that's one of my problems.
The other one is an ongoing
situation at Road forks and
Interstate 10, where the
existing lighting there at that
um
Exit ramp where there's a
convenience store hasn't worked
in years, and it is at night, it
is really a dangerous situation.
There's no lighting off the
interstate. I'm really surprised
we haven't had a bad accident
there as well.
So those, those are my two
dangerous issues that I would
also like to be at the top of
your list.
add to this, this uh effort, so
I appreciate your attention to
that.
Thank you. And, well, before I,
before I end, do you have any
idea about the codes that would
be in place, uh, to limit the
use of these uh wide loads for
this particular road, the state
roads, and they could be using
the interstate.
Yeah.
On the highway line.
3 weeks ago, I was counting
engineer.
Or Donna County.
Signed very familiar with what
you ask.
And unfortunately,
Text. Texas DOT does not allow
them.
The wide load certain time.
And they don't want to wait till
they come through our roads.
That's why you see them on
Highway 9, a lot of it, and then
also.
The current construction
projects on I-10 between El Paso
and Las Cruces.
is very slow, as you can tell,
it's very restricted.
So
That's one of the reasons that
uh
A lot of these white laws are
using.
All roads
And Highway 9, unfortunately in
Donana County.
I think 100 years ago actually
was written the Donana County
would be in charge of the
Highway 9 in Donian and as a
county engineer, I can testify,
tell you that we never had
enough funding to really do a
lot of work on Highway 9.
And every year we have been
asking for funding to take care
of it, but we never.
Got enough money to really do
that.
Also on the district one.
has been working very closely
with the
Wide loads we trying to make
sure they are safer.
And coming through and at the
interchanges in actually Hidalgo
County.
We wanted to install them, but
we didn't want to pay for the
energy, and we wanted the county
to pay for energy.
And the count did not agree to
pay for the.
Energy for those lights.
So those lights were never
installed.
Thank you for that. So you're
saying that, that all they would
have to pay for is the energy
that you would be responsible.
DOT would be responsible for the
the infrastructure, the actual
lighting.
Yes, sir.
OK.
I think I, we'll have to talk
more about
The Highway 9 situation, the
wide load situation, if there is
an ordinance in place, the
earth, we need to make changes
to an ordinance. I would like to
know about that, so I'll be in
touch. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Representative.
Um, just a quick couple quick
comments. Thanks, thanks again
for your, your presentation. I'm
impressed at the status.
DLT is given the safety uh a
high priority.
Um
The there was an article today
in the journal. I didn't read
it, the headline was uh
Um
Traffic deaths are down.
Can you come is, is your program
had anything to do with that?
But
Recognizing that, I guess you
say you haven't implemented the
program yet?
Why are deaths found?
Um, Mr. Chair, I'm not sure I
haven't read the article, so I
don't know. Um, I think that,
you know, we've been DOT New
Mexico DOT has been doing safety
for years, decades, and so, um,
work that we have been doing is
coming to light and impacting,
um, traffic fatalities. Uh, what
we're doing with Target er is
making sure that we amplify and
boost those, so that we're not
just coming down, but we're
coming down all.
Mr.
As Amy explained, did the safety
has been number one forever. I
mean, when we build roadways, we
knew there were people having
crashes.
So as an engineer,
As
Send it to Gonzalez explained,
you are licensed engineers, and
we are ethically required to
create safety.
That's number one thing. We go
to school every year, you'll
required 2 hours ethics classes.
So that's the reason we all make
sure safety is number one, and
the crashes have gone down
because again, as Amy explained,
the department has been doing a
lot of things to create safer
roads.
One of the things we discovered
that a lot of crashes are
happening. We call runoff
crashes.
It means people are leaving the
roadway.
So we implemented by
Instructing or constructing
rumble scripts on the roadway.
So when you get to the shore,
the, the noise changes and you
are aware of that. That has
reduced a lot of the crashes.
The second thing is our
striping.
Or pavement markings have really
improved. We put in better
paving markings on the road, and
some roads we have found out on
the curves, if you put wider
stripe in people will pay more
attention to it. So that has
reduced some of the stuff, and
Also are signing.
We have now engineered design
sign reflective signs, so they
are more visible at night, so
people see those. So it's a lot
of measurement that we have been
using.
To increase or enhance the
safety.
And that's why you see the
crashes of down and also the
outreach, outreach has been
excellent, as we explained
earlier, we have been running
advertisement, going to schools,
going to communities.
We are doing a lot of outreach
to the
Even the
You know,
community-based organization
using the community CBOs.
To get the message out to our
customers that
We're having issues with the
safety and one of them was
Senator Gonzalez said is
disputed.
Um, GTI transportation, Texas
transportation Institute did a
study in 2008.
And they found that 30% of the
crashes are caused by
differential speed.
Not just speeding, but if you
have somebody going 30, somebody
going 80. The higher the
differential speed is the higher
chances of having crashes. So
that's what we're hoping that
people know that.
You got to go certain.
You know, pretty close to the
speed limit, so you won't have
that differential speed which
causes more crashes.
Thank you.
OK. Well, thank you for that
answer.
About a month ago, I rent it.
flew to Cincinnati and rented a
car and drove 500 miles to Ohio
and upstate New York.
and to follow up on the
representatives Allison's.
Uh comments about striping and
well marked.
I was blown away by how how well
the the roads were marked.
In the Ohio in the upstate New
York.
Also, um,
Interesting side comment that
that the rest areas in Ohio and
New York State.
Or or or
tremendous to the bathrooms and
The rest areas in upstate New
York are as nice as an upscale
hotel. I mean, it was
unbelievable.
In the rest areas in this state
are just
this terrible. I mean, it makes
such a
And I stopped it a couple of
them lately, and they're just
Man, they need to be updated. Is
there any plans to, to do that I
guess it doesn't sound a safety
issue, but man, it certainly
doesn't make a good impression
out of state motorists.
Um
And uh
The
Another interesting time I grew
up in upstate New York and 50,
60 years ago, they're the only
state I know of that allows
Double
50 ft trailers.
And in the wintertime, it got
kind of exciting to get a lot of
snow and ice, and you'd be
trying to pass one of those
double trailers, full length
trailers.
And that the second trailer
would be
Certain
Weave back and forth.
Got a little scary, but they
they still allow and I.
And and one, and last, one last
comment, the speeding on I-40.
Through uh Albuquerque.
I've had I've been here 18
years. I've never seen anybody
stop, and almost every day they
have an accident. The truckers
must hate coming through here.
It seems like almost every day
there's an accident, traffic is
backed up.
And there's no enforcement. Now
I know that's not the state's
responsibility, but
City of Albuquerque's
The traffic enforcement is
almost non-existent.
I first moved here.
18 years ago, there was, you,
you see people stopped
throughout the city.
But the last 10 years.
It's, it's, there's no
enforcement, it's unbelievable.
And um I don't know how would
the the.
The traffic crash rate has gone
up or down and
In Albuquerque, but um
You know, an academy.
Speed limits 45, people going
60, 70 miles an hour.
I've never, I never ever seen
anybody stopped. It's like a,
it's like a raceway, and I drive
that every day.
That's all
Um
That's all I have. Thank you
again for being here. Excellent
presentation. I'm glad to see
that.
You were giving um
Thank you, a high priority.
Thank you again for being here.
Next up,
On our agenda this morning is uh
A presentation on the DOT
resilience Improvement Plan.
And we have a substitute.
Teacher today.
So, uh, welcome to the committee
and we look forward to hearing
your presentation. Thank you.
Thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chair and committee members, um,
obviously, I'm not, uh,
Secretary Serna. Uh, my name is
Jessica Griffin and I'm the
planning division director for
the uh New Mexico Department of
Transportation, and I'm going to
talk about our resilience
improvement plan.
Um, and that's great, there's
slides. So, um, New Mexico's
infrastructure, as you all know,
is facing increased threats from
everything from wild fires and
floods to dust storms and
extreme heat, and continuously
having to repair these assets
that are damaged by hazard
events is costly,
time-consuming, and it can
seriously impact uh travel for
our users.
Um, so we've been looking into
starting to design our
infrastructure with resilience
to these hazards in mind and
then in that way we can
hopefully avoid or lessen major
damage that a hazard event could
cause to our infrastructure to
bring us coffee.
So, uh, the definition of
resilience, um, it has many
meanings, but as far as
transportation infrastructure,
we define it as infrastructure
that is designed to avoid
anticipate, absorb, adapt to,
and or rapidly recover from
current and future hazards.
So there there's a little bit of
history here, um, on our
resilience improvement plan. I
actually started looking into
resilience back in about 2019,
um, I attended a resilience
conference in Washington DC and
at that time, the big focus of
early resilience efforts across
the country was, it was pretty
focused on coastal areas, um,
sea level rise, flooding, and,
and all of that. But we did
start looking into a resilience
study, um, and we completed that
in 202.
One and basically what that did
is that it identified some needs
in New Mexico around resiliency,
um, as well as identified uh at
that time there was a lot of uh
gaps in the data available. So
we decided to kind of let that
sit for a little bit and, and
wait for there to be more useful
data, um, and then in 2021, the
bipartisan infrastructure law
was passed, and that actually
introduced the concept.
Of a DOT resilience improvement
plans. Um, and also provided
federal funding for
implementation of these plans
for uh resilience projects, and
I'll talk about that protect
funding here in a minute.
Um, so, um, resilience plans
demonstrates a systemic approach
to transportation system
resilience and include a
risk-based assessment of the
vulnerability of these
transportation assets and
systems to current and future
weather events in the natural
disasters. That's the federal
definition there. And I want to
say that resilience improvement
plans are voluntary, they're not
federally mandated, um, and then
the, the
benefit of having a DOT having
an approved resilience
improvement plan is that you get
a reduction of the federal match
amount or the, the state's match
amount that's required for
federal funding.
Um, and so we decided to pursue
developing an actual resilience
improvement plan that met the uh
the uh federal standards. And in
2024, that rift was approved by
the Federal Highway
Administration, um, and so I'm
going to just briefly go over
that rip to just talk about how
we created it and how we're
using it.
So, uh, the, the 2024 rip.
I resilient improvement plan,
RIP. Um, it was very data-driven
and um it uh we conducted a
pretty uh detailed analysis of
the DOT roads and bridges are
assets, um, because that's what
we had the most data on.
Um, and so what the, what we did
is uh identify assets that are
the most risk for damage from
environmental and natural
hazards.
And the way we did this is first
we had to identify the hazards
across the state and we um
did that by looking at what's
happening the most and what do
we have data on? And so the key
hazards include wildfire,
rockfall, flooding, and also
debris flows, that's not just
about water coming down, but
also all of the, um, you know,
burned logs and rocks and all
the other things that happened
after a fire that that come down
when there is rain.
Um, as well as drought and dust
storms, um, and so the, uh, the
first thing we did was um uh
math where our um assets
intersect with these uh major
hazards.
And then we looked at the uh
vulnerability of these assets to
the hazards and doing that, we
assess the sensitivity which
looks at the extent to which an
asset is damaged or disrupted
when exposed to the hazards, and
you have to take into account
the condition of the pavement or
the bridge, as well as the age
of the structure, um, and this
helps us determine the
vulnerability of the assets.
And then we looked at the
criticality or how important is
this asset to the system and the
users and we looked at several
factors there, so we looked at
economic factors, we looked at
like proximity to hospitals, uh,
we looked at, you know, is this
a critical freight corridor, um,
is, uh, what's the redundancy if
something happens to this road
or this bridge and it's shut
down. How long is the detour to
go around it.
We also looked at transit routes
and active transportation
routes, so pedestrian and bike
routes, um, as well as uh social
inequity considerations. So, um,
looked at, uh, you know, what
are the, what's the vehicle
ownership rates for the people
in this area, the poverty,
education, language, and age.
So we used all of this to
calculate resilience, risk
scores, and ranked them from a
low risk to D, very high risk.
Um, and we developed hotspots,
which are continuous corridors
along a single route that have
consistently high or very high
resilience risk based on all of
this analysis.
And what this produced is this,
this table and it shows um the
percent of district road miles
by risk rating, so you can see,
um, you know, there's low risk,
medium risk, high risk, and very
high risk, um, and that shows
you the percentage of each in
each of the districts. Um, and
as you can see, uh, the map on
the right also shows just the
different kind of hotspot
corridors.
And
We took all of this and turned
it into a, what we hope is a a
useful um explorer app.
Um, that is used internally.
Anybody at the DOT can go in and
pull up a corridor and assess
what, you know, what the risk is
of wildfire, debris flow, uh
rockfall, um, and how critical
this asset is and then start to
identify needs or projects that
we could, um, um, that they can
submit for funding, federal
funding in order to um address
the issues.
So
Now we have this rip and we have
this internal map that districts
can use. So how do we fund all
these projects? Well, um, there
is the protect funding that was
also included in the 2021
bipartisan infrastructure law
and protects stands for
thankfully the acronym is nice
and easy to say because what it
stands for is promoting
resilient operations for
transformative, efficient and
cost saving transportation.
Um, and so we received DOT
receives about 13 million a
year, uh, for in this protect
funding, we do have to set aside
about 2% each year for planning
projects.
Um, and the protect formula
funds that the DOT receives are
only available to, to the DOT
for DOT led projects on DOT
roads and bridges.
Um, there is a protect grant
fund that's available and um
tribal and local public agencies
can't apply for that funding.
So this is a little difficult to
read, but this gives you an
example of the some of the
protect projects that we're
funding, um, we, uh, we are
prioritizing uh projects on
corridors that were identified
in the rib.
Um, but you can see we've got
quite a, a range of projects
here and what's really nice
about this protect funding is
we, we are using it for things
that we normally can't use
federal funding for. So for
addressing rockfall, there's a
rockfall study underway and one
of the districts.
Um, actually, the US 64 hogback
rockfall mitigation project is
in here. I think that's the one
you were referring to,
Representative Allison. So we
are using Prot protect funding
for that. Um, and that's a
programmed in 2026 for 2
million.
Um, and then also you can see
we're doing some uh cult
improvements as well as
addressing some bridge scouring,
uh, down along the Gila River,
um, the Gabian basket repairs
and um addressing some cult
improvements that will help uh
with the debris flow that from
the calf Canyon Hermit peak
fire, um, and so this, this
funding is really useful and um
we're very, very happy to have
it.
So just some examples of
resilient infrastructure. So as
I mentioned, flood debris, we
can install barriers in fire
prone areas, properly sizing
culverts and flood prone areas,
um, preventive preventive slope
stabilization, wind breaks, heat
resistant paving, and
revegetation to mitigate dust
down um some of you're familiar
with the Lordsburg Playa. We've
been doing a lot of dust
mitigation projects down there,
revegetation and all of that to
try to cut down on the.
the dust that blows across the
road and causes crashes. Um,
that's a, that's a real
interesting resilient safety
projects, and combines all those
factors.
Other examples of resilient
infrastructure are um
nature-based solutions, which is
um, this is, is really big in
the protect program. So native
revegetation, retention ponds
and bio swells, and naturally
enforced retaining walls. So as,
as the slide says, the solutions
serve a dual purpose of
protecting infrastructure and
reducing human impact on natural
environments. So the next steps
for our resilience improvement
plan and theE program, which
hopefully
We, we, we'll continue to
receive funding for, um, is that
we actually have a protect
resilience coordinator position
that is, um, as being advertised
as we speak.
Um, and we'll continue to work
with the districts to use the
rip to identify projects for
protect funding.
We are also reviewing our DOT
design standards to identify
recommendations for integrating
resilience.
Um, and, uh, we're about to host
a national training on
resilience to develop technical
capacity of our DOT staff.
And as well as invite other
state DOTs to participate in
that.
And then we will be updating the
resilience improvement plan to
include culverts after the
completion of the DOT culvert
asset mapping plan, which is
underway right now.
And with that, I'll stand for
any questions.
OK, thank you for your
presentation. Very good.
And next we'll turn to the
committee for questions and
comments. The first up is uh
representative Amane.
Thank you very much.
Mr.
Thank you very much um for being
here. I love the client
resiliency plan. I love all the
work that DOT has been doing
around that. Um, I do just have
one question slash concern. Um,
do you have a plan or what will
happen if, um, you know, not all
of the funding is received
through the bipartisan
infrastructure law by the end of
the year.
Um, well, so we have programmed
out for the years of funding
that we know we're going to
receive, uh, which is 2020
through 20207, I think 2026.
Um, and then our 2027, and then
we've got some projects kind of
on the shelf, should the bill be
reauthorized or
You know, and hopefully the
funding will be continued.
Great, thank you. Maybe we can
look at it from a state
perspective as to how we can
protect resiliency and
transportation and um continue
to fund those initiatives just
through a state mechanism, so
thank you.
Thank you.
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Chairman, Vice Chair.
thank you for the presentation,
uh, on your funding.
And when it comes to a
wildfires.
So this means that uh this would
not be state roads or they
probably would be 4 service
roads or county roads.
And you can work with the
funding for that.
Uh, um, thank you for your
question, uh, Representative
Gonzalez. Um, this is, it's not
about helping to prevent
wildfire. It's about looking at
uh damaged roads and culverts
and all of that following a a
wildfire and the the the um
destruction that occurs after
the wildfire. Um, now, counties
and uh local jurisdiction and
tribes can apply for the
protect.
Grant funding.
Um, which is, uh, through the,
through the feds, um, but they
are not, they cannot access this
protect formula funding that the
DOT receives, and the DOT can
only use it on DOT roads.
OK, very well, Mr. Chairman that
clarifies it. Thank you.
Oh, thank, thank you, Senator.
Uh, next up, we have, uh,
Representative Armstrong,
followed by Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
I apologize for being late. Uh,
I really like this, um, the
what's at risk and, and the
percentage.
Uh, this is, this is really
telling, and um, I, I would
just um go to on to say this is
exactly why we need consistent
funding.
NMDOT we need consistent funding
across the state of New Mexico.
Maybe we could get a little R&R,
roads and restrooms.
And, and have a package, a
consistent funding source for
DOT. I think it would bring down
the cost.
Of construction across the state
of New Mexico of these roads.
Uh, I do think that um your,
your plan of moving forward is,
is excellent and identifying
those, those issues across the
state and uh and it looks like
to me in your list that you
spread it out, um, across the
state and trying to meet all
those needs. I just want to
advocate for consistent funding
for DOT. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, this is one of those
presentations that
You don't really think about, so
thank you for making us think
about it. Um.
So pavement's a big issue, and
I'm always amazed when I go to
the University of New Mexico
because it's just cement.
And, and you talked about heat
resistance paving, how
extensively have we used heat
resistance pa paving on our
state roads.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Garrett, for your question, and
I actually am going to have to.
And that question over to uh
Patil.
Good morning, Rick Petty,
executive director of Department
of Transportation, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, representative,
that's a great question. So in
some form or fashion, the
department is always used, um,
I, I don't know if it's heat
resistance, but we use oils in
specific areas of the state, um,
that could, you know, make them
softer, um, help prevent
oxidation, those types of
things. So we've always used it
in a way, but I think now as
technology kind of evolves, um,
the emotions and the oils that
we can use in hot mix in.
and other materials has come a
long way, so that uh heat
resistance or the sun resistant,
the oxidation, uh, we can reduce
that quite drastically.
Thank you. And then,
The flip side is, do we have
pavements that absorb the water.
I mean, water is a precious
commodity, and we hear about,
you know, produced water and
everything else, but
we work so that water is
collected on our vast network of
roads.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
representatives want it, yeah,
right, that's a great question.
Um, there, there are certain
pavements that that we apply
that do um allow water to pass
through and meaning our our
OGFCgraded fiction course that
we apply on any road that's
above 50 miles an hour in speed,
we apply a thin wearing course
overlay and it's very uh porous
in that the water uh will
infiltrate into that top layer.
We don't water, won't water for
trading into our into our hot
mix into our be, that's
ultimately water juices and
that.
That's what creates potholes and
everything else, and that's bad.
So we don't want that, but we
want the water off the surface
of the road, um, so we could
prevent hydroplaning black guys,
those types of things, um, so we
do have some and they're applied
very deliberately in locations.
OK. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative, and
uh
Thank you again for being here.
I also have a question, comment
we.
Revolving around heat resistant
paving, so
I assume that uh
This is gonna increase the
initial the cost of construction
and maintenance of highways and
How much, what's the percentages
that increase the cost of uh
New construction.
Mr. Chairman, good question. Not
drastically, um, the oil that
we'd use in southern New Mexico
versus something we use in
northern New Mexico just because
of the uh the amount of sun
southern New Mexico receives is
maybe 1 or 2% more than the
standard oil that we use in
other locations, nothing too
crazy. I mean, we use a ton of
it already. So cost, you know,
isn't that drastically different
from other oils that we use in
in other parts of the state.
OK, well, that's, uh, that's all
I have. Uh, thanks again for
being here.
Oh, I'm sorry, you were on the
list and.
I have trouble reading, so.
Thank you.
Um
My apologies. Uh, go ahead. So
thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
thank you, uh, Mr. Padilla. One
of the my question is, I'm
looking at page 9 and your uh
resilience improvement plan, and
it talks about roads and bridge
structures. So I want to direct
your attention to the little
bitty, to the little city of
Santa Teresa. And in that city,
there's a, a railroad uh track
that goes through there and
sometimes they are very long.
Trains that go through that
city, uh, holding up the
progress of people being able to
cross from one side to the
other, so the question is, as a
part of this improvement plan,
are you looking at building a
structure or overpass over that
railroad so that it will be uh
help the people to keep moving
even when those long trains come
through the city. Uh, Mr.
Chairman and Representative.
Not through this program, not
through the resiliency program
that that's not what this is
for. But when we look and study
that particular area, yes, that
will be one of the alternatives
that we move forward.
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
got a better answer, stem.
Mr. Chair Representative.
Again, as I said earlier, 3
weeks ago I was counting
engineer for Donana County, so
we applied for funding for that
bridge. You're talking about the
one on the industrial park.
Road
The trains are 2 mile long, so
you're right, it creates a lot
of.
We apply for funding and we got
the money.
And that project is going to
start June of next year.
Um, thank you, mister. Thank you
very much. That's gonna make the
people in Santa Teresa very
happy. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Oh, thank you, Representative.
Uh, any, uh, last-minute
questions from anyone, any
members of the panel.
Hearing none that concludes this
section of the.
Agenda, thanks again for being
here and we move on to the next
agenda item, which is
Interstate 40
trade corridor.
To be uh.
Presented by Marco.
Gonzalo Marcos Gonzalez is he.
is here and we're gonna approve
it.
Mr. Chairman, they come in.
See here. Yes. He's just right.
Oh
Mm
Um
Welcome to the committee, uh,
Mr. Gonzalez and go, you can uh
proceed. Thank you.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm uh
Marcos Gonzalez, uh executive
development officer for
Bernalillo County, overseeing
economic development and
financing for affordable
housing, and with me is.
Good morning, Mr.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh,
I'mmaia Sarcheleta I'm the
deputy county manager for public
works for Bernalillo County.
Right. And so, uh, before you
were here today to talk about
giving an update on the I-40
trade port corridor project.
Uh, this is a project, a
public-private partnership that
uh we've been working on at
Bernalillo County with uh Metro
area partners in Sandoval
County, uh, the village of Los
Lunas, and then our uh fellow um
Groups in Arizona with Winslow,
Arizona, and Kingman Arizona and
the Port of LA. And the idea is
really to address the challenge
or the problem that we've seen
in this country with supply
chain management, and we've all
experienced those instances of
having not being able to get a
product or a certain item and um
or having a businesses that are
falling behind because of uh the
supply chain issues and then
also the really the big issue
with uh climate.
A reduction piece as well is
having folks really sitting at
the port waiting for shipments
to come off of ships and being
able to have um
The loading uh.
Um, surrounding that piece.
So it's really, how do we um
engage with the public sector,
how do we engage in a more uh
efficient uh supply chain system
and really for New Mexico, take
advantage of that because for
I-40 Albuquerque is really the
last spot in like 40 where
before the goods pan out to the
rest of the country and being
that critical point of being
able to take in a lot of the
goods for warehousing logistics
and then be pushing them out
into the rest of the country,
um.
So as I said, a lot of our next
slide, a lot of our um.
Public partners here locally in
the metro area and uh federally
with the USDOT Build America
Bureau and really designing a
business case that allows for
the investment of public
infrastructure that would see
private investment and
development of a lot of
warehousing and transportation
items. Um, the shippers and the
private sector is really uh in
and invested in this group and
this is a list of letter support
that we have from our different
uh congressional groups.
And public sector groups and um
different uh groups across, um.
That the spans across the
spectrum, and then the next
slide, um, this is just a
continuation of our public
support that is for our project
as well. And then um the next
slide.
In slide 7,
it's like sexually dictates out
uh why the private sector is
really behind wanting uh this
type of project. It really
develops a lot of the
infrastructure that's needed for
clean energy and fueling and
charging really creates a more
efficient uh supply chain system
and really surrounds uh these
hubs to create uh the mask
that's needed for private
infrastructure development and
um really pushes a lot.
lot of development to happen
outside of a major um or urban
areas as well. Um, so the
private sector consultant that
makes up our group as well is
where the GLD uh partners uh
group out of Arizona that we've
been working with and really
bringing a lot of the industrial
space to um committing to our
um.
Project, and the equipment and
the other logistics that are
needed to complete it. And we've
also partnered with UC Berkeley
on the next gen technology for
um with uh autonomous, not just
vehicles, but autonomous systems
when we're talking about and
you're talking about autonomous
vehicles later this afternoon,
but really looking at it from a
whole holistic view of how is
autonomy managing um how our uh
trade is moving through the
country. How is?
Uh, products being moved
independently amongst hubs
between companies and
warehouses, and then ultimately
on the road itself. So really,
we're really trying to capture
the whole um consortium from
that and then also ensure that
we're looking at it to making
sure that we're analyzing safety
and um.
Um, efficiency on it, and with
this in partnering with UC
Berkeley, uh, we've also
partnered with the uh other
pubblo to do a lot of testing
there for safety and
consideration.
Next slide, this is really who
we've had uh from the private
sector who's really been
supportive of the project and
wants to see it moving forward
of making of not only renewable
energy companies but shippers,
truck manufacturers, and um a
distribution groups, um, that
really want to see a more
efficient, uh, especially on
I-40 being the major artery for
the country and how goods are
shipped from, especially coming
in from Asia to uh Middle
America and back and forth.
Um, the other component that
where they
With this unique P3 partnership
is really, how do we um create
that initial spine on the clean
energy piece to be able to
capture it and being able to
make um.
The uh
Be really the catalyst for how
we're going to be feeling how um
goods are shipped in the country
in the future, and really
developing that piece.
Um, this is just a um
illustration of, as you can see,
I-40 and the three hubs that we
have with Albuquerque, Winslow,
and Kingmen are really showing
how um
But, um, coverage that we can
have, but also showing how um
how much goods are flowing
through the feeder shed to um
The rest of the country and
really being able to be that
space where we can be pushing
our goods into where a lot of
manufacturing happens in the
country, which is in the Midwest
and then to the southern part of
the country and back and forth.
Um, I-40s cargo, uh, Bush
continues to to grow and and not
only on truck, but also on on
rail as well, and we're gonna
continue to see that and an
important thing to note is that
we're not talking about adding.
space onto I-40 that already
exists and continues to exist,
but it's mainly how are we going
to continue to manage all this
commodity and freight is moving
through the state and then more
importantly, taking advantage of
those commodities that are
moving through the state, and
either adding value to them or
having an engagement with that
versus just being continuing to
be that bridge state between um
The west coast of the country
and the middle of the of of the
country.
Um
At
This is an indication of where
we would see the uh sites and
for
buildouts on our Albuquerque
Treveport area, we're looking at
about a 6000 acre site that
would be a trick mobility
center, but also would have
manufacturing, warehousing and
logistics and uh and um
educational center as well. Um,
So we're not just tipping into
just being a um feeling stop or
a one-stop truck stop, but
really a whole holistic adding
to the value of the different.
Uh,
Commodities or items, um, and
Once again, these, this is
really just the start of it,
with it coming from the port of
LA to Albuquerque, but looking
at how do we continue along I-40
as well.
Um, this is really just a, uh,
by 13, a demonstration of really
what the truck mobility complex
would would be able to have and
having all the different
synergies around it, which is
similar to what you see in a
port or within a um
A uh trade uh.
Air cargo as well, and so really
building all of these components
into and surrounding the truck
mobility complex as well, which
we, we plan to do as well.
Um, these are the different, um,
investment attractions that
we're looking to have within the
different ports and from Kingman
Winslow and then in the
Albuquerque, um, as well, which
is going to be the larger of the
hubs and positioning to take on
more of of the manufacturing,
pulling in from the four corners
as well as I-25, and really, um,
the rail piece is why we have
the village of is involved
because the county several years
ago invested into their a rail
park.
able to uh push in a rail into
the Bernalillo County area as
well. So, um,
And once again on the
Really also manage me not only
talking about infrastructure,
road infrastructure, but also
how do we manage with automation
and
And the big day.
Data piece as well with having
um
Last mile a delivery piece,
making sure that we're actually
uh taking advantage of how um
these Conex boxes are turning
and really taking the most
efficient route through the
country is right now there's not
a lot of different pieces that
are talking to each other as
they should be creating
efficient corridor systems, so
really.
And that also leads to with
automation with, of course, um,
safety and wanting to make sure
that as rate continues to move
and increases to move through
the the country that safety is
paramount um piece as well.
Um, so in terms of the
investment from the US Federal
government that we've seen with
the trade port first we were
designated as a regional
infrastructure accelerator site
by the build America Bureau that
provided a little over a million
dollars in planning funding, um,
the USDOT is taking on a new
model of kind of doing some
venture funding of you proposing
an idea and then putting up a
little bit of money for you to
plan further and develop it, and
then we were also successful,
uh, lastly, with 15 million.
dollars in a um a raise grant
for planning funds and we'll use
about a third of that at the
Albuquerque hub, and then 3rd at
the two other hubs as well, for
planning of infrastructure, uh,
funds, and they'll be going
after additional grant funding
to actually deploy physical um
infrastructure as well.
Um, so that leads us to kind of
the our ask as well of the
consideration of going into um
It legislate uh session, there
is gonna be an industrial
logistics initiatives bill that
will help uh provide
infrastructure funding for these
sites as well for trade port
sites and that will be taking
advantage of it would be New
Mexico trade port, which is down
in um the southern New Mexico
area, the 403port corridor and
the greater Gallup area that has
a similar uh project of going
after different markets.
Um
We are looking at um as well as
legislation being formulated for
the site, a readiness program,
which is paramount to all these
different sites that still need
critical infrastructure to
actually become um operational
on the public infrastructure
side from roads to uh to to to
water and there's critical
elements that are still needed
all over the state.
And then, of course, the power
up bill as well, which allows
utility scaling uh for the state
of legislation. And so power is
going to be a critical
component, not only for um
manufacturers and warehousing
and distribution sites, but also
on as we look to convert uh
local delivery trucks to EV
trucks or even um
Other trucks are going to need
that type of charging
infrastructure, and then really
in the um
correcting a lot of the language
that is uh probably in the clean
fuels Act to be able to actually
designate agency to create the
rules regarding the permitting
and guidelines for hydrogen
pieces, cause right now,
hydrogen's manufactured in
Texas, transported by truck from
Texas to California, but can't
actually physically stop here to
be sold or do something with it,
so that's an element that we're
um proposing as well. But
without send for any questions
and thank you again for the time
for today.
Oh, thank you, thank you for
being here. Thank you for your
presentation. I would move on to
questions from the committees.
First up is a representative.
Lustrom, who is on Zoom.
Oh, you turn the volume up. Can
you hear? Can you hear us? OK.
That, that's better.
OK
Both thank you, Representative.
Uh
For your, uh
Presentation and explanation of
the bill. Next up, we have uh
Representative Hochman Di.
Nobody else, huh.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, I think someone if you
could.
Representative Lundstrom, can
you turn off your microphone
just for while I ask the
question, then I'll meet mine
and you can respond.
No, that helps.
OK, we're just gonna have to
deal with the echo. Um, thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Marco
and team. Thank you,
Representative Lunstrom for
bringing this bill. Um, I think
it's really important. I just
have a couple of questions
related to um getting our path
straight this coming 60 day
session, we have a lot of bills
that we're bringing that have to
do with infrastructure
expansion, grid modernization,
um, beneficial electrification,
and so my question is, is this
bill, um,
From the economic development
site readiness perspective, the
same bill that is coming from
the economic development
department or is that component
of your bill different.
Thank you, Representative, um,
that makes sense to me. I do
just wanna um.
I want to bring that issue to
your attention, um, I think all
of us, and thank you for your
support of the Power Up bill. I
think it'd be really beneficial
if all of us can maybe meet and
talk about our bills and figure
out how they all will work
together so that we're not, um,
kind of reinventing the wheel
and stepping on each other's
toes. I think it'll be fine, but
um I, yeah, it's such an
important issue. It's going to
be a huge issue this session and
I'm really glad to see everybody
taking it on head first, um, and
so thank.
you very much for this bill. I
look forward to supporting it. I
look forward to talking to you
more about it and um.
Yeah.
Trade.
Thank you, Representative.
Next up we have a
representative.
He
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. This is a great
proposal and my question to you
is how many new jobs will be
created as a result of this
being put in place.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Perdon. So at, uh, we were to
get to the full build-out phase
that would be about 50,000, a
new jobs.
For the um
Um, Shreveport area.
Wow
And, um, and Mr. Chair and Mr.
Presenter and then you also have
in mind a plan for housing for
all these people.
And then is that a part of what
you're doing?
Mr. Chair and a Representative
Hedon that would have to be a a
plan as well of working with uh
different uh housing developers
that would be located close to
the area, we know that um either
um any of the sites that we've
been looking at for the a
demonstration site, the
different developers are looking
at how already how to develop
affordable housing into the
area, just wanting to have
affordable housing next to the
growing um industries, uh within
the metro area.
That is something that needs to
be um addressed as well, making
sure that affordable housing is
close to any growing um
industry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
presenter.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
Next up, we have uh
Representative Garrett, followed
by Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
um, Marcus and team Berlio and
uh Representative Lindstrom.
Um, Representative Lumstrong,
can you give me an example? I, I
need the picture a New Mexico
trade port certification. Can
you describe a town or community
other than what we've already
learned with that start with
Gallup? Would that be smaller
communities, just kind of draw a
picture of who would want that
certification.
Thank you, that it's really,
really helpful. Um, and then it
would apply to everything along
I 10 and I-40.
OK, thank you. That's the
clarification I needed.
OK, thank you. Oops,
Mr. Chair, may I please ask just
one other follow-up question
that was raised by some of the
people who are listening in
online and they're concerned
about the port that's going to
be built in the Gallup uh area,
Mr. Chair. The question, uh,
they're asking is making sure
that it is going to uh be
mindful of sacred sites and of
tribes, nations, pueblos, and
real and will there be some real
consultation?
with those uh communities, uh,
madam, um, uh, presenters and
Mr. presenters, can you please
address that issue for our
listeners, and they can't hear
very well. I don't know if
that's a problem with what we're
doing here and in terms of
hearing the uh presentation.
Thank
you, madam
and Mr. Chair and Representative
Peron, just to let you know on
for the I-403 port corridor
we've been working with um other
pueblo
as well as providing uh better
support from the Navajo Nation
and the Hopi tribe, and the
Indian public Cultural Center as
well, but we're definitely
taking that into a a mindful um
approach as well.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Representative, uh, next up we
have, uh,
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
um,
Just want to
Just, you know, I guess, um.
Maybe a little bit of um.
Uh, we have been working with
this for quite some time, and we
actually started with a study.
To
Look into and working into where
it's today.
But uh if you look at page um.
10
And uh you can see how that
falls from the west to the east
coast.
Uh, New Mexico is prime to be
one of the main arteries to this
whole system.
But also what he would develop
to the economic development.
You know, for our state and uh
we would be very remiss to stay
back and, uh, you know, not
really, uh, be a part of it and
be competitive to it and uh so
you can see this.
And also with uh.
You know, the New Mexico
trucking Association also very
supportive.
You know, into welcoming, you
know, the.
The volume that would come to
this, so again, you know, it is
um we talk about jobs, we talk
about bringing in businesses to
our state.
And at the same time, uh,
You know, the, the readiness
that it would bring to our
state, you know, to just be part
of that whole thing and being
able to be part of a.
A very strong trade port
corridor.
With Mr. Chairman and thank you
to our presenters, you know, to
both and.
Uh, we'll continue to work hard
on this.
Mr. Chair, if I could just for a
moment as well, just unpack that
as well with some additional
context is that a number of
years ago was
Senator Gonzalez and Senator
Adilla had provided some uh
funding to do the strategic
planning session with for the
state of New Mexico because at
the time there was no uh
autonomy or mobility policies
the state had had, but also we
looked at it across the country.
There was nobody that had mixed
mobility with economic
development incentives or
economic development
initiatives, so to really take
advantage of um improving
technology, but also mixing it
to making it an economic
development play for the state.
That's where we uh did that and
that's where this project was
born out of as well, as well as
the I-10 project and there was
even elements for a Northwest
New Mexico as well. So, um, it's
being used to further uh the
work of, um, the doing it
together, but really uh trying
to row in the same direction of
really how we, um, taking
advantage of new technologies,
new distribution systems, and
making sure that New Mexico is
putting its flag in the ground
and taking.
advantage of items that could
propel our community forward and
make the state um.
Um, a better tomorrow.
OK, thank you.
Um, for that.
Uh, next up we have um
Representative Garcia to be
followed by myself.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
we still, wenzalez, thanks for
the presentation. Patty, thanks
for the representative
Blumstrom, thanks for all you're
doing. You know, uh, ladies and
gentlemen, this has been in the
works for a long time.
You know, and you make, you
know, if you look at the traffic
on Interstate 40, it, it's huge,
it's monstrous, you know, I
don't know how many trucks we
get a day, Mr. Chairman, but I
think 20,000 or so, I mean, it's
a
Anyway, you know, it's a lot of
truck traffic and, and if we
don't take advantage of these
opportunities that are, that
are, we're looking at, it's
gonna bypass us and we're gonna
be seen next year, man, we
should have done this and we
should have done this, you know,
in the long term, I really
support what you've been doing,
you know, cause it's a lot of
effort being put into this, you
know, I've been up in, in Gallup
and Carbunco Road and all those
places, and matter of fact,
McKinney County is in my
district also, and you know, I
just wanted to uh reinforce the
The support for this cause we
need to set up, we need to set
up and do it.
You know, a lot of, you know,
I've been a rep for 8 years now,
and a lot of things that 8 years
ago,
That we should have done, we're
gonna do them now. These things
have been there for quite a
while. With that being said, Mr.
Chairman, I want to put my two
sins into it, cause I am in full
support of that. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Oh, thank you, thank you.
Representative Garcia.
I have a couple of questions.
Thanks again for being here.
Thank you for your presentation.
So with this uh
If this program is uh
implemented, become successful.
Does that mean we're gonna have
to add a lane.
Another lane to I-40.
Mr. Chairman, uh, at this point,
uh, like we, like Marcos
mentioned earlier, a lot of
this, most of this traffic is
already there. Uh, we're
anticipating that the growth
that we're showing um over the
20 years on I-40, uh,
Really won't be majorly impacted
a significant growth were
capturing and repurposing the
trips that are already there. So
right now, uh, and you, you hear
this from our partners at, at
the Mexico DOT I-40 is
essentially a bridge, uh, route
or freight as well as just
interstate traffic. So what
we're trying to do is create a
Uh, destination purpose with
these trade hubs along I-40,
where instead of the, the
container simply passing
through, uh, New Mexico ending
up at either a, a point where
they're dish uh broken up for
regional distribution or local
distribution, we're stopping
here and we're gonna pre uh.
We're gonna basically put a new
end to that one. So with us
looking to do the trade hub, uh,
here in the Bernovio County
area, we're looking to capture
some of that, uh,
redistribution, um.
Activities to be here, uh, as
well as mode ship pulling him
off the trains, putting them on
the local uh Berlio County, uh,
and the Albuquerque metro area
is uh perfectly situated to be
that point because of the system
interchange with I-25 and I-40,
uh, like the map showed, that's
the point where we can break
these up and send them into the
Midwest on a number of different
corridors.
Oh,
thank you for that answer.
Um
On page 6.
Number 2
You
take a moment to look at it. So
could you expound a little bit
on number 2.
Give me some
Concrete
Substantive.
On enhancement so that
Section, I mean.
It's kind of uh nebulous.
Mr. Chair, and so the, with the
efficiency piece and having um
Having short-term inventory
management pieces is being able
to have um like uh Eliah Solata
was explaining about having a
lot more of the inventory
management pieces being placed
here in Bernalo County, so being
able to, rather than having
those uh pieces be in Dallas or
Kansas City or those items, but
how do we do that here in um in
Albuquerque as the last like
real hub before I-40 splits out,
and so really increasing the
efficient.
ency by having more of those
type of activities for the
shippers here in Albuquerque at
like the.
Basically, the critical point
before um good start going all
over the country and so making
it a more efficient for shippers
to have a critical point at the
node before um really the uh the
nation's uh.
Shipping systems, uh, really fan
out to all over the country
since Albuquerque's that.
Um, I know the point. Do it here
rather than Dallas.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I can handle some
of that, uh, right here because
of where Albuquerque is
situated, they can stack
functions that they're doing.
The functions, their rest
functions, as well as breaking
up the hub. So instead of making
multiple stops along to refuel,
then to get their mandatory rest
time in and, and then get to uh
uh a uh.
A location where they can break
up their break up their truck
into to the various parts that
need to go out there, this can
all be done in one stop.
So it reduces the time on the
road, it reduces that time to
destination for the goods,
because they're consolidating
all those functions into one or
two stops rather than 4 or 5
stops along.
for sure. Uh, yes, that's part
of the
Uh, public private partnership
piece is looking at investing in
the public infrastructure with
the public side, but on the
actual development of the actual
sites and infrastructure that's
needed on the sites is having
private sector pay for those
elements as well. Um, so that's
where it's a unique public
private partnership piece.
been uh implemented in another
part of the country.
Um, the other project that is
similar to this is Tradeport
California, that is um
internally that runs between LA
and and Northern California with
their tradeport pieces, um, so
that is a um a um.
Existing one as well. And then
from the US DOT standpoint and
Congress's standpoint, they
really like um these type of
projects, um, because it not
only works on clean energy
pieces on the um other
logistics, but also get states
to actually work together on on
different projects and um which
they don't see a lot of and so
forth, the USDOT there's
currently only 3 tradeport sites
that they have uh
certifiedreport, California, the
I-10.
Project and I-40 trade port as
well. And so there's another
round of funding that's going to
be happening, uh, here before
the holidays, uh, with the, um,
that they should be awarding in
the next um couple quarters.
Oh, thank you for that answer.
So,
The uh
Is this something that the state
of New Mexico came up with.
I
They showing the um most of the
initiative.
Are the distributors and the
trucking companies demanding
something like this.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, so we've been
working in partnership with the
DOT or in the economic
development department, but
they're not leading the uh
initiative, the various um
counties are leading the
initiatives in in in in earnest
and um this is something that
the private sectors are asking
for, like the power up New
Mexico bill, that's actually
been brought to us by Volvo has
been wanting, um,
electrification and industry
pieces to be able to.
happen so they can sell their
electric trucks, so a lot of, as
companies are switching to clean
energy pieces or wanting more
efficiency pieces, they're
asking the states and
communities to actually design
infrastructure that actually
helps them work and implement
their uh different pieces. So
unfortunately, there's not a
federal, um, pipeline or spying
system than how clean energy is
gonna work, so it's really been
left up to the states or
localities to design that, so
that's something that we've
decided on as
initiative for Bernao County to
take advantage of, uh, with our
workforce and with our hub is
how do we design this system to
not only work for us locally,
but also work for the um state
as well. And so we've taken on
that initiative and working with
uh public and private partners.
Oh, thank you for that answer.
Is, isn't this something they
could do on their own while they
need public support?
Um, Mr. Chair, I think a lot of
it is that the state, which is
why we're having the site a
readiness bill is that there's a
lot of still missing public
infrastructure that's needed for
private sector to take advantage
of something we see in uh
economic development is always
that infrastructure piece is
always the last piece to get
funded, but it's a critical
element that's needed to
actually uh complete the project
and so especially when it's
public infrastructure that's not
only for the single benefit of
just the one.
entity but will benefit other
entities of needing that on. And
so there's so much public
infrastructure that is still
needed for many of sites across
the state, um, that's where
we've seen, uh, we've been uh
working with uh federal and
state partners to actually
develop that infrastructure
piece. So I think it's um
Developing that public
infrastructure piece will allow
private sector dollars to follow
for the interact um.
A development.
Oh, thank you. And one final
question, uh,
The uh
What what evidence has the
private sector.
shown that they're fully be
committed to this project.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we've, um, have
had some verbal discussions with
the different private sector
pieces, but they want to wait to
provide letters of commitments
or letters of interest until
they actually see that um
infrastructure plans are
actually being completed, which
is something that we're working
on now with our $15 million in
the raise grant, uh, to actually
put pencil to paper for actual
uh
Pieces of saying we're in public
infrastructure is going to go.
Um, so I think once those
elements are completed, we can
see um then commitments from
private sector.
Well, thank you for that answer.
I lied. I do have another
question.
So you said that you just have
verbal commitments. Are we gonna
get written commitments before
the state commits.
Money
Uh, Mr. Tay, um, that's my will
continue to, to work on as we
further the planning for uh the
public I see
thank you for that answer,
And Mr. Cheriff I could add to
that a lot of the elements,
especially with the site.
A readiness piece is that we
need to be looking at how are we
holding our developers
accountable, because if we're
waiting for a company to be on
the hook for the job piece or
items like that, that's a lot of
times for the infrastructure to
actually get developed and put
into place, it doesn't follow
their timeline for their lead of
being able to operate because a
lot of what we're working with
is very short timelines of
wanting to be operational in the
year or 2 years. Well, maybe
take longer than that,
especially in some of our areas
in.
Mexico to actually develop that
infrastructure for talking about
cutting new roads or putting in
wastewater and water
infrastructure. So we need to be
looking at making sure that
we're not just wanting to hold
that, um,
Company completely responsible,
but how do we then hold the
developer piece responsible for
creating the jobs which can
happen. And so that's something
we need to be looking at is
making sure that we're building
in this infrastructure with
enough time.
To allow the company to meet
their timelines as well.
OK, well, thank you, uh.
Um, we have another, uh,
Member of the committee wants to
speak to Representative Jones.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all for your presentation
and, and everyone, including
Representative Lundstrom, who
worked so hard on this project,
this could be huge for New
Mexico, and I, I heard you
mention I 10, but I don't see it
on our map, and, and I also one
of the things that comes to my
mind when we look at this more
northern route, although
obviously we're southern and
rela relation to the nation is
that sometimes it's difficult to
pass.
through here, the roads, you
know, in wintertime especially
and would there be um a
consideration of rerouting to
I-10 at any point.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Jones, um, so just to clarify,
this project, this uh
presentation was specifically
centered around the, the I-40
trade port piece, but we are in
contact and working with the
I-10 quarter piece and their
real play is working on that. I
tend to the port of Houston or
along the the southern part of
the country and have different
markets as well, but we are
looking at how do we work uh
together, like in this
infrastructure bill and other
elements and making sure that we
share.
a best practices as well, but we
are working with them as well,
but just to clarify this
presentation today was just
centered around I-40, but we are
uh working with our partners,
um, and down south as well.
I see, thank you so much. If
there's anything I can do to
help, I'd like to be involved in
that effort. Thank you.
Mhm.
Go ahead, uh, Representative
Nation.
Thank you so much. Looking
forward to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
OK, that concludes uh this
portion of the
agenda, so.
We have, uh, I'm sorry.
Representative Montoya, you'd
like to, you have a question?
Oh
Yeah we have two folks that
arrived uh.
A little
Recently, they have introduced
themselves.
Yes, thank you and uh
Representative Marmstrong.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
bouncing back and forth between
two committees today, so, uh,
uh, but, uh, representative
Montoya from uh, San Juan
County, Glad to be here today.
Obviously, uh, transportation is
something that affects everybody
in the state. There's some
things we talk about in some
committees that
Um, may, may affect you or not,
but uh this committee and, and
folks before us today, this
affects all of us, including
anything that happens like this
on a on a trade, a trade quarter
or something like that. So,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I'm Gail Armstrong
from Magdalena, New Mexico. I
represent House District 49,
which is Valencia Catrin
Secorro, and Sierra. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Uh, at this time, we'll, uh,
Um, entertain a emotion to
accept the minutes.
We have a move and we have a 2nd
from Representative.
Garrett
And do we have any, uh, any
opposition?
Hearing no opposition of the
minutes are approved.
And you're probably wondering
about lunch.
Lunch will be served at noon
time.
And we have uh
Obviously, we have a few minutes
uh
to kill, and we'll see you uh.
Back here after lunch, which we
resume, we'll resume at one
o'clock.
Thank you.
