turn it to janice consolace
hi everyone
classic
thank you for having us today
and jennis can have been in
various committees with most of
you over the years in different
roles as a peditreasion with the
periodic society and then with
early childhood education and
care department but now i'm back
with doh
very new role about six weeks
ago I start
and I think you know that we're
doing kind of a rebuilding and
be organizing of dohe so this is
a newly credit role we created
some centers with in public
health and so I am the director
of the center for healthy and
safe communities includes most
of the program programmatic
pieces of public health and
the population and community
health bureau is one of the
bureaus
that turn over to east.
Good afternoon term and
committee members my name is
lishortes I am the chief of the
population and community health
bureau
have been for a short three
months now
but been worth the bureau itself
for the last nineteen years
thoroughly enjoy it so currently
I am also the interim director
of the new pack program until we
can fill that position
and then we have a few other
people in the audience that I
just wanted to make sure we we
are gave an opportunity to
introduce themselves so ho say a
costaco juice please stand up
and save a word or teal
my name is gossett going in we
have recently seen me as the
director of the steep
became director now the public
health division.
And then serra a rather.
The.
Just swatter could you say a
few.
Think you guys aren't also i'm
an atturned over to janice
consolidates to start the
presentation thank you.
I'll start the presentation
for good afternoon chairman and
committee members um again my
name's lee short use i'm going
to go through the sly the
presentation and that towards
the end I mean have chris
terrorists over our marketing
campaign if i'm not loud enough
please let me know a health
speaker
are you okay
up
so starting I would just want to
start inside to
so I do all know and i'm
preaching the choir here
nicotine use of the most
preventable cause of disease
disability and death in the us
about the industries right now
our targeting are youth.
With the decline and smoking
among our adults are youth in
younger dollars are being
enticed with production and
distribution of east circus and
other products cdcs
recommendations is a
comprehensive and evidence based
stateway nicotine control
program.
We do fall under cdc's
recommendations this would
include a coordinated effort to
establish smoke and beat free
environments policies and social
norms it is most effective when
the individual components work
together to produce the
energistic efforts
components include state and
community interventions master
each health communication
intervention sets station
interventions to release again
preaching the wire he guys know
cdcs as many costs of spending
on prevention and marking a
little over nine million dollars
a year
and move it on to the next slide
the cdc work plan the five year
work plan for the new mexico
tobacco program includes best
practice areas such as statewide
and community based
interventions in disparities
prevention of a nation of
emerging to back a products for
youth which are under eighteen
years and young adult c c
considers is eighteen to twenty
nine years and the elimination
of exposer just I can have smoke
and easigre error solves it's
also best practices mass reach
health communications
infrastructure administration
management interventions on
tobacco use independence and so
relative evaluation the nicotine
use prevention in control
program with permanent health
works on all of these areas we
do cover all of them and health
communications and marketings
does cross all of those areas.
Our tobacco sort of meant
program fund our house
appropriation from the for the
public health program new pack
is what we call them previously
two pack is approximately five
port four million this year in
anticipation of a shortfall in
fy twenty five we have withhold
five percent of that fund
but with the new pack cdc afford
twenty five a word cdc we are
funded by one point five are
sorry one point one million
minute covers our salaries and
administration costs no
contractual services we so in
total we have an annual budget
of only about six point five
again reiterating cdc's
estimated costs of prevention is
over nine million.
I'm going over quick quick
question is that that figure
that recommendation nine point
three is that for fiscal year
twenty five that were in.
It current year yeah I believe
that
that's where I got the
information thank you current
year.
Will be done to the new pack
organizational chart and there
are ten full time employees
currently there are a ford
filter positions there are a
horse epidemiologist and we have
three health educators there are
five vacancies and the director
position which are all vacant we
are currently have a hopeful
candidate for our director that
is our priority is to fill that
position first.
Our new pack goals
so we have a top four goals with
the new pat program I do want to
mention that the the term
tobacco in this presentation
when used is for the role of
role of commercial tobacco
it's not for the secret or
religious or traditional use of
tobacco plant
the new pet goals do follow the
cdc best practices that as I
mentioned before the primary
objectives of the recommended
stateway comprehensive tobacco
control program are to reduce
tobacco used and the personal
social social burdens of the
tobacco related disease and
death gaw one is focusing on use
and young adults this is the
prevention of initiation of
emerging tobacco products goal
to focus is on the multi unit
housing exposure of second hand
smoke and east cigarette aerison
goal three focuses on adults and
youth tobacco use dependence
treatment interventions and golf
war focuses on our priority
populations these are community
based disparity groups and
exposure to second hand smoking
to cigarette results.
The new pack the new mexico
program new pack has a fiber
extra action plan for electronic
baber products new part goals
one and three as described in
the previous slide describes our
efforts to prevent beeping among
your youth and young adults
these include both our
objectives and implementation of
strategies so based upon our
five year action plan the
decrease in the privilege of
nicotine product use among the
high school youth it has the
past our fiber expectations so
far by thirteen percent in
twenty nineteen that was thirty
eight percent
and in twenty twenty two we were
down to twenty two point two
according to our use
or yrs data.
Um
objective to the decrease
improvements of an indicating
product use among new mexico
young adults has not great
decrease significantly i'm in
twenty eighteen it was forty
five point three percent we are
now at thirty percent of young
adults
as youth who rape in twenty
nineteen now being younger
adults this number has not
decreased as significantly
because nicotine remains
addictive.
So i'll get into some of our
data do you decide.
This first one is the percentage
of any tobacco product used
including electronic vapor
products this is all tobacco
products so from twenty fourteen
to twenty twenty three you can
see the percentage of any
tobacco product use has
gradually declined our young
adult usage has decreased from
forty six percent to thirty
percent and are you usage has
decreased from thirty two
percent to twenty two percent.
Okay.
For next slide is talking about
smoking among adults
in new mexico these are the
highest levels of smoking among
adults from the twenty twenty
two brfss areas to note or
thirteen percent of all adults
in new mexico smoke the lowest
demographic is the college
graduate at seven point four
percent and our highest
demographic is our low income
which is less than fifteen
percent at twenty three point
two percent so I do want to note
that some of these areas do
overlap of course.
Next slide are estimate you
remains higher than cigarette
product use among our youth and
again this is our less than
eighteen year old according to
the yrs three and twenty twenty
three and this is the school
based health serbia of new
mexico middle school in high
school youth the eastern right
use remains higher than
cigarette product use among
youth
we top current meaning in the
past thirty days so this is of
any youth have used utilised in
the cigarette within the last
thirty days.
Yeah.
As you get as you can tell me
being is decreasing but
cigarettes
still remain lower than beeping
used it
next fight this is our
percentage of you again i'm just
different quick so i'm going to
interrupt apologize but that's a
dramatic increase at some point
will you be able to speak to.
Watch as you dick through the
numbers to the extent you can
and other questions that you've
asked
why why are we seeing such a
decrease something seems to be
working and it would be
wonderful to know what it is
thank you
okay so next i'll talk about a
female youth feeping over our
mail youth feeping so according
to the yrs twenty twenty three
the percentage of female youth
feeping has slightly decreased
since twenty eighteen however it
still remains higher than mel
use usage you female speeping at
almost twenty three percent
remains higher than our youth
mails at fourteen point seven
percent
i'm shortly in a little bit
you'll see the data and young
adults and how the mel usage
rate from youth into young
adulthood has remained higher
than females.
Next light is just our
demographics of our new mexico
youth that are currently using
electronic beeper products
specifically
nineteen percent hispanic
latinos that have our higher
percentage of usage in our use
demographics with the higher
percentage over all of you being
urge lg beat
t sorry i'll be gb at twenty
eight point two
disability at twenty five point
four and then are senior year at
twenty three point one that's
high school senior year you can
also tell the beeping increases
by grade level in ninth grade
it's fourteen point three
increases and in tenth grade to
sixteen point seven and someone
up to our twelfth graders at
twenty three point one.
Our percentage of young adults
again this is over eighteen up
to twenty nine years
people who were surveyed in
twenty nineteen are now the
young adults in this survey and
are still
in twenty nineteen the youth
beeping rates were at thirty
four percent for both mile and
females that was a few flights
before those youth are now young
adults and in the twenty twenty
two to backward evaluation
survey the presentatives have
split off by gender mills are
higher at twenty two point seven
and females are at fourteen
point one
something to know is that our
mail youth were a higher percent
before twenty nineteen and those
youth are now young adults and
the mail are still higher than
the females
okay.
This is just of interest some
information we wanted to
highlight or the comparison of
interest in popularity between
the electronic vehicle products
like the ultimate versus the
synthetic nicketing pouches like
then
as you can see interest in the
flavored synthetic nicketing
purchases spiked in the past
year over the deeper products.
I'll move on to our contractors
now so that with our data
and foy twenty five our
contractors we are under an r p
a request for proposal for an
environmental strategies to
reduce adult and youth no
continuous there were six
categories in this rfp with four
awardies the rfp runs from FY
twenty four through a fight
twenty seven
we also had an rf for nicotine
addiction treatment services
this had one awardy we have an
it service contract they is in
the drafting fees this is for
marketing a promotion and we
also have a memorandum of
agreement which is for our
evaluation planning and
implementation with one of.
As discussed one of the
contractors was are wordy which
was test with coalition to
reduce nicotine use in new
mexico
this contract was awarded in
february twenty twenty four
through rfp process one one of
those four wardies it's for
capacity development for
nicotine use the control
partners there's a wordy will a
manage statewide education on
communication initiatives it
will ask also is task to build
upon existing partnerships and
relationships as one coalition
that aims to reduce the
continues in your mexico
in fy twenty five the coalition
sorry has the coalition is only
one of four project or
deliverables for this awardy
amongst the coalition this
awardy will also provide an
annual convert convenient and
annual convention of new mex and
new pack staff and contractors
that provides training and
development capacity to support
tobacco control initiatives it
will also have an annual
convention of all state white
partners coalition members
contractors new packed staff
bureau stop in all eligible
recipients of ce used it will
also hold the annual anti
oppression training for all new
pack staff contractors and other
tobacco control partners
or that was provided if I twenty
four by this awardy was the
advancing health equity
symposium and the anti
oppression tr.
Okay
so moving on to one of two arbor
initiatives then sorry
initiatives to prevent tobacco
product use among our youth is
our stanford medicine reach lab
curriculum
and chairman as you had us so
this is one of our current
curriculum that we're utilizing
with our youth this is the
sanford medicine reach reach
stands for research and
education to a power at a
lessons and young adults to
choose help in november twenty
twenty three new pack introduced
this free stanford medicine
prevention education and
awareness curriculum into what
we call our beep one or one
workshop presentations which we
provide to communities and
partner state white beep one or
one workshops are presentations
usually in person by new pack
staff and the new mexico
department of health health
promotion teams it's to county
professionals ranging anywhere
from school health advocates
teachers nurses administrators
community help representatives
and health cancels and problems
and surrounding
this is a talk
tobacco for prevention talk it
again free resource it's called
you and me together beat free
this curriculum is provided to
educate educators and
administrators and the lessons
are based upon age group and the
length of the course is
there are courses provided to
both high school and middle
school as well as elementary
school
the gall of this currency is to
increase the knowledge about e
cigarettes in the forms that
they cause getting awareness of
strategies manufacturers and
sellers of eastern employee to
increase among our lessons such
as this deceptive and creative
marketing strategies gain skills
to refuse experimentation of use
of an easigrades and ultimately
to reduce and prevent esiget use
and this curriculum is open to
any school within the state of
new mexico or nationwide
the other part of this
curriculum is called healthy
futures this can be a group
letter alternative to suspension
program this program is geared
for students who have been
caught using you cigarettes.
And or for any students for it
interested in trying to quit it
can be a self paste course or it
can be facilitated with an
individual or group setting
curriculum with two to four hour
options in there.
Another whenever our initiatives
that we use
is the for the youth is the
twenty four seven initiative
are single awardy of category
one of the rfpa mentioned
earlier was rescue agency new
mexico this awardy worked in
cooperation with new pack and
ped to manage statewide
educational technical assistance
of the twenty four seven
initiative currently new mexico
law requires that every school
has a tobacco free policy but we
all know policies have loopholes
this campaign promotes the best
practices in tobacco free
policies that take a
comprehensive approach to
controlling tobacco use and
preventing nicotine addiction
this is a commitment to support
school administrators through
their complete process of
adopting an enforcing tobacco
free policies that their school
is standard on six components
that are score must have to
create this tobacco free
environment with the support of
this initiative those six
components are commitment
comprehensive tobacco free
policies communication
compliance and enforcement
sessation and support and
cultural competence.
And i'll turn it over to chris
mr chair members of the
committee I had to pleasure to
talk with you today about our
larger marketing strategy as we
look towards the future and the
changing needs of nicotine use
across the state of new mexico
marking is really gonna take a
central piece in in baping
prevention and synthetic
nicotine prevention and really
will include interagency
collaboration from our partner
agencies coalition members and
will incorporate c b c
guidelines on marketing and most
importantly will incorporate
youth voices that
those who interact with our
marketing campaigns can actually
see themselves in it because
it's based on those behaviours
and those voices that currently
reside in new mexico
this campaign which were calling
veeping is not a vibe is the
first first part of that larger
strategy to consolidate our
marketing efforts and take a
more strategic approach to
reduction and prevention across
the state at the goal of this
campaign which we plan to launch
this fall really focuses on
reducing bapping across the
board increasing awareness of
the harmful effects and the
myths associated with feeping
and challenging the perception
that is quote unquote cool or
hip or with it
we we look at really as least
you mentioned earlier targeting
a two primary audiences first
and foremost it's teen stage
thirteen eighteen those who are
more succeptable to starting
baping or continuing raping and
then that cohort of older
individuals who are a potential
role models and he be there
stopped beeping or hadn't have
never done it to begin with the
messaging with this campaign
which you can see represented
visually in the graphic to the
rate is really to highlight that
it is harmful that it is a dick.
That at the what your ingesting
or what those who
use vaps are ingesting is not
quality controlled and see don't
really know the true effects or
what of what you're ingesting
that it impacts your body your
mind and your health that can
lead to serious contact
consequences
and that there is a choice that
you can make not too
I mentioned the image on the
rate I just want to hall it
specifically that this is a
creative concept to visually
showcase the impact that beeping
has both on the individual and
on their immediate communities
for the people around them.
On the next slide I have briefly
highlighted that the tactics
that we are going to take
essentially we want to meet
audiences where they are using
the platforms the engaged with
the most and so the focus here
is on social media
and on engaging influence for
who use social platforms and
have a strong
voice and can influence their
audiences in a way that that
positively audience isn't a way
that uh in a way for good rather
than that
we want to use those influences
to reinforce messaging uses to
using the voices they trust both
online and person.
And so in addition to taking a
digital first approach we are
also taking a community
claboration approach we want
those mentors those friends
those parents there's people
that they trust truly drive home
that core messaging that it is
horrible that you don't know
what you're ingesting and that
you have a choice not to be
will also use traditional media
to socialize that messaging at
the parental level and to spread
awareness about the education in
the information and the
resources
that those who are currently
beeping can use to stop as I
mentioned this campaign will
likely run in the far we will be
looking at running it from about
four to five weeks and will be
gauging campaign success based
on traditional engagements
sentiment so again around
whether or not it is cool before
and after
and then uh through potential
impact on sales now this is a
point where we still need to
figure out how we're actually
going to quantify it but I think
it's an important metric to to
to die deeper
that at a high level is debating
as not if i'd campaign on behalf
of my colleagues I want to thank
you mister chair and the
committee
for the opportunity to present
this information today and i'll
turn it back over to you for
questions.
You have minister
okay thank you very much and wow
what a difference from a year
ago so I might
thanks to those of you who've
been able to put this a
substance that we were looking
for and and weren't finding
I believe that at that time but
and there and clearly there's a
plan going forward and
what's in combine and us as
legislators is to be sure that
you have a fault budget like the
nine point three or the cdc tara
program of twenty
twenty million and that was
several years ago so likely much
more in that but an
I hope that
you will are
come to myself in the vice chair
of the committee for what you
think those needs are and if if
we could
to supplement the activities
that you're doing and if you
have any suggestions but also
then we need to figure it out I
had a bill last year that I have
to own the fact I was it was a
very good bill for attacks and
it was so convoluted that we
tripped up one part of it and
there just was in time to get it
untripped in that month long
session but our commitment to
you is to do that tax again and
generate
that was at that time five
million dollars but i'm
beginning to fill maybe we've
got to do more in that given how
cost is an inhipitor for you to
sell
so I wanted thank you again for
really elevating this program
and how how you're going forward
the back in the day I i.
I I was an academic research I
have lost most of those skills
in memory
and but occasionally comes back
to me and so forth and
and and again this is probably a
preliminary question
but if it sometime you could let
us know
fascinated by the decrease and
the use and and what are the
variables that are seem to be
doing that
and as you heard the
miss hill from
a national council of state
legislators
if you begin to find what you
think the leavers are invested
that are generating that
reduction does that compare to
maybe what other states are
doing again are as you look at
the epidemiology where we seeing
and other states and begin to
correlate and so we may you may
have some insights
but they they may be great to
carry late so again
for what's working and working
more than more we can focus so
that that's our commitment to
you is to get you more funding
it isn't until it stands you
know
but
this isn't and hearing from her
again from and I said here is a
clinician
and
has someone who has experienced
a addiction and the no clear
family and the profound effects
it has and the family and
knowing that almost every
nuclear family is not the
christmas card of every nuclear
family has likely an addiction
situation to deal with
themselves that the harm that is
coming from it but again that I
know i'm repeating from previous
sessions but I just can't
emphasize it and enough this is
a gateway.
It damages the front of lobe
connection and the front of the
lobe is what's needed to
establish an inambition and it
takes about significant time to
develop it's interesting because
women
develop this in their late teens
early twenties men don't do it
till there late twenties but
it's so it's kind of curious to
see that would make her taking
this up more so I again that
maybe that's just a
confounder but the damage that
it can do and and us to
recognize it and as to
prioritize it not just this car
or that's a cute public health
issue now a very profound issue
and and what we do in this
country
in smoking cessation was
financial due to a very very
courageous attorney general
pediatric search and his name is
escaping me at the moment
see every coop right yeah I
actually did meet him when I was
in the indian health service he
came out to can to arizona and
the naval hope what a dynamic
figure but
again a critical and that we we
we get to the source and am and
then they could team component
and just
stop people from
starting itself
so I don't know if you have any
insights now but it would
certainly appreciate
after my local stump speech
there and would really
appreciate if you could come up
with what you think are the
variables and because that will
help us convince you know and it
particularly if it's related to
something we're actually doing
them then that will be even more
powerful to convince those who
ultimately decide and funding
that this is a good price.
Mr chair I just wanna maybe
partially respond to that we've
been in discussion for quite a
few weeks now looking at the
starter and I think that one of
the things that were seen is is
actually a little bit troubling
because we've seen it as a
powder now for a little while
not a little while probably a
long while and that is just that
you know tobacco manufacturers
are just amazingly innovative
and so I think that once we
start to tamper down uncertain
trends we're going to see
something like this and power to
start steadily rising and this
has seems to be the long game in
the strategy it's about you know
constantly looking at that
younger generation to lock down
your market and they do it
through innovation and they
outspend us and the outspend us
on marketing and so I I would
say that that's probably one of
the factors I want to let our
epidemiologists from new pack
may be respond to that it's well
she might have some more
insights.
The.
Yes mr chairman i'm sarah arraha
that eptimulators for new pack
we just recently received the
wires two thousand twenty three
data and so next we expect to go
through the population and find
out who exactly is faith being
in the among youth and then with
that information
we have the behaviour's
information we can target those
groups and looking to see who
make them the prior priority
populations and find out more
about this group and why they're
very
yeah.
Thank you mister chair so
this does maybe it's just me but
for years all of the advertising
etc about how safe beep being
worse than how was it you know
as a quick device then and I I
don't know if i'm seeing less of
that or if i'm seeing other
things that bother to make that
much or would that would it's
kind of gone into so is there a
sense I know out of england
they're still pushing a lot of
you know this is the best quit
device that the rears and so i'm
wondering what's the status on
that and and how do we combat
those kind I mean I still see it
like on twitter and stuff yeah
being will help you stop smoking
out well but
but so just if you have anything
um
chair members and I think that
we are seeing
I mean the home reduction of
going off of you know smoking by
using faping devices is only
it's only useful usually among
older adults and that smoke
presently
it's being used much more often
as a gateway as you mentioned
where hughes are beginning to
eight and then it kind of
just stays with them it's it's
addictive basically you know so
it stays with them and affects
their their health
rental lowballer that it will
act hit their mental health
there are developments of that
so
thank you for that and then um
if we could get a list of your
wardies and I think i'm speaking
for the committee that we were
very upset to here last year
that at new pack ran out of
money.
In contract is had done work
that they weren't reimbursed for
so how do we prevent that from
happening
I might I got a lot of tier full
phone calls you know we're we're
going to go on a business if we
don't get paid in all that kind
of stuff and it's just we have
such a little bit already we
don't we can't afford to lose
anything
right mister chair and mad
invoice to her
I think that you're referring to
the last fifth school year what
we had has been sort of a
regular occurrence actually so
we we've started to predict that
what what happens as we budget
for a certain amount of tobacco
settlement funding we do that we
come to the committee we say
we'd like to request flat
funding for views acts ync
programs we budget for that
amount but what we started
seeing and you are probably both
you're all aware of this is that
we started seeing about a five
percent amount that failed to
materialize and we didn't really
don't realize that until about
three months before the fiscal
year ends.
And so secretary allen
intervened about a year ago and
said we should just start with
holding five percent that's
about what we are seeing
regularly is the amount that
fails to materialize we are
hoping to do that to stabilise
our budgets and not disappoint
contractors who relying on are a
budget in
we also have speed sixteen who
hits you all our very familiar
with because you passed it in my
understanding is that that bill
is also intended to stable eyes
funding into programs over time
it's a little complicated and
i'm sure you could probably
explain it better senator hiki
but I think that that's one of
the efforts that is going to
overtime make things field more
stable the the last thing i'll
say is that lfc decided in the
last fiscal year to actually
move the funding that would
normally come from the tobacco
settlement that that supports on
brest and servical cancer
diabetes and I believe hapc
they actually gave us a base
increase of the amount that
those programs run on annually
so that they're not affected so
new pack is the only recipient
of funding it currently and
we're hoping all those things
are going to stabilise
everything into the future
mister chair just to follow up
so I want more than steeple I
want growth I mean I and I hate
to hear that we've got it
withhold to make sure that we
can pay our bills essentially so
i'm i'm wondering if we need
legislation that says something
along the lines of you know this
this is sacred don't don't put
your grubby hands
so just just something to think
about and i'm i'm maybe talking
to lender mahes in the back
about whether
whether we need this kind of
legislative so thank you thank
you mister chair.
Thank you yes representative
thank you mr chair I have lot of
questions we don't have to go
into total you know in depth but
you know maybe we could get back
but
in your organizational chart
last year we talked about why
there were only three regions
there used to be a fourth and
then one was eliminated
i'd like to know why we can't
bring that back even though I
know there's a lot of vacancies
and then also.
Is this why a lot of the
programs are you know and new
pack is somewhat flailing
because you have all the
vacancies and you don't have
the.
Knowledge from past
people in these positions that
have gone over the course of the
last
three or four years
when the one director was
brought in from out of state and
the others who had the
historical knowledge of how the
programs work and how to
implement how to work with
contractors
are you going to have you know
is leadership
going to make sure that the
staff
that are left are going to get
professional development and and
the support that they need.
Germany gee and committee
members
again i've only been in this
role for a few months but i've
been with this bureau for
numerous years with the new pack
program as one of those programs
we have seen a high turnover
loss of knowledge
because it was silomingle as
chief of the population
community health bureau is to
remove those sales is to break
down the barriers and make sure
we have a lot across training
professional development amongst
all of my programs and not just
new pack also forming
collaborations not just within
our bureau but within the public
health division and with other
agencies and entity is so
popular public health are sorry
public education department or
an stretching our outreach to
partners
I am unsure as to why we did
lose that other regional health
educator I do know who we had we
did have four reaching health
educators now we only have the
one southern region health
educator
that was identified I believe in
our cdc funding cause that is
how all of our positions are
funding are funded is through
cdc um I don't
have any other information
historical information from that
but going forward I I can speak
on behalf of the bureau and and
our direction is to break down
those barriers and those site
lows then and create better
collaborations and growth for
the program
mr chair and thank you we should
I i'm not sure that new pack
really hasted
not being a silo to be a factor
but
I can appreciate you trying to
cross train but it seems like it
needs to be focused and targeted
whatever new pack is doing and I
was really interested in.
The demographics and I think
the things you pointed out where
and spanic and latino have a
higher percentage of bake
beeping but then also
with a less being gained by
sexual twenty eight percent and
disability
youth at twenty five and senior
which is really stressful and
you can see from the grade
levels as it increases how that
goes up
you know it seems like teams are
or people who are under a lot of
society or stress are using this
as a coping mechanism and then
getting into substance use you
know this is the gateway um
whether it's a beeping and then
they go design or whatever
so
how do we target
you know and
the marketing that was spoken
about um all these different
routes I didn't hear anything
about targeting besides just
what the media was going to be
how do we make sure that we have
a messaging that
will let you know not only
how it supposed to
how it impacts them but also you
know the enforcement it's
schools how do we make sure
schools I know i've seen sign no
baby but then we know it happens
I am just like with alcohol use
but if you could explain how the
targeting would work
mr chair and members of the
committee and are made by share
thank you very much for that
question we can really use a
variety of digital data sources
and trends mostly associated
with keywords to target.
Behaviors are based on how
individuals are
searching for these are niche
team in tobacco options and
vaping options.
We can also look at demographic
and behavioural data uh best on
on region of across the state of
new mexico to identify.
Really where they live and how
that correlates to
sales
and then usage rates across the
board.
The it will really depend I
think I believe on
as we dig deeper into the I
believe the why are student as
we dig deeper into the wire
esita that should give us better
insights into how individuals
are consuming and we can use
that to target from there
okay well you have the
percentages but you're going to
mr chair i'm sorry.
You're just going to look at the
demographics of I mean where
these demographics are using the
most to be able to target is
that what you're saying yes
mister chair and i'm out of my
share yes that is a big starting
point and then we can use
digital data like social media
searches posts key words being
searches google services
to brought in that that data set
to get a better sense for what
products they're looking for how
they're talking about it within
their communities and we can use
that information to then drive
much more targeted messaging so
if the
attenant saying I love to use
zin and the posting in about on
social media as an example we
can develop an ad
honor social media platforms
with our one of our vendors and
to say
we're gonna target the key words
in and any time somebody posts a
balance in on their channel
it'll make that connection and
the admiral theoretically be
displayed
mister chair and thank you you
just mentioned about the
contractors
we're worried about them getting
paid but i'm also worried about
how if you're doing this
marketing separate from the
contractors when the contractors
I think used to do some of that
implementation of the marketing
and things like that how is that
going to be effective how do you
you know keep that collaboration
high collaboration on what
they're doing in their
communities and their region
that will you know continue to
be effective.
Um mister chairman madame by
sure and just so I understand
the question correctly it's how
are you utilizing the
contractors to maintain the
relationship with the community
well and get your marketing
message out the implementation
as well i'm worried about
gotcha yet
yeah I i'd like to answer that
madam chair if you don't mind so
I recently we've also gone under
a reorganization over a policy
communications and marketing one
of the things that has been
historically very very
problematic and actually
counterproductive is the many
many contractors who have added
marketing into their scope of
work because of that in this
sort of violates the fundamental
law of marketing you have many
people talking about the same
thing and different voices with
different branding and it's
essentially under mining our
ability to have a fact of
marketing so what we're trying
to do right now is actually
consolidate marketing who are
trying to do the opposite and
what we find through looking
through a lot of these contracts
is that they actually have the
very broad scopes of work
they're doing lots of different
things and the marketing piece
needs to be appealed out and
consolidated so that we can have
so that we're all pointed in one
direction was what really
matters with this is that we're
using doh branding were
centralising our massaging and
the work that we do with
community happens at the
development so that we have an
agreement on a final product
that we cannot be behind and we
cannot promote together and so
there needs to be really broad
effort
and regular effort and
soliciting feedback from are
executive agency partners and
all of those entities that make
up historically a pretty perhaps
coalition of tobacco and
nicotine partners in the state.
We would like to to work on
marketing with them at the
creative stage so that by the
time we start pushing out
messaging we're all unified
behind one message if that makes
sense yes of course my mba was
in marketing
and I understand having it
centralised in one message or
sort it I mean cooperated in
collaborated but who has the
expertise that's going to make
sure that
it's going to be effective
marketing and effective
messaging you know to the
programs do you have that
expertise to you know rely on
matter vice chair I we have been
building up our marketing
capacity with within the
department of health so we now
have a marketing director and a
graphic artist and social media
adviser who work actually at DOH
we also have a contractor that
as I said we are attempting to
consolidate some of those
marketing
items that we cannot do and
house we would like to
centralize under one marketing
partner and so it'll be a
combination of in house
expertise and one contractor
that we work west
I hear you saying about
expertise about how to do the
graphics in this and the
outreach but I am talking about
messaging how do you make sure
it's going to be targeted to the
different people you need to
reach and how to reach them um
but especially to keep the
message in the information
that is going to be the most
effective
okay i'll turn that over a two
chris harris are marketing
director thank you.
So from a messaging perspective
sorry mister chairman by
secretary
from a messaging perspective the
approach that we are going to
take is going to rely on focus
groups so
I have developed the creative
concepts the creative concepts
will come from my team that area
just mentioned we will use those
focus groups to that the
creative concepts are to make
sure it is in a linement with
with our audiences once in our
audiences needs are and then
from there will use
more traditional analytics data
from things like social media
from things like google search
histories from from things like
behavioral trends
in collaboration with our
partnership to dial in that
messaging and one of the one of
the pathways we've been
exploring in claboration with
with our contractor is utilizing
a a system of optimisation
called ab testing in which we
can develop different types of
messaging different types of
graphics
and in different types of courts
to action and then create a
random sampling
on our social media platforms or
based on
the
audience said that we're trying
to target and run essentially
too different ads the same time
see which performs better
and then use that to inform
which creative or which
messaging or which calls action
we actually used again based on
what resonates more from a data
perspective
okay I guess i'm chair mr chair
I was interviewed up the room
that sounds like a usual
progression of you know what
marketing companies do.
But they're also are already
some of the programs you're
talking about the twenty four
seven in a tobacco free kids and
empowerment that have developed
a lot of that and have the
research
so I would be sure that you
included them and take advantage
of some of the development that
they've already done and have
for at a national level as well
as to make it so that it's
tailored for new mexico and the
different targeted groups that
have such a high but I think the
prevention part of it is really
in a one of the most important
things that we can do and to
make it like a return on
investment and we need to
increase your investment and I
don't know maybe next time we
meet we can ask you how things
are going in filling the
positions that you have you know
and trying to get people with
you know is much experience as
possible and
or
provide training for your staff
that's left
um and I was also wondering
the awardies that we wanted to
get a list we were talking to
UNM and their program here
they haven't gotten a contractor
been asked you know to do
something that they have a great
program here why that can't be
you need to talk to them so what
i'm trying to say and I can get
you the program I was one we had
earlier and
if they can't do it for the
whole state like they were back
in twenty sixteen to twenty
twenty I believe they mentioned
you know there's
other hired you know programs
that we should be looking at and
um.
It is constellation the company
that was doing your.
Out you know the
handling the contractors
and different tom are of p
providers
mister chairman bicector
that was a multi question sorry
more interesting there
so i'll i'll speak about you in
a first yes you and m was under
a contract back in twenty
sixteen through twenty twenty we
went through underwent another
on our peace process and twenty
twenty and again in twenty
twenty three now this is the new
rfp and twenty point twenty
twenty four
u n
has successfully completed be a
tobacco free campus the current
awardie who got category two of
that rfp is a state wide
awarding
caris is the contractor's name
they are part mean right now
with new mexico state university
and intox with them to become
the next tobacco free campus
so not to overstep and say you
know we've taken a part you and
am it they are successful with
that our next task is new mexico
state university to focus on
mr chair
and miss or tease
just because they've reached
that goal
they need support kind
continuing so
we should have the funds even if
we have to spend some of the
five percent but we need to
increase because at the six
point what was it nine or one
percent a million cdc says we
should be at least at twenty two
and it's probably a lot higher
than that now
we need to get as much funding
out as we can and continue some
of the programs I believe and
would encourage you to consider
that and what was the name of
the company that's handling all
of the.
Awards
that were spoken about last
year.
If you can clarify vice chair
sorry if you can clarify what
you mean all the awards so we
have four wordies of that
specific rfp
not of specific guard opinions
but
there was a who paid out to all
the different individual
contractors in rfason there are
the ones who didn't get paid so
they didn't pay the contractors
who was that.
Okay it was constallation
are they not involved anymore at
the consolation does have a
category six and category five
of our current
what is category five and six me
sorry
our current art be sorry mr
chairman and vice chair we have
six categories that the current
rf for our environmental
strategies
each of those categories is for
a different purpose that is on
the days.
Back to her contracts.
Fifteen yes so
we have six categories that were
awarded to four total or wordies
and six categories category one
is prevention strategies for our
use category to his prevention
and intervention strategies for
you on the adults category three
is our shortest strategies for
smoke free multi unit housing
environments category four is
second hand smoke sorry second
hand smoke protections and need
of american current community is
category five of the advancement
and outreach with priority
populations and category six is
our capacity development for
nicotine using control partners
not indicated on that slate
specifically but I can provide
that information to you plus the
contractors things
sounds good
because I think those are the
important people that are in the
communities and implementing
programs and I
think reinforcing how many
people we can have doing
different projects with the same
messaging is really important so
thank you for that and um
I know we're stored on time so
but I also like to talk to you
more about I brought it up with
another
department that were hearing
about only two sessions of
smoking session or nrt
instead of getting the full
eight
is something that we need to
walk through and make sure that
when you're having people get
the information about you know
what they can do in the quick
line that that is actually
what's happening you know that
they are getting the services
that they need and the patches
start
madam vice chair I just wanted
to quickly respond to.
That I did follow up with our
achieved medical officer
previously when that subject was
brought up when i'm the health
care authority was present in I
know the rule is eat it's eight
weeks if you're hearing those
things I think that would be a
concern for the health care
authority to sort of monitor
you know that it's emcel
contracts I would I would
imagine but I I do know that it
is eight weeks that should be
the amount being received I
corrected when I first said six
to eight but we're hearing it's
a lot less
but okay well thank you very
much that's all
mister
any other questions
given the time anything else I
have i'll do offline with you
thank you very much for your
presentation please do stick
around for the ped because the
collaboration between the two
departments itself
and i'm not talking into the
microphone apologies but
collaboration between
departments is something that I
striving for in in this whole
area so thank you.
Folks I apologize for probably
going to go long
but this is such an important
topic we had a technical glitch
plus we really want to hear from
those who have come to present
and hope that you are well
collaborate freely and following
as we move into the future so
thank you.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee you
have caps to the slides is that
correct excellent yes i'm sorry
and I didn't present you
appropriately and morally is it
jeezer
yes okay
thank you so much mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is marlor
theater director of the safe and
healthy schools bureau the new
mexico public education
department are a bureau provides
programs and initiatives that
support the linkage between
health and academic success the
bureau works to promote health
your schools by providing
professional development
technical assistance and
resources to local education
agencies our workers guided by
the others understanding that
health promoting schools become
high achieving schools.
While the public education
department does not receive
tobacco settlement funds we do
actively partner with the
agencies here today especially
with the new mexico department
of health that just proceeded us
we work with unpreventioned
education and resources to score
so where does the new mexico
public education apartment fit
into this as
referencing some of the
information that you've seen
today tobacco uses the leading
cause of prepaintable death the
new states the majority of daily
smokers which is eighty two
percent began smoking before
eighteen years of age and more
than three thousand young
persons began spoken each day
schools have direct contact with
more than ninety five percent
foreign nations young people are
just five to seventeen
with
about six hours per day
for thirteen critical years of
their growth and development
schools play an important role
in promoting the health and
safety of children and add a
lessons by helping them to
establish life long health
patterns including those that
help prevent chronic health
conditions later in life
the work we do is guide it by
the ccs best practice framework
which is similar to what was
presented by my colleague says
the department of hell
are the key components that we
will be talking about for our
framework um that would be the
development and enforcing a
school policy on tobacco and the
continuous providing instruction
in kindergarten through twelfth
grade with the short and long
term negative it's consequences
social influences peer norms
regarding nigcotin use and
refusal schools skills.
We assist with providing
training to educators that
support session efforts among
students and also staff who use
nicotine and we assess the
nicotine use prevention programs
in key to twelve schools at
really intervals
next listing into the components
of assesment and training
and partnership with the
department of health and the
public education department we
assist with the implementation
of the bi annual new mexico
youth risk and resiliency survey
which you've looked at closely
in the previous presentation we
also partner with the department
of health and the university of
new mexico with the
implementation of the school
health profile which looks at
the policies further and cut a
partnership with the c c we
partner on the annual mess
because we national up to back a
survey which was presented
earlier at that one o'clock
presentation today.
And acquired these are
considered the best launch of
trution launch a tude or not
assessment tools we have
available for assessing the
trends and continues in young
adults and measure house schools
have put in place efforts to
reduce use
next we're gonna talk about the
component of policies you will
see some of the strongest
policies that are available the
livers as you would say
available to the public
education department to address
education and
reducing continuous in schools
the first being the tobacco free
schools in fact this past over
the past year we worked with a
new mexico department of health
as we rekilled and replace and
max six point twelve point four
which was that tobacco free
schools updating the existing
rule reflecting contemporary
terminology as you notice the
terms for nictene methodologies
changes rapidly so we updated
that language and we talked
about the delivery devices and
added language about enforcement
of rules and ways uh to adapt
that in the school setting next
we address policy through the
content and performance
standards for health education
which includes age and great
appropriate negative prevention
knowledge skills and performance
standards as a requirement for
graduation that's one of the
bigger ways that we are able to
work on education is through our
school systems and then finally
as you will see there again
through and max six point twelve
point six we provide guidance
and technical assistance of
schools as they develop their
local weldness policies included
in those willness policies are
efforts and strategies to reduce
nicotine use among students and
staff and on campus beyond just
the health education regular
that we talked about in the
previous and mac
thank you the next one that we
lever are component that we use
is through funding that's
available through us in the
public education apartment
although we don't get the tat.
To back a settlement funds we do
have the US department of
education title four program
that goes through our bureau
funding from this grant may be
used to support schools
support school health and
environmental issues including
funding to schools to support
nicotine and drug prevention and
education as well as detection
technologies we do not see all
of the specific doctrine
prevention programs that take
place and the state except those
that come through the title of
four program and then we have to
take a little bit deeper into
the nicketing prevention but we
are aware of two examples that
we would like to highlight which
would be capped hands scores
which is using funding for
contract services to address
beeping in particular and then
also mountain air schools is
using their title for part a
federal funding to address out
to provide beeping detection in
their schools we also know that
there are some other schools
using this title for funds such
as dexter and raswell to do drug
screening and prevention
programs I will actually skip
through the next two slides
because fox covered that
information both in the wires ah
data that was competitively and
comprehensively provided by the
department of help or so that
side that you have on the
national tobacco survey was
addressed at the one o'clock
presentation I will address that
um this is a very strong
commitment and collaboration
with a department of health I am
one of the three try chairs on
the use risk and resilience
whose survey in fact we just had
a meeting this morning looking
at possible questions for a two
thousand twenty five so we meet
monthly to either develop news
surveys assessed the data we
were looking at some of the data
this morning so I do want to
stress that there's a very
strong component we could not do
it without their efforts of the
department of health and that
implements the survey in
collaboration with the
university of new mexico
prevention resource center um
and we are there to help
communicate to superintendents
and charter schools.
Yeah.
So next steps while trends are
moving in the right direction is
you've seen today for the most
part the pd understands that the
thread proposed by tobacco and
nicotine use to the health and
well but building well being of
our youth is concerning the new
mexico public education
department is encouraged by the
outcomes of our collaborative
work with our partners including
our legislative partners and
intend to continue to support
the following efforts we will
continue to provide professional
development to educators
throughout the state we will
continue to support effective
school based nicotine prevention
policies we will continue to
support effective nicotine
prevention curricular and
programs and schools and we will
continue to straw to road strong
continued support for the
national and state level
research on and nicking you some
prevention as noted earlier and
then of course we would support
legislative strategies such as
increasing the cost of nicotine
products greater restrictions on
nicotine access products and
device assessors talked about
earlier detect.
Thank you mister chairman
members of the committee I stand
for questions
thank you and for a very concise
presentation glad to hear about
the collaboration with the
department of health and will go
to questions and
well
thank you
really fast
when you mentioned about buying
purchase curricular and
educational resources on the
schools are having to do that um
who do you purchase it from so
the
thank you mr chairman members of
the committee the schools
purchase that through funny that
they have for curricular that's
available to them for the
capital out I believe
that
yes so they receive funding
directly through the ped to buy
curricular so that's it's
delivered at the local level we
will do the technical assistance
and training unhealth education
related topics but the schools
will there allow to pick the
curriculum the works best for
their community so they purchase
the correct so they buy it from
independent companies that come
in and try to sell them so
they are free to purchase it as
a as their procurement process
works on member mister chairman
members of the committee and we
do have the new mexico
benchmarks and standards so we
do have a list of health
education curriculum that has
been reviewed to meet the new
mexico health education
standards and benchmarks so that
would be one of the first places
to start but beyond that it is
community
decisions of the curriculum that
is used and of course we are
always available to help them
with their health education and
we do ongoing training for
health education
does storm.
For a new mexico
thank you for that but i'm
wondering why
we are through department of
health and new pack providing
map for all of our schools
and mister chairman and members
of the committee what we have
done in the past through the
efforts of our collaboration is
we have
um worked with the previous
coordinator of new pack to bring
them to our annual had to tell
conference so that they could
present and also have a booth at
the conference so they could
educate
schools on the stanford
education program that they had
in the mentioned in their slots
that is free to scores and it's
packaged in talkats so that is
definitely one of the ones that
we recommend and we are
collaborated strongly with the
department of health to bring
them to our annual conference so
they had a venue to reach the
schools i'm answer questions
walk through the technical what
walk through the tool kit and
that is it free resource to
schools would be an excellent
resource for tap nicotine
prevention
okay great so this is just if
the schools are wants to go
above him beyond comprehensive
but i'm glad that it's being
provided by the state is it
are we able to we have
let me ask
mislamp do we have the a tool
kit that is to the caliber of
what these companies coming in
from out of state and i've seen
them no difference
conferences when they exhibit
things like that or do we need
to invest more to make it more
appealing to all of our schools
i'm i'm actually inviting
someone from the program to come
up and help me with this answer
madam by straight.
I do know that one of the the
challenges we probably are
always going to for this is that
there is some power sharing
between of course local school
words and ped
you know there is a definitely a
willingness and
to promote thus practices and to
get the word out I think that
this program the standford
medicine reach lab is relatively
new so I think probably many
administrators are going to get
rolled into this implementation
so so far were pretty early into
it but it but it is really a
best practice and something that
we hope that they want to adapt
and we would like to do you know
of course promote that more
frequently and at every
opportunity that we can
let me see if anyone else has a
few more words to say about
that.
Yes mister chair
as you know rescue does work
with the US I mean with new
mexico and with many of the
other us states it's a national
program so I think they're very
well aware of other programs and
they are um
they have the ability to
talk to the people of the c c
and the office of smoking and
help there and also work with us
they have outreached to many
places and last causes are all
over and we've worked with them
for quite a while yeah
mr chair and panel is just
something that we should
offer
you know support more you know
throughout the state to be
available or you are ready doing
that
matter by share I think that
we're currently doing that will
continue to work with ped to
make sure we're making these
resources very widely available
so that is a central art you
know sort of aspect of what new
pack would like to be doing and
is there enough funding to do
that madame vice chair I believe
that this is a free package and
tool kit I don't think it's
going to require any additional
funding actually
maybe we should charge and then
they'll value it more
maybe that's the problem
I think so okay
so and thank you I just really
appreciate
the information and what you're
trying to do in the schools in
the policies and
you know because that's where I
think kids are actually
being and sharing and up
some of the products and things
like that s.
If we can have more awareness of
even that faculty just like we
do it the unit you are now
asking them to
be more
out worried about you know
taking away and the product when
they see it and stopping youth
cause it's happening right under
their nose I mean they can see
it but we need to back the
teachers up whoever's in
the principles to
be more aggressive about it
so thank you thank you mister
chairman thank you.
Thank you again watching those
questions
and
i'm trying to get seller than my
mind so there are programs that
are free through the department
of health two the school scores
but it's up to each individual
school and or local school for
i'm assuming to whether or not
they want to emphasize this or
do it so you had a slide there
were on the national average
with something cdc programming
in new mexico were below that
so
what what and and I know
mandating things for p d is like
the third rail so
early set what i've learned so
far
the but is there
could hey
the comment maybe if they had to
pay for it they value it more
i'm not sure but
when i'm wondering is is there
any way that we as a legislature
without getting electrical can
either through funding or
whatever to encourage more
schools in school deserts you
mention two or three scores and
a model scores
I guess and earlier in the day I
was you and them with a model
program and unfortunately
a higher education didn't see
the relevance of coming in
participating in this forum and
dumb but it it sounds like where
it's going on at you and am
could definitely go on other
schools and and I I think we
need to have more or oversight
again the
post high school is still a very
formative period and.
Folks need that education and
influence and and co influence
to not take this up so i'm just
getting in that little editorial
comment so that we get them here
the next time
and because III think it's just
appreciating responsibility to
not and and maybe we as a
legislature I have been on the
education committee and we
hardly touch anything in higher
education although recently
there has been a little more
well to do that and I think
there needs to be a very strong
will to do that and but again
we've got a resource here at
your name as some other you're
going to and a msu
with a program i'd like to see
it in others but my my final
pieces do you if we package some
sort of funding to put out there
yet scores could apply for to
get more depth or to do unique
programs would that be helpful
mr chairman members of the
committee as it noted the
curriculum is free which is
excellent so we will continue
invest in our efforts to bring
the communication and the
marketing to the schools as
noted in the slides I think an
ours and and the department of
health information that
curriculum was just put together
as a package in new mexico in
november of two thousand and
twenty
three to twenty three so it is
still fairly new in new mexico
and I think one of the things
that you're you're heading on
also in part of your messaging
is looking at the assessment
data that we have in new mexico
you did talk about that what's
being taught and mexico
likely we look a little bit
better than our neighbors in
arizona and and texas for some
their nicotine prevention that's
being provided through teachers
and schools and there's
definitely room for improvement
and I think looking at our local
data in new mexico it is
interesting looking at the trend
data we don't know yet we just
got that third point on the
trend data showing that our
numbers are a decreasing friend
the continuous.
It is interesting to note that
there was a spike around the
time of covert and perhaps
schools are the protective
environment that we're hoping
for them through the data is
that when they came back to
school the
did not have perhaps access to
the informal systems where young
people can access nicotine
products that's a conjecture we
can look into with our research
and with national researchers as
well it's a it's a quality of
study that would take some time
to do
so
thank you for that i'm gathering
then I shouldn't look for
legislation that puts money in
the PED for applications kind of
like the higher ad I guess does
some applications with DOH
because it's free in your spying
itself thank you for that and
and again thank you for the
collaboration
with doing it it's huge and and
as I said I I hope that that
he d
will at least help us round up
the twenty nine institutions of
higher education where we can
ask these questions about what
they're doing because I think it
is an incumbent of pin us has
legislators in terms of policy
to be sure were impacting all
those who need to be impacted
and that's basically any wonders
school age all the way up to the
time of up
if they do graduate from college
so thank you very much up do we
have questions for any other
folks that are here
okay otherwise thank you all of
you for being here I I will
contact
the regulation and licensing
department to get a little
better idea and what we could do
you may be get every every
vendor to
utilize the software i'm getting
carded at the grocery store when
I buy a bottle.
The wine and i'm you know if it
first is like oh of yeah i'm
just little kid but anyway so
it's great to see that and also
around enforcement and and then
a penalty so
do h and over and cast
communication and and ped thank
you for being here and educating
us are so well thank you and we
now have a few per functory
things to do
and but we also have to do
public comment
okay so we will so we are open
for public comment and we have
one person on zoom and we have a
three minute to
limit to public comment so
whoever is answered please are
let us know who you are in what
it is you'd like to bring to our
attention.
Thank you
mister chairman advice share
this is net dean i'm a person
like disabilities and i'm also
disability advocate thank you so
much for your time I know the
day is running long
couple of
quick things limit is three
minutes and I understand that is
there is very low participation
right now in the new mexico
injury prevention coalition
steering committee and if anyone
would like to join us we really
do look at injury prevention as
pre nailed post grave what can
we do to prevent from the
beginning through every stage of
life and then when I say post
grave it's before not fighting
over the silver bracelet they're
they're dealing with their grief
on another matter
experience that I had
interestingly enough several
years ago was having a meeting
at the department of occasional
rehabilitation which shares
office space with a workforce
connections and an important
worst force connections with
outside smoking
within the space limit for even
outside of
experiencing exposure to to
smoke and they refuse to move
further away when enquiring to
dvr and work for us connections
could someone please ask them to
move further away
they said we really don't have
any control over water employees
do or don't do we share the
building there's nothing we can
do so we really need to look at
that broader perspectives and
that the anxiety may have been
created by media the negative
that it also needs to embrace
prevention and supporting saving
healthy communities another
factor is with cigarettes being
approximately eight dollars and
forty seven cents a pag in
smoking a pack age you have
about three thousand sixty six
dollars a year for someone who
may be sharp lifting.
Good to be able to pay for their
cigarettes so it is a multi
prompt approach to cheaping
people out of the justice system
while they're dealing with their
uh prevention of use of negative
and also making sure that that
eight sessions of a cancelling
to remove that need to smug is
very very intouched so that the
rumor isn't you get to
discussions what's that worth
how am I going to get the help
that I knew thank you so much
mister chairman advised her
members of the committee I
appreciate your time I always
still and we always conditions
have a live together have a good
idea.
Thank you for finishing with
thirty seconds to go okay any
other further public comment
seeing none of we have some
performance business that we
need to do and first is approval
of the minutes of the june tenth
meeting
i'll in favor of a significant
saying I
okay minutes are approved
secondly the two letters one two
uh the attorney general and went
to the board of finance
hopefully you've had a chance to
review those and need approval
to send them up
I moved we accept and send out
the letters as proposed and I
second thank you others in favor
of significant saying I
very good third issue is the
september meeting in mascolaro
given the uh
situation
there with the fires and in the
flooding and so forth
and also that
myself and senator lopez are not
going to be able to do september
seventeenth
are we loved a change.
Okay so you'll be the committee
and the seventeenth we could we
do have we have two more
meetings coming up october
sixteenth
no i'm sorry I did send
mescaler yeah
two one two
change the date either change
the date of not have the meeting
and conduct our business in the
last two meetings we have unless
you would like to change the day
mr chair I don't need more on my
calendar I I don't either
just have a longer meeting when
we go to los crucial october
sixteen that sounds great yeah
okay and okay I was a favorite
second favor saying I
passed around and now emotion to
a journal some moved
so a second other favorite
significant by saying I I thank
