Test
Yeah.
OK, I woke up on this side of
the curtain.
Yeah,
Yeah.
It
It's still talk.
OK, we're ready to resume.
Number one on our agenda is uh
A report from District 3.
Engineer Paul Brasher.
And welcome to the committee and
uh take it away.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good to
see you again, members.
Uh, Rick Pitty, executive
Director of Department of
Transportation. It's good to see
everybody again. Hopefully
everybody's doing well.
Um, we're getting kiddos off to
school obviously, so we are very
busy not only in our
construction program, but
getting all our crosswalks and
our flashers set for school.
Um, which is good.
Um, we're starting to transition
from construction into winter
maintenance here pretty quick.
We're always at least a season
ahead of that, so we're already
talking snow and ice, um, so
that way we can be prepared when
it comes, um, as you all know,
we are very busy, we have
several construction projects
around the state, uh, some
pretty major ones we just kicked
off Montgomery Camache, um,
the largest construction project
we've had in several years, and
so it's gonna be a long 3 years.
Uh, Mr. Brasher has uh.
As assured us that um he'll get
it done in those 3 years and not
a day longer, of course, um, but
we look forward to, um, to, to
getting that job underway. I I
don't know if you guys have seen
it lately, but we've already are
well into demolition of at least
one of the structures.
Um, so we are knee deep in it
already, so that's a good news.
So, Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, I will turn it
over to Mr. Brasher, district
engineer, and he will take it
away. Thank you, Paul.
Morning, Mr. Chair.
Committee, uh, I'm Paul Brasher,
I'm the District 3 engineer for
New Mexico DOT District 3, I
take it you have a copy of the
report in front of you.
Uh, the front, you'll see a, a
map of the district right here
and you'll see a little inset
showing how the district is
carved out of the rest of the
state with the other districts
at any rate, uh,
in brief description, the
district runs from uh Berlin
down south up to the bottom of
La Bajada Hill on I-25 up north.
Runs out west of I-40 west of
the Route 66 casino, and then
Deadio Hill on I-40, we have uh
46.5 miles of I-25.
Or rather 94.5 miles by 25, 52
miles by 40 for total 146.
And a half miles, the lower
right hand corner of the inset
on the uh cover sheet of the of
the report here. I've got a
summary, financial standing
right here we have uh an
operating budget as you can see
of $22 million contract
maintenance at 8 million field
supplies at 3 million striping
and signing at 1.5 million. We
have an IT budget of $277,000
and then uh construction
contracts.
Uh, in excess of $36 million.
More on that later. There's a
listing of those later.
And how we do it all is with um
This breakdown of employees we
have a, a mere 210 positions for
the uh for a district this size.
Now this district is, is 3100
square miles. We have 2100 over
2100 lane miles of road to take
care of in that 3100 square
miles, but to do this in the
business side, we have 36 uh
positions on the maintenance
side, 81 positions in
construction, only 62 in on the
engineering side, 31 positions
for a total of 210.
Right now. If you guys go to
page 2 here at the top. This is
a report of what we have done
with the funding that the
legislature in its wisdom has um
assigned to District 3 for its
priority projects to take care
of.
And it won't go through these in
excruciating detail for you
here, but uh the earlier in the
earlier years, projects were
completed. There are various
stages of completion as you go
through 2020, 2021, 22, 23, and
then down here 24 projects that
are in progress right now.
Uh, the only thing I will, I
will say about these, you can
read the list for yourself, but
I will tell you that these are
these projects are distributed
geographically uh throughout the
district.
Pretty evenly geographically
throughout the district, and
they are aimed at addressing uh.
The, uh, the various needs, uh,
the growing, the growing needs
and uh the deterioration of the
infrastructure that we face. Let
me draw your attention to the
3rd page here. Um, the, uh,
projects under construction that
make up that $306 million or
these are flagship project that
uh Mr. Padilla mentioned a
minute ago is I-25, uh
Montgomery Comanche Project, uh,
this project is, uh, under
construction. We started
Friday night, this last Friday
night uh with the northbound
side of the Comanche Bridge.
We are seriously under
construction right now.
And um,
We have, uh, Rick has sworn me
to complete this project on
time, so I, I am metaphysically
certain that we will
Finished project on time.
And that uh people will like it
when it's done we may uh
We may uh
Request the patience uh during
the process, but we believe
they'll like it when it's done.
We have a project on New Mexico
14, which is around about that's
under construction where the
triangle.
Where the triangle grocery used
to be, but Frost Road
intersection turn off up to the
crest.
Uh, we have Project on I-40 uh
in the Cedar Crest area right
here, we have uh New Mexico 109,
which is the bridge uh down in
the Berlin area that's under
construction over the railroad
tracks.
And then of course I have 40, we
have a city of Hill the far east
end of the district. We have a
project going on right now with
Mountain State. So we have those
5 projects which which
Managed to occupy $306 million.
Then, uh, the next listing is,
of course, our transportation
project funding from 2023 and
here again, these projects are
distributed pretty uniformly
throughout the district. If you
if you look at the locations on
the left, particularly the, the
entities that are involved, the
uh transportation project
funding for 2024 is listed. I
showed the 95% state amount the
entity contributions and the
totals, and those are
distributed pretty much
geographically, uh, further on.
Uh, there's a, there are a
couple of maps that show
graphically where these projects
are.
And then we have our completed
maintenance projects that were
uh
The district is particularly
proud of here and these are
again uh.
Pretty much a geographically
throughout the district our
emphasis is on
The interstates, uh, the US
routes and the state routes, our
emphasis in everything is
economy, uh, safety.
A multi-motor mobility, uh,
environmental protection and
cultural resource preservation
in every project that we do with
construction or maintenance
takes all of these uh factors
into account. So these are
completed maintenance projects,
upcoming maintenance, what we
have planned.
Or, uh, of course, 556, this is
Tramway Boulevard, we have I-25
by 40, uh 528.
Uh, which is, uh, basically
Alameda, and then of course US
550, which is the route that
goes through.
Burn Leo, if we uh flip through
the 4th page.
Uh, and turn it sideways, there
is the, uh, these are our uh
Design projects. This is what we
have in progress right now. And
uh these are sizable projects,
and what I have done is I've
listed uh you know, the
anticipated letting date for
each one of these and then the
expenditures we expect to make
in FY 24 through.
Uh, before 28.
And uh you'll see that we have.
Uh, Pam, uh, tramway
intersection, we have that
project 116, uh, this is uh 116
parallels high 25 and goes
through Berlin, uh, just east of
I 25, 3:13 parallels I 25 and it
goes, it runs from, uh, say Bern
Leo out to uh San Felipe Pueblo.
Uh, we have, uh, New Mexico, New
Mexico 22.
Which is uh near Cochi de
Pueblo, 500, which is Bravo 25
Gibson interchange. This is
after we finished the Montgomery
Comanche, the next project we
expect to launch in on would be
the uh I-25 Gibson.
Interchange reconstruction,
reconfiguration here. Uh, we
don't have the total funding for
it yet. That's in the list below
of some unfunded, uh, some
funding needs yet to come.
Uh, then we have um.
Uh, uh, Project 550 in Rancho
area.
And then we have um a bridge uh
replacement that's uh we're
working on and this would be
down in uh south end of Bola.
And then uh these are are
listing below that is our future
projects which are unfunded
here, you know, uh, you may
recall that we suffered some
catastrophic damage to the
diversion channel at San Pedro,
between the lanes of eastern
bound east and westbound lanes
of about 40.
And uh we did a quick fix, an
emergency fix.
Uh, we need to launch a.
The next phase of the emergency
fix.
Uh, pending probably replacement
reconstruction of a large piece
of the channel, but this, uh,
this channel is what we're
working on here. So if you look
at the rest of the rest of the
list of our future unfunded
projects, um,
If you recognize some of those
as needing doing here, but I
won't go to.
Uh, uh, a lot of detail on those
on the right side of the page is
some upcoming studies that we're
working on.
Um, I would be glad to, uh, uh
describe those in a little more
detail if you like. You flip the
page.
Go to the 5th page, you'll see I
have a mapped the location of
our local government road fund
projects, the uh of course the
municipalarial program, school
bus routes, the county
arterials, the kind of co op
school bus, uh, school district
co-ops, municipal co-ops, and
you can see from the graphically
that those projects are also uh
distributed pretty evenly
geographically throughout the
district. If you slip to the
next page, uh, the 6th page,
then we have the transportation
project fund.
And here again
It looks like up and down the
I-25 corridor.
Uh, coincidentally, but uh this
is where transportation project
funds of over $10 million are
going graphically represented
here on this sheet. The next
sheet shows the location of
those 5 construction projects
that I highlighted a minute ago
here.
Our flagship project right now
being the I-20, but this is
geographically so you can
feature where these projects are
that we're working so hard on
right now.
We go to the uh
the 8th page right here. Uh,
these are equipment needs, you
know, it's not uh
We have a lot of uh overtime
needs, and there is a lot of
mileage to be driven, which is a
uh reflected in the amount of
fuel that we uh
That we spend, but it's wear and
tear, it's mileage on heavy
piece uh piece of equipment.
That need to be replaced from
time to time. So this is a
listing of the uh equipment
needs.
Partial listing cause the
complete listing would be uh.
It would be a several times this
uh this amount, but these are
the like a priority, and this is
generally what they are. If you
look below that, there were
local government road funding
projects that I mapped in a
previous page.
Uh, are these, uh, specifically
by detail showing the uh where
it's going, uh, the, the funding
and the state amount, and that's
how you get $400 at the bottom.
And uh
Then uh what you see at the very
bottom those.
Photographs happen to be, this
is the uh the one on the left at
the bottom is the roundabout
under construction on Mexico 14
at Frost Road, and this was
taken about a week ago, uh,
right about in progress, the one
on the right is the bridge in
Grales.
Uh, under construction right now
as we speak.
And so in 12 words or less,
that's the uh that's the
district in a nutshell, I'd be
delighted to answer any
questions you might have.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I noted that you have 81
personnel for maintenance, is
that correct?
Of his chair representative, we
have 81 positions, 1 positions
for maintenance and how many of
those are filled?
Um,
We are probably missing on the
uh on the maintenance side,
we're probably missing uh.
15 or so.
Thank you.
And here I'm actually really
curious, what did, what are your
construction personnel do?
Construction uh personnel are
the people who manage the
projects who do the inspection
and all the accounting uh and
ensuring the contractors
compliance with the plans and
the specifications and the
schedule. OK, so they're not
actually building things out
there on the, no, they're not.
OK, thank you.
Also I have a question, Mr.
Chairman, related to Mesa del
Sol, Bobby Foster, what's that
about?
Um, that is a, uh,
Bobby Foster is a county road,
the uh
The money allocated there is for
a study of the intersection
Bobby Foster connects to um.
Broadway at that point, which
Broadway is a state route right
there. The uh left turns aren't
entirely controlled and the uh
if if there is a need for a
signal uh at that intersection
because they're it.
That intersection does
experience a high volume of
traffic.
Uh, particularly where they have
events that makes a little soul
and that would be initially to
uh launch a study.
Of the intersection itself and
any improvements we might be
able to make channelization, for
example, has no sidewalk, has no
ADA has no uh.
Um,
Might need some improvements so
that we can make.
Thank you. Lastly, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, I also noted that you have
Isleta Boulevard from Sledda
Pueblo to Bridge Street. I'm
assuming that's improvements to
Esledder Boulevard. It is and,
and that's been um administered
and coordinated through Berlio
County. They're actually the
lead. Yes, it is.
It's kind of. So I
Is Berlio County contributing
funds outside of their personnel
administrating the project.
Yes.
What do you know that?
I don't know what that is
though.
Because one of the things and
I'm gonna be a little bit of a
broken record, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
whenever Berlio County
is conducting one of those
projects where the state's
putting in the lion's share of
the money on their signage, they
don't even mention the state of
New Mexico. It's just it looks
like it's all Bno County. I
would really encourage us to
ensure that the citizenry knows
that state dollars are being
used on their behalf because all
it has is county commissioner's
name and Berlio County and the
engineer and that's it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chair, thank you,
Representative.
Thank you, Chairman and thank
you, Paul, and
Mr. Padilla for being here. Oh
right.
Um, I've said this in the past,
chairman harp on this maybe at
some point in time we'll change
it. I think it's important to
show funded versus vacant
positions.
And where we're at and where
your struggles are at.
I think it's very critical.
And it's unfortunate that we
continue to tell our district
engineers that you're really
only.
There's a little bit more going
on in your district and the
overview that you just gave.
And it's unfortunate that we
can't, as the transportation
committee actually appease that.
And actually hear the true story
and understand the, the, the
stresses and struggles that are
going on.
Especially as we are starting to
prepare for new budget cycles.
In 2 months.
OK.
Somebody else I'm sure already
has the budget figured out, but
at some point in time, the rest
of us will be able to be
involved with it.
Um,
One of the things I know on this
is we talk about Section 9
funding for
For 2024.
Pretty sure LSC took section 9
away from you and that we
probably should correct that.
And put it where it belongs and
then.
I'm sure there may be another
representative or two that wants
to comment on that, but um, no,
that was stolen away from you.
Um,
On page 8
The last page.
Chairman, uh Paul Utah.
Specifically about your
equipment needs.
So I wanna drill down to this
because I missed this on the
last two.
And I want to remind our
committee and the people.
That are listening.
These are immediate needs. Would
that be a 1st, 1st statement?
This chair representative I
would say so, yes. OK.
So
If you.
What is your budget for
equipment right now?
To we're in August with.
You just got your new budget
last month.
Um, but what's your budget?
Mr. Chairman, Representative,
uh, the statewide, uh, EC budget
is right around 1510 million, 10
million, um, previous year we
had an additional 5, but last
year our base budget and
previous years is just 10
million. So you need to divide
that up by, you have to divide
it by 7, right? Because we have
the 6 districts and we also have
um a fleet uh area or section
within the general office as
well here in Santa Fe, uh, we
have to have obviously sedans
and SUVs and pickups for um not
only our design stuff but also
our service.
Cruise and field crews are
drilling crews and things like
that. So we have a very robust
fleet, um, area within the Santa
Fe area as well, so that's
divided by 7, not much. And you
look at a, like I said, I think
last time I mentioned that a
snow truck is about 250,000, so
that kind of gives you some
perspective.
I appreciate that answer, Mr.
Padilla. Thank you, Chairman. I
personally think that you're
fleet from Santa Fe.
Just turn them all into electric
vehicles and let the Environment
Department. Don't, don't take
that out of our road budget.
So let them handle that.
They, they want those and, and
we can charge 5 times to get to
Lee County or get down to Silver
City.
All right. Um,
The uh
The point that I was making is
You have the $10,000 budget just
about every district has
massainos within a couple of
million.
Right?
And we continue to unfund you.
If, if
Chairman and Mr. Padilla and Mr.
Basher, um,
You actually had 9.972.5 million
dollars right now.
From hot box to litter truck.
If you ordered it today, how
long would it take you to get
it?
Mr. Chairman, Representative, we
ordered it today, we'd likely
see some of that equipment
starting to come in next year.
if not longer for snow trucks
craters, heavy yellow iron.
It's probably 2 years out, but
um.
You know, the hot boxes and the
uh litter trucks are probably a
year.
So we take 10 million divided by
6, so we give you a couple
million and you buy it on
equipment, chairman and
presenters that you're not gonna
get for 2 years.
And yet we do this to you every
year.
Year after year after year. Yes
sir, Mr. Chairman,
representative, we are seeing
snow trucks we purchased two
years ago showing up this
summer.
Thank you, Chairman. Um, thank
you for that. I think at some
point in time, this is something
that I asked for last year and
how appropriation or house
transportation. We didn't really
get to do that this interim was
actually breaking down.
House Bill 3.
So at least at a minimum our
house appropriations people or
house transportation people
understood the depth of what we
were requesting and what the
true needs were. We all get
these and and um I watch as we
leave committees, the majority
of
These documents are left behind.
We're, we're, you have 1.5 to
200 to spend this year and
you'll be lucky to fulfill a
10th of what your needs are.
And I think that's continually
important to understand when we
have this excess.
Oh
In excess.
Now don't get me wrong, as, as
appropriators we've done a
really good job of.
money and Senate Bill 378 and so
our house and Senate Bill 26 and
House Bill 2 from a couple of
years ago. So we take away the.
3 to 4 additional billion that
oil and gas brought.
So, so nobody sees that, so it
looks like we're really not
influencing.
Our state budget.
The money's there.
Capabilities there actually fill
the needs on a daily basis for
the roads, for the safety that
we're all supposed to be
concerned about for our
traveling public.
And yet each year.
We continue to do this to you.
Until you, oh, by the way, 60
minutes is all you get
disappointing.
Um,
So secretary, I know you're not
sitting at the table, but it
would be.
Great to see builds versus
unfilled and where we're growing
and where we're losing.
On those positions, I think it's
important that we break out
where our budgets are at.
The other thing I think would be
great if we look at this
chairman is
We talk about who's doing the
work.
On the construction side, but we
don't talk about who we're
giving the work to on the
engineering side.
I think it would be good to
start adding columns.
Rick, you and I have talked
about this in the past. I think
it's critical that we understand
where we're at on who's
Um,
Who's doing the work.
And I say that specifically
because you're continually
questioned by this committee and
others.
On how much is going to.
I think it's important to show
Mexico engineers.
And granted, some of our
engineering firms are, are more
than just a statewide firm, but
they do have offices here.
So I think it's important that
we, we showcase that.
And then we also showcase where
you're, where you're going with
the funding, um.
And I like these, uh, on
Your last spreadsheet.
Chairman and, and Mr. Basher, I
see, you know, future projects
unfunded, but we show the status
and progress.
So there's some level of funding
in there somewhere.
And we're showing what we're
doing, so we're not really
discussing the the full extent
of that and what the true need
is.
And how that ties into the trip,
the tamp, and the stiff so kind
of pulling it all together for
the few geeks in the room that
really want to understand that.
So, um, those are the things
that
Um,
I'd like to see and I think that
was day two of Transportation
Committee and a 30 day session
from me.
So, uh, if we could continue to
do that. I do appreciate the
hard effort, the work that you
put forward.
Our DOT puts forward our state
contractors put forward.
State engineering firm to put
forward, and how it works in a
unison.
I do not like
The disassociation with, oh
well, you have this much money
and you haven't spent it. Yeah,
I haven't done this, you haven't
done that.
And then as the proprietors, we
fail to mention that, oh by the
way, can we appropriated this
money, but you don't get it till
next year.
But you still have the money and
you haven't spent it.
And, and you were all part of
those conversations during house
appropriations this last year.
We'll continue to, to, to stand
up and fight for that. And I
think it is critical that we
understand that you're so
underfunded, it's not even
funny, and it's sad.
When we think it's important.
Take care of our the safety of
our
Residents in the state of New
Mexico.
But not enough.
Actually make the roads safer
for them.
Thank you, chair.
Uh thank you, chair, and thank
you very much for this report.
As you know, we are always in
time and strength, so, um, I do,
you're always been a man of few
words anyways, but I'm asking
for short answers, so I'm doing
updates for um my district and I
won't um take any of the
committee's time on.
Speeches or process issues, um,
the, the city of uh well I'm
looking under transportation
projects in 2023.
Um, city of Rio Rancho,
Enchanted Hills, has that not
been completed?
Um
For sure, representative.
I believe it's uh near
completion. It is not, uh, I
don't think it's closed out yet,
but I think it's near
completion. I'm so sorry, I
can't understand you. Can you
say that again? I think it's
near completion.
It's OK.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And the under the village of
Corralis, the sagebrush, can you
tell me where you are on that
project?
Uh, I'm not sure where the
sagebrush is right now.
We did a project through uh New
Mexico 448 through Corrales
here. I'm not sure what the uh
status is right now of uh
Sagebrush, the repaving.
OK, thank you. In, in later on
this week, could you provide me
an email with an update on the
sagebrush project, please.
Thank you. And then the um down
in transportation projects for
FY 24 City Rear Ranch of
Broadmoor. What are we, um,
Are we, uh, widening Broadmoor?
What, what is it? What are you
doing on Broadmoor?
I believe that Broadmoor is
getting some uh sidewalk and
some uh ADA redisiliac
improvements.
So some of this federal funding?
No, I believe it's uh state
funding.
This is state funding. Are we
access federal funding for our
ADA compliant ramps and
sidewalks?
Mr. Chairman and representative,
yes, we do for our
infrastructure we tap into
federal funds to improve um ADA
sidewalks, lighting, all those
types of things, um, on several
projects, yes. Thank you so much
and thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
next up we have um
Representative Nunstrom,
followed by Joe Carrot.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and good morning
everyone. Just a couple of
questions. Um, I'd like to ask.
And do you have, do you have,
Mr. Secretary, your economist in
the room today?
He does DOT is DOT is um what
I'd be interested in, Mr.
Chairman and committees, I'd
like to understand.
With the multipliers for the
size of these constructions. I
think it's incredibly important
for us to be able to explain to
the public with that multiplier
looks like.
So every $309 million that you
spend in construction, what does
that do for the economy?
If you could uh provide that to
us, uh, take any one of these
districts. We use Albuquerque as
an example.
Albuquerque district, I'd really
like to know what that looks
like.
And then the second question I
had, Mr. Chairman, is this next
60 day session I plan to work on
another P3 bill. That's my.
Annual attempt, but we'll be
working on P3 and I'd like to
ask the uh district engineer of
the projects that you have
listed here, what would be the
kinds of projects that would be
most likely uh that we would
attract P3 attention.
Do you have a sense of that?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Representative
Lundstrom, I think right now if
we were to uh pick a project
that we felt like P3 was
probably gonna move forward with
and it's gonna be um.
It's gonna be um.
Drew a blank upon the hill
and Steve.
So, so, um, Mr. Chairman and
and representative, that's
probably the one that's closest
to a P3 right now. Yeah, we've
been kicking this pro this
authorization type language
around for at least 15 years,
most of the time that I've been
here.
So
A P3 project that uh.
Road
What, what, what's the total
cost for a property.
24 money is probably around 100
million. So that project's about
$1000. We have um interest by
the private sector for projects
like that.
That's a perfect example of
something that would, if we had
an authorization.
Bill in place for public-private
partnerships.
That that would be one of many,
I think throughout the state of
New Mexico.
So I'll be reaching out to you
guys on that. That's a bill that
I'm super
interested in working on again
this next, this next session.
Because what I'd like to see are
the projects that are identified
by the New Mexico DOT.
Or P3.
And with that authorization
would look like. I know we've
tried this a lot the last few
years, but now we need to get
serious about it. There's
funding available for the
state's portion of P3 for that
question.
And it's something that I think
you could immediately apply
because of where you're at in
your letting schedule.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
wanted to give everybody a heads
up that we're seeing another P3
bill. Thank you. Oh, thank you,
Representative. Next up we have
a representative Garrett
followed by Representative
Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. And I just want to
compliment the department for
the completion of La Bajada
every time I drive up and down
it, it's like praise the DOT.
Thank you very much and all the
companies responsible and
welcome Mr. Brasher. How long
have you been the district
engineer now for 3.
Representative, I think my first
day was uh Memorial Day.
You disagree, yes.
Thank you. Um, just a and uh two
questions in District 3, Mr.
Chairman, do you have any
engineering interns that are
completing their education and
interning with uh District 3.
Madam Chair Representative, we
have 3.
OK, 3 and 3 and across the state
in all 6 districts.
We had 40 this summer total
statewide.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
That's just great news. Keep up
that.
Um, couple of questions on page
2.
Uh,
And the laws of 2024, New Mexico
347 Paseo del Van, is that money
going to the development in
Sandoval County right now.
For the extent for the extension
from
And.
South
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, uh, it, it is,
uh, physically located in
Sandoval County. Yes, that's
where it is, uh, the, um,
The state uh uh studied or
launched a study of the uh of
of a kind, uh, starting at
Rainbow.
Uh, generally, uh,
It follows 28th Street West, and
it turns south after Vista Drive
then runs south along uh 20th
Street to Southern.
About 7 miles or so.
And then, um,
This has been a, you know, as
you know, it's been in the long
range plan for cog since uh.
0, 20, 2002 or so.
But it's geographically sitting
inside the Sanval County,
Sandovalt County has a portion
of study in progress itself
right now, uh, a short piece and
uh they're designed it goes
between user and Rainbow.
Oh.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, my
understanding is that the plan
is to connect it to a Trisco
Vista.
Uh, which is right about where
Sandoval and Berlio County.
Meat, is that
Accurate
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, yes, uh, it
will, and eventually connect 550
to I-40 and the connection point
at I-40 will be west of a Trisco
Vista.
OK, thank you very much. This is
my question.
We have representative Garcia
followed by
Representative Hackman Viejo.
Thank you, Mr. Sherman. Thanks
for the presentation on the
I-40, I mean the I-25
construction right there on
Comanche and.
That area there
Uh, is that a state contractor
doing this or who's uh.
All the contracts that are there
are these contractors.
This chair uh representative the
uh contractor is AUI Albuquerque
Aderground Inc. and uh in New
Mexico contractor and I think it
is uh predominantly in New
Mexico subcontractors.
Working under AUI.
And thank you for that. That's
very important because you know
every time they have a big
project in New Mexico, it seems
that out of state contractors
are getting I'm not very glad to
hear that about that one, that
one, and I don't know if it's
gonna have any effect on
anything, you know, the balloon
is coming up and every afternoon
you come through that I25 now,
you know, I've been through
there quite a few times and you
guys did a good job of rerouting
traffic.
What effect is that gonna have
on the fier comes up.
This chair representative, uh,
obviously the construction, uh,
Will tend to have an effect on
uh any increase in of surgent
traffic here, uh, the contractor
will do everything it can to
keep the, keep the interstate
open and as much of Comanche and
as much of Montgomery Open and
Montgomery shouldn't be uh
affected by the time the balloon
fiesta comes around, but uh.
will do everything they can to
keep the uh.
Uh, circulation is flowing
freely as possible.
The construction, uh, timing is
everything and we just happen to
be under construction.
When the Balloonsa launched.
Uh thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. You know, my,
my last part of trim is just a
comment, you know, we, we sit
here every year.
Talk about uh Department of
Transportation, the needs of the
trans uh the department, you
know, as appropriators we need
to appropriate what you guys
need.
You know, it's very easy to sit
here and point fingers at what
you're not doing.
But at the end of the day, if
you look at the general picture,
if you don't have the funds to
do it with, that makes for long
days and at the end of the day
it all comes back to you guys,
you guys aren't doing your job.
You're slacking up, you're
wasting money, and if you don't
have it to waste, it's, it makes
for a long day and like I said,
Mr. Chairman is appropriate, we
really need to look at the
department because this
department is the most important
department in the state of New
Mexico.
You know, you're gonna have more
expenses because the governor
wants to go all electric. You
have to have more charging
station cars, uh, what happens
with these uh cars start going
down who fixes them, that kind
of stuff that we really, really
need to look at now before we
get to that point. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Oh, thank you, thank you,
Representative. Next up we have
a Senator.
Representative, uh,
Back when Vi followed by uh
Representative Ellison.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, Mr. Brasher. Good to
see you here this morning.
Um, just a couple of questions,
talking more about the
Comanchein project. I think it's
a great opportunity for us to
utilize this public forum to
describe to the people of New
Mexico exactly um what the
Comanche project is, why it is
necessary and what the timetable
is for completion just so we can
kind of put everybody in notice
so that they know exactly what
this is and why we have to do
it.
Sure. Representative in 12 words
or less the Comanche project is.
We call it Comanche. It's
coupled with Montgomery and the
interstate in between and uh the
the overpass on Comanche and
Montgomery are both under
capacity, undersized.
And uh
It, it
Because they're undersized, they
can't handle the.
The, uh, people who take the
ramps to go either direction on
Comanche.
But especially Montgomery.
And uh the only solution to this
is to widen those, widen those
bridges, and then to modify the
interstate in between so that.
Uh, traffic can more easily get
on and off, so what we're going
to do is widen the bridge
Comanche, widened the bridge at
Montgomery and uh with emphasis
on left turns, so that when
you're coming.
Either direction of Montgomery
or Comanche, uh, will have dual
left turns uh for ease of access
onto the interstate.
And we'll have left turns uh off
the interstate so that you can
access Montgomery Camache.
That's fundamentally what the
project's all about to do that
we need to wreck out the
bridges.
That are there now.
And uh it's emphasis on left
turns is what access.
To Montgomery and 2 Comanche and
then access to the interstate
from those routes, and that's
fundamentally what the and uh
the uh it's a dissipated to run
for 3 years.
In the doing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Brasher, for that
answer. Um, I, I think that
helps to describe what is
happening and um in terms of
delays, I also want to take a
moment to um brag upon the
agency. You guys have set up a
text notification service that
New Mexicans can sign up for to
give you information on the
Montgomery Comanche delays, I
highly suggest that everybody in
Albuquerque and District 3 sign
up for those text notifications.
Because we need to start getting
it in our minds now that they
can and will be delays the same
way there were on La Bajada for
quite some time, and I echo
representative Garrett's um
sentiments and we are all
extremely happy with the way La
Bajada turned out, and it's a
beautiful piece of road, so, um,
Mr. Chairman Chairman and vice
chair, if I could just touch on
that, I think you're absolutely
right. I think the public
involvement piece is really
what's going to be critical in
this project and as long as we
can keep everybody in the know,
um, because we are, we are going
to inconvenience people, no
doubt.
About it, I mean, there's gonna
be delays whether we like it or
not, um, but if we can at least
inform people of of what we're
doing out there and of those
delays, I think it's gonna go a
long way. We have the, the, like
you said the text messaging,
we've we've touched every media
source we can to talk about
alternate routes around when
things do get bad, because I
know things are running pretty
well now, but they won't always,
we're gonna have some hiccups
here, here and there, so um I, I
totally agree with you. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr. Bia and
thank you, Mr. Chairman and to
piggyback on the, the issue of
Fiesta, Mr. Brasher, um, in
terms of what the agency is
doing to anticipate further
delays, um, what are you guys
planning to do in New Mexicans
shouldn't Mexicans also
anticipate more delays this year
than usual.
Mr. Chairman and, and vice
chair, I think it's a great
question. So one of the things
that we will do early on is
obviously get that public
involvement piece working pretty
well by then, hopefully we'll
have that down, um, but as much
information as we can put out
there for individuals and people
to um understand the traffic
patterns and the flows of of
when you know, October is
around, but not just Bun Fies so
we're also thinking about also
New Mexico State Fair as well.
So we have two big events in
Albuquerque that are coming up
this fall, and we are well um in
The, you know, the works of
trying to get people to and from
his best and easy as we can and
right now it's really
information.
Like just blasting out lots of.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Dia. Um, my last
question, Mr. Chair, has to do
with um the upcoming maintenance
projects on the I-40, the Rumble
strip mitigation.
Mr. Brasher, you're both
smiling, uh, Mr. Chairman, and,
and, um, Mr. Brasher, Mr. Pia, I
have received several emails and
comments from constituents, not
even my constituents, but um I
guess since I'm the chair of
transportation, um, people
really wanted to let me know.
Is this the mitigation project
in, in that the noise, the
rumble strips in that particular
section in I-40 is generating a
lot of noise to the point where
it's very disruptive to people
living in and around that area.
Is that that project, Mr. Mr.
Brasher? Yes, Madam Chair and,
and, and Vice Chair, I'll let,
I'll let Mr. Brasher touch on a
little bit, but you're right. So
she had us through that
construction project, what we
developed was a rumble stripe.
So basically the white line is
within the rumble strip.
And it's intended to prevent um
vehicles from leaving their
driving lane, um, the
engineering was sound. It is a
great um application. It just
wasn't placed in the right
location, and I told those folks
that evening when I went to go
look at it and we got the call
and I went to a look at it as
soon as I got out of the car, I
knew we had a problem. I could
just, I just knew we had a
problem. Um, so yes, we embarked
on, on a maintenance project
what we thought would would
correct that in that we were
gonna plan on filling the rumble
strip up with what's called a.
It's a very hard material that I
mean you see it all over the
interstates now we put it
basically anywhere we, we need
to, um, you know, prevent the
payment from raveling and
potholing and cracking. Um, so
we thought we could do that, um,
come to find out that as we were
applying that material we
actually what's called bath
tubing, the typical section, so
what it would do during a
rainstorm or even winter worse
is the typical section would not
drain, um, so that's a problem.
So we stopped that process and
we actually came in and we're
gonna have to just mail it out
and repave it.
And I'll let Mr. Brasher touch
on exactly what that entails.
Sure. Representative, vice chair
of the, um, it's under
construction right now and we're
basically we're working on the
eastbound so we're just about
done with the eastbound side,
eastbound lane.
Uh, running several miles.
We've taken out the rumble
strips, and we haven't cut new
rumbles through there will be
new rumble strips. It's just the
rumble strips will be a little
further from the edge of the
paving. They won't be in the
stripes, so if you're using the,
if you're driving the road and
you're using the stripe as kind
of a guide to kind of herd your
car down the road, uh, at least
you get close to the stripe, you
won't be in the rumble strip. It
was uh obtrusive to the uh
residents in the uh.
Hes Valley there through the
entire quarter. Anyway, that,
that problem will be solved. You
still have rumble strips when
we're done. They're not there
yet, but they're on their way.
But uh it's been taken out
eastbounds, uh, just about done
work they're starting working on
the westbound.
And it'll be another couple of
weeks.
We'll come back in, cut rumble
strips, except it be.
further out from the driving
lane, and then we'll come back I
think we will have uh settled
that issue.
Uh, once and for all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Brasher, so just estimated time
of completion.
We have another uh.
Miss Che represented,
we have another um.
Probably another 3 or 4 weeks or
so.
Great. Thank you very much the
people uh in and around these
mountains really appreciate your
help on that. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sure
Thank you, Representative. Next
up we have Representative, um,
Representative Ellison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you for the presentation,
and Mr. Brasher, good to see you
again.
Uh, my question is on your
handout on the last page. I
noticed this is the first time
in these reports that there's uh
quite a bit of money allocated
to the school district co op.
Uh, county roads and things like
that. Are, are there school bus
route allocate money allocated
to all districts.
And if there is
Uh, because of my unique
District
Uh, I have a lot of, uh, Navajo
communities that have a lot of
bus routes. Are they able to tap
into these available funds, and
if they do tap into the funds.
Can
Or uh
Is New Mexico DOT the only one
that can use the funds or can
Navajo DOT tap into some of
those fun to maintain the roads.
Uh, the reason why I ask that is
because
Um
With inclement weather
approaching, there's gonna be a
lot of times that the buses get
stuck before it gets to the
original stop, and that causes
students to miss school that
attributes to why we're
Red very, very low or very, very
high.
Depending on which way you see
it. And then also, it also
damages state bought equipment.
The school buses are state
equipment, and it's damaging to
them, and I think that we need
to
be a more uh
Cooperation and collaboration
between the Navajo Nation, DOT
and the New Mexico DOT to
maintain those roads. So my main
question is those funds are
available? Can they tap into it?
And how do I go about it?
Getting the people directed in
that.
Direction, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, yes, they are
eligible to participate in it's
what's called the local
government road fund. Um, that's
the fund that we utilize prior
to the TPF on the transportation
project fund. Um, it does have a
a cut out for, uh, you know,
schools and school bus routes,
um, all the Navonation would
have to do is obviously develop
their project.
Um, and then once we go for a
call of projects just like TPF,
we have a call for projects,
they would submit their project
and then, you know, it would go
through the.
The evaluation process and
ultimately if it it it uh rose
to the top, it would receive
funding for that.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, forget me, giving
me a second bite at the apple. I
just wanted to give Cher a fun
fact with you. I asked what the
multiplier would be for um the
the Department of
Transportation, if you look on
page 3 up at the top.
For the uh projects under
construction for this district
at 3306 million, the multiplier
would equate to 1 billion $200.
So right now, just the projects
that are currently under
construction because it's a 3.4
multiplier. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
And uh
8, you have a list of uh
Equipment
Totaling $100 is that?
Is that a wish list?
Uh, how much
Is that something you need
immediately or is this like over
5 or 10 year period.
Uh
Mr. Chair, the listing of
equipment that you see is
immediate needs.
We, we need this, we need this
right away to replace equipment
that uh not much of it is new
equipment, uh, this is a
replacement for equipment that
we've had that has deteriorated
condition.
It's uh approaching the end of
its useful life.
And, and we'll probably not have
much salvage value by the time
we're done.
Well thank you for the answers.
So how much?
Of the $10 million do you really
realistically expect to receive.
And uh the next budget in the
next fiscal year.
Mr. Chairman, you know,
We're expected, he's expected to
see his little less than $2
million this fiscal year, um.
This legislative session, you
know, we'll put together a plan
and, and we'll we'll try to move
forward some equipment budget as
well in that plan, but um it's
something that we're
desperately.
In need obviously.
Oh, thank you for that answer
and correct me if I'm wrong, so
you have immediate need of
$10,000 which you realistically
only expect to get 2 million.
1/5 of what you need, Mr.
Chairman, that is correct.
That's correct.
I mean, in, in probably his 10
million, that's just his
immediate needs, um, that list
is probably closer to 1520 per
district. So a halftime pickup
bus.
5 $50,000.
Yes, sir. You can buy a Tesla
Model 3 for less than that, so.
I'm getting tired of people.
Pardon?
OK, thank you.
So
Just play devil's advocate for a
moment on the command sheet
Montgomery project.
I've driven that.
During the rush hour.
If you stay in the right hand
far right hand lane, you can get
down to Montgomery pretty fast.
So it's only
Malaysia just for a few minutes.
So how, how can we justify
$250,000 to fix that.
Sure.
The uh
The uh during the rush hour
during the a.m. the morning in
the afternoon uh.
Peak hours, particularly the uh.
Traffic is very heavy and
traffic backs way up backs up
off the ramps onto the main line
of the interstate. The road
handles uh that corridor between
Montgomery Comanche handles
maybe 250,000 vehicles per day
freaking through it and uh
There's not a lot of between the
Montgomery Commission, not a lot
of wavelengths so you can get.
Where you can get over from a
far right lane to the far left
lane, and it's just the traffic,
the volume that it has to handle
at the same time, the bridges
over Montgomery, Montgomery
conveys an awful lot of traffic.
Going from Montgomery on the
east side to Montano on the west
side, particularly Montgomery
and uh likewise with Comanche
going.
Riegos and
Each way, just the volume of
traffic is there.
The uh bridges do have some uh
They uh
They're in need of in need of
replacement, not desperate need
of replacement, but they are in
need of replacement and the road
needs the quarter could use some
uh reconstruction.
Or its condition, given all that
traffic over all these years.
OK, thank you for that answer.
Also, uh,
Oh.
Representative
Aman v. Hill's question, are you
Are you replacing those bridges
or?
We're just adding a lane to the
existing bridge.
Monsieur, we're replacing the
bridges.
Or or recon bridges, yes.
So they
You're gonna be able to maintain
traffic?
Well, that's the, that's the
difficulty replacing the bridge
at half at a time
and uh it'll be two-way traffic
for a while on the on the
portion of the bridge is not,
uh, so two-way traffic will be.
Directed under one bridge.
So I drove down the I-25
yesterday afternoon.
It was my understanding they
were gonna
3rd and the northbound lanes,
but they were
Shifting the lanes on the
southbound lanes, so.
Are you gonna be working on the
cell phone and northbound lanes
at the same time?
Uh, Mr. Chair, there will be
some work going on in the
southbound side, but, uh,
fundamentally right now for the
near immediate future we're
working on the northbound.
Uh, over the bridge, the
Comanche is, uh.
Um, bridge and the corridor
between Comanche and Montgomery.
Montgomery will start, uh, the
Montgomery Bridge will start uh
being taken out here pretty
soon.
But the uh but for now it's
primarily the northbound. There
is traffic control set up.
That's gotten underway on the
southbound side.
Uh, but, uh,
It's really in advance of the
Comanche construction.
OK, thank you for that answer.
And lastly,
I see you mentioned a, um,
Project, a real
Bravo bridge replacement.
Uh, let the contract gonna be
let on April 25.
I swear I read that that project
was underway. I guess I didn't I
reading comprehension is not too
good.
So that's, that's not, I thought
it was under construction
already, but obviously it's not.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Rio Bravo is,
uh.
The uh is a replacement of the
bridge total replacement of the
bridges that are deteriorated
the peer caps have uh really.
Or failing.
And uh the project is uh will be
underway. It, it will be
affecting traffic control, uh.
Uh, pretty soon, according to
the schedule here.
So it's coming, it's real bravo,
which is the state owned portion
of Rio Bravo over the river. So
Mr. Chairman, it has already let
and been awarded to a
contractor.
There has been,
you'll see construction pretty
soon they got moved up.
You get completed sooner than
you originally thought. No, no,
it, it did let, Mr. Chairman, it
did let in in April.
Mr. Chair, you'll see it under
construction here pretty soon
there we will get a.
OK.
Mr. Sherman, excuse me, I
apologize. It's gonna let next
month, the next landing. I
apologize. OK, well thank you
for for being here. Thank you
for your presentation and um
That concludes this.
section of the um
The meeting.
To remove item will have a
rearranging the agenda, we're
moving.
To item number 3.
Which is a presentation from the
National Conference of State
Legislatures.
And we're gonna hear from
Douglaschenko, who's
Director of the transportation
program.
OK, great.
So Mr. Shenko,
Go ahead. Thank you for being
here and we look forward to your
presentation.
I appreciate it, Senator Tollman
and represent Hackman v. Hill.
Thank you very much for having
me here today.
It's an honor to be able to be
in such a beautiful building and
a beautiful state state to
present to you all on a very
important issue, so.
Um, yeah, my name is Doug
Shinkle. I am the transportation
program director.
At the National Conference of
State Legislatures, NCSL for
those of you who don't know, is
the national organization
comprised of every single state
lawmaker and every single state
legis legislative staff.
Um, and we're appreciative of
your support and hope that you
take care of, um, take advantage
of the um research and technical
assistance and peer to peer
learning that we have available.
So, I am the director of NCSL's
transportation program, and
basically gonna get go.
Let me try this one. It seems a
little better. I'm gonna
basically go over, give you.
Uh, little context on why
We need to talk about
transportation funding.
And then talk about what states
are doing.
So, uh, next slide, please.
So this first slide is pretty
illustrative. It's from the
National Association of State
Budget Officers, which is called
uh short for Nasbo.
Um, this shows you the breakdown
of state transportation revenue
sources.
Um, and you'll notice that the
biggest slice of the pie is
motor fuel taxes, gas taxes of
37.6%. Now of course this is
averaged over all 50 states.
Which you'll notice there over
the left that
That percentage was 41.1%, not
too long ago.
And it is already declined 3.5%.
And I think that in of itself is
pretty illustrative of.
Uh, the challenges that states
are going to have to deal with
in the future, and I'll go into
that in a little bit more depth
and then we'll talk about
exactly what states are doing.
So, so perhaps let me pause
here, so, um.
Fuel fuel revenue is decreasing
in most states except for those
states in which population is
growing at a pretty um
Healthy rate.
And the decline in gas tax
revenue is not only electric
vehicles, which is what a lot of
people talk about or concerned
about, um, but the, the market
penetration of electric vehicles
is still relatively small,
although in some states like
California, Hawaii.
A few others, it's getting up to
3 to 4% of commercial of of
passenger vehicles.
Um,
The bigger short term issue is
the vehicles have just been
getting more and more fuel
efficient for the last 1020, 30
years.
Now that's, that's a great
thing, and I want to be clear
that
I'm speaking to this from
The perspective of someone.
Who focuses on transportation,
especially transportation
revenue. They're obviously good
reasons to have more fuel
efficient vehicles to decrease
emissions and increase and
improve air quality.
But nonetheless, the push
towards more fuel efficient
vehicles.
And vehicles alternative fuel
vehicles that don't use any fuel
at all.
are leading to a continuing
degradation of the motor fuel
tax and motor fuel tax revenues,
and that's likely to intensify,
uh, and get much worse in the
next 5 to 10 years. Much, much
worse.
Um, so we're not maybe to the
bad part yet, but that's coming
soon. So this slide just shows
you the states that have uh
taken action since 2014 to
increase their gas tax. So,
actually 34 states and DC have
done so, although the trend
we're seeing.
In the last 3 or 4 years.
Is that
States are increasingly
reluctant to do so.
In part because of concerns, you
know, gas tax is not a fun or
politically popular thing to
raise.
But also just because, um,
You.
Because you don't want to um put
too many of your eggs in a
basket for something that's
already declining.
Now, 24 states in DC have
indexed or variable rate gas
taxes. I don't believe New
Mexico has any sort of gas tax
index. What that means is that
the gas tax is in some way
tracks with population or um the
consumer price index or
construction cost index, and
that's kind of an effective way
to make sure that the gas tax is
at least keeping pace.
Um, so that's one other thing
out there. I know that New
Mexico has not raised their
Gas tax for um quite a while,
so, um, some of this does and
does not apply quite as much
here. So I did want to give you
a comparative sense of how
reliant New Mexico is on the
motor fuel tax revenue for
transportation funding. So
you'll see here with kind of
some comparative four corners
nearby states, New Mexico is
kind of falling in the middle
there, but compared to that
number I showed in the other
slide 37.6%.
New Mexico is kind of on the
more reliance on the gas tax end
of things.
Um,
And so that has a lot of
implications for the years
ahead.
Um, and it's interesting to look
at
How reliance or not reliant
states are on the gas tax.
For example, I work a lot with
um
Kansas representative Shannon
Francis. He represents liberal
Kansas in the southwest corner
of the state, not, not too
awfully far from here, um, in
Kansas, they only um only about
11% of their transportation
trust fund comes from the gas
tax.
Which is interesting. So they,
they're not maybe in as
difficult of a situation at the
moment in terms of being
over-reliant on the gas tax, um,
and I shouldn't say overreliant
because honestly the gas tax is
a great way to pay for
transportation and a lot of
economists say that it's
basically the perfect tax. Um,
it's very easy to administer.
It's very easy to collect.
Collection costs or just kind of
total operation costs are
typically
Estimated between like 1 to 3 to
4%. I'm gonna talk about some of
the alternatives. It's not gonna
be the case that it's gonna be
that easy and cheap to
administer these alternatives,
especially in the short term,
um, long term is the kinks get
worked out, perhaps so, but um
let's let's dive into to talk
about things a little bit more.
What, what are the alternative
states we're looking at.
So the most common thing that
states have done is they have
put it in place an annual
registration fee for electric
vehicles and or hybrid vehicles.
So as you can see from here, 39
states now have these EVPs, so
we're getting to the point where
nearly every state has one.
There was another, I want to say
3 or 4 just this year. We have
22 states that have a plug-in
hybrid fee.
And the thinking behind these,
of course, right, is
They're not using gas, or
they're using less gas.
But they're still using the
system and if we're
If we're proceeding with kind of
a user feeee user pay,
principal.
Method model.
We need to think about a way to
recapture revenue from the
drivers, vehicle owners that
have vehicles that are not
paying as much into the system.
So these bees range quite a bit.
As low as $50.
And all the way up to uh almost
$300 in New Jersey once some
indexing goes in over time. Um,
these are all flat registration
fees.
They are on top of the
traditional registration fee
amount that you're paying.
The clear advantage of these is
that this is incredibly simple.
Effective
Cheap to collect, very little
administrative collection costs
with these.
The downside clearly of these is
that if you're
Someone who drives.
3000, you, you, you know, miles
a year.
retiree or in in older New
Mexican or just a student or
someone who doesn't drive very
much, you may be paying
disproportionately more than you
should be.
Um, because these are not based
on use. So this is the
This is kind of the
The other side of it, but in
terms of quickly identifying
something, um.
This seems to make a decent
amount of sense. Most states do
dedicate the bulk or their
entirety of the revenue raised
from these.
To traditional transportation,
um, needs.
Although there are 5 or 6 states
that dedicate some of the money
to um
Help with electrification. So in
other words, electric charging
stations and things to help
build out the electrification
network for electric vehicles.
Um, in a few states do have
indexing provisions for these
fees as well, so you don't have
to go back in.
Couple of years later and say
this fee is $75 now we want it
to be $90. If you just put in an
indexing it'll go up by a couple
of dollars a year.
Uh, Next slide, please.
So this slide is incredibly
busy, um.
So
I'm hoping most folks are at
least somewhat familiar with the
concept of road user charges.
Which I'm gonna refer to as
rock, means a per mile fee.
For a driver, um, this map kind
of demonstrates the breadth of
the activity going on across the
country with respect to rock.
Ruck is also known as
mileage-based user fees.
More commonly on the east coast
or Mbuff.
Or like a vehicle distance tax
or other things like that, but
I'm gonna call it rock.
So what you'll see here is that
essentially a lot of states been
studying rock, um.
I see that, you know, New Mexico
is, I believe, a member of Rock
America and has kind of been
involved in kind of monitoring
this issue but has done no pilot
or what have you here, you'll
see quite a few states, states
in red have done a pilot, um.
The states in um green, which
I'll get into in the moment,
actually have operational
programs, and so I want to get
into talk a little bit about
these rec programs, what they
look like in the states and some
of the
Challenges and benefits of them.
So next slide please.
So there are 4 states that have
um
Rock programs, operational ruck
programs. These all have been
created by their state
legislatures. Mostly bipartisan
although I'm not gonna say it
was unanimous or anything like
that. All the rock programs are
currently voluntary.
And participants are exempt from
paying the electric vehicle
registration fee.
And the maximum ruck paid is
capped at the EV registration
fee amount.
So really what states are trying
to do right now is they're
trying to encourage vehicle
owners to enroll in these
programs.
The more people you have in
these programs, the more you
learn about what does and does
not work well.
And the more vehicles you have
in the program, you also achieve
more scale, which starts to
shrink some of the collection
costs associated with them.
So, like I said, these are all
voluntary at the moment. No one
is, no one has to participate in
these, and
They're trying to incentivize
drivers by making sure that
you're not paying more than you
would pay in the EV registration
fee. All these states that we're
gonna talk about having ED
registration fee. Um,
So the vehicle is allowed is
also interesting. It varies, but
typically focuses on electric
vehicles and alternative fuel
vehicles, and I'll get that into
that a little bit more. So the
first this line has Utah and
Oregon, which are the two oldest
rock programs.
Um, in Utah, only alternative
fuel vehicles are allowed into
the program, um, so no hybrids
and no kind of high fuel
efficiency vehicles. And there's
only one payment option, and I
want to return and talk about
payment options because there's
kind of a trade off with
payment. You if you offer more
consumer choices in terms of
payment.
Could be good, but once again,
could make the system on um kind
of needlessly complex, I would
say.
Uh, Oregon has the oldest
program, um, Oregon has been
studying this issue since the
turn of the 21st century, a
former president of NCSL, uh,
former Oregon Senator Bruce
Starr started discussing issues
issue and kind of just realizing
that states were going to have
to deal with this and kind of
here we are about 20 years later
without moving, moving along.
Perhaps more quickly than we
anticipated, um, their programs
pretty small.
Um,
They do allow vehicles with fuel
efficiency of 40 MPG or above to
participate, as well as
alternative fuel vehicles.
However, they have 3 different
vendors, so you can go through
the state or to the state DOT or
two private vendors, um, and
while I think that may have made
sense at the time. I'm not sure
it does as much now, once again,
you're creating kind of needless
complexity, um, and having
multiple collectors of the fee
rather than just one. the other
thing I would just mention is
that these fees, um, the per
mile charge you might ask is
usually around 2 cents in the
states that have them.
Thus far, and most of them have
formulas so those go up over
time.
And
The states thus far, the focus
really is like, how do we
supplement.
Or replace the lost revenue for
the vehicles that are not paying
into the system or paying into
the system to the degree to
which they previously did when
they were a purely
An internal combustion engine.
Uh, next, next slide, please.
So, we're really interesting
example, um,
is from Hawaii. So Hawaii is the
latest state to create a
statewide ruck program.
Uh,
This is sponsored by Senator
Chris Lee. Representative
Garrett may have had a chance to
meet him briefly at a conference
this summer, but uh he's someone
we work with a lot, but, uh,
Hawaii has been very aggressive
about this rock and so they've
now gone, um, they're in a
situation where it's in a
mandatory re program, meaning
you have to um it's not
mandatory quite yet, but it,
it's gonna be mandatory in a few
years, um, until June 2028.
The EV owners in the state may
pay a register the register the
EV registration fee.
Instead of the rock. After that
date, electric vehicle owners
will have to um enroll in the
Ruck program and that will be
the de facto, that will be the
way that electric vehicle owners
and they're in the state of
Hawaii.
Um, kind of pay into the
transportation system. So that's
a pretty big step in the kind of
state transportation landscape
here, to have a mandatory
program.
Um,
Now, Hawaii is an interesting.
State in two particular ways
when it comes to rock.
First of all, one of the main
concerns we hear, especially
from eastern states.
But you know, we're here in New
Mexico. I know a lot of people
in Trinidad drive over Raton and
Roone to Trinidad or down in Las
Cruces, you're probably crossing
state lines, but there's always
the question what happens when
you cross state lines. Well, in
Hawaii, that's not very much of
a problem.
Um, which made me predict about
4 years ago that it would be the
first state to do this, so I
feel gratified that I was
correct in that um prediction,
um, but there's another key
component of the state that's
really important, and that is
that Hawaii is one of 14 states
with a mandatory vehicle safety
inspection. I don't believe New
Mexico. Yeah, New Mexico does
not have those, but there's 14
states, so not a lot of states,
but not an insignificant amount.
So in Hawaii, you don't have to
worry about out of state miles,
right?
And then you just go and do this
man you're mandatory vehicle
inspection.
They record the odometer.
They calculate how much that was
in last year. I think they're
thinking about having monthly or
quarterly payments, so you
don't, so someone doesn't get
sticker shock and have to pay
too much.
Um, at one time, but so in other
words, they don't have to worry
about out of state mileage,
which is a a big issue, and they
have a very easy way to collect
the rug, because if you don't
If you don't, so an odometer
reading is probably the easiest
way to do things.
You can submit those things
remotely through apps and just
like take pictures. There's
gonna have to be some sort of um
compliance mechanism put in to
make sure that um that works
well and you're not having too
much tax liqui too much kind of
rock leakage.
Um, you can, of course,
Use devices that are on your
phone.
Uh, or ones that plug into your
car.
Or that are actually in your
vehicle. Now, there are some
concerns about those from a
privacy perspective, right? Um,
States have done, I think, a
pretty good job of addressing,
at least with these, these four
states of putting in some
privacy safeguards, um,
communicate, you know, stating
that the information will not be
used, um, for anything outside
of just kind of collecting the
rock.
Um, so, but I always say there's
there's trade-offs between
privacy and payment. So, so
imagine a constituent says,
well, I don't, I don't want my
miles to be tracked. I, I don't,
I, I don't like that.
I said, OK, um.
What if that person owns a
private ranch where they're
driving around on their own
property all the time. They
don't, they don't have to pay
fees to the state when they're
on their private land, or what
if they drive into other states
a lot. So they're so
consumers, I think as time goes
on, and to be clear,
These rock, this, this concept
of rock is
Complex. I'm not gonna say let's
sit here and say that I think
every state's getting up going
this direction, but it, it, it
does kind of seem
Long term likely where things
will go. Now states can try
things that are not user fees,
could just raise the sales tax.
I'm not sure if that makes
sense. I'm not a tax economist.
I think the user fees model
makes a lot of sense, um.
But you really do have this
trade-off between privacy and
payment, because the more
Privacy if you allow
The state to know that you just
at least that oh you drove
outside of the state and they
don't charge you for those
miles. It's essentially what I'm
saying. So that's kind of an
interesting dynamic to keep in
mind when thinking about a rock,
and then the last state I want
to talk about and this is the
largest one actually now is
Virginia. Now Virginia is the
largest state of these four.
This was also enacted by the
legislature. It's quite a bit
different because it includes
any vehicle making uh that gets
over 25 miles per gall.
And so a big distinction from
the other states, a very large
distinction.
So this program is more
I would say
Probably designed in a little
better way. I mean, I don't want
to make big value judgments
here. It's kind of my job to
just kind of nonpartisan provide
this, but given that a lot of
the degradation of the fuel tax
is actually coming from highly
fuel efficient vehicles and not
just electric vehicles.
It probably does make some
degree of sense to think about
capturing revenue from those
vehicles that are not paying as
much into the system as they
perhaps should be.
And so essentially, Virginia has
this program, um,
Called um a highway, they have a
highway use fee, and you can
choose to pay either this kind
of capped.
Um,
Enhanced registration fee, um.
Or you can choose and enroll on
the highway UP program, and they
have the number I have here is
7000 enrollees, and once again,
this is voluntary, but I know
it's quite a bit more than 7000
now. So that's the program that
I think a lot of us are watching
carefully because it seems like
it's trying to tackle not only
the alternative fuel vehicles,
um, but also these higher fuel
efficiency vehicles, and they
have just one firm in the state,
um, that they contract with, who
All the reporting and the
collecting of the mileage and
then issues the invoices.
So I'm gonna switch speed now.
That was a lot about Rock, and
I'm happy to take any questions
because it's a very complex
topic, um, um, but, but really
quite interesting. I just want
to talk about a few other
potential revenue sources. So
one thing we've seen
Um, oh sorry, next slide,
please, keep on forgetting I'm
not advancing.
So transportation network
company fees, transportation
network companies, also known as
TNCs. These are Uber and Lyft
and other ride-hailing services.
Um, so 13 states have enacted
laws creating an additional fee
for using an Uber for taking an
Uber or Lyft ride, um.
The states in red dedicate some
or all of the money from the
fees generated to
transportation, um,
Your neighbor, where I'm from
Colorado and acted this a couple
of years ago. Usually these fees
are between 5 to 25 to 50 cents,
uh, Georgia and New York City
are using the funding um to help
improve their transit systems,
um,
And a few other states are kind
of using the money for some
other dedicated transportation
purposes.
So this isn't necessarily a big
chunk of money that's raised,
um, but it is another option
that we've kind of seen the
steady drip of states, um,
enacting, and you might ask
what, why, why would we, why
would this be done? I mean, I
think probably the most
compelling reason that I see.
Kind of
argued for out there is that,
you know, um,
TNC, Uber, Lyft, they provided
incredible service. I use them
just to get around Santa Fe, you
know, yesterday and use them
quite a bit, um, but they do the
studies do tend to see that they
actually add to congestion, and
they also are doing a lot of
deadheading, meaning they're
driving around without
passengers in the vehicle, which
is not really the most efficient
use of a transportation system,
so nonetheless, that's a kind of
revenue source that some states
have looked at.
Uh, next slide, please.
Another one we've seen, and this
is just kind of perked up in the
last couple of years is delivery
fees. So of course, we saw post
pandemic or during the pandemic
and the post pandemic, um,
shopping patterns, um, shift
even further to online to your
door delivery. And so states
have kind of responded to some
of that, um, well, two states by
creating fees on deliveries um
to generate some revenue for the
transportation system.
So Colorado and Minnesota, the
two states with such fees, they
differ quite a bit. Colorado is
27 cents per delivery, so it
does not matter if what you get
delivered is like the people who
I see who order like a Snickers
bar from 7-Eleven and stuff like
that, which always really,
really confuses me. Um, you'd
have to pay 27 cents on that. In
Minnesota, it's only on only on.
Retail delivery purchases over
$100 and not on food. So quite a
bit different there. um,
Colorado, their first year they
generated almost $76 million in
revenue from this, so it's not
an insignificant amount of
money, but of course, like I
said, this is a, they do have a
much more um.
Perhaps aggressive approach to
this, Minnesota is estimated to
generate around 600 million in
their first year, um, in
Washington State is now looking
at something similar and there's
kind of a new report out there
kind of looking at at some of
the pros and cons of this.
Um,
So another
Uh, next slide, please, uh, you
got me.
Is a kilowatt hour charges.
Or another way to put this is
electric vehicle, public
charging station fees. So this
is is charging a fee based on
per kilowatt hour excise tax.
Um, to charge your vehicle at a
Publicly available charging
station.
8 states have established such
laws, 7 of them in the last just
like 3 years or so, or yeah, 5
years or so, I guess, including
Iowa.
Implementation of them these has
been quite slow, um, although
you are seeing some ramping up,
um, of
Of the actual collection, for
example, in 2023, Pennsylvania
collected just a little bit
under $1000 from this.
And I think the way to think
about these.
Is that, um,
It's a way to make sure you're
capturing revenue from people.
Particularly who might be so, so
take the scenario I know New
Mexico has a lot of people
driving through an I-40 or I-25
on their way to another state.
Typically in the past, they
would have stopped and filled up
at some point, right? And um,
but now if they have electric
vehicle, they're no longer
paying into the system.
So this is a way to make sure
that electric vehicle our owners
from out of state are paying
into the system, which I think,
you know, makes a pretty good
amount of sense. Um.
Now, the drawback is that.
You know, most folks, most New
Mexicans probably that own
electric vehicles, the vast
majority of electric vehicle
owners charge within their own
home. So they would not pay this
fee.
But those who live in an
apartment, or just don't have
access to a charging facility
within their home and have to
use it publicly available one,
they would have to pay this. So
that's kind of the equity
drawback with his approach, and
I'm not, you know, I'm not
passing value judgments. I'm
just kind of presenting the pros
and cons from what I've seen,
Um, these are also arguably
maybe even more.
Complicated than a rock to
implement, got a lot of new
technology.
And you have to get the
utilities involved the the
electric utilities and the
question I always ask myself and
I think it's worth asking from
Mue's perspective is what
incentive does the electric
utility industry have to
participate in something like
this. This isn't their problem,
uh, the lack of transportation
funding is the state DOT and
this transportation agency, so I
guess I express a certain, a
little bit of skepticism.
that getting the utilities
involved in this, another kind
of party is the best way to go,
but, but you know,
8 states have done this now, um,
and it's kind of interesting to
see um that more states are
considering it, and is, I think,
a pretty, um, legitimate way to
raise some funds, although it
may not ever raise a lot of
funds.
And so with that, um, just have
a slide with some of the main
resources that we have in CSL on
this issue.
Um,
And the last thing
I know, I just want, I don't
have a slide, but I just wanted
to comment real quickly. I've
been working with uh
Representative Garrett over the
last 3 or 4 years with regards
to public-private partnerships,
just kind of sharing some
information, um.
And I know that that has been
discussed, um, and there's been
a couple, you know, there's been
bills debated the last 3 or 4
legislative sessions, um.
And I'm kind of happy to answer
questions on P3s. I think P3s
are really interesting, um, for
use in the transportation sector
because they are a great way to
um transfer risk to the private
sector and take advantage of if
something goes wrong, it's on
the private sector to figure
out, um, but also take advantage
of the expertise of the private
sector, um, and the fact that
they can sometimes do things
faster, better just because they
have more staff capacity.
and expertise, um,
You know, other countries.
It's always a little dangerous
in America to make comparisons
with other countries, but you
know, Mexico, Canada.
Australia, the majority of
Europe, they all use P3s much
more than the United States,
which I find
A little bit interesting, a
little bit telling. It, it, it
feels like we're maybe not using
them in the United States to the
degree that we can, um.
Now,
Uh, I'm not here telling you to
do anything that's not my job
and in CSL I'm just trying to
give you the pros and cons.
Uh, the, the pros with P3s, like
I said, or that you can transfer
risk, you can take advantage of
expertise from the private
sector.
Um,
The cons are that you're at a
disadvantage in terms of
Capacity and expertise, you're
going against, essentially, you
know, companies that are
multi-million billion dollar
companies with many, many
staffers, many, many financial
experts, many, many lawyers.
Um, and that usually
puts the state at a
disadvantage. You do have to
think about your own state
institutional kind of capacity
to make sure that if you create
a P3 law.
Many states have P3 laws.
But they don't use them, or, or
they don't say we're kind of
hang, you know, Lucy's 10 cents
to talk to me, Charlie Brown,
like we're open for business.
Come here.
You really have to do that to
get the private industry to kind
of get on board. It, it, it does
have to be a partnership.
Um, but there's a lot of risk
with that, and things don't
always work out right, and so
you have to have the legal
language, um, really airtight to
protect the constituents of your
states, um, the, the other
reality with transportation P3s
is that there's there's two
types of transportation P3s,
there are revenue risk and
availability payments.
So
Revenue, let's do availability
payment first availability
payment essentially means that
you are um you enter a contract
and agreement for a P3.
And as long as the private
company meets certain
benchmarks,
Around, you know, keeping the
facility in a state of good
repair, plowing it, fixing
anything that gets broken within
a certain time frame, very, very
defines um kind of contract
language, then the state will
pay them a certain agreed upon
amount every year and if they
fall short, you know, there's
usually a formula so for how
much you pay them. So that one
piece is an availability
payment. But the way most
You know what, what piques the
interests of the private
industry more is the other
piece, which is the revenue
risk.
Well, what does revenue risk
means? Revenue risk means that
you're gonna have to toll a
facility in generate money from
it somehow. Now there's there's
plenty of availability payment
um type P3s in the US, um, I
think they're a little bit
harder to pencil out for the
private side, um, but you can do
it, um, but I know tolling is
obviously not something that's
enormously popular either.
An interesting example from
Colorado from where I live in
Georgia and and some other
states is the proliferation of
express lanes. These express
lanes are additional lanes.
You're not taking away a lane of
traffic.
You're adding a lane, and that
new lane.
You have the option to pay to
use it. You have the option to
not pay and use it. If you pay,
you're probably gonna get there
a little bit faster. So it does
help with overall congestion. It
helps with individual choice,
giving individuals choices and
what you find is a lot of people
want to use them and it's, you
know, they use the pejorative of
them the Lexus lane, but I'm not
sure that a lot of the research
shows to the contrary. You take
the example like um a mother or
a father running late to pick up
their kid from daycare, and
there's a
$30 fee if they get their 15
minutes late.
They're gonna want to use the
express lane.
So, um,
That those are just some of my
thoughts about P3s. I'm happy to
answer more questions, but it is
a tricky, it is a tricky world
out there. I do think there are
some good possibilities and
states like Colorado, Georgia,
Texas, Florida, California, um,
Indiana, other states have
largely had good success with
P3s, although there are some
definitely a few stinker
projects mixed in mixed in there
that didn't work out well. And I
think have led to larger lessons
learned for the P3.
kind of world in general. So
with that I will.
Stop and um thank you again for
having me here and happy to take
any questions.
Oh, thank you for your
presentation.
And I will take
Some questions from the um
Committee members, the first
step is uh representative.
Not true.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I did
have a couple of questions I
wanted to ask. I wanted to start
by saying at our last committee
meeting, we all sat through 140
page PowerPoint.
And in that presentation, the
problem was all related to
manufacturing of electric
vehicles and the supply of
electricity.
And how um
All the related government, uh.
Provisions and standards about
carbon standards.
we're not gonna be able to meet
that.
Um, I don't know how many of us
remember that, but we sat
through 146 pages of PowerPoint
last meeting.
And the bottom line was there's
not the electricity capacity.
Or the ability to manufacture
the vehicles.
In time to meet those carbon
standards that we've set.
So with that being said, um, I
had a couple of questions, Mr.
Chairman, and may I ask Joey on
a couple of these.
Is um all the motor vehicle
excise tax going to the road
fund currently?
Yeah
Yeah, um, Mr. Chairman,
Representative Lustrom, uh,
Joseph Simon, I'm the DOT
analyst for, for the legislative
Finance Committee. The answer to
your question is no, a big chunk
of that goes to the general
fund. OK. So currently, the
motor vehicle tax is not going
to the road fund.
How about the gross receipts tax
on transportation construction,
is that going back to the road
fund?
Uh, so, um, Mr. Chairman, and,
uh, representative, uh, I, no, I
don't believe it does. It is not
assure you it is not.
And we increased as the tax
department increased, we
distance tax for battery 18
wheelers in New Mexico.
So, um, Mr. Mr. Chairman,
representative, no. OK.
So we've got 3 funding sources
right now.
immediately available through
legislation that we could put
into the road fund.
The other question I had for
you, um,
Joey, I know that in the state
of New Mexico almost 50%.
Of our transportation fund
revenue comes from gas tax, but
I know we have some other
sources in there.
Uh, this looks a little high. I
mean, for just gas tax, but um
when, when you present, I'd like
you to.
Focus on that.
Mr. Chairman, I'm also looking
at page, the page here that he's
got Utah at 3434.6% is coming
from gas tax, the gentleman from
NCSL.
And this is the one state that
also does ruck. It also does the
EV registration fee, but no
plug-in fee, so are we to assume
that 1/3 of the transportation.
Um,
Budget there is funded by gas
tax and the rest comes from this
rock source.
No, um, thank you, uh, Chairman
and Representative Lindstrom,
um, the rock is actually
collecting a very small. In
fact, the ruck is probably not
collecting money at this point.
It's, it's so small in terms of
the number of drivers. It's
really more about getting the
system going. So the, the delta,
that other 65% is likely coming
from, and I don't know
specifically for Utah, but a
decent amount of it's gonna come
from from things like vehicle
registration.
fees and any sort of DMV related
fees, um, some general fund
dollars, some sales tax dollars
and some other transportation
user fee related sources
probably some stuff related to
commercial vehicles in there.
So, Mr. Chairman, this is a
little misleading then this
these charts.
Because at first glance,
And I see a 34.6% for Utah.
From gas tax, my assumption is
that what was presented is
filling the rest I imagine it's
more of a general fund that's
filling that gap.
So Mr. Chairman, I, I would, I
think it would be important for
the committee to consider.
The establishment of a
transportation trust fund.
I think it would also be
important for us to consider
legislation moving the entire
motor vehicle tax to the road
fund.
I also think it'd be super
important that we get the gross
receipts.
Tax on transportation
construction to go back into the
road fund.
And I think it would be
incredibly important that we
look at increasing weight
distance tax for battery.
18 wheelers because the weight
is so much heavier.
And the other 18 wheelers.
So we've got 4 funding sources
here that if they were set up in
statute to go into the road fund
now.
Um,
Just some ideas. I'm pretty
close to this or have been in
the past and I think we ought to
have the staff start digging
into this, so in our next.
Transportation during.
Maybe Joey would be the
appropriate one to start digging
into this for us. We would
actually know what those values
would be.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Oh, thank you, thank you, uh
representative for your
suggestions and we'll uh
Take it under consideration.
Serious consideration. Next up
is uh
Representative Hackman Vi Hill.
Followed by Senator Woods.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Schenko, for your
informative presentation. Um, I
want to go to, it looks like
page 2, I guess peach one if you
don't count the cover, uh, to
your presentation and you show
this pie chart.
It states that there's 30.1% uh
other revenue sources. Can you
maybe describe to me a little
bit more, get a little more
granular on that for me.
Um,
I can't too much because
obviously this is taking all 50
states and every single source
of revenue that is going in, but
I would tell you generally that
that's going to mean things like
the general funds, um.
Like sales tax, not vehicle
sales tax here but just more
general sales tax. A few states
are there's several states that
use quite a bit of sales tax
funds to pay for their
transportation system, um,
sometimes it, sometimes states
use things like lottery funds,
real estate transfer titles,
actually have a document that I
can send you that lists out
about 100 different sources of
funding that states use for
transportation. Now some of
these are only
Used in one or two states, and
many of them are relatively
minor amounts of money, but I
think
It kind of demonstrates that
there are a lot of possibilities
out there. I think it does
depend too on whether how
How much you want to be tied to
like transportation and the use
of the system, or if you just
want to be like, you know, our
whole state needs
transportation. This is
something that is merits, you
know, using general fund or
sales tax dollars. Um.
So the, the examples I gave in
my presentation are more of the
user fee type models, but
there's a lot of other ways that
states pay for their
transportation systems and I'm
happy to send you, there's one
document in particular that I
think would be helpful to you,
but that's the kind of somewhat
short answer to your question
and uh represent Hackmanvill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Shingle, and I, I would
very much appreciate receiving
that document because that's
actually exactly what I wanted
to drill into this hearing
today. I don't know how familiar
you
Familiar you are with New Mexico
system, but we actually use
quite a bit of general fund
money to fund um large item line
item, transportation.
Projects specifically and um I,
I think part of the interests of
having this presentation today
was to explore, see how other
states are doing it and see if
other states have a similar
approach, uh, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Shinkle, I mean,
specifically, I want to know
Representative Lundstrom just
fired off 4 great ideas that
could specifically help New
Mexico generate more funding for
transportation infrastructure,
um, but, uh, we, there's another
idea that I wanted to see if you
knew of other states, uh,
implementing in that
codification of a certain
percentage of of their step.
Every year in and
In law, saying, OK, every state
has their step, and we're going
to appropriate a certain
percentage of general funds each
year towards completion of that
step. Is that something that you
have heard of and and our other
states doing it?
I, I am not aware of any state
that has that in statute, but
that does not mean that that
does not exist. So I can look
into that and as well, um.
I don't actually see as much
legislating on the the the st
piece, um, in terms of like laws
creating kind of formulas or
systems for how that must be
done over a period of time.
It does tend to be more
specific.
To that particular step at that
point in time, if that makes
sense, but I can look into that
as well because I do have some
resources that I think that
could speak to that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Chinko. I would very
much appreciate seeing that
information and thanks for being
here today and accommodating our
schedule change. Appreciate it.
Of course, thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
next up we have us.
Senator Woods followed by
Representative Garrett. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, many times, uh, in the
legislature, we are uh
Or
Incentivized to take action
because of emergencies.
And so,
Is there any studies out there
that tell us how quick.
That easy demand will change
over from gasoline.
Uh, that we, we just absolutely
have to do something.
And we have, uh, and, and what
I'm saying that because if it's
going to be several years down
the road.
Uh, maybe we can watch someone
else.
Figure out the ideal system
here.
Mm
That's a, I think that's a
really good question,
Representative Woods, um,
So I can speak to a little bit
of info and I can send you
actually at our legislative
summit just a couple of weeks
ago we had a presenter present
on kind of the timeline for what
this looks like. I think we
still, as I kind of spoke to in
my remarks.
You're seeing the the the gas
tax starts. I wish I could share
I have a separate presentation
with some of these slides up
here, um, but what you'll see is
that the, the, the average fuel
efficiency in the in the US has
increased, you know, since 1980
from 15 MPG and now it's up at
like 25 MPG now, so we, we kind
of know that from, you know, the
past, but, um, gasoline sales in
the US, of course, dropped
precipitously during the
pandemic in 2020.
They have rebounded, well,
that's rebound is not the right
word. They have not rebounded
because they have never returned
to their past point of amount of
gallons sold in the United
States. So that already tells us
that we're kind of on the
declining end, and that's like I
said, most states are getting
less gas tax revenue already and
I'm guessing that's the state
that the case here in New Mexico
as well, although I could be
wrong, there's a lot of other
factors going on. Um, so,
You see here that let's see.
The annual gasoline sales in
billions of gallons was over 145
billion gallons in 2018 and 2019
nationally, and now it's more
around 135, 136, and that's even
with driving.
VMT vehicle miles traveled in
the United States returning to
or exceeding or pandemic levels.
Um, and then I'm just looking
at, and I'm happy to show you
some of this and share this
presentation, you get permission
from the, the person who did
this, but like seeing Utah, like
their gasoline sales are still
going up kind of slightly, but
like plateauing, but they are a
growing state, California, a
state with, of course,
aggressive emission reductions
and with aggressive electric
vehicle adoptions, um, they
sold.
Millions of gallons was around
almost 16 million in 2019, but
now it's down below 14 million.
So you can kind of see those
numbers there. I'm trying to
see, and then the electric
vehicle, that part is really
difficult.
There are many projections out
there from
The kind of auto automobile
experts, um.
Folks with Bloomberg, other
agencies trying to kind of
workshop what they think
electric vehicle adoption rates
will be, but it's kind of hard
to know what that curve is going
to look like, because it has
been perhaps a little bit slower
than we've been anticipating,
um, but I think the cumulative
kind of story of all this.
is that there's gonna be more
EVs on the road, whether there's
going to be
15% in 5 years.
Or there's going to be 10 or
there's 20, those would make big
changes, right? Um, but if you
start getting up to your vehicle
fleet being 15 to 20% of
electric vehicles and in 5
years, which I think is
Perhaps may happen, um, then you
have, you know, a problem right
there, obviously, unless you do
have another way to capture
revenue from those vehicles, um,
the, the projected kind of
growth in the EV fleet that I
have here. There's 3 different 3
different kind of forecasts. One
is that by 2050, almost 50% of
electric vehicles, I mean, of
passenger vehicles in the United
States would be electric
vehicles.
The kind of mid-tier, the
mid-level projection would be
just below 30%.
And then the most um
Kind of skeptical type of um
projection is just a little less
than 10%, but even at 10%, you
know, you're starting to have,
you know, that's obviously gonna
impact your system.
Excuse me, that's for 2015.
Those were for 2050. So if you
want me to tell you, so let's
see here. So we're, we're plus
or minus 10 to 50.
What's that?
The, the estimates are plus or
minus or or up or down from 10%
to 50%. Exactly. And if you go
to like say 2035, which is
really when these show the
projected anticipation that
these will increase quicker.
It's still, you know, you'll
have the low tier at about 5%.
Uh, the mid-tier at about 10%
and the high adoption rated
about 20%.
So that's kind of telling you
that's 2035, which is not too,
you know, awfully long off in
the distance. It's not tomorrow,
but it's, you know, sooner
rather than later, um, I'm just
trying to see if there's
anything else that would be
helpful. And then you know that
the the big piece of all this is
that the expected fuel sales in
the United States, um,
are around around 2020 we were
at about
Once again, let's see. Yeah, I
mean these these numbers would
be probably easier if I just
tell you, but oh yeah, here's a
good one.
pull this up.
Maybe you could give me an
estimate of the decline that's
being expected in gasoline sales
over there that's what I'm
actually trying to get this
slide pulled up into a view
where I can actually see it. I'm
having trouble with it. Give me
one second.
Yeah, so this, this actually is
a really helpful slide right
here. So,
Projected delta.
Now, this is based on all those
varying EV.
Saal projections.
Um, essentially we would have a
shortfall in the United States.
Of 21 million billion, sorry,
$21 billion by the year 2030
nationally.
That's a decline of 19%. If
We had kind of the.
If you kind of have the no,
yeah, and, and then it kind of
intensifies and that
The between the expectation of
what we thought we were going to
get and what we're actually
going to get, you know, all this
is, this is hard because we
don't know how much the degree
of people are going to buy
electric vehicles. We know some
people are buying them, we know
that um they're increasing quite
a bit in some states, but are
they going to reach 20-25%, um.
This paints a picture. I, I
think that's the thing that I
say is part of my job. I feel
like this is gonna this is gonna
get worse. Um, it hasn't quite
happened yet, but you're
starting to see the numbers
pretty much every state is
starting to see deep, like I
said once again.
Notwithstanding states with
Pretty healthy population
growth, otherwise you're seeing
basically every state have less
gas tax on revenue every year,
and I would expect that's going
to continue to be the case and
unless things are, you know, um,
changed to.
To, to, you know, supplement
from other sources.
And when you stated that 19%
decline, that was from period.
A 10 year period or or how long?
That's essentially from 2020 to
2030, yeah.
A 20 year period.
10 year period and then yeah and
then you see, so that 20, yeah,
21 billion projecting by 2035,
so let's, that's kind of helpful
between 2030 and 2035, it's
expected to go from 21 billion
to 30.2 billion deficit that
less than was expected kind of
with the normal situation we're
dealing with perhaps now or a
few years ago, 2020,
essentially.
Well, I'm just trying to figure
out how much we need to, you
know, uh road costs are going up
by 30% and hopefully they will.
Level off somewhere here pretty
quick, uh, hopefully this
inflation will kind of curb
itself.
Um
But if we factor in all
Everything that's going on with
inflation, decrease consumption.
Uh, we've got to figure out some
handle on this.
To, to try to keep those road
revenues in pace with
construction costs and repair
costs.
And so we're just looking for
the magic formula here.
So
Were you given that to us.
Well, and I think a lot of it
does depend to Senator Woods,
sorry, um, on
How reliant you want to be on
user fees versus using other
general, you know, you can use
general phone but I very much
recognize general fund is.
You know, that's difficult.
That's very difficult. So, um,
But a lot of states do use a
decent amount of general fund
that I think the STI idea
represented Hackman v. Hill
mentioned that's kind of
interesting. I will look in and
see what's out there, um, and
I'll I'll share, like I said,
that resource that kind of gives
you a full accounting of all the
ways that states paying the
transportation system, but you
do have to have, I think that
healthy conversation about how
much are you going to pay for
your transportation system
through user fees and how much
are you going to pay for it
through just the public paying
for it because I do think
There really is strong
reasoning, um, to have user fees
be a pretty
Big base of your transportation
funding system because really
when you think about it, your
transportation system is it's a
utility system. Well, they, I
have heard.
They're expecting to the cross
country trucks are expecting to
be about a 200 mile range.
Uh, and so we're gonna have
several.
Uh, fueling stations for those
trucks.
That we can collect.
The sales tax there on the
phone, so to speak, just like we
do the gasoline tax.
So
The trucks we might be able to
figure out as they come in.
Uh, whatever cost that might be.
Uh, but with all the home
charging.
Unless
Unless the utility is willing to
put some kind of demand charge,
which is probably more important
than the, the electric sale
charge.
Um, they should, with smart
meters I can probably do a lot
of things, but I'm just trying
to figure out.
The rate which we need to
increase.
Taxes
And, you know, representative
Lanstrom had a lot of good ideas
there if we just funnel the
taxes we're collecting today
into that, and, you know, the
whole hiccup of the whole system
in New Mexico is.
50% of our revenue comes from
oil and gas.
And I realized that we, we
produced very little gasoline in
state.
All of our, all, most of all our
stuff leaves the state. It's,
it's uh an economic development
terms, it's great because we're
getting out of state money to
into the state, but
This is a more complicated deal.
For, for our state, as I see it
as a small population state
when, when states on all sides
of it as.
Uh, a lot more population than
us, you know, 10 times the
population at the minimum.
And so what they're doing,
Maybe be pretty irrelevant to
what we have to do to maintain
our many miles of road.
Because we just had literally
less population to tax.
And, and, you know, um, I know
that people get tired of me
saying that all the time, but uh
we've got to figure out other
things to do as a decline of, of
consumption of gasoline goes
down also. So, I appreciate
your, your input. Um, I
I, I appreciate the thought of
the percent decline because
that's exactly what we have to
figure out is how we escalate
the
The uh revenues.
Uh, to take care of the decline
in consumption. That's a big
deal.
And
How, you know, when, when, when
We're, we're moving away from
the oil company.
Essentially providing gasoline
so that we can tax it to the
electric company providing
energy so we can tax it.
And we've got to figure that out
on how we do that, whether they
do it at home or whether they do
it.
At a charging station.
And, and the biggest hiccup I've
seen to electric vehicles is a
waiting time to charge, and, you
know, until we get a, a huge
number of charging stations out
there.
That we don't have that
consumer.
You know, I'm not going to sit
there for 20 minutes and while
the guy in front of me is
charging and then I get to go up
there there's 3 guys in front of
me, um.
You, you drive down the street
and and Santa Fe today and if
there's
If the, if the station is uh 2
cents cheaper and the cars are
lined up all around it, you go
the next station. You say, well,
hell, I'll pay 2 cents more just
to get.
Get gasoline and quick.
So
I just can't understand how the
consumer is going to accept the
fact.
Of, of sitting still for, for uh
extended period of time waiting
in line, but, and the cost of
the charging station.
Who's going to take care of that
deal because if all that revenue
to pay for the charging station
and all the infrastructure to
put it in.
It's going to have to be taxed
or or paid through through the
sale.
Electricity is gonna be high
priced.
So that's another thing we're
supplement some
where were through the general
funds we're supplementing some
of those.
But do it.
Supplementamol, and when does
the, when does the EV industry
stand on its own.
And we could supplement that to
the.
To the system
We have, we have a hard time
deciding what we want to push on
our, our ratepayers.
And we've been very successful
pushing a lot of stuff on them
right now our, our taxpayers.
And thank God for oil and gas in
our state.
Because we've got excessive
revenues from, from them, you
know, that we don't have to go
to the working staff out there,
um.
Serving us in the restaurants to
to pay for our incentive for
electric vehicles. So we're very
lucky for that, but
Uh, I don't see how it can keep
going. I don't see how you, you
supplement.
Purchase of electric vehicle.
And not charge them for the road
tax either.
It's, it's, it's, it's kind of a
kick in the face to to.
very hypocritical to do that.
On both sides. So, thank you for
your presentation. If I made a
question in there you want to
answer.
Thank you very much. I, I mean,
I think I will just comment.
That I do think that there is a
lot of tension between, you
know, there's a lot of states
that for good reasons want to
reduce, um,
Carbon emissions, um, but those
decisions were made.
Perhaps.
Without considering what they.
I'm trying to say this
delicately, cause I don't want
to say any state did anything
wrong or anything, but that
like, you know, you do this one
thing over there that is, has,
you know, that maybe perhaps a
lot of people, but not all
people perhaps agree with.
But that was maybe done by
energy and environment
lawmakers.
And maybe not by transportation
lawmakers maybe were not
involved in some of these states
at the beginning and then you
realize, oh, we we're now going
to.
Decimate our main source of
transportation funding. That
doesn't mean that you shouldn't
maybe try and reduce carbon
emissions. It just means that
you kind of need to
Recognize that at the front ends
and I think that's maybe a part
of one of the things I try and
when I talk to legislatures, I
had to be very careful about how
I say that because I'm not
telling anyone how to do
anything, but just that, you
know, keep that, keep that in
mind. Maybe you can accomplish
both, but it's, it's tricky, and
I, I do have a few more stats
here. So in 2022,
Let's see, you know, so, so
comparing 2019 and 2022,
gasoline sales or 4.4% lower,
even though the vehicle miles
traveled was up.
Um, and so that in and of itself
just really tells you, and then
you um spoke to the construction
cost, construction inflation is
up 7% from January 23 to July
2024. That's pretty significant,
and I'll I'll make sure to share
this presentation with Sheila so
you can see all this data.
Oh, thank you, Senator Woods.
And next up we have is
Representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and Doug,
it's great to see you in person.
A couple quick questions on the
transportation network company
or the Uber Lyft fees is the
passenger pain.
The fee
That's a good question. Yes, in
most instances, it is actually.
I, I wanna say all of the
states, um, it's actually
appears as like when I use an
Uber or Lyft in Colorado, it
actually appears as a separate
fee, so it is the rider
themselves paint it.
And Mr. Chen Doug, is that like,
OK, so in Washington DC I
probably took 8 Ubers.
Some are 45 minutes, some were
10 minutes. Is there any
distance related to that or is
it just a flat?
Flat that I can think of.
I believe they are all flat.
There are a few states where if
you take a shared ride, you
know, you have the option to do
a shared, right? There are
discounts for those because they
wanted to recognize that people
want to save money and also for
kind of environmental congestion
purposes. So there is that
distinction in a few states, but
they're all flat.
OK, thank you. And then um
Just a comment, Mr. Chair on the
EV public charging fee.
To me it's not really
inequitable because if I have an
EV.
Vehicle I'm probably paying for
solar panels.
I'm paying for the installation
of my charge and the out of
state person doesn't do that, so
to me it would be equitable.
To have a fee at a public.
charging station just to calm
it. And then my third question,
Mr. Chair and Doug, is.
Hydrogen.
That's the hydrogen fuel cell.
And I understand it's more
expensive than gas and there's a
lot of issues and they've closed
some of the stations in
California for various reasons,
but in our state as part of the
I-40 Trayport corridor that goes
from the port of Los Angeles.
To Berna Leo and Sandoval and
this area.
Um, they're talking about
hydrogen.
Healing stages. So how does
that, does that have any impact?
Have you looked into that?
It's something that is talked
about a lot.
I must admit that I do not know
very much about hydrogen fuel,
um, in part because I think in
my job I start paying attention
to things when they start
becoming the reality and
legislatures deal with them just
to be kind of frank, like.
That technology and the scale of
it isn't quite high enough, but
I think you'd be presented with
basically the exact same issues
with EV fees, um, with, with
electric vehicles, um, that you
would, so I, I don't really know
that much about that, and I know
that I've had some conversations
with different lawmakers about
that, but I haven't seen any
really action being taken in
states now. I will mention that,
you know, and this is kind of
getting into what represent ones
was maybe talking about a tiny
bit that um.
That commercial.
Alternative fuel vehicles,
whether it's electric or
hydrogen or some other sort of
alternative fuel, that that's
something that's gaining growing
attention from states, and I
actually were developing um some
information for another state
and I think it would actually be
really helpful for the
conversations you're having in
the room, so I'll pass those
resources. Basically how to, how
to capture some sort of revenue
from commercial alternative fuel
vehicles, um, the weights, the
weight distance
Tax, that's, that's one we
distance fee, that's one option.
There's a few others and so I
can share some examples of
those. Thank you. Thank you.
OK, yes.
Thank you, uh, we have uh
Except we have uh Representative
Armstrong followed by Senator
Tollman, who has a two quick
questions and we'll accept short
answers.
I got the message. Thank you,
Mr. uh Chairman. Thank you for
your presentation. I'm just
happy we're talking about taxi
movies some way or somehow that
are using the roads like gas
powered vehicles or diesel
powered vehicles. So I'm, I'm
happy to have that conversation.
I would just uh make sure that,
you know, in, in moving forward,
um, I'm all on board with what
Representative Landstrom and
Representative are Madam Vice
Chair.
Uh, Hackman v. Hill talked about
using
Using what we
Created the tax for for what it
was meant for. Um, I, I've been
involved in several different
entities across the state with
uh emergency vehicles and
emergency, uh, you know, in our
ebbs and flows in the state of
New Mexico, we start.
Grabbing money and using it for
other things, uh, than it was
actually originally uh 41 of the
things that I would just caution
is that um
On some of this rock.
Uh, things.
Some of the language says
alternative fuels.
In New Mexico, we have
alternative fuels. The the
definition of alternative fuels
is
Probably different than other
states, so I would make sure
that we liked diesel.
Is that is in the alternative
fuel and so I would just caution
that we make sure if, if
anybody's bringing that kind of
legislation that we um
are making sure that
You know, there's compressed
natural gas, there's propane,
there's di diesel, there's.
Regular diesel, um, and all
other kinds of fuel, so I would
just caution to make sure that
we're not taxing.
Fuel that's not used actually on
roads sometimes and in
construction a lot of the time.
So that's, that would be my only
caution. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Oh, thank you, Representative
and um.
They have a quick comment and I
Question
So, uh
Last year during the legislative
session I sponsored a uh
Bill the text for a bill
included a $100 registration for
EVs.
The Bill
Successfully.
As both chambers and then it was
vetoed by the governor this
year.
Uh, myself and representative.
Amano sponsored uh
EV credit bill that was signed
by the governor, but
unfortunately it didn't include.
A um
EV registration fee.
The way
I came up with $100 was
multiplied, uh.
Assuming
Car got anywhere from 28 to 30
miles to a gallon at 18 cents a
gallon.
And traveled 10 to 11,000.
Miles you came up with roughly
$100.
So, what's the average?
EV registration fee is according
to your chart.
The lowest $50 in Colorado, 290
in New Jersey.
I don't know if I could tell you
the average offhand, um, it
probably is around.
Like we could, we could map out
and show you just kind of like
all the way down from 50 to 290
and where those are at, but I
would say around 100 would be
around in that range, the most
of them are in that 100 to $125
range.
So, uh
Thank you for that answer.
So one other quick question I
accept a short answer and they
talked about.
The enacting a fee on retail and
food deliveries.
Maybe administrative nightmare.
How do they, how did they gather
that information?
I think all the that's a good
question, and there's a report
that speaks to that, but I think
that it might be a little
simpler because you have these
pretty large companies, um, like
DoorDash and Amazon and what
have you, and they're kind of
the bulk of the ones doing the
deliveries, um.
You know, this doesn't apply to.
If you're doing like in-house
like pizza delivery service that
doesn't apply to that. It's
something where like it's kind
of an almost an extra that
you're asking for it to be
delivered to you, but I haven't
heard too many issues with
compliance, but I can look back
because Colorado, Minnesota is
just one end in effect, but I
can look at Colorado's and get
back to you on that.
OK.
But
Uh, OK. Well, thank you for that
and thank you again. I just want
to reinforce what the vice chair
said. Thank you for being here
and accommodating us by changing
uh the schedule.
Thanks, thanks for your
presentation.
Because anyone else have any
questions? If not, we'll take a
short 10 minute break to gather
a lunch and we'll
Have a kind of a working lunch.
And um
There's not a lot enough lunches
for everyone, but
We'll have the uh members and
the staff take first grabs.
And then uh
Anyone else in the audience who
would like a lunch.
And have a lunch. Is that OK,
mister?
Garcia, so please don't fight
over the, the lunches that are
left, but I did want to uh give
a shout out to Jim Garcia with
the Associated Contractors who's
providing lunch today. Thank
you, Jim.
