Thank you madam chair
Representative Christine
Chandler from Los Alamos house
district forty three it's a
pleasure to be here with you all
this morning.
Thank you madam chair Senators
Craig Brandt from some district
forty stand Rio Rancho W. or the
all the.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Harry Garcia Representative
house district sixty nine
over five some one looking to
swallow Bernalillo Valencia of
support counties I've been this
committee since two thousand
sixteen this one of my second
was committees refers this
committee is veterans so what's
nice to be here chair thank you.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee up to our audience
so Senator wrote the Bobby J.
Gonzalez districts six
representing the Los Alamos on
Rio Arriba some stuff in the
house.
Good morning everyone of Bill
Tallman representing district
eighteen.
Which is the.
Portion of the northeast heights
Albuquerque but to be here look
forward to discussion thank you.
Good morning madam chair
representative Randy Crowder I'm
from the Clovis area
Representative district sixty
four which is the best group of
constituents of any district in
the state.
And the honor to be here always
enjoy coming thank you.
Good morning madam chair
representative Ms Constand ice
district seven yes Sir send me
Gallup and Torrance now no more
Santa Fe it's an honor to be
here today with you guys and.
Exciting here without the in
store for us and I'm sure.
Representative will you should
just fifty three four south
central and Representative right
up against Texas been in this
not going on for years and I
provide great returns in this
particular committee because
I've been able to gain some
insight from other federal funds
to some always and drawing
cartoons to get together and
hear what's coming ahead thank
you madam chair.
And madam chair state Rep joy
Garrett from the west side of
Albuquerque from the mighty real
quick go to answer I forty to
Santa it's inside of that
basically I'm looking forward to
an electrifying meeting but
before we do that I'd like to
have our staff attorney Pam
Stokes introduced herself and
her staff.
Pam Stokes Legislative Council
Service my colleagues helped me
out today recovery Griego also
the council service and has
twenty questions sorry question
right yes at thank you.
Okay and with that I'm going to
ask our presenters to come up
our first presentation is one
we've been eagerly waiting for
it's the transportation electors
K..
Infrastructure updates and I do
believe will need some extra
chairs.
For you are I will ask each of
you to introduce yourself before
you start on there are some
chairs of here yes just around.
Thanks there said sheriff here
if you want to take it is there
one more person.
Thank you.
I'm Lucas ask when you're the
person giving the presentation
of.
You're being broadcast to the
masses throughout the state and
the country.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
My name is Jerry Valdez I'm an
executive director with the
department of transportation
special projects division
And I'm here to present today an
update on the electrification
plan that was submitted and we
have for the state of New
Mexico.
Just one second this
presentation.
Okay.
This presents.
You
madam chair thank you it's the
first tab in the D. O. T.
booklet first tabulate cation
tap.
Thank you madam chair.
So the first slide and I want to
go over I think it's one of the
most important sites and that's
the slide it talks about the
amount of funding that we
receive that we anticipate to
receive and so there's been a
of.
Different bland of funding
sources that we've been using
and that will be embarking on in
regards to the federal formulate
a plan under the twenty twenty
one regular session we received
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars budget request approval
and one point two million
dollars appropriation that was
approved as well in twenty
twenty one under this special
session we received the ten
million dollar are proposed and
that was approved by this body
in the governor to expand the
electrification of the state of
New Mexico in the infrastructure
for Evey vehicles under the
twenty twenty two session we
received an additional three
hundred and eighty seven
appropriation transfer and so as
as you can see we received
approximately twelve million
dollars through the
appropriation process and we've
been working with that funding
to look at expanding the
electrification of our state in
ways that are very targeted and
strategic and I'll go over those
here shortly one of the biggest
discussions nationally and the
questions that I get most asked
about is our navy funding which
is our appropriated thirty eight
point three eight seven million
dollars
Questions that the federal
government has a portion to the
state of New Mexico for the sole
purpose of expanding the
national electric infrastructure
system throughout the nation.
That will be is a five year
thirty eight point three eight
seven dollars program.
If you go to the next slide.
We talk a little bit of our
statewide strategy and how we
will be using our our for
procreation which our state
funds as well as navy and then
the other.
Funding source that was not
mentioned but that is very
critical is our discretionary
federal funded program that we
have the opportunity to take
advantage of and I'll talk a
little bit about that later on
as well.
The three locations of the three
areas that we're really looking
at this from the perspective of
where are we looking to expand
our infrastructure the first
locations that we looked at
because we only we have
oversight and it's it's much
easier to building constructed
our due to facilities we are
statewide when you think about
the department transportation we
have six districts scattered
throughout New Mexico with an
additional eighty two patrol
offices in the rule is part of
our state so when you're looking
at electrification plan you want
to make sure that you're looking
at every aspect that you have to
make sure that there's areas
covered throughout the entire
state the second portion that
we'll be looking at is our
interstate corridors I. forty I.
twenty five in.
I ten are going to be critical
in establishing the
certification process that I'll
go over a momentarily to certify
New Mexico from the navy the
national electric vehicle
infrastructure program to ensure
that once that we certify New
Mexico under the nephew program
those additional dollars that
are remaining can be used
discretionary relief to fill
that gap and I'll talk a little
bit about that plan one of
covering the navy portion of
this presentation and then of
course all regions public and
private one of the uniqueness of
this bill under the IGAD is that
we're allowed to utilize this
funding not only from a public
sector perspective but we're
able to take advantage of
private public partnerships that
we are able to utilize these
funds in a way that really
address the inequalities it
helps alleviate economic and
racial disparities throughout
our state and we also are going
to be focusing on equity and
making sure that justice forty
requirements from the
perspective of forty percent of
the federal findings are used to
address these discrepancies and
disadvantaged communities across
New Mexico.
So the first funding source I
want to talk about is our
problem what we done.
We had approximately twelve
million dollars to the ten ten
million dollars appropriation
under our but plus the probation
that were provided in the twenty
twenty one and twenty twenty two
legislative process what what
we've done is that we speak it
constructing electric vehicle
charging stations as I mentioned
earlier on some of our DOT
properties Debbie Lesko Debbie
Roswell and Las Vegas are
currently under construction
there will be DC fast charging
stations installed at all three
locations able to charge
electric vehicles at level three
charging levels in those three
areas.
We also went out for a direct
solicitations so we put out a
press a call for projects and
I'm happy to say that we
received approximately fifty
seven applications that were
eligible for grants totaling
over eight million dollars
unfortunately we don't have a
million dollars so what we did
is we use a set of criteria to
make sure that the communities
that receive this funding
targeted all of those areas that
are important not only to all of
you but to make sure that we
eliminate the range exact eighty
that exist when traveling with
electric vehicles and we're also
looking at entering into
collaborative agreements with
our government partners our
public partners in areas such as
the coral reserve Anthony
Williams Burke Quemado hatched
in Silver City if you turn to
the next page that gives you the
R. Pirtle course that went out
last week these award letters
went out if you look at the list
of communities that received
awards tapestry of rural New
Mexico they're the backbone of
what we consider New Mexico from
a rural perspective areas of
like our tribal partners in P.
could ease Zuni Santa Clara.
In hammocks as well as areas in
northern and southern New Mexico
so this is the list of the
thirty two award that went out
totaling a little bit over five
million dollars which each one
of these communities will
receive funding for DC fast
Chargers we will not put level
one or level two is these are
for this fast charging systems
that will get individuals in and
out of these communities with
the limited amount of time just
enough time to spend some of
those hard earned dollars and
really drive economic growth in
these communities in a way that
allows them to travel throughout
our state rather than just the
urbanized areas.
And then just recently we
received notice that the
statewide implementation plan
that the state submitted in
August was approved in order for
the state to unlock the federal
for Milik funds necessary to
take advantage of the federal
program we have to submit a plan
we had to bring together
stakeholders we had to bring
together what our vision is the
state was state it's not a
cookie cutter plan the federal
government realizes that every
single state is unique the every
single state has its unique
differences and the every single
state how to create a plan that
meet met the unique needs of
their state I'm proud to say
that New Mexico was the first
state in the nation that
submitted their plan not because
we went out early in it took
short cuts but we really took
into account the uniqueness of
New Mexico we had a number of.
A stakeholder meetings that
included not only our sister
agencies from around the state
and Environment Department
energy and minerals General
Services Division PRC but as
well industry partners
manufacturers are energy
partners who are joining me
today on this discussion to
really understand the the the
uniqueness of New Mexico and
make sure that we're meeting the
needs of New Mexico in a way
that we can build this
infrastructure to meet everyone
that's travelling to our state
appropriately
Once we do and mark on the
nationally to be closed for
structure program
there's going to be some
requirements that will allow us
to qualify to unlock those funds
more discretionary relief the
first we have to do a few things
and if you turn to the next page
what is fully built out me.
What is fully built out mean to
the federal government what it
means is that on alternative
fuel corridors you have to build
out infrastructure every fifty
miles with the minimum of six
hundred kilowatt of power at
each location because you need
to be able to to charge these
vehicles for a minimum of four
vehicles simultaneously at a
minimum of a hundred and fifty
kilowatts purport what is that
mean that means that if somebody
pulls up to one of these ports
they're able to charge up within
a half hour it's about a hundred
fifty kilowatts it's about a
hundred miles per every half
hour so after an hour you charge
up to two hundred miles you're
gonna be able to go and visit
true chess peek going to be able
to go to the task email the and
drive out and travel and spend
money like I said because we are
taking economic factors into
consideration.
Once we been certified and we
are able to get that
certification from U. S. C. O.
T. the
Pete but it just secretary but
it just and his FHWA team will
certify us unlocking those funds
to then be able to go back out
and fill the gap if you go to
the next
Page we talked a little bit
about the R. F. P. that will be
going into the federal cost
share for the navy program is
eighty percent.
So the federal government will
put up eighty percent of the
funding for these projects but
the uniqueness of this is that
private and state funds can also
be used for the remaining twenty
percent cost share so we planted
the state to take advantage from
an economic growth perspective
to partner with private industry
to ensure that we're I cannot
make engine in New Mexico that
these charging stations are
going in areas that will not
only allow people to charge
their electric vehicle but that
the become an anchor to drop
people in who are driving
electric vehicles into these
private committee into these
private industries in these
communities scattered around the
state to take advantage of this
once in a lifetime opportunity.
the plan also outlines that the
implementation what will driving
strong labor safety and training
and industry standards we will
partner with the labor unions to
provide training on this front
to make sure that when they're
installing this infrastructure
that is going to be installed
safely to industry standards and
making sure that there's someone
in every single job site that is
trained in the installation of
this type of devices and
mechanical.
Electrical systems.
Ownership operation and
maintenance again talking about
the ability to partner with
private industry private
entities will be able to acquire
install operate and maintain
these public the accessible even
charging infrastructures and we
will work to get to the cost of
this is infrastructure the cost
of operation maintenance so the
fees and then talk a little bit
about it later on in the
presentation from our energy
provider partners those will be
set by industry via Cooper PNM
or other energy partners but
there's also going to be costs
that are associated with
operation and maintenance the
requirement of this
infrastructure is that it will
be functional ninety seven
percent of the time and that for
the minimum of five years that
this infrastructure will be
operational and that will be the
requirement from the federal and
state perspective for anyone who
wants to to embark on operating
and maintaining this industry
that they commit to that and
they have the established
mechanisms in place to make sure
that those requirements are met.
on the next page public
engagement.
We talked a little bit about the
navy plan that was a
requirements that we submitted
it it was approved on September
fourteenth unlocking the first
of apportionment of funding to
the state of New Mexico.
But deal T. although we're
overseen and we're responsible
we're not doing this alone we
want to make sure that we're
listening to the voice of our
communities I talked a little
bit about engagement with our
industry partners our energy
providers but again we also
conducted six shareholder
meetings across the state to
listen to the voice of our
communities so here's some
examples on this slide that
people talk about their concerns
about you know staff
requirements what to the site
look like in regard to safety
auditing access to amenities
also these
Site requirements you know when
we talk about I do see level
three fast charging verses level
to level twos and those of you
who drive electric vehicles
no that a level two charger
we'll take a little bit longer
you know a little bit by means
of three or four hours to charge
your battery completely tour
level three will have you
getting out under an hour also
pricing working with our energy
providers to make sure that the
pricing is set in a way that
really encourages the adoption
of electric vehicles I've heard
stories I was at the plaza on
Saturday at an event put on by
PNM and people are driving in
from all over the state in
southern Colorado and they said
to me the cost of two dollars
and fifty cents to charge up the
battery and to get into the pods
in Santa Fe and they said that's
about half the cost of a gallon
of gas for two hundred miles.
This so pricing is a big issue
with this we're also we're
looking at that it not only from
the perspective of
decarbonisation but really
helping drive the economic
factors that are associated with
the electrification and then
public private partnerships
again driving that can make
engines to make sure that we're
partnering with industry
partnering with private industry
across New Mexico in these
communities to meet the unique
needs of each and every
community in New Mexico.
The navy deployment plan if you
go to years wanted to.
We have approximately nine
hundred and ninety seven center
lane miles of interstate in New
Mexico we look at I. twenty five
I. forty and I. ten nine hundred
and ninety seven cents billion
miles so that means we need
approximately we're averaging
every fifty miles we need
approximately twenty stations
twenty stations with thirty
eight point three million
dollars.
We believe that we can get to
that twenty station mark within
eighteen to twenty million
dollars.
What does that mean for the
remaining funds.
If you turn to the next page.
Yes three and beyond.
What we're gonna do with the
remaining of the funds is that
will probe prioritize access to
easy charging infrastructure in
rural New Mexico underserved and
disadvantaged communities.
Making sure that rural New
Mexico is not left behind in
this initiative.
Not only putting infrastructure
where there are individuals who
are early adopters if we put
these charging stations in
locations where there that we're
there's electric vehicles
they're going to be communities
that are left behind.
So make sure that we identify
the gaps in the existing service
and charging station a more
availability in under served in
those disadvantaged communities
and looking at the economic
benefits when I talk about any
look at the arpa in those
communities that were identified
for the first thirty two
locations Hey miss pueblo Zuni.
chess Sharma.
What we really want to do is
make sure when people have
discretionary funds of their own
to spend that they're spending
it in rural New Mexico that's so
making sure that we take those
into consideration as well as
the Justice forty requirements
that come with federal funds
that we're using a minimum of
forty percent when you look at
the map a large portion of New
Mexico falls under the justice
forty.
And so it's not only about using
it from a strategic perspective
but making sure that this
funding is going to work needs
to be not only to get people
charged up but to drive the
economic engine.
And I'm gonna turn it over to
our energy partners
I want to just make a quick note
and it's not on the presentation
but I took a I took a from the
department of energy off the
website this morning
There's five hundred and thirty
charging stations in New Mexico
today five hundred and thirty of
all types level two and that
includes Tesla as well there's
three hundred and sixty three.
level two and then level three
there's one hundred fifty seven
scattered across two hundred and
eleven stations around New
Mexico.
That's important to us because
what we want to make sure is
we're building out this
infrastructure is that we're
building that out in areas where
not only are we not trampling
upon industry in the market
because the market will drive
infrastructure as well right
Albuquerque downtown Albuquerque
Santa Fe but we're looking at in
the perspective of making sure
we fill the gaps and so that
that's my update and I'll stand
for questions either now madam
chair or after the other
presenters.
Wait until of the presentation
thank you.
The next.
Morning madam chair members of
the commission.
My name's merry Jane parks and
I'm a USDA we follow and working
with the New Mexico public
regulation commission on
transportation like vacation and
community solar issues this
year.
And I'm here just to briefly
support that D. O. T.
in their public engagement
process and also highlight to
some of the accomplishments that
the PRC has undertaken this past
year
and that is just to highlight
the significant energy need that
will be involved with the
transportation walked for
cation.
First of all the NM PRC
conducted a transportation
electrification workshop and
summit this past year.
when engaged many stakeholders
throughout the industry and
members of the public to learn
from them what issues were
important to them for this for
driving electric and where to
charge their vehicles.
we also conducted the public
engagement process with this in
a DOT.
And.
Happy to provide input there on
with the energy grid would look
like in a electrified
transportation network.
and then finally we're what we
completed draft transportation
elector cation rule it has been
issued and the utilities and
other stakeholders are in the
COVID phase currently we expect
that role to be completed by the
end of this year.
Of the next slide I I just
highlight some issues that will
be important to you as you go
forward looking at
transportation elector cation
the implications on to the
grant.
I would like to highlight the
third bullet there attention to
dispersed rural and low income
communities New Mexico is the
fifth largest geographically
Largest state in the United
States so huge territory.
And but dispersed rural and low
income communities which are of
the funding for is important to
the federal and state grant.
So how do we make sure that
those communities are have
access to an AV charging
it's it's like a trickle charge
it'll definitely get you there
maybe about thirty on miles
but if you're going further
distances or maybe if you wait a
few days before you charge per
vehicle it might not be
sufficient.
The next level which is probably
the most common that most of us
are going to become familiar
with this AC level two charging
I like to tell people this is
the same thing is plugging into
a dryer outlet it's either a to
wait or to four forty what
service and you can charge
anywhere from two to four hours
this is what most residences
eventually will have on their
homes and they're charging their
electric vehicles overnight
you're also going to start
seeing this at shopping plazas
it's the ones that we see you
know typically for street
parking those sort of things are
going to be charging up for a
little bit.
And then the final level was the
DC fast charge some people refer
to this is level three we we do
switch here a little bit because
this is direct current directly
into the battery now as opposed
to the straw or level two which
is maybe like a garden hose
level two is like a fire hose of
power going into the battery it
is by far the quickest way to
charge you would never do this
at your house it is a four
eighty volt three phase service
significant amount of power
drawn is used along those
corridors that my colleague
Mister about this was talking
about to help get you long
distances so typically the
charge air again is anywhere
from thirty minutes to half an
hour.
sorry thirty minutes to one
hour.
the one there on the right I
simply include because I think a
lot of people get confused about
the different charging types for
years and years we've been
accustomed to diesel on one side
gasoline on the other the gas
station it's somewhat similar
here AC level two has the
terminologies terrible here I'll
admit as an engineer we have the
J. one seven seven two charter
that's the that's the totally
normal in that you're going to
see and then the DC fast charger
type for that it's called the
combo charger or the CCS the
only difference of the two DC
point at the bottom so that's
what you're gonna see a lot of
there is an older Japanese
standard that's in the middle
there the level two looks
exactly the same the DC fast
Chargers actually a different
port call in Chatham though
you'll see the sun the sun
leaves but this is being phased
out this is not going to be the
standard going forward even even
the Japanese manufacturers such
as Nissan moving away from that
so this is more of a legacy
charger that that is going to be
phased out but it's good to be
familiar with and then finally
Tesla does their own thing so no
need to worry about that Tesla
runs a proprietary network
strictly for their cars from
utility perspective and and as
well from the from the federal
perspective in the DOT we're
really only looking at open
standards here so those would be
those the J. one seven seven two
in the in this CCS charter.
Okay so why are we talking about
this today if we move on to the
next slide we can see why this
is so timely and why this is so
exciting.
On the left there I have a graph
of what we call an S. curve an
S. curve is how all disruptive
technology is adopted it starts
off slow it's sort of like a
trickle in and then it hits an
exponential curve we're improves
very very rapidly and then it
starts to plateau off we see
this curve over and over again
in every technology that's been
adopted over time specifically
over the last hundred years you
can look at this ask her for the
electrical grid itself you can
look at it for computers
probably the the most recent one
in memories the smartphone will
remember a time when you know we
knew one or two people maybe
that had an iPhone it was very
very fancy and then it seems
like overnight we all had one in
our pocket but we also all have
that grandma that will never
ever buy one that's what's
represented by the S. curve here
we're going to expect the same
thing for electric vehicles and
you can see here on the right I
have some data to back this up.
This is the actual market share
of electric vehicles in the
state of New Mexico over the
past decade so we hunger for it
looks like probably five or six
years around half a percent then
it pumped up to right right
around one percent for three or
four years and over the past
year we've had about four to
five hundred percent increase in
the adoption of electric
vehicles in New Mexico we're now
just under five percent adoption
as a state well five percent
doesn't sound like a lot what
this is actually doing is for
moving from that innovator stage
that you see on the left into
the early adopters we're
beginning to hit the exponential
growth curve and it's imperative
that we have these.
partnerships and corporations
all across the industry that we
can prepare for this growth.
There's also some other exciting
things that have been talked
about today as we're having this
growth we can think about the
economic opportunities the state
well we as a utility in the
other utilities were going
through the hearing process for
our programs there was a study
done by some of our stakeholders
that was able to quantify the
economic benefits as a state
depending on adoption rate when
anywhere from five billion to
thirty billion dollars by the
year twenty fifteen this is
going to be an increase in
tourism as my calling Mr Valdez
was talking about Evey drivers
tend to look for places that
they can charge their cars
having charging stations
ubiquitous you know throughout
our our service areas utility
and more broadly across the
state is very important for the
economic development of New
Mexico.
There's also going to be a lot
of technicians that are needed
we need people that can work on
these cars this is a re training
opportunity we're going to be
more like Christians to install
and maintain the stations as
well so they're they're
opportunities all across the
secretary for New Mexico to get
involved and then also we can
bring in visitors as as most of
us just saying we we were
fortunate enough to host an
event on the plaza on Saturday
there were lots of people from
around the state that came in
some brought the reviews we're
going to see more and more of
that people that are traveling
from out of state to New Mexico
as a destination because of the
work that we're doing today.
So now it's sort of the meat of
what you're probably hoping to
hear from me and that's about
PNM is transportation
electrification program this is
based on a law that was passed
in twenty nineteen House Bill
five twenty one and it required
all the investor owned utilities
to file these T. P.'s by
December of twenty twenty we did
so we spent the year going
through the hearing approval
process and we got approval just
before the Christmas holidays of
last year we've spent this year
building out that program and we
are some some parts of it have
been launched and we're getting
very very close to launching the
rest of the way that I described
this program as it stands on
four pillars the first color
both residential and non
residential infrastructure
incentives.
We believe that we can provide
our customers with the incentive
funding needed to install own
and operate charging stations on
their own.
At least PNM service sorry
that's very different across the
state but in our service area
were square simply providing
those incentives to our
customers we're not looking to
own and operate them ourselves.
So on the home we're actually
providing in a rebate of five
hundred dollars for a level two
smart charging if you're low
income customer there's
additional incentives to cover
the installation costs about now
if your nonresidential customers
could be any business so so you
want a grocery store you want to
put a level two charger in front
or maybe you have a parking lot
you want to find some some
charging for your for your
employees are for your customers
or even if you want to become a
site host and install DC fast
charging and possibly pancake in
with some of the number of
funding all of those are going
to be opportunities through the
PNM program.
The next thirty be specific
rates again both for residential
and non residential customers
the residential rate we're
calling the whole home electric
vehicle right this is going to
be a subset of a of our current
rate one a it's typical
residential service which offers
a lower cost of charging
overnight so the as my calling
this parks is talking about
trying to help our customers
shift loads of them we can
adequately planned for the
increased adoption of the bees
so we don't want people everyone
if ever to drive any be today
and everyone comes home at five
o'clock on July fifteenth
employees and yet it might be an
issue so we're prepping our
customers to shift their load to
those overnight periods through
great design this is going to
continue of all and but this is
our first stab at.
For the nonresidential customers
there's a specific rate that we
will be implementing for
charging for simply for charging
stations so you can have a big
business employment turned along
qualified for the specific right
it has to be dedicated for easy
charging the really exciting
thing there is we've realized
that the man charges are a huge
barrier and so this is a
volumetric only right so energy
only to help our customers
install these charging stations
it's also a time of use rate
again looking at those times
when there's less demand on the
trip on the grid and trying to
incentivize our partners to
charge those times.
The third pillar is customer
education and outreach it's sort
of like what I'm doing here
today but on a much much broader
scale so we doing community
events you'll see commercials
those sort of things educating
our customers this month
actually were officially in
October we're planning to also
go out into schools around
around New Mexico all across our
service area and educate kids on
the benefits of electric
vehicles as well so we're we're
trying to to reach our customers
where they are answer their
questions if you're maybe not
quite of driving age we can talk
to about this and if you're just
about to buy an EVM TV or if you
have one already we're looking
to to help us connect with you
as well.
And then finally this last one
is really only exciting to me
program administration and
reporting this help give me some
staff so they started in June so
we have to additional staff
members are helping me to
actually implement this program
we're getting very close to
signing a contract with a third
party support system as well and
then reporting creating reports
so that we can be very
transparent about what we're
doing.
So with that again on the very
last slide there you can tell on
the card I had to pay had to put
a still of one of my favorite
movies that Max very road there
so really all that I'm trying to
illustrate with that is we're
all in this together I I am
hugely appreciative of the work
that me and my colleagues still
in my team and my colleagues
still if you have further
questions of course I'll be here
today you can also visit our
website PNM dot com slash T. V.
you can join the EDD community
will send updates probably every
other month or so to your to
your inbox you can always ask us
questions Evey at PNM dot com as
well thank you very much for
your time.
You madam chair my name is mark
Fulton very on the VP of
marketing for west to farmers
electric cooperative.
The the western farmers the
DJIA.
For those of you that are not
familiar with illustrious
farmers were the generation and
transmission electric
cooperative with our corporate
headquarters located in Anadarko
Oklahoma just so happens if you
look at the second slide we also
have four members from the state
of New Mexico those distribution
cooperatives are farmers
electric cooperative
headquarters in Clovis Roosevelt
with their headquarters in part
palace Central Valley an
artesian Lea County with our
corporate headquarters in
Lovington and so you can say our
footprints relatively large what
makes this work is that we're
all part of this B. B. market
obviously I don't have
transmission line that runs
across the that portion of Texas
to tie things together but it's
worked very well for us to bring
the New Mexico members into our
membership.
Really Madam project opportunity
because this is such a huge
subject matter and the
appreciate the opportunity to
speak with you kind of share
some of the hurdles that we've
went through western has been at
this for quite some time we
started back in twenty eighteen
we'll talk about why that was
driven in some of those things
that happened so quickly but we
want to share with you not only
the hurdles that we've covered
but some of the current things
were working on and also looking
into the future insurance some
of the vision in the things that
we see that will be necessary to
make transportation look for
cation really role now
interest enough we can rephrase
that we actually call of the
future mobility one of the
things you have to think about
is as you look is this
transpires this is no longer
just about electric vehicles
this is now about school buses
will be talking about a current
school programs about long and
short haul freight this is
an individual that I know that's
basically been shocking to me as
a marketing person and you have
to realize this guy is like
number one on my list is
building a home for electric
vehicle Chargers in the garage.
He plans to have an all electric
zero turn mower he's already
ordered his Ford F. one fifty
has to test all of which would
be electric vehicles and he's
ordered a Polaris all electric
ranger and plans to buy small
scale utility tractor that is
also all electric so as we
started to see this our board
and our leadership started to
see clearly that our vision had
to be broader and we're going to
probably have to be much more
proactive than we had been to
that point in time rather than
reactive.
If you look at the next slide
again we don't see that is what
mobility looks like today.
Probably for the electric
vehicle peace on the next slide
that's probably more like what
we would say that would be a
station we would call with
multiple charges are set there
and these would be more in very
highly concentrated core areas
this would not be what you would
typically see in rural areas
many of those cases you'll see
in our initial efforts we
install DC fast Chargers those
level three units were talking
about they were more in the
fifty KW range and as this
market is involved you have to
realize that a fifty KW DC fast
charger is really probably the
level two charger of the future
why the Ford F. one fifty I have
an order the lightning has a
hundred and thirty one kilowatt
hour battery even if I'm using
the fifty KW charger it will
take me almost two hours to
completely fill that vehicle
these vehicles continue to get
greater and greater range and I
think that's why he is you'll
see through the navy and other
funds were starting to see an
increase in the capacity as you
saw earlier for one hundred and
fifty KW Chargers to be able to
comment at how rapidly this
snowball is rolling of what
we're gonna have to have to
accommodate future.
The next slide those especially
important to rural electric
cooperatives this is where we
see the real future.
The charge.
That's what the whole and it
creates a very unique dynamic
that my colleagues have talked
about or whatever we have to be
in a position to educate our
consumers to be at a point that
they recognize that you just
can't come home in charge all
four vehicles at the same time
we just recently went through an
incident of a gentleman that
bought a Tesla model three his
wife loved it so much that she
bought one and then I loved it
so much I bought their son a
Chevy bolt.
So in their garage they have
three electric vehicles totaling
thirty KW of demand and my
elector cooperative has twenty
five K. VA transformer serving
side.
One hundred four degrees guess
what happens to the transform.
So I mean this is this is real
this is the issue of we call it
beauty and the beast that beauty
being the opportunity that
presents Jeez I'm in marketing
love so actress the but the
point is is the challenge of
making sure that we have the
infrastructure to do it.
But also that we have the right
structures and everything to
make sure that these consumers
clearly recognized this is the
time to charge this is not the
time to charge.
If you look at the next slide
this is been a very long and
winding road for western farmers
I'm gonna start of kind of where
we're at in Oklahoma obviously
because of some dynamics that
I'm gonna mention to you but
then we'll start to talk about
where this is move forward and
what we're doing with New Mexico
that our journey started back in
early in twenty eighteen it was
driven by two things it was
brought to our attention that
there had been a seventy five
percent state tax credit that
the state of Oklahoma to put in
place and I'll be very candid
with you it was not put in place
for electric vehicle charging
infrastructure it was put in
place for CNG.
Fortunately it did not have
language in it that prohibited
electric vehicle charging
stations qualified for the
seventy five percent state tax
right now will make sure that
seventy five percent state tax
credit that coupled with the
fact that the state of Oklahoma
moved very quickly with their
Volkswagen settlement dollars
combining those two pieces
together enabled us to see a
future that in a red state such
as what Oklahoma is that we
actually were able to build out
that electric vehicle charging
at work that was commercially
available and had to be to take
advantage of the tax credit by
December the thirty first of
twenty nineteen with charging
infrastructure every fifteen
months so now is the navy funds
come forward were able to go
back and work with the state
fill in the gaps very similar to
what we're seeing happen here to
Mexico and we're really excited
because you know as we looked at
this and came and visit with the
department of transportation
kind of sharing the vision we
were excited in the fact that
they saw the same vision we did
we saw vision that maybe our
state better vision the
legislative charging
infrastructure all across our
state something that enable
tourism and other things to
drive about our our public
comission the same as New Mexico
a lot of what happens in our
rulers is is that tourism dollar
that comes in so we felt that
was very important in our very
first visit when we went with
Kevin grown statewide
association and visited with the
DOT there were I have the same
vision and so it's made this
very easy for this to move
forward but those two pieces
initially I had just have to
really focus really fast so if
you look at the next stage we
had to go with a very simple
plan it has three stages and
first and foremost and I cannot
over emphasise is I thank my
colleagues have talked about
this this is about education
education education education I
have a slide will talk about as
to where that went more moves
forward secondly though because
of the demand of all of the time
frame can straits then we had to
moved infrastructure before we
could do that we.
Had to educate ourselves you
have to understand my board of
directors at western farmers
electric cooperative in twenty
eighteen not one of them had
ever ridden in an electric
vehicle much less driven one.
Twenty eight teams not that long
ago but this is transpired and
move very quickly in the last
four to five years and it's kind
of amazing this snowball and as
more more of these type vehicles
hit the market we all need to be
prepared for what's coming forth
and then last but not least
dealer development believe it or
not as we went and spoke with
many elector the I mean many car
dealers across the country our
state in in New Mexico no one
really knew what was going on
they didn't even have makes and
models unless you were is out of
state that enabled you to be
able to get a when we first went
as an industry trying to bodies
in the state of Oklahoma all we
were able to buy was a Tesla and
Chevy bolt.
So we incorporated those we
started to learn we move toward
a look at that but it was only
that we could start marketing
vehicles after we get accomplish
these first three pieces I think
another important note is all
the way through this process we
worked very collaborative Lee
with the clean cities
organizations they were great
resource for us to work together
we launched websites in both
Oklahoma and New Mexico called
choosy the NM and choose the V.
okay and it has a tremendous
amount of that first step of
trying to educate those early
adopters about where they need
to go who they need to talk to
their local electric utility and
one of the things I I really
appreciate about that it was
investor owned utilities and
electric cooperatives municipal
systems all having the same need
and all of us pulling on the
rope together to make that
happen if you look at the next
slide the when we talk about
education.
You'll see I use a lot of active
but you just can't get the cart
before the horse here this was
an aspect like I said we had to
train ourselves I literally had
to sit on my own management my
CEO would never driven an
electric vehicle.
He didn't quite see this and we
had to sit down and educate our
CFO Andrew Garcia everyone is
was very new and so as we work
through that process we started
with our board then we have to
start working with our co op
leadership our managers are
elector Cooper the marketing
people we had to start working
with our legislators and our
regulators we had tons of ride
and drive events and again we
have barely scratched the
surface of where we need to be
specifically when it comes to
educating our consumers and
making sure that look before you
make this decision.
We're your trusted adviser come
visit with us let's talk let's
make sure you understand the
right structures making good
well informed educated decision
before we get into that
trainwreck of that you've got
way too much load and I don't
have enough electricity to find
what you need.
Just much more viable.
If you look at the next slide
though I think this will
probably be were more of your
focus is is when we started to
look at the charging
infrastructure we broke it down
into three distinct areas first
and foremost corporate needs we
look at that those were not only
the needs of western farmers but
those of our distribution
cooperatives you'll hear in a
few minutes that we had a
strategic relationship with an
entity that will discuss that
really greatly benefited our
ability to quickly get level two
DC fast center all of our
electric coop is both Oklahoma
New Mexico.
Another interesting thing is we
had to make sure that we had DC
fast charging we needed it at
our corporate facilities so that
when our members who were moving
forward in educating themselves
and by electric vehicles and
they came to our board meeting
that have a place where they
could charge the car so we
incorporated and make sure that
we had that put in place
We incorporated seven pull
callers and are fully.
The only negative we had on that
I can tell you right now if you
look at the economics for
western farmers as a corporate
entity we buy our electricity
from one of our distribution
Cooper's and I can tell you that
what I've track or saving about
eighty percent on fuel alone
that does not take into account
the since these vehicles are
bought there's absolutely no
maintenance or upkeep on the
vehicle as more more makes and
models of these vehicles become
what consumers want and they
start to wake up we're gonna see
kind of that snowball fact that
don't don't get me wrong I don't
think that in my lifetime I'm
gonna see every location and
service station look like what
we had on that one side few
months ago.
Myself personally I right have
forces I have a three horse
slant I get ready to drive to
certain locations electric
vehicle is not a fit for that I
still have my diesel truck but
on the other hand the for
lightning that I have order will
be the vehicle that I drive back
and forth to work in a phone
hook up a two course that I can
do our model in this is it EV's
are not intended for everyone
but they might be right for you
so it's an education process to
see are you a commuter is it a
fit for you and if so educating
them direction.
If you look at the next slide
though probably the most
strategic piece for us was we
recognize that we had this tax
credit we recognize we have this
Volkswagen settlement money but
as a rule electric cooperative
we have one problem we don't
have the tax act.
We needed a strategic partner
they could utilize the seventy
five percent state tax credit in
that we could couple with to be
able to go out and share our
vision.
We look at many companies a have
to remember that point time
believe it or not there were not
that many companies that
actually manufactured level
three DC fast charger many of
those have come to fruition
since that period of time so it
limited where we were able to
get it we were also competing
with electrify America and that
whole effort of being able to
get the Chargers delivered and
commercially available before
December the thirty first of
twenty nineteen so this was
quite a challenge and we knew we
we did not have the technical
ability to do it so we formed a
strategic relationship with a
company based out of Tulsa
Oklahoma it didn't hurt matters
that they were not home based
company because it kept it close
but they brought to the table
the expertise they had a tax
appetite and with that being
coupled with the elector
cooperatives relationships and
credibility in the communities
where we needed to go out and
help people in rural Oklahoma I
understand you want to be on
that elector vehicle roadmap
after realize when you're
looking at infrastructure
development in your sentiment
we're has the amenities needs a
restaurant you want wifi you
want security of all these
amenities when you're dealing
with the local rural chamber of
commerce or a city government
many of those individuals had
never driven electric vehicle
either this was just kind of
starting and so our ability and
probably the greatest thing we
brought to the table from from
France perspective was our
credibility of helping people in
those areas understand this is
real it's coming and it's
something that you really really
really wanting your communities
women for.
So that shared vision kind of
talent if you look at the next
at our regional vision was to
have an electric vehicle
charging station and every
electric cooperative service
territory and if you look those
are the coop service searches of
Matt look pretty impressive so
my fact the Rolex require
presidents within that
nationwide would have a I
believe will that work.
Even greater than Tesla because
of the size and scope of the
national rural electric coop of
program group the problem with
this is so much of that
infrastructure would be looked
at probably be built at the co
op.
As we step back to look at from
the consumer's perspective the
EDD driver that's not where they
needed charging infrastructure
even our own members we started
to recognize we need Chargers
where are members go to do
commerce after all we're going
to try to sell as much energy at
opportune times at home at night
so why do we need to charging
infrastructure set so where they
don't have wifi they don't have
twenty four bathrooms it's going
to be a chip public charging
network that vision and
understanding of strategically
citing these were consumers
could actually use them and
what what did not really have a
problem setting fifteen twenty
minutes we have a lot of casinos
in our state I found it
interesting that they did what
level three charging they
preferred we put level two
charging.
I like that elector George could
cost you a hundred Bucks pretty
quick if you're in there for
thirty minutes but as it moves
forward we started to see if you
look at the next graph we
started to realize Hey let's
start strategically identifying
these hub city locations at
major teaching sense and
withdraw fifty mile concentric
circle around and as those grew
darker you started to see that
we had much more concentration
and fortunately this time I
think we are the third possibly
the fourth.
Largest volume of charging
infrastructure in a state per
capita because of the
combination of these pieces if
you continue on to take a look
the next slide actually became
what you're looking at you see
those different balloons that
are on that graph those are
different size charters at the
time remember this is a twenty
nineteen most of the vehicles on
the road or Chevy bolt or Tesla
that could even use that network
there wasn't even the discussion
of a vehicle and at a hundred
and thirty one kilowatt hour
battery those weren't real and
so these fifty KW Chargers
although they are only fifty
there is charging infrastructure
that for example we set one
right at the start of what we
call palomino drive we have very
beautiful portion of our state
what the the drivers can now
feel comfortable driving down
grabbing a burger charging their
vehicle going across the very
scenic driving having charging
on the other side if they needed
it it's just a kind of a change
in mindset the plan education is
so huge and just of getting them
to understand when to charge how
to charge you don't need a full
charge we always think of
filling up the gas tank in this
world it can be twenty eighty
and you survive it's just a
mindset change.
Long story short that charging
network when it was completed in
twenty nineteen Francis had a
hundred and nine sites
consisting of two hundred and
fifty three Chargers and it's
jargon kind of gets thrown
around you gotta realize we call
it a station just like a gas
station could have multiple
pumps we call this is electric
charging stations and then at
that we have multiple Chargers
that are set there again in the
same way that my colleague
indicated you've got to make
sure that you have to Adamo CCS
all the different connections
that would be able to work from
there but that total to fifty
three there at that time there
were twenty three other
providers we ended up with a
hundred and thirty two stations
across the state we finished up
with a hundred and fourteen
Francis locations three hundred
sixty three Chargers by the time
was done a hundred and thirty
seven charging station and that
was at that time obviously
that's expanded to move forward
as we look for.
So you're going alright that's
plenty about Mexico let's talk
excuse me this point about
Oklahoma let's talk about New
Mexico.
So you look at this have a
unique set of circumstances as
we were coming off back into
this match with department
transportation we were
introduced our strategic partner
we shared a statewide vision of
what we're looking at we had two
things happen at a pandemic and
then following the rules of the
pandemic we started have supply
chain issues and other things
that are there but the reason I
don't actually have the slides I
one of the most current
information from friends as they
send it to me on Saturday
unfortunately I didn't have time
incorporated before the slides
were made but basically Francis
is slated to finish ten to
twelve of the bill that's what
they're looking at by the end of
twenty twenty two the remaining
sites that they've been awarded
are to be built before June or
July twenty twenty three the
reason of these delays
predominately not their supply
chain more the electric utility
supply chain because as many of
you've heard right now we're
looking outward of sixty weeks
or longer to be able to get a
transformer delivered.
And so it become the utility
supply chain issues that's
holding up some of these they
were excited to point out that
they did receive some additional
funding that I was not aware of
from the department
transportation many of these
initial pieces were funded at a
sixty kilowatt charger they've
now been moved it they're going
to put in instead of sixties
they'll be putting in a hundred
and twenty two hundred fifty KW
Chargers which is more in line
as to what the market place
needs today with many of them
having to one hundred fifty said
each of those sites.
If you move to the next slide.
Basically as national school bus
on the right hand side I don't
have a number on the slide deck
this is where we want to talk
about some of the current
activity we've talked about
charging infrastructure we have
the different levels this was
another one of those issues that
was just been thrust on all
electric utilities across
country but I felt important you
hear where this is that for
those of you that aren't where
the EPA was given a directive to
launch out what they call their
EPA clean school bus grant
program realistically this is
more of a lottery then it is a
grant okay at co ops are unique
in the fact that so many schools
in this program that we serve
are listed as priority schools
and as are many of the schools
across the state of New Mexico
the reason it's different if
your property school in this
grant application you get a free
electric school bus not a
percentage discount but you get
a free bus and you also can
receive up to twenty thousand
dollars.
For the installation of purchase
of the charging infrastructure
that the school would make.
Obviously is this came about
those deadlines for those
applications I think it was
December it should be August the
sixteenth of this year we worked
aggressively with our coops in
New Mexico as well as in
Oklahoma and I'm happy to say we
have a lot of the applications
that are sitting there waiting
to be awarded and then the EPA
turns around and comments that
instead of the original five
hundred million dollars.
That they were going to award a
billion dollars in this so a lot
of the people that made these
applications are more likely to
be funded and therefore we have
to be working with those schools
to be prepared to move forward
now in addition to that there's
four more billion dollars of
other grant applications that
the EPA will be working through
so there's gonna be a lot of
other opportunities for other
schools or for a school to maybe
add a second or a third bus you
know it it's very much the same
thing not every school bus route
fits electric bus.
But a lot do and we're starting
to find is the schools get to
look their average route being
forty miles the bus being able
to get about a hundred thirty
miles being able to come back in
it makes sense Abbas is probably
more logical than a caller but
what really intrigues this is a
utility is the functionality
that a bus is set up to be used
for we called vehicle to grid.
As a utility we're looking for
research and development dollars
to be able to utilize the
battery that sits in that bus to
be able to take an offset grid
power specific periods of time
and that's huge and I think the
key piece a really recognize
that one of the things that
makes the Midwest so unique if
you're in the S. P. P. market
the point on that will be asking
these bus to fuel will be
appointment times at a very high
percentage of the energy that's
being used to fuel the bus will
be renewable energy and that's
very important the EPA indicated
us look at again we went looking
for strategic partner begin with
that in a lot of elector school
buses we once again we're
fortunate that run up the
turnpike from Oklahoma City
there's a company called I C.
bus and they had just recently
moved their electric school bus
then if the manufacturing
facility there so they're
actually being built in Oklahoma
and we have set up Google
workshops they have a very
strong dealer network we thought
that was important we needed
somebody that was going to hold
a hand for schools make sure
that they understood what we're
here you don't have a way to be
a problem for your bus we're
gonna be there propose to
introduce our whole trucking
centers in Oklahoma and Robert
struck in senators so the reason
their credibility is so large
because both of those entities
already skills I think that
Roberts probably owns about
sixty or seventy percent of the
bus market in the state of New
Mexico now in other words they
did that much of the volume of
business was school so they were
very credible in need to go and
say Hey you've got some routes
of this electric school bus
thank you be apple let's bring
in our utility partners a let's
talk about this let's see what
works look at the rate structure
staff but it is the same
challenges we have education we
have infrastructure that we have
to think about in that aspect
and we also have a rate design
issues that I think every
utility your from either calling
those are the things that we're
having to work for.
Madam chair I probably ramble
more than you'll hear but are
greatly appreciate the
opportunity and look for us any
questions also.
I think our final presentation
for Vince good morning madam
chair members of the committee
put but he said I guess I could
have been right there only have
talked but priced a little bit.
So as you know try state is a
not for profit co operative
power supplier our mission is to
provide our member systems with
reliable affordable and
responsible supply of
electricity in accordance with
cooperative principles we have
forty five members of the make
up tri state forty two our
electric distribution
cooperatives and for state
legislative power to over one
million consumers and across the
early two hundred thousand
square miles today our energy
load is about thirty eight
percent renewable and by twenty
twenty four will be at fifty
percent renewable six years
before the U. T. a mandate our
members can feel good about the
energy they get from tri state.
On slide three you'll see our
eleven New Mexico members that
belong to tri state central New
Mexico which is located tend
quarter didn't win Moriarty
Columbus electric is a southwest
part of the state and it's
headquartered in Deming
continental divide is
headquartered in requests Hey
Mrs in Espanola more us and we
go as a more a northern Rio
Arriba electric cooperatives in
Chama for Terrel lecture it is
in Cloudcroft Sierra is in
truth or consequences Secor of
course it's a coral southwestern
electric cooperatives in the
northeast part of the state
headquartered out of Clayton and
spring or electric is of course
in spring a letter carrier.
slide for awhile after the
vehicles are member cooperatives
must be able to engage with
their members on new
technologies he pumps heat pump
water heating and EV's the
opportunity for member low
growth is what excites try
students members.
Eighty percent or more of the
the charge charges are at home
so that's a great great low
growth opportunity a study in
twenty sixteen demonstrated that
EV's could increase residential
sales budget between twenty five
to forty percent and with the
truck and SUV models on the
horizon the sales can only go up
and there's others a state at
the time of use rates and other
existing demand response
technology helps keep load off
peak times hello providing
members a full charge overnight.
On slide five.
Some of the common common the
challenges and barriers to you
the ownership they include that
most people don't know that they
can charge the fees at home so
that is something the tri state
is trying to address.
On slide six every study that
has been done identifies a lack
of understanding around EV's
price it tries to address this
and three friends turn key
educational material for members
outreach and engagement material
and Evey driving experience.
On slide seven one of the tools
tristate uses his choose the V.
choosing to be is a industry
leader with comprehensive
educational worse website the
website covers a wide variety of
the the information including
budget fact saving calculators
make model information
incentives and charger locators.
On slide eight.
The website can also be made to
look like the members site so
every tristate member has access
to this resource interested
along with other utilities have
developed a series of short
animated educational videos and
one page doc documents that can
be co branded with members
systems information.
Slide nine tristate has also
provided members with some
consumer report evaluations on
cost of ownership and as you
know consumer reports an
independent consumer advocate
most people are aware of.
Slide ten tristate started levy
experience fleet and twenty
nineteen and it has proven to be
a very popular service.
These vehicles can be used to do
right and drives a delivery
staff and members of the.
And members to experience a navy
remember the studies indicate
once someone has driven in the
V. they're much more likely to
consider purchasing any of the.
Price that has for you these
member utilities can schedule to
keep for up to three months we
have two Ford F. one fifty let
means in order that will
integrate into the fleet as soon
as they are available.
And so far we've had over ten
thousand driver experiences and
I have personally driven those
yes less than those the reason I
can tell you they make you look
younger as soon as you hit the
accelerator all the all the skin
on your face goes to the back of
your head.
Because the to the take off so
fast.
On slide eleven tristate
provides electric vehicle supply
equipment rebates.
since nineteen and since twenty
nineteen tri state has rebated
over seven hundred twenty
residential.
The services.
Slide twelve.
The director of the current fast
charge rebate incentives are
scaled by a peak amount of
energy that can deliver since
twenty nineteen tristate has
supported almost sixty
commercial thirty three L. two
thousand twenty four D. CFCs.
Slide thirteen our a couple
examples of these the yes
Rebate so we didn't support on
central.
In slide fourteen.
try states twenty eight twenty
responsible energy plan not only
set our goal of seventy percent
renewable energy by twenty
thirty it also allocated two
million dollars.
To the electric vehicle
infrastructure program that was
forty five thousand four member
system.
The funding is available.
for the distribution members to
establish publicly accessible
charging to match local needs to
date of these funds of.
precluded twenty seven level two
and ninety CFCs.
Slide fifteen annex is another
example of that includes more
all electric and to coops in
Colorado.
And looking forward tri state
plans to meet future member
system needs with expanded
services such as expanding
options with growing technology
multi family and income
qualified programs and strongly
engaging with commercial fleets
like school buses box trucks and
the like.
Includes my.
Press the briefing the final as
a Mike and Matt could be here
from tri state today there are
experts on TV's there in Denver
but they simply send this than
the compliments to you.
Hope to visit with you anytime
soon.
Thank you everybody but before
we have we do have a lot of
questions for you as you can
imagine very excited about
everything but before we do that
I'd like our to
Representative two came in late
and do some self Representative
Pettigrew and representative of
hello clover then we're going to
just quickly do our equipment
and we'll go to questions.
Thank you madam chair my name's
Randall Pettigrew I am the state
Representative one of the state
Representative from Lee County
New Mexico.
And
Happy to be here thank you.
Thank you madam chair I'm state
representative Jane E. Powdrell
Culbert Representative district
forty four point four.
Was on a Bernalillo.
The town of Bernalillo Kerala's.
part of Albuquerque New part of
Rio Rancho so.
The here thank you.
Thank you and we have two sets
of equipment we have July fifth
to six which was in Gallup
and set and then we will have
this thirty first to September
first and tell us so if I could
get a motion.
Thank thank.
Second is there any objection to
adopting the Gallup July minutes
thank see no objections there
prove.
Okay and then our second set of
motion for August thirty first
to September first inTaos the
little.
Second.
Thank you second Senator.
Okay we've had a motion is there
any objection to a passing the
minutes approved the August and
September.
Okay they're both approved and
with that we'll move to
questions our first is
Representative Crowder and
senator Munoz and then Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you madam chair I I had a
bucket full of questions within
in the interest of time I will
not do that I just yes I
madam chairman my first question
is
pertaining to the do you and the
staff we had a great
presentation for PNM and from
the coops and everything but but
the thing that's missing in my
mind is we're is Xcel energy the
the whole southeast part of the
state is covered by.
Xcel energy were they invited to
decline did the.
What what happened there.
That's not aware okay all right
for the record there's another
part of the state under an excel
covers all of it so Hobbs and
Carlsbad Clovis per talus that
whole piece of the state down
here I'm curious as to what
they're doing and I will remain
curious until.
Our next meeting or something I
don't know but I appreciate it
very much I just curious what
happened Xcel energy so
Monday next question is
regarding the gentleman from
Oklahoma
did an outstanding presentation
the the partner that you chose
Francis I guess disorders I'm
assuming it's an American
company I'm assuming that are
those Chargers manufactured in
the United States or.
Tell me a little more about that
piece of that component of it.
Madam chair representative
answer the question.
presented choose corporate
indeed located in Tulsa Oklahoma
okay as we look to the quick
obviously with all the navy
dollars we spent that have to be
about American type component so
that equipment will be in that
the original pieces that we done
were manufactured in the United
States but I wouldn't say that
all of the Partrick component as
with any vehicle that you buy or
anything else came within
manufacture of the United
States.
But I've heard stories that the
majority of of the batteries and
everything or the the components
necessary for those are coming
from China from overseas and I
just became curious are the
actual charging components from
China as well or are they major
components from United States
and and I think you've answered
it well I just was curious about
that piece of it
Ranges what's that way so and
then my final question this for
jury I guess you mentioned that
there's thirty two that have
been awarded thirty two deals
and you you mentioned a number
of how many had applied and I
missed that I think it written
down there are more applications
than you could award is that
correct Representative Crowder
yes so there were approximately
fifty seven eligible proposals
that were submitted there were
almost there were almost a
hundred proposals that were
submitted the policy that was
established in the grant program
required the proposals be level
three charging stations as well
as geographically located in
what we consider
Energy desserts right places
that we needed to address under
the first round of funding from
our but there will be additional
funding sources that will target
of course all of New Mexico in
different pockets of money but
fifty seven actually were
eligible and then all of the
requirements under the policy
established under the grant
program and that fifty seven
thirty two were awarded
different different amounts
again depending on the
geographic location and the cost
one of the things that we
cooperated with the leveraging
of funds to allow us to stretch
those are but dollars so the
large majority of those that
were awarded cracked funds from
our but we're also coming with
funding to the table as well my
colleague talked about
Volkswagen settlement funds
there were is awards given to
finish or complete the
completion of the construction
to those that were already
provided vaulting the settlement
funds to get him over the finish
line if you will with the
remainder of those are the
dollars in these communities.
Thank you for the response madam
chair and and you're at I'd like
to maybe get with the F. while
the given that the thing it was
obvious to me this call was a
brutality or not on this
wordlist.
The fifty thousand people be a
you mentioned shamans any and
some of the little ones they
made the cut got the funding for
Chargers but though those two
communities of Clovis and
Portales didn't and and I'd like
to understand why did they not
apply with the not awarded to do
not qualify we get together
offline but that's.
That's very obvious to me that
you know Hobbs and Carlsbad got
money and.
As I look at things always try
to look for equity in and that
sharing diversity around the
state and and there's a big void
out there on the central for the
side of the state that didn't
get to do unto to Care in there
either so but
what chat offline madam chair
that's all my questions I think.
Share our love to engage in that
conversation and make sure that
we look at those communities and
see what funding opportunities
exist to cover every aspect of
the state in regards to rural
and urban areas as well.
And chair Dr Pritchett that I
just I'm curious why the to make
the cut we'll we'll find that
out we'll discover thank you
madam chair thank you venture.
Yes thank you madam chair a J.
let me ask a quick question and
and we're doing the small towns
issues any for example right.
Sometimes you drive through
username it's close for
religious purposes.
How are these people use these
charging stations again know
that they close any during child
go right you can't even drive
through there and other
religious times a the drive
through there that they're not
having a phone or a camera even
in your possession because it
will take it away and so how you
gonna handle that when people
say Hey I think I'm a go through
soon because that's a nice drive
and they get their like all
right this closed
Center moon yo's and I think
that's an important is from an
education perspective what we're
working on from India T. aspect
is with R. G. I. S. T. are
creating a dashboard that'll
provide the public information
on one where these charging
stations are also when they're
up in winter functioning and so
we don't want anybody to drive
to the area location where one
one of our tribal communities is
closed because of religious
purposes or as you know we've
been during the pandemic some of
them close out completely and so
I created the dashboard our
department of tourism's actually
started that endeavor but from a
D. O. T. perspective partly with
the department energy and our
industry partners for the
starting stations are it's
communicating that to the public
when and if these are
functioning what we don't want
to do is because again the
standard is ninety percent
ninety seven percent of the time
that these charging stations are
going to be operational what we
don't want to do is because of
the cultural differences in the
needs that every committee that
you missed needs of every
community that we leave them
behind as well so those
considerations will be taken
into account as as something
that we communicate to the
public when the sorting stations
are accessible.
And then I I just did the math
on the cost per unit I mean the
numbers off the number you gave
us since like six hundred
thousand dollars a warder per
per unit.
Because eighteen million for
thirty two units six hundred
some thousand per per unit and
madam chair senator Munoz and
you know that's one of the
questions that are me and my
colleagues get quite regularly
how much does this charging
location cost and and one of the
things that is this is difficult
is to nail down a number in that
we talked about the energy
requirements six hundred
kilowatts every fifty miles
geographically inside condition
analysis is required to see
where those Energy pockets exist
so we going to location already
has energy we're talking about
transformers and infrastructure
that already exists can be much
cheaper install a charging
station that location now if you
go some miles out of that area
then that cost of infrastructure
is going to compound the
increased substantially so one
of the great things that under
the joint office of energy
transportation is that they're
gonna take that into
consideration inst in that.
If there are areas that
economically it doesn't make
sense we're able to find a
waiver or request to pit put it
down the route in other words if
Two miles away from a community
that we could put a charging
station in rather than in the
and I I'm gonna say it and it
might not be popular in the
middle of nowhere right every
fifty miles you gonna have to be
a little flexible we want to get
into those rural communities
even if it's a few miles down
the road and that will
definitely determine the price
tag when you're looking at level
three we talk about fifty
kilowatts stations going to be
level two of the future those
are still relatively cheap
not cheap two hundred thousand
two hundred fifty thousand
forty talking about six
relatives also thought up to
we're talking about six hundred
kilowatt you absolutely are
talking five hundred thousand
six hundred thousand and and and
G. the infrastructure and the
conditions of war that
infrastructure may lack.
And then I I guess it's maybe a
question the next questions are
going to be for everyone is in
I'll give an example to coral
they want a couple well right
but then and that's a single
phase well.
But then they're gonna come back
and do these charging stations
that are three phase two hundred
forty volt.
So for eighty so how how are
they gonna chair good if they
can service their customers
right now on a single hook up
hello how are they going to
manage Evey Chargers and then I
a customer in rural New Mexico
going to house or well or.
Whatever and deny them and then
say oh well we got power for emu
stations but we don't have power
to service our customers.
How are we going to manage that
that's going to become a bigger
and bigger issue and then and
part of that is.
PNM is here I mean we know we're
gonna experience rolling
blackouts next summer because
your grades not build supply
chains messed up right.
So how are you House Penan going
to choose if someone's going to
get to keep their freezer on or
if you're gonna charge cars at
somebody station or inside their
house how we gonna choose that.
Senior that has an air
conditioner running and hundred
degree weather versus electronic
vehicle charging is PNM gonna
shut down these grades and say
okay we're not servicing these
power stations because.
There's priorities and
household.
How is that gonna be managed on
the grid.
to do that and maybe just call
the cops on answer that.
Also please use the Mike okay
thank you and anybody who wants
to add to it.
Madam chair senator Munoz thank
you for that question I don't
I'm gonna be very blunt that's
way above my pay grade so I do
customer programs
in in terms of.
Hooking up the stations you know
we certain we we try and be
equitable for for all of these
things so these all go through
to process we have to see where
there is capacity on the grid
and interconnect that according
to the rules of interconnection
so I can say it's it's fairly
straightforward there as far as
your second question about
capacity constraints on the grid
the that that is something that
is being discussed again not
something that I've expertise
and so I would I would be
hesitant to answer that question
directly that's something that
we're doing at at a corporate
level not necessarily at my
level but just to reflect to PNM
is in the same position because
there's a client in cliff New
Mexico has PNM service and
they've been waiting in in a
year for you guys to connect.
And so how are you gonna
prioritize this is going to be a
problem in the in the in you
know I'm a contractor so pulling
a three phase transformer I.
Good luck if you can if you can
get one today.
Unless it's an emergency if
there's even one built in the.
In the yard sitting somewhere so
I mean he's going to be using
our per dollars you'd better
make sure that your plan.
Transferred three phase
transformers dropping off that
poll.
Converting that power what time
frame of those going to be in
are you going to make sure our
propellers to because that is
gonna get very restricted we're
we're gonna hit twenty twenty
four next year that are proposed
away twenty four twenty four if
it's not contracted I think in
twenty twenty four or twenty
twenty two then it goes away in
twenty twenty four.
But I mean these are some of the
things.
It's going to happen change
going to happen but how we gonna
do it so we don't lose money Hey
a little bit so the senior who
said there whether air
conditioner running is
prioritized over someone sitting
there electrical vehicle their
house charging when their
futures not working or the
freezer is not working kids with
children in the house and and
food spoils and and that cost so
those those are tough questions
I think.
In in Madam chair Senators thank
you for that I I will say though
the one thing I can say very
generally is not every location
on the grid is equal so so
thinking about a customer and
cliff that's you know probably
in a in a much for rural part of
the state where there's probably
one in a single phase line going
out there the that would be very
difficult you know to to drop a
largely be charging station out
there so it's it's very location
specific that's the one thing I
do want to say so so it's not
it's not a question of
you know is this one residents
the same is dropping a a brand
new large three phase service on
there it's very location
specific and we will operate
under the rules are connection
for that and madam chair but you
go from Silvercity to to cliff
is thirty miles and you go to
the Buckeyes forty miles and go
to in one and that's your sixty
mile limit and then from going
over the reserve is another
forty miles and reserved models
another fifty and so you're
gonna have to meet these
requirements and here in in the
I guess the PRC is gonna have to
demand that you meet these
requirements to do these
vehicles so I've got a look at
drafting legislation requiring
PNM to to have these three phase
lines in the sixty mile radius
so Senator I think Miss parks
might have something to add to.
Chair senator Munoz.
Good questions and I really
don't have too much to add to
your your concerns and your
vision right now I think those
are valid points and something
that the PRC is looking at and
working with the utilities and
the cooperatives on the planning
is something that came out with
the New Mexico department
transportation public engagement
where we gonna put these
Chargers and what how we gonna
fill in the gaps we got a lot of
feedback from the co ops and
utilities and members of the
public on key areas of where
those should be on the highways
the other message especially
from the coops was that they
need to work within a DOT on
lead time how long it's going to
take of the cooperative to get
the transformer and in a rural
electric cooperative staff
talked about that today but it
is an issue the supply chain
issues on how their power gonna
be prepared to work with that of
DOT on this insulation plan.
the PRC also recently had a
workshop on resource adequacy
just in general on how we're
going to look at the outages
during the summer of twenty
twenty three twenty twenty four
so it is definitely on the right
are working with utilities to
understand more about the
resource plan and create
capacity and reliability issues
if I may madam chair
Representative Crowder although
they're not here today S. P. S.
N. A. P. A. both have submitted
an educated transportation
advocation plans already
submitted to the approved by the
PRC so there in a reporting
schedule and have similar twelve
programs to it PNM talked about
education of the public
different rate incentives mobile
charging apps at electric
charging stations so they are
working with our customers.
to fill those teepees.
Thank you
and doctor does want to add
some.
I just have one more question.
Senator Munoz thank you for that
and and one of the things that
we submitted our plan we felt it
necessary for us to bring up the
fact that the unique
geographical you know needs in
New Mexico has are different
than other states on the east
coast and so when you're talking
about every fifty miles
currently right now and I didn't
mention this in our plant
currently we're sitting on
twenty one hundred designated
les miles for our alternative
fuel corridors I brought up the
nine hundred and ninety seven
because that represents our
interstate corridors but if I
had to build out the Navy
formulaic build up to date I
would have to build out on those
twenty one hundred you just in
New Mexico rights as well as
nine hundred ninety seven
interstate miles and of little
over eleven hundred US in New
Mexico routes part of the plan
that we talked to join offices
to do designate those U. S. a
New Mexico wraps not to leave
those rural locations out of the
plan and not to
say that we're not going to
build out in those locations
just interviewed most talked
about in that it's it's going to
be very difficult to get some of
those faced three power lines to
those locations they make they
they may not even exist today
but might be designating those
eleven hundred plus US New
Mexico route what that does is
allow us to only focus the
requirements of the guidance of
the federal government every
fifty miles six hundred kilowatt
stations primarily and
exclusively to those interstate
corridors.
And what's were able to get
those nine hundred ninety seven
mile certified what that does is
free up the remainder of the
navy funding to go into
communities and to build an
infrastructure to meet the
unique needs of New Mexico at
energy capacity so many
corporate level two charging
stations what makes sense or may
incorporate a level three
charging station at the lower
end of fifty kilowatt in a
location that will have the
energy capacity to sustain that
energy that charging station but
once we get that nine hundred
and ninety seven mile certified
that we do have the discretion
to build it out to meet the
unique needs of New Mexico.
And then at I I just want to in
with our pro do we we have about
ten million or twenty million we
put in for the charging stations
is that combined with our but
offset this course at a
separate.
RFP bid and the higher handling
and only know if those went to
DOT madam chair ceremonial so we
received ten million of our part
of
and then we also received about
a additional two million on
probation capital outlay that
was given to us in twenty twenty
one as well so we have about
twelve million of state funds or
our posts last treasury funds
and then I need to reiterate
that.
Arpa was under contract incretin
if I'm wrong you may know more
about our presence been awhile
for me.
By twenty twenty two had to be
under contract by twenty twenty
five had to be completed
otherwise it reverts into for
not completing those in the
timeline whether the to supply
chain issues or anything I I
think that we're gonna have to
look at replacing some of those
are for dollars so want to make
us well aware that then maybe
with during the session those
twenty twenty Harper dollars
that are not under contract will
probably be looking at to re
appropriate if you have any are
per dollars and DOT that that
are appropriated under contract.
We're gonna be looking
appropriate though so we can use
those federal dollars first so
thank you madam chair.
X. Senator Gonzales.
Thank you madam chair and it's
getting close to noon and I'll
try to be real brief the.
To our panel of.
all of you were really good you
know it's really L. one of the
best presentations that we have
had a in my part to note this
year and you bring in the a lot
of parts but I just feel that
well there's a few things that
need to be talked about because
so to be rounded and this is so
are part of our responsibility
as our committee and one of the
things that you brought is so on
a paradigm shift he no you
mentioned the education and you
mentioned of the grandmother
will not change and you know
these kind of things but any
time the to have a little.
A shift like this you have fear.
You know and within fear I think
this is what we have to be real
careful and where I'm going at
is some.
No the solar panels first came
out way back you know a lot of
bad actors got into a the we had
some bad experiences you know
the worst thing I think would be
is for someone to buy an
electric vehicle and then the
neighbor would be saying oh I
would never buy one because I
can have a charge you know so I
think this are some of the
safeguards that we always have
to keep in mind.
Of the other part is so I really
feel that a our universities
need to be at the table you know
if we're talking about research
and development and the you know
there's a lot to this you know
because so the maintenance
component and also the
understanding of the actual
system that you're getting the
batteries and how they work how
they operate the life the
expense in all these are things
that will fall into place.
No
With the with having this in
place you know I also feel that.
From a Canadian perspective that
we have to see is how is this
going to affect.
Our funding for the department
of transportation because our
revenue comes from.
Tax and gas and diesel.
You know and when this starts
taking place what does this do
to the Department you know we
have to be very careful of how
we have our policy set in place
to be able to balance this now I
think one of the most important
part that we're seeing with this
system.
Not also what to address today.
But if you look at the market
almost every tool is changing
over to electric from your
chainsaw to your you know every
tool it's coming so it's not
only the demand that's going to
come from just our vehicles with
everything else of the one thing
that that I didn't here today.
Yes what is happening.
At the source.
Or energy is created.
And is that going to be meeting
the capacity to the region to
the area to the state to our
neighbors states because if we
go forward and we have all this
in place and.
New Mexico decides to support
school bus transportation is all
electric and then we have all.
Five hundred buses that can get
electricity.
You know we have a problem
enough and so I'm not trying to
you know I'm seeing that
positive not negative but I
think we really have to be real
with the entire picture not just
one part the other is that all
but if it's a very well thought
very well and it's a place.
And that we don't all of this
see where electricity is as much
or even higher than what we're
paying today for.
The fuel we're using so that
competitive and I know that a
lot of market thing is you know
so some of it is out of our
control that they and I think
those are things that we that we
really have to look at now
If well if you want to see
change.
And I understand the paradigm
shift.
You have to start with early
childhood with kindergarten the
scope and sequence through
education to bring it into our
part in this is what I feel that
our partners in education have
to be so that the the this
students today are so sharp the
third grader will probably tell
you exactly how it works you
know but we need to have that
and as they go into the will be
the future for for us you know
the they'll be with that strong
foundation of the whole thing so
I really want to thank you I
really do because so like I
mentioned it's one of the best
presentations but we need a few
corners to round off you know to
to be more into into building of
that trust into knowing where
we're going with of some
safeguards.
Thank you for.
Madam chair Senator Gonzalez
thank you thank you for those
thoughts I'll I'll respond again
very very generally as as a lot
of things are outside of what I
do on a day to day basis but
just some general remarks as far
as the source as you're well
aware there is the energy
transition act so here in New
Mexico we will be moving to a
hundred percent carbon free
energy by twenty forty and so
that that's what we're doing is
utilities complying with that
state law along with our own
goals
As far as some of the the other
things I mean I'm I'm happy to
say Santa Fe does have an
electric school bus so so we're
looking for that but when we're
talking about General resource
adequacy looking into the future
one of the things that utility
does just by nature is planning
and so we have an in integrated
resource plan process the I. R.
P. is every three years and what
we're looking at is what do what
do the needs of the utility look
like every three years and we're
trying to plan for that so
definitely something that you
know very talented people were
more smarter people than me or
are looking at PNM is how do we
do this how do we plan for it
what does it look like so I just
wanted to address again at a
very general level some of those
points you brought up thank you.
Thank you madam chair Senator
Gonzales bring up some very
interesting points more
insightful appreciate you bring
those are like two things that I
want to mention it and we talked
about this earlier.
We felt it was extremely at
necessary instead of Oklahoma to
address the roadies issue we
work closely with the department
of transportation or state just
so you'll know what we ended up
with is a
Tax that each individual and
they tag their vehicle that some
of the ten electric vehicle rate
starts at a hundred and ten
dollars a year and that's to
help offset the road use tax
that are not currently painting
usual Dick vehicle in our view
point was I actually had a
colleague say why are you
supporting this and I said
because our roads still have to
be fixed no matter what vehicles
driving it our roads are roads
and department transportation
needs that money.
So is as we look at that the
second piece was is that we
incorporated a three cent.
Sales tax for road use
designated directly to that that
every DC fast charger has to
collect after a certain date and
time.
They have to think that it
member I told you earlier that
we see a lot of if I'm charging
my vehicle and I have a choice
use public charging and paying a
three cent per kilowatt hour tax
versus being able to charge at
home and I've already paid a
hundred twenty five dollars here
from a reduced tax I'm actually
saving an additional three cents
by charging at all this is the
reason that we start to see that
home charging even becoming more
prevalent as we look in the
future but that was a a balance
some people felt and it was a
real challenge that they thought
that hundred and ten was too
high looking at the economic
savings is the utility for
consumers and representing as a
not for profit member of the
organization we felt that that
was fair and equitable based off
the savings that they're cheap.
The second issue that I'd like
to address madam chairman and
Senator Gonzales is this market
capacity issue when we talked
early we expressed our concerns
and I think the states taking
the the right approach the th
six hundred KW it may not be as
easily to obtain in certain
areas of rural Oklahoma New
Mexico as others and so I I
think the direction that they're
taking is is is very wise in
that aspect but when it comes to
the capacity remember we're all
alright for market participants
in the S. PPE market place and
just PPE is looking at this very
seriously let me tell you
because it has that we had the
issue of having to deal with
bitcoin put in a lot of
constraint in our state we had a
tremendous amount of cannabis
growth Mr farms itself grew by
fourteen percent so I can assure
you madam chair and senator
Gonzales we hit this is on our
radar screen of understanding
proactively how we have to
address the generation resource
necessary the transmission
resources necessary as well as
the distribution and
distribution services necessary
to accommodate this beauty and
the beast concept that we're
talking about for example just
PPE is looked at this and and
for those of you may not be
aware they're now considering
moving the summer reserve
capacity requirement for any
participant from twelve to
fifteen percent in the summer
and historically S. P. P. did
not have a winter requirement
but they're looking at moving
that requirement to a twenty
five percent could pass
requirement.
To accommodate all the things
we're looking at so the
combination of those two as
every utility that's in this
market place realizing that we
have to build some generation
and we're looking for the best
ways to do that.
Is it a combination of
renewables and fossil fuels in
my opinion yes.
Chair Senators us thank you as
well for that question I think
it's important to know the New
Mexico as the state is also
looking at this period
seriously I know that in Gallup
we did a presentation madam
chair also attended a conference
with DOT staff in relation to
road usage as we're promoting
adoption of electric vehicles of
course is gonna have an impact
on the collection of our field
tax we have our economists also
we have a very bright economists
here at the DOT who is
monitoring looking at pax even
now as we're talking about five
percent we talk about the valve
cover the S. curve that's going
to accelerate and it's gonna be
after five here and so it can
become a real big issue for the
department transportation as.
are plugging in rather than
feeling up and so we'll continue
to monitor will continue work
toward solutions look at what
other states like Oklahoma and
done to offset that my friend Mr
Senator Tom is that a couple
built a couple years that we
look at this as an important
issue to get ahead of we're that
sweet spot in making sure that
we don't penalize the adoption
of electric vehicles but they're
paying their fair share I think
that's critical I think in New
Mexico people want to know that
people are paying their fair
share for the maintenance of
roads and so we're working on
that isn't working and that is a
state and we're we're working
together with industry and other
stakeholders to make sure we get
that right moving forward.
Madam chair thank you and then
by all means I supported you
know I'm just looking at you
know the safeguards and you know
how we're.
Working with this going forward
you know I myself just a
recently bought an ATV it's all
electric it's beautiful it's
nice but it does need to be
charge on.
Works well.
Thank you.
And just reminder lunches until
twelve thirty so we're all good
okay listening Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I had just
started looking at this and
hearing about this a couple
years ago.
But also.
This time last year we were
having presentation on the
economists vehicles.
And the requirements of the
economists vehicles and so maybe
this is the issue and maybe not
but I'm sitting here thinking
and and listening to what has
been said.
Are the two coming together are
you are you looking at how the
the two will come together and
as a state.
On how we will address our
roadways.
With the two entities because
there were special requirements
and I did bring my book with me
but there was and I know you
glad I did but there was special
requirements that we we heard
you know about this time last
year on the time this vehicle we
had a two day presentation so
can anyone address that.
Shares of color thank you for
that and and I think that that
question is gets me excited as
you remember
Mr children kids and I supported
the house bill two seventy a
tonne of this vehicle bill which
really I think planted a a sign
in the ground The New Mexico's
open for business that we want
to be a state that promotes
innovation we want to be a state
that really brings manufacturing
and economic prosperity in ways
that are driven by technology
and so when you ask the question
is a Tanami and electric
vehicles connected the short
answer is yes they're going to
they're going to they're going
to cross connect there are going
to be some electric vehicle a
Thomas vehicles available in the
market no not only from
Passenger when you're thinking
about Tesla's thinking of other
manufacturers were you talking
about freight one of the things
that house bill two seventy up
opened up was the ability to
platoon
it allows for vehicles to be
connected vehicle to vehicle
right so you have a lead vehicle
we have three vehicles following
and that following too close
provision that hinder the
ability to bility for platooning
was eliminated we're still yes
thank one of the things that
we're doing is we're monitoring
those that are in the state
right now torque for example is
running yes a long hi forty and
so we're we're partnered with
industry to make sure that
they're safe that we're
promoting innovation and that
we're bringing jobs in New
Mexico but the short answer
without very much specifics is
yes electric vehicle and it's
time we are going to cross
connect down the road.
And madam chair on Friday of a
spot seven of us legislators
spend some time at don Chalmers
Ford in a.
Rio Rancho.
And that was one of their
concerns is is being able to
plug in and right now most of
the car dealers as understand
providing free.
A connection for the EV's that
there.
A selling but they have a day
out of the bill industry as a
big concern of putting these
vehicles out there and then
having to be accountable
responsible maybe in certain
situations of making sure that
they're connected be able to
connect and move across our
state and so the ride was very
interesting the pick up and take
off.
The
a trunk space
you know we were in a truck and
so is very smooth ride and you
know quick take off and
everything and I don't know if
that's good for New Mexico's
better drivers as we have but
yet is yes is this something
that you know if you have a road
one is something to be concerned
you know about and the impact
that the demands of the
economists vehicles and the
demand of the electric vehicle
cover coming at the same time
here in our state so thank you
letters in a part of Culver one
of the things is that you're
dealing is that we're not in
this alone and I think that we
see the cost cutting panel that
we have here today
you know we during our a public
engagement reached out to the
new vehicle our dealership
Association the new director Mr
Kantor cases a friend of this
body for sure and he is part of
that stakeholder coalition that
is being brought in to address
those exact issues to make sure
that we're not only talking
amongst transportation leaders
but they were talking to auto
dealerships that we're talking
to the public energy tribal you
know manufacturing in making
sure that we get a complete and
as senator indicated Senator
Gonzales a well rounded panel of
experts to make sure we address
this and get this right for New
Mexico moving forward okay thank
you madam chair.
Thanks for more legislators
asking questions remember we're
trying to finish sharply twelve
thirty are listening
Representative up Pettigrew then
Senator tall men and then
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair
would kind of have any.
Need responses on anything.
Madam chair I.
Do appreciate the presentation
today I will start out by saying
I'm disappointed in the
presentation from an overall
perspective I would have
preferred this presentation to
be a to date presentation to
we're madam chair the presenters
actually went through the
struggles and the depth.
What is the projection with us.
I struggle with with comments
made today.
Where we're gonna work with
labor unions to get this done.
We actually have an entire
economy out there.
We don't just have labor unions.
That really frustrated me.
Madam chair of I'm frustrated
with
You know we talked about this
let's let's look at California's
an example.
Five days after California
announced that they're going to
be and gas vehicles by twenty
thirty or whatever day they.
At five days afterwards they
also put a statewide mandate out
to so don't please don't charger
vehicles and I.
We have the same problem here in
New Mexico madam chair.
A year ago I had PNM executive
sitting in front of me and one
of my committees.
Guarantee me they have the
intestinal fortitude to sit here
and come to the legislature and
tell them if they didn't have
the ability to control their
blackouts when San Juan
generating station went to.
That conversation never came
back to the legislature.
But it's all over the paper that
we know we're fixing to have
that.
We want to transition madam
chair to look at electric
vehicles.
We have no solution for
electricity in the state.
I struggle with that I struggle.
One of the struggles elector
vehicles I struggle with the
story not being told.
In a really really frustrates me
with the depth of this let's
talk madam chair about the fact
that an electric vehicle takes
five point two five times the
natural mineral resources.
The gas operative vehicle takes.
Let's talk about the extraction
necessary of those minerals that
we we're not even talking about
we're not talking we want.
Carbon neutral but.
Pick a year.
We want carbon neutral but we're
not talking about the minerals
it is going to take to get this
done.
You guys want to.
Put in four hundred eighty volt
charging three phase four
charging stations let's see how
well the solar panels work for
that.
I am just.
Removes the moratorium on
Chinese made solar panels which
have some of the most toxic
chemicals in the world in them
that are just getting thrown
into landfills we're not talking
about the stuff.
The presentation I would have
preferred madam chair to see
from you guys those were the
struggles are going to be worth
the hard decisions are actually
can be made.
Because nobody's telling that
story.
I feel I have a very long
discussion with Lee County
electric regarding.
The.
Presentation we got from western
form.
Madam chair of which is one of
these grant on the monthly
market share for easy adoption
and we're comparing apples and
apples battery the V. to plug in
hybrids.
First wrestling comparison
there's a whole different set a
group of vehicles out there our
actual compares.
Versus struggle gonna be to get
to the point that we need to be.
First the real story with the
hard decisions that we need to
make the state legislatures for
truly going to go down this so
we can answer those questions
for constituents this is all
fluff pretty this one.
But it's not the truth.
Very frustrating madam chair.
Thank you.
Senator Tallman.
Thank you for.
Some of the presentations
first.
I have.
I.
I used in the state of New
Mexico the public comment
findings.
To help.
Wind power over the phone.
The Dallas.
Your point and how we explain
how to give a check drove the
car with the
car I love the car now we go
back yes it's the chair.
Regardless of.
People are saying genesis okay
transaction and stop producing.
gas powered cars from two
thousand.
Thirty five this is the future.
And.
What happened.
Representative.
Mentions that the.
General use to reduce taxes.
That may be true but they sure
as hell on is toxic this is what
we all gas is doing.
Our our own gases into our.
Yeah.
So the credit is five hundred
dollars for.
Charges.
madam chair Sierra that's
correct for the for the
residential charter incentive it
will be a five hundred dollar
incentive for the cost of the
directors.
No for that like a point of
sale.
Correct yeah either so madam
chair center Thomas so I I think
of a rebate is being you by an
up front on the Senator form
we're gonna have multiple paths
to do it so you can either like
an instant instant rebate
perhaps is when I think about it
or you could do a traditional
forms so I try to avoid the work
remains the same set of.
Representative that.
Maybe Dawn.
Well.
Based on some of the more
expensive Santa Fe.
but pretty.
Senator.
The service.
There.
The ex The presentation also.
Thank you for having the vision.
The issue.
Call off.
Simply the.
This is should go right as we.
So thank you for being here for
your excellent.
Presentation that is a.
This is all that the father is
the the the madam chair Sierra
yes I am.
Helpful.
Did you.
In helping the
Some concession compliance.
So far this issue that we've
Madam Sierra thank you for that
yes public services critical
important and necessary to drive
excellence in the state of New
Mexico I'm just happy to be part
of it with an amazing team at D.
O. T. as well as an eighty TRD
so thank you for recognizing
that.
Four percent the.
But a couple years ago.
And has.
She's a Mexico's there three
times a lot of people that we
three times more stations.
For
the so the plan is.
I used to the.
That is closer to hello.
How many that is the goal is to
close in on that gap and really
build out the infrastructure
that meets the unique needs of
New Mexico is so that is our
goal we looked at Colorado would
looked at Tennessee Oklahoma
from the perspective of France's
energy in the great work that
they did maximizing both like a
settlement funds we're trying to
stretch and get those dollars
into every community across New
Mexico utilizing the unique
funding opportunities that are
before us in the next five
years.
Thank you.
to the this is sponsoring a bill
to.
Further to that the.
Yes the.
Four years.
Those are.
Because.
This.
With some of our incidents of
Bill.
Who have projected to our the.
Fifty dollars.
Some states.
They.
They're not so
Which is very reasonable.
The states for faster five six
sure our.
for the fifty dollars.
Our.
So they are not seek the.
Hi this has been a struggle most
states have done have a of.
Station.
Thanks for.
solution
that should.
Have to find system.
So much for
there are.
So that is something that needs
to be done again this year.
And that is to their fair share
thanks.
For the state.
So.
so also.
There is concern about.
The great Dane able to.
The man.
Here are the twelve that
Number two of section five
percent.
Because of that.
The infrastructure bill that was
signed by I mean in the fall
which is far short of what we
need.
There's no money is money nation
wide for electric over the no
money for New Mexico.
And there's no.
Broadband we need to billion
dollars is only a hundred
million one to one twenty of the
what we need for broadband in
the state.
Our city third state engineer
quit publicly stated he didn't
have the resources to the job he
told me personally and publicly
he needed two billion dollars
for water infrastructure gonna
get three hundred fifty million
one six what we need from that
bill so we're falling far short
of what we need and the
infrastructure including
electric create but I'm
optimistic that the C. that
problems this is gonna be self
think it's a problem that we all
need to to address the concerns
so.
I'm done thank you madam chair
thank you panel for being here
I'm done thank you.
Madam chair and senator Tom just
real quick a couple of items
again I appreciate your comments
in the on a presentation percent
that one of the things been
discussed a lot one is this
isn't the utility and the Case
Western or any of our members
driving this trying we're trying
to work with customer choices
just like an individual might
choose to heat their homes
natural gas or heat with
electricity we're seeing many
more members and with the curve
that we talked about many more
adopting and moving in choosing
to use electric vehicles other
than others so we're trying to
prepare be proactive in dealing
what we're saying coming forward
not to mention the makes and
models of these vehicles are
coming forward in the tremendous
capacity concerns we have one of
the things and this is another
challenge we have is rethinking
the way we do things if you'll
notice for motor company is
formed a strategic relationship
with a company called sun run.
And that someone will be the
entity that works predominately
with a lot of their charger
installations and one of the
things that Ford has done is
they have the ability to
actually run the home during an
outage the entire home off the
Ford F. one fifty for upwards of
the day.
So it becomes a mindset change
my gonna charge of vehicle are
we going to be able to take that
vehicle off the grid because it
has a battery storage system it
may have a battery in the whole
this is utilities we have to
rethink the way that we've
always done may not be the right
way to move forward that's all
that I have thank.
It was a powerful statement you
just made I'm sorry that
Representative Pettigrew didn't
hear it K. Representative
Montoya and can you also
introduce yourself.
Thank you Representative Montoya
and from San Juan County
house district one
spent my eighth year and the
legislature
to questions I have are about
the the cost.
Of all of this and how.
Infrastructure.
Will do the necessary answer
infrastructure will be paid for
and as it was stated we're just
talking about the cost of the
dollars we're talking about just
initial costs I believe it was
mentioned that this be kind of
phase one that we would have to
continue to spend money to up to
take this out from the main.
In the interstate corridors then
out to the rural areas so so
there's gonna be more costs
associated with this so I
appreciate the fact that to
taxes have been.
Mentioned one was and and if if
senator Tom would not have
mentioned that his proposal I I
was going to cause a
something was present earlier
kind of presupposes that that
tax goes in place.
And that as as was mentioned
senator Tom it's not exactly a
you right wing Republicans
supporting oil and gas training
just make sure that oil and gas
to make sure that that fair
share of of the cost goes to the
folks driving electric vehicles
to pay something that would go
towards wrote wrote tax.
And to the roads fund.
And and I'm and I'm not sure it
would have legs today so I'm
just saying that you you use
your presentation made it made
more presuppose something that's
not in law yet and if even if it
did and and we have the current
governor I'm not sure that would
be signed.
so there is that there is a it's
a bit of a hole there
I was.
Questioning I heard a a number
that was presented of course I
was not here and I'm not sure if
was presented here as some other
important here in Santa Fe but
that the cost to charge for an
hour would be in the
neighborhood of at two dollars
and fifty cents for a for an
hour.
So I have some questions on that
just to there and I'll try to
keep the faster you get your
responses quick I.
What does it cost what is a
kilowatt hour of electricity
costs.
Right now to a homeowner's at
two dollars and fifty cents is
it greater than that Madam chair
representative Montoya
it no not quite so all back up a
little bit here so on average
under current residential rate
structure a single kilowatt hour
is about ten cents so not much
the the figure that was referred
to earlier is we have two new
rates that we're launching one
of them is a as a residential
home home electric vehicle right
that's trying to get electric
vehicles to shift their load to
overnight for customers that are
able to do that to reduce the
strain on the grid we're
offering a special whole home
electric vehicle right as we're
calling it the WHAV that's about
three cents a kilowatt hour so
it's a lower cost of energy and
that's for the two dollar and
figures of two dollar and fifty
cent comes from if you assume
the battery capacity of probably
seventy five eighty kilowatt
hours so that's a two dollar and
fifty cents I would say zooming
out
much more generally a figure
that's except that across New
Mexico is that fueling and
electric vehicle is about the
equivalent of a dollar per
gallon of gasoline so that's
residential public level two
public DC fast charging sort of
averaging it all together think
about filling your car up at
about a dollar a gallon so Madam
with that does that include I
know I get electrical electric
bill and some of it is the
kilowatt hour but then there's a
whole number of fees and other
things so the actual cost of
that kill one hour.
Including all those fees what is
that and what it and what is
that also to to businesses I
know that that's Google can't
talk about a couple different
right so what is the total cost
not just the kilowatt hour.
Line item Madam chair
representative want to know
that's a very good question
you're right so when I when I
say ten cents a kilowatt hour or
the approximately three cents a
kilowatt hour that is the energy
cost on the bill there are other
taxes fees whatever that's going
to depend on on where you live
some of those are passed through
fees to county government or
cities or things like that there
are also writers on the bill so
I don't I don't know exactly is
the short answer
to discuss the commercial fees
as well that's also going to
depend on the rate structure
there on so sometimes it's a
it's a kilowatt hour for your if
you get into a car or more large
power rates there's actually
demand component with those and
so it gets to be a very nuanced
conversation so we just kind of
a slightly different question
and that is so.
The state with some funds that
are coming potentially from
federal government will be
putting in the infrastructure.
Who will only infrastructure
once it's in one of the state on
it or will that be the is going
to whose responsibility to
maintain the infrastructure at
that point.
So madam chair representative
Montoya all answer for me
totally perspective and I'll
need to pass it on to my
colleague through the PNM plan
we are we are not planning to
own and operate infrastructure
we are providing incentive
funding to
to customers both existing
customers and new customers to
use this is almost a revenue
stream so we're taking a more
market based approach.
Convo on this real quick madam
chair so the state will be
responsible to run this the
state will on the infrastructure
Let me ask you this and
maintenance all that that will
be the state required know who's
paying for that.
Madam chair reserve one thank
you so the state has no appetite
to phone infrastructure will we
own infrastructure within our
DOT footprint absolutely for
example I mentioned one of the
strategies is to install
infrastructure on state owned
property adjacent to our
districts because we own the
property we have the easements
which streamlined the process to
get in but what's unique about
the IDA funding is that they
they allow for the eighty twenty
percent cost share to ensure
partnerships with private
entities and so the federal
government is basically saying
from another perspective will
pay the eighty percent cost
share and private entities will
be able to put up to twenty
percent portion to then take
ownership and responsibility
responsible for the operation
maintenance of that equipment
now they'll be provisions if all
contractual W. responsible for
having it functioning ninety
seven percent of the time
Reports they'll be responsible
for providing reports back of
the usage but the unique nature
of this bill is that it does
open up the opportunity for
these and and I know it may not
be P. three in the traditional
sense of what we talk about him
the state of New Mexico but from
a federal perspective the state
does not intend on owning and
operating this infrastructure we
intend on partnering with
contracts and contracting with
private entities to own operate
and maintain these for the next
five years so madam chair that I
guess that kind of gets to where
I thought we were going and that
is it is it appears that what
we're doing is we're investing
in this and then we are
donating.
A large portion of this.
Infrastructure and the cost of
that.
To the utilities for whoever
there's a there's a there's a.
If we're not gonna own it
somebody owns it and if they're
owning it that means we're
passing that on and it appears
as if whatever.
Tax dollars are going into this
this is this is a to whoever
utility is and I'm I'm anyone
understand why utilities maybe
more in favor of this to some
degree.
They're gonna be able to charge
on the other end give us maybe
some sort of fee for taxes on
the other end.
But this is a revenue source
they're going to get.
And we've given them site
building and gas station for a
gas for a company sells
gasoline.
to some degree.
And we're and and and the cost
of this sounds like eighty
percent of the cost for this is
going to come from taxpayers to
maintain the cost of it.
If I were a business of any
other sort I would love to have
this arrangement with the state
where the taxpayers pay for my
business for at least eighty
percent of it I would enter that
contract where I would then only
twenty percent of it.
And pass the cost of maintaining
my this at least this portion of
my business on
if I have shareholders this is a
good deal maybe not such a good
deal for the taxpayers even if
it's nationwide but at some
point if state dollars have to
go into this.
I'm not so sure this is such a
good deal for the taxpayer so
thank you Madam.
Madam chair representative I
just want to clarify one thing
the utilities are not looking to
own and operate stations from
state funding so we will not be
I mean although I can't speak
for every utility but our
current plan is not to try no
operate that's not that I don't
think that that's the intent of
the know the funding and it's
not PNM is intend to this time.
Thank you madam chair they may
not be the intent.
Chair and senator mature and one
of the other areas of this is
that a contractual obligation we
will allow for the operation
maintenance and upkeep of the
charging stations and then of
course the kilowatt charge as
well but the intent of it is and
you mention intent is not to be
a revenue generating endeavor as
much as providing infrastructure
for the charging the mobility of
the drivers.
So madam chair that I might
suggest you might see some
legislation to this effect if
the taxpayer is going to be
paying maybe the cost would be
it maybe should be more than two
dollars and fifty cents per for
the hour maybe we charge a
little more and the state if
money is going in from the state
potentially I'm right now we're
talk federal dollars but
potentially from the state if
that's the case that the state
would be able to recover from
the folks are using the charging
stations and it back field so
the taxpayers are not on the
hook because once again we were
just we were just told to
beginning of the initial
Interstate quarters before going
to continue to expand the state
then the tax payers are going to
be continue to be on the hook
for that and not everyone of the
state taxpayers can't afford a
electric vehicle so I'm just I'm
once again my questions are
about getting my head around
this and I I agree with uh
Senator Tallman quite a bit I
supported this legislation and I
really agree and I've and I
really appreciate Santo toms
attitude on all of this which is
people who are choosing to do
this and one more people choose
to do this as they do.
Need to be caring the cost of
these things I know one but my
first a.
Video game cost a certain amount
of data certain amount as they
grew and as the market share
grew the cost went down but in
the meantime the people who
jumped in first did it did cost
them more and but what we're
doing right now with electric
vehicles and the such is the
state is bearing on most of the
cost of this as we go forward to
encourage people to go down this
road and at some point the the
folks in the state who are poor
even if even if all of new
vehicles come out by twenty
forty or electric that doesn't
mean everybody in the country is
going to be able to force a
lecture to be able and so they
they there's that and but as as
the as the usage goes down on on
on fossil fuels but those fossil
fuels remain intact especially
poor people who cannot afford to
transition to electric vehicle
unless the state then also
decides to give them an electric
vehicle which means that's the
cost to the taxpayer than those
of poor families the cost of
their fuel is going to go up on
the vehicles that they have so
either way front end or back and
the poor gonna get hit with
these decisions and we're not
and we're we're just not having
that discussion thank you madam
chair.
Representative Crowder quick
question.
Thank you madam chair and it is
very brief used to turn the
gentleman from PNM use the term
a little bit ago of whole home
electric vehicle right.
Help me understand what whole
home is because I get images in
my head that could or could not
be right
does that mean it has to be a
total electric com but is it
going to be a gas heated home
and they have electric vehicle
can be a very remote rural home
with propane and they get the
special rate can you help me
understand what this whole home
mean.
Madam chair representative
Crowder yes thank thank you for
that question so when I say a
whole home it's just the
electric meter itself so if you
have a natural gas heater if you
have propane I'll all of that's
fine it's it's not requiring
customers to have a a whole
electric home its that the rates
will be applied to the whole
home as a residential service so
for this right specifically in
order to qualify you would need
to have certain things on the on
the charging station itself you
would also need to have a an
electric vehicle registered at
your PNM service address that
would qualify you we're going to
swap out the meter other
utilities do this by actually
sub metering the charger itself
and having a specific right but
that was determined to be much
more costly to our customers to
