comments. Thank you, Clinton.
Chairman, I was, um, I'm Clinton
Turner, your legislative
economist, I just wanted to
address um some of your
questions, some of um the
Representative Armstrong's
questions Garretts that might be
a little bit more uh New Mexico
specific, um, from the last
presentation really quick. Um,
so we, we had a really good
presentation on a 5050 state
overview on what a lot of states
are grappling with, um, but I
wanted to make sure that you're,
um,
it in on the very somewhat
unique situation that New Mexico
has, um, and in some ways, that
means that a lot of the
technical, a lot of the
administrative work is already
done that.
Probably 40 to 45 other states
are going to be grappling with
for years and years to come, and
it's already finished um here in
New Mexico.
So when, when we say um we
don't, we, we do today tax
electric vehicles, fuel. Um, we
know, you know, it, it starts
out in New Mexico as natural
gas, coal, and wind.
Um, about 1/3, 1/3, and 5th, um,
and a 10 solar, um, and then we
turn it on to electricity and
then we we tax it.
Um, so we tax that today in New
Mexico. It doesn't matter if
it's at your home. It doesn't
matter if it at a charging
station because I like the
utility will sell that
electricity, so it's gonna be 7
or 8% on average, so that 7 or
8% compares to a 6%.
Uh, effective rate on gasoline.
Um, so today we do tax electric
vehicles, energy at a slightly
higher rate than um gasoline or
diesel powered cars, and in that
sense, New Mexico's finished.
Um, now the question is only for
you on the policy is exactly how
much of that money should stay
with the general fund, how much
should go to municipalities, how
much you go to the counties for
their roads and how much
automatically and
recurring basis to the road
fund. Um, so today that money
goes mostly to the general fund
and municipalities, some to the
county, and some to the road
fund automatically every year.
Um, and then the last 4 years,
uh, big chunks of the general
fund have also gone to the road
fund. So your choice is knowing
that money is already collected.
We're actually finished in a way
that's unlike almost any other
state, um, I'd say on that slide
where
There's a kilowatt hour fee,
where we should be on that list
and it's easy for us to do.
We've we've been, we're done.
We're, we're collecting that at
7 or 8%. If you think that 7 or
8% of the value is wrong, we
could adjust that, um, but now
all you have to decide is where
you want to put that money. If
it's in the right place today,
um, with a general funds,
municipality, county road fund
mix that it is today, or if you
wanna up it um higher than it is
today. Um, so I wanted to make
sure and clarify that New Mexico
specific situation that we have,
and also
Another New Mexico specific
situation is today we have a
little bit referenced as a cent
per mile tax that almost no
other state has. There's only
less than a half dozen, but it
only applies to commercial
vehicles above 26,000 pounds,
and it, and it already today, if
they're heavier, it stair steps
up between 1 cent a mile to 4
cents a mile, and even if you're
up above a semiweight, it gets,
you know, faster, fast with
Some special overweight fees. So
if you want that, if you want
that tax to start lower than
26,000 pounds, um, you could do
that, or if you think it hasn't
been adjusted for inflation and
those trucks coming across on
I-40, um, should pay more than 4
cents a mile, um, then and you
wanna hit them.
And use that money to add
another lane to I-40, you can
Uh hit commercial trucks over,
you know.
You know, 26,000 pounds more
than once in a mile or those big
semis, more than 4 cents a mile,
that that hasn't been inflation
adjusted, and that almost all
that revenue today is coming on
across state traffic or I could
let the the DOT speak to that,
but I will vast, vast majority
of that revenue is coming from
I-40 and I-10 coming across your
state and not even stopping. So
those are a couple of very
unique situations that you have,
and it kind of focuses.
What
40 states are still grappling
with, and now you're finished
with that and you have a lot of
other questions of where you
want to put the money and how
much you want to put it in road
funder versus local road funds,
but some of those questions are
already solved for you.
Thank you. Do you have a
representative? Yes,
go ahead.
Thank you so much and thank you
for clarifying. That was great
information. Can you give us a
percentage of what is going to
uh municipal
Paities and then counties. I
know that the majority is in the
general fund, but what is going
to municipalities and cities is
that or municipalities and
counties? Is it different per
county and per municipality. Can
you give me a range?
Sure, um, Representative Cason,
chairman, and, and that's
exactly the right question that
now that what do you have to do,
and, and it's a complic somewhat
of a complicated question
because it changes in every
single county, every single
municipality, depending on the
rates imposed on real rough
levels, you, if, if that
charging station was in city
limits, if it was in your house
in city limits, it'd be almost
um half local, half general
fund, with the majority going of
the local going.
to the municipality and a a
fairly small portion directly to
the road fund through fixed
distributions and through
percentage-based distributions.
So not very much today, as we
have not very many overall EVs.
So that's one way, um you might
wanna start increasing those
fixed percentages and fixed
amounts that are going to the
general fund as EVs goes up, but
if it's within city limits, I'd
say about half.
Local in real rough numbers,
half local, half general fund,
um, and then the general fund,
um, the for the municipalities,
some of it's earmarked to the
general funds to each of the
grocery receipts tax increments,
some
Specifically to transportation,
so, um, like there's
Certain parts that Los Alamos
collects that specifically
earmarked for the
transportation, um.
Uh, funds that they share with
the regional counties, but
that's varies county by county,
municipal municipal government
by municipal government.
Would you have a question?
When you start talking, the
grocery seats tax on electricity
is what you're talking.
It's still not dedicated to the
road.
And I think that's the question.
That we're talking about is how
to dedicate that.
And like you say, you could put
a an increment.
In there to go directly to the
road fund.
But that would be the same
increment that was going to heat
your house or cook your food.
And the residential rate.
So
And again, we just, you know, we
need the budget.
To see how much we want to spend
on roads every year.
And we do that more or less.
But we need to figure out how to
put an escalator on that and how
to put an escalator on the
revenue for that.
And we can do it with all, all
pieces, all parts of it.
But to me,
That's the important part.
I figure out what the overall
budget is, what we're, you know,
and I, I'll go back to the
thought of the 5 year plan.
To say we want to bring this
money in.
And escalated over a five-year
period and take into account how
much the inflation rate is over
that period. And if we want to
improve the roads in the state
of New Mexico.
We're gonna have to do something
more than what we're doing
because
We have a huge amount of roads
that need work that we're not
getting to.
And, and, and that's what I'm
getting at, Mr. Chair, is
figuring out that revenue
stream.
Along with the budget we need.
To, uh, fund an adequate.
Adequate transportation. And I
think that's what this committee
Should be looking at?
What is that?
What is that number?
To adequately fund the
transportation. That would be a
good thing.
For a transportation
subcommittee of the LFC to do.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
you're on the LFC That's right,
but this is a subcommittee of
the LFC.
Right?
Isn't this a subcommittee of the
LFC, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
Senator, I believe this is a
subcommittee of the revenue and
Tax Stabilization Committee, I
messed up you
you got some clouts so you could
be LFC.
There you go.
OK. Any other?
Before we uh move on to uh
mistress.
Simon or Simone?
Mr. Simon.
Thank you, Clinton, for your
comments.
And um
Next, we'll move on to Mr.
Simon, who, who gave us a
presentation.
Uh, and, um.
Federal funds, federal and state
funds for transportation.
Yes, the perspective of the LFC.
Thank you, Miss. Go ahead. Yes,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Joseph
Simon. I'm the Department of
Transportation analyst for the
Legislative Finance Committee.
And just real quick before I
dive into this presentation,
just make one point on, on on um
what Clinton had to say. This, I
think really illustrates.
Uh, you know, how hard it is for
us as staff even to do some of
these cross-state comparisons,
because little things in law can
change. I think Representative
Armstrong represent, uh, you
know, mentioned one earlier,
just these very tiny things and
so sometimes it's, it can be
really difficult for us to do
some of these big multi-state
comparisons, um, and that's why
NCSL frankly, is so helpful to
us in, um, you know, helping
manage a little bit of that, and
it's just, it's something we
couldn't do without their help.
So with that, I will uh begin my
uh prepared presentation here uh
talking about uh state and state
and federal revenues for
transportation.
And you should all have a
presentation.
Uh, looks like this, and, uh, it
starts off with just a brief
overview of the infrastructure
investment and Jobs Act. So, Mr.
Chairman, you asked us if we
could give the committee an
overview of the uh of that law,
that's the current federal law
that governs transportation
programs. So, uh, federal
transportation programs go
through a 5-year reauthorization
cycle. So the current uh law uh
will run from federal fiscally.
2022 to uh federal fiscal year
2026. Uh, the previous law ran
from 2016 to 2021, with a with a
one year extension.
Um, and so, uh,
You know, the, the, the real
core of the infrastructure
investment and Jobs Act is that
reauthorization of uh what sort
of the bureaucracy more broadly
calls the surface transportation
program of the federal
government. So basically that's
all of the programs of the
Department of Transportation. In
addition to that, there are a
lot of other kinds of uh of um
funds in that bill uh related
more broadly to uh
infrastructure and the
environment. And so,
You can turn to page 4 in your
um in your handout and see uh
the, the federal government's
sort of broken this up into
about 13 different categories.
So that's range from everything
from transportation programs
like airports and roads to um uh
environmental remediation that's
um at uh the Environmental
Protection Agency, for example,
some broadband programs, I'm
sure many of you are familiar
with, uh.
Some of the large amounts of
money that the federal
government's been allocating to
broadband expansion and to um
And to improve affordability of
broadband.
Those are in as part of this
bill. So all told, um, the
federal government reports
there's about $1.2 trillion in
Uh, in the infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act, that's
over 5 years. Um.
One source that we frequently
use is is a is a service called
Federal Funds Information for
states. That's basically, you
know, a service that, you know,
monitors all of this federal
funding on 44 states and, and
lets us know, uh uh the what the
different funding opportunities
out there are. And so they're
tracking in just the
infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act, tracking 281 separate
grant programs, and frankly,
there are a lot, uh, there's a,
there's a big chunk of uh the
infrastructure investment and
Jobs Act that they're not
tracking like uh.
For example, there's some Army
Corps of Engineer
appropriations, for example,
that it's not really a state
issue, so they don't track that.
Um, in to, those 281 programs
account for $750 billion in
federal funds over the five year
life of the bill.
Um, if you turn to page 5, you
can see uh from this same
source, what they estimate New
Mexico's allocations for these
programs to be. Uh, so you can
see in the left hand portion of
that, there are, there's uh
about uh 3.8 billion uh in this
bill, uh, that, uh,
We would estimate to be uh uh
coming to the state of New
Mexico. Um, most of that is in
the form of formula funds and
we'll get to that in, in just a
moment. Some of it's in the form
of competitive grants that um
different agencies throughout
New Mexico. So, uh, it's
important, I should point out
here, this is not just money for
the state of New Mexico but also
includes uh local governments,
other entities within New Mexico
that are eligible for these
kinds of federal funding, that's
all tracked um by this service.
And so in total, once we, you
know, so I, I said the 3.8
billion for transportation
programs, there's an additional
on nearly $2 billion in other
areas, including, uh, I'll just
uh note here at the very top of
that other agency program.
You'll see $1.2 billion for
broadband. It's been a lot of
discussion in the legislature
about those, those significant
amounts of money available for
broadband expansion.
Uh, another big item, uh, the,
the import to New Mexico, you'll
notice at the bottom of that of
that same uh
Uh column is 456 million for
water projects. Um, so I'm here
today to talk to you a little
bit about the um uh the
transportation programs that's,
uh, those are all run through
the Federal Department of
Transportation, whereas these
are are funded through other
areas.
And uh so I, I, I, before I move
on actually just real quick
note, not all of the competitive
grant funding in the IIJ has yet
been allocated by the federal
government, so there's still
about a 96 billion FFIS
estimates that is available in
competitive grants for FY 25 and
FY26 awards, um,
And uh
And that. So, on page 6.
Of your presentation here we can
see funding uh at the national
level, specifically for
transportation programs. So, as
you can see from this chart, the
Uh, the biggest chunk of
transportation programs is for
our roads, and it's important to
remember when we talk about
federal road funding, the, the
sort of the
The key item for states are
these large formula grant
programs that flow through the
state departments of
transportation across the
country. So, um, there is in the
IIJA, you know, uh, some of the,
the state transportation
officials have noticed there's
an increasing number of these
sort of competitive grant
programs that Congress has been
adding to the reauthorization
bills for um uh for
transportation, increasing those
numbers and increasing the
amount of fun.
Ones that are um
That are there, uh, the
Association of State Highway
officials like to see 90% of
highway trust fund.
Uh, revenue, um, flowing through
formulas rather than through
competitive grants. And the
reason for that is these grants
can be pretty costly for states
to go after, right? They're not
free. And so, you know, a grant
application for a large project
could cost the state $200,000
and that's before, you know,
they, they don't even have any
guarantee that that $200,000 is
going to be um returned through
the investment. So, you know, we
talk, we talk a lot about the
opportunities of federal grant
programs, but understand there's
an opportunity cost to that, and
You know, the and we're we'll
talk a little bit later about
state revenue for
transportation, but, you know,
Putting a lot of money chasing
grants that you may or may not
get is maybe not the best use of
use of that funding, um, versus
funding formula programs that
give states a little more
flexibility to invest in
transportation infrastructure.
Uh, and so on,
I just point out on this chart,
so you'll see there the total
amounts nationally um for uh
different categories of
transportation programs as well
as the percentage of that.
Pot of money that flows to uh
states or or other governments
through formulas.
Uh, so, on page 7.
These are New Mexico specific
allocations for the different
categories of transportation
appropriation. So I showed you
at the earlier the, the sort of
big picture, here's across all
of the agencies, this is
specific to transportation, that
3.8 billion roughly over the
five years. And so, as you can
see, as with
The rest of the country, the
biggest chunk of that by far is
the 3.3 billion roughly that's
gonna flow to um through formula
grant programs. There's a lot of
different formula grant programs
in here. Uh, the biggest one is
what's called the National
Highway Performance Program.
That's the biggest appropriation
in the infrastructure investment
and Jobs Act, and that's where
DOT gets a big chunk of its
operational fund or I shouldn't
say operational funding, but
it's operating budget that it
then reinvests in um
construction projects statewide.
comes from these 4 mg. Um,
Even though the biggest chunk of
that um is from those formula
grants. I would be remiss to
note, to not note that um DOT
has been successful in going out
and attracting uh some, some
pretty large uh grants in, uh,
uh, that have been part of the
infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act, um, most notably, and
this is relatively recent, uh,
the US Department of
Transportation announced New
Mexico had been awarded $71
million to replace the bridge
over Nogal Canyon on I-25.
Um,
There's also a a big one you may
have read about for EV charging
facilities down on Interstate
10. That's for heavy trucks, um,
in there, uh, there's been a $60
million appropriation for US 64
in San Juan County. And then
just to illustrate how this, you
know, affects not just the state
DOT but a lot of other
governments in there. I've I've
included a couple of programs
that are not DOT but are for
local governments. So there's
$25 million
For the city of Albuquerque for
the ABQ Uptown Transit Center.
Uh, that's a, that's a transit
project for that, uh, for the
city. In addition, there was a
$14 million award to Taos
Pueblo. So, uh, one of our
tribal sovereign entities to do
some road reconstruction uh on
on Pueblo Roads. So I think one
of the things uh it's important
to remember when, when you uh
look at the sort of the news
about, you know, you hear about
these huge sounding
transportation.
Bills from the um from the
federal government is they, they
don't necessarily talk about it
the same way we talk about it a
lot of times. They'll tell you.
Not just what the new money is
that's going into that, but
they'll count the entire money
that
Perhaps not wisely, we were
expecting to get from the
federal government because
because it's what they've always
given us. So, uh, you can see on
this page, on page 8, total
allocations uh for federal
highway formula programs, um,
over a longer period of time. So
you can see there starting in FY
15.
Uh, and then you can see a big
bump there in FY21. That's the
passage of the infrastructure
investment and Jobs Act that 30%
increase from about 429 million
to 561 million. So, you know, a
30% bump in single years is very
nice, but as you can see, it
tends to level out once we get
that first, that initial bump.
So we're not getting uh
necessarily the same level of of
revenue growth year over year.
You know, another really thing,
uh, important thing for you all
to remember about uh highway
formula programs is receipt of
these funds are
Um, contingent on the state
coming up with a non-federal
match for these programs. And
so,
You know, in, in a way, you
know, the this additional
highway revenue, it's not really
an obligation because we could
choose not to draw down those
dollars, but in in a way it
almost represents an obligation
for us, us to come up with 30%
more money than for match. And
so just uh keep that in mind
when we uh talk a little bit
about some of the state funds
here in in just a moment.
Um, also this, so I wanted to
show you the 2nd biggest pot of
money for the department, uh, or
for, for New Mexico from federal
dollars, um, is our federal
transit programs. So you can see
again, pretty similar pattern
with federal transit programs
where they went up by about 30%
uh between FY 21 and FY 22. I
would say from an operational um
perspective, uh, most of these
funds flow through to local
operators who actually operate
these programs rather than being
kept.
So, um,
That was just a very brief
overview of some of those major
uh federal funding sources and
so now I'm gonna move on to the,
the big state funding sources
and, you know, uh, the, the big
one in that for uh state
highways and that how that uh
federal funding impacts the
state budget is by looking at
the state road fund. So the
state road fund, um, is about
84% of NMDOT's state revenue
goes into the road fund. It's
used to pay the, the vast
majority of their.
Operating budget costs. So, um,
staff at the department, you
know,
Uh, we talked a little bit about
equipment earlier that comes out
of the road fund.
So in the last decade, we have
seen some revenue growth in um
the state road fund from uh uh a
bit grown about 42% over that
those years. It's an average of
about 3.8% per year. Uh.
But I think it's important that
we keep in mind and I feel like
I maybe was uh preempted a
little bit by Senator Woods and
some of his questions of the
last presenter and uh talking
about slide 11.
And so slide 11 shows you um uh
illustration of highway cost
inflation is calculated by the
Federal Highway Administration.
So the Federal Highway
Administration, uh,
Create something called the
National Highway Construction
Cost index. You, you heard it
referenced earlier today when
talking about how uh some states
index some taxes um to highway
cost inflation. This is what
they use. So,
Uh,
You can see for most of the
period, uh, we were talking
about, there was moderate but
pretty steady increases, where
uh highway construction costs
have pretty significantly
increased is if you start to
look there in uh in December
2020.
So, since December 2020, uh,
costs for highway construction
have risen by 40%. That's a 13%
average per year. Now, if you
think about that in the context
of, you know, your uh state
revenues for transportation
going up by 3% a year. That's a
pretty significant gap.
And so what um I have presented
on the next several slides. I
won't go into a great amount of
detail, but I will provide you
some detail that Representative
Lundstrom asked for earlier. Um,
And that's basically just
looking at these major revenue
sources into the state road
fund and how those have grown
over time, if they've grown at
all, and um an an idea based on
the uh highway construction cost
index that I showed you a moment
ago, sort of what the purchasing
power of those dollars over time
represents. So, um, you can see
on slide 12, you've got 12, so
in in FY 13.
DOT reports there was a $112
million collected in gasoline
taxes. Um,
In FY 24, the revenue estimates,
we don't have final numbers yet,
but the revenue estimates expect
to take in about $115 million.
So that's $300 over that decade.
And so what inflation has done
to that is pretty significant,
right? And so we see about a 2,
about a 2.5% increase in
And revenue into that fund. But
when you uh hold that constant
in $2013 what you see is a 47%
drop in inflation, or sorry, in
purchasing power of those
dollars.
I will say also, you know,
another thing, and I talked
about this a little bit before
as well. Um,
So, even, even with um the
increasing efficiency of uh fuel
efficiency of vehicles. We have
seen very small increase over
time in the gasoline taxes. DOT
now is starting to begin to
project those actually falling,
and, you know, we'll see that
when um we get we get updated
revenue estimates if those hold
or if indeed we're gonna still
sort of tread water in this $115
million range. Probably won't go
down a huge amount.
All at once, but we're, we've
reached the point where just
even in nominal terms, we're
going to start seeing gasoline
tax revenue into the state road
fund actually fall.
Um,
And uh so I, again, I wanted to
be responsive to uh that uh
request from Representative
Lundstrom, so that this can
really illustrate some of the
difficulty there. So in FY 23,
according to the Department of
Transportation, 21.1% of revenue
into the state. This isn't on
the slide, so I apologize, but
21.1% of revenue into the state
road fund was from gasoline
taxes in FY 23. You back that up
to the first year I talked.
About FY 13, it was 29.9%.
So as a percentage of the
revenue the DOT is bringing in
into the road fund that amount
has fallen dramatically.
Um, again, uh, just to, to show
how the purchasing power of the
department's been affected
affected over time. I've
included some of the other
revenue sources. So, uh, here on
slide 13 on the left hand side,
you can see uh special fuels
tax, that's diesel, um, that,
that's actually an area where um
in nominal terms, the revenue
has gone up pretty
significantly, right? It's gone
up 44%. We're still seeing
because of those high
construction costs in the last.
couple of years, purchasing
power of that going down. Um.
As of FY 23, the um special
fuels tax accounts for 24.3% of
revenue into the state road
fund, uh, that's actually pretty
consistent with where it was
back in 2013, so it's been
pretty, pretty steady.
And we also talked briefly about
the weight distance tax. Again,
that's another area where we're
seeing growth, uh.
About the same on uh
Uh, as, as, as the diesel tax,
uh, but you having the same
amount of purchasing power, we
distance, um, provides a little
bit less to the road fund in in
FY 23, it was 19.2% versus about
19% back in FY 13.
Turning the page, I I did just
put um
Uh, there's, uh, one chart for,
for registration and driver's
license fees, uh, that, um, are
there on the left. But what I
want to point out to you is the
one on the right because this is
actually one where even even
adjusting for inflation we're
going up because of legislative
changes that you all made a few
years ago. Um, it was mentioned
earlier, the motor vehicle
excise tax, uh, the biggest
chunk of that goes to the
general fund. I can tell you how
much. Give me just one second.
So, um, 59.39%.
of that motor vehicle access tax
goes to the general fund versus
uh 21.86% to the road fund. So
that's what you see here is that
21.88%, and if you're sort of
wondering where did that, where
did that that percentage of
gasoline tax go? It went to
motor vehicle excise tax because
it's now 11% of your revenue,
and I, um, it does, uh, it's my
understanding of this is a
little more um
Uh, subject to economic cycles
uh and what you're seeing and so
we'll see how this revenue
source grows with time as
vehicles become more and more
expensive, but it is that is
something to keep in mind when
we're talking about motor
vehicle excise tax.
And so just sort of bring it all
together on the last slide on
page 15. So this is overall
state road funded and so you can
see um in nominal terms over the
period we've been discussing
about a 42% increase in um
Revenue into the state road
fund, um, but because of those
cost increases that have been,
uh, have been noted uh pretty
significant drop in purchasing
power for for that um amount.
And so,
So the next question is, so, so
what have, what have you all
done about this, right? And so
if you turn to page 16.
You can see how the legislatures
responded. And uh so,
Uh, in the past, you all have
made some, some pretty small um
uh relatively small
appropriations, uh, from the
general fund to uh DOT for road
projects. So what I've done here
is take a look at how much in
each fiscal year.
Uh, NMDUT has spent from special
appropriations, uh,
To the department for, for
projects and added that to road
fund revenue, right? And then
held it constant over time. So
this
Uh, don't be confused. These are
not actual amounts of dollars.
These are the amounts uh from
those years in $2013. So
basically what we're, what we're
looking at here is how has that
um kept up over time. And you
can see actually, we've kept it
pretty steady with significant
influxes of general fund
revenue. So there was a there
was a peak of that purchasing
power in FY 21. Um, it's pulled
back because of the that
significant um inflation that
we've been
Talking about uh for a while
today. Um,
I will say, uh, again, this is
based on the money the
department has actually spent.
You all have have um already
appropriated a pretty
significant amount that it's
gonna take DOT a couple of years
to spend down these projects,
you know, uh, take a longer
period of time, so, um, yeah,
there was some discussion of
that earlier today. So there,
there is um based on our
estimates about 860 million out
there in the um
Already authorized by you, that
includes the 380 million that
you authorized last year in
severance tax bonds, um, the
department will be able to go
out and, and sell those bonds in
December. I think they've got a
couple of projects, um, that are
planned to be let in FY 25 and
then they can start spinning
that down and the rest of those
probably let in FY 26 and start
pining those down. So we might
actually see um
The, the blue bars on this chart
actually grow based on the
significant amounts that you've
allocated from either severance
tax bonds or from the general
fund in, in, in recent years.
Uh, so with that, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I will stand for any
questions.
And uh
Thank you, Joey. I'm gonna uh
take over driving here for a
little while to allow the
chairman to eat his lunch.
Um, but thank you very much for
the informative presentation as
always, um, I think our first.
Set of questions will come from
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, thank you, chair.
Joey, on page 5, you lay out all
of the various categories for
funding. That's a total of
federal funding, is that
correct?
So, um, Mr. Chair, and a
representative, uh, so that is a
total of federal funding within
the infrastructure Investment
and Jobs Act. There's a lot of
other federal funding from other
bills, you know, big, big one
obviously would be Medicaid.
That's not in these numbers.
This is specific to that law.
Pardon my ignorance I'm
learning, um, so Joey the, the
amounts that are categorized,
are they static?
Or is it something that there's
flexibility to move to different
categories of necessary or is it
deemed necessary by the
legislature.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, so, um,
To my knowledge, it's so
essentially the infrastructure
investment and Jobs A is an
appropriation bill. Just like
when you all make an
appropriation for a particular
function, you know, there may be
some flexibility within that
appropriation for
You know, in this case, a
federal department to, to make
some some latitude, but as you
all do, frankly, Congress does
the same thing and that they
want those dollars spent on, you
know, on a particular item,
right? So, you know, they had
they exercise not only their
appropriation authority through
the restrictions in law, but
also their oversight authority
um to really um
You know, try to, try to keep,
make sure that what the federal
departments spending is within
their intent on that. So, um,
within these categories, there
are lots of different grant
programs, uh, so I couldn't
necessarily speak with absolute
certainty to every single one,
but in, in general, I think just
like you all do, Congress
expects these dollars to be
spent the way they anticipated
they'd be spent.
Lastly, chairwoman, uh,
So is there a formula that's
provided to every state?
Excuse me, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, there is a
formula, um, it's
It's pretty straightforward, but
I don't have the details in
front of me, basically, so how
the US Department of
Transportation calculates out
each state's allocation. I know
like.
You know, what you would imagine
is is in there, you know, so
like your road miles,
population, things like that and
and we can get you more details
on what exactly is, is in there.
So for um the, if you look on um
page 7.
Mhm
So the the column underwear says
formula funds. Those are all
allocated based on a formula
that's that's set in in federal
law and that the department,
federal Department of
Transportation charged with
determining.
I would like that information.
Thank you, Turbo.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
next to go to Representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation.
Mr. Transportation, Simon. Um, I
have one question, rail funding
isn't really included in here.
Is there a reason for that?
Yes, so, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, so
All of the appropriations in the
infrastructure investment and
Jobs Act for rail are
Competitive, right? There's,
there's not a formula program
for, well, let me take this
back. Um, for, um, passenger and
freight rail.
There's not a formula, right?
So there is federal transit
funding for light rail, like the
rail runner, for example, and
that's included in the public
transportation piece of this
rather than the um the one that
says rail, um, and, um,
I would just say, you know,
looking at the individual
grants, um, within that, uh, a
big chunk of, of that money is
For example, for Amtrak
specifically, so that's who's
eligible.
Um, and so, uh, there are some
competitive um state grants that
um New Mexico could go after. I
don't know that um either the
department or the mid-regional
Regional Council of Governments
operates the rail runner, um,
Have definitely applied, but I
do know that certainly going
looking at where there might be
competitive federal funding
opportunities has been a
priority for the mid
mid-regional Council of
governments and so it's possible
they could see something we just
don't have anything yet.
Thank you. That's very helpful.
Uh, and Madam Chair, is there
any major um
Grant that we failed to get due
to a lack of a match on our
part.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Garrett, um, I
don't wanna speak categorically
to that without getting input
from the department. I do think
overall the department is
Concerned about, um, you know,
being able to, to do the work
they need to and and get the
match, but there's a lot of
flexibility in the
appropriations you give the
department to, to go after
those, those dollars and and um
and match that with state road
funds. So I don't know that
they've ever looked at a
opportunity and said, man,
We should go after that. We just
don't have the match because
they do have the road fund that
they're able to to to go,
they've come and ask you for
significant general fund
appropriations so that they
could go after some competitive
grants that's been explicitly
what they've said is this gives
gives us money to go after some
of these federal grants, um, but
there is the road fund that they
can use to match, and they do
indeed when they get
These federal grants will get a,
a budget adjustment request from
the department saying, well, we
need to pull some out of the
state road fund balance that you
all didn't appropriate?
To go after those dollars.
Thank you. And final request,
um,
Madam Chairwoman and
Mr. Chair, um,
We've never had like a
presentation that really
addresses rail in our state.
I mean, I hear, oh yeah, they're
gonna extend the rail up to
Denver.
But I think it's still a bus. I,
I would just like to request a
robust presentation with BNSF,
uh, United, uh, Union Pacific,
sorry.
You
And, and just envisioned.
Uh, where are we at? We've had
the request for rail from Gallup
down to I-40.
But we've never had it all put
together in a presentation. So
if possible, I would really
appreciate seeing that.
Visually and and thoroughly, not
just tacked here and tact there.
Thank you.
Mr. Sherman, uh, real quick,
just sort of, um, unrepresented
Garret's point about the rail. I
will say um the NMDOT is in the
process of updating their rail
plans, so the federal
government.
wants us to have a rail plan in
place. Um, they're probably not
gonna have it till next year, so
it wouldn't be available this
interim, but that's probably
something that you all might
want to to consider taking a
look at once NMDOT has updated
that. It's been out of date for
a little while now, so taking a
look at that when NMDOT has
updated that would be a good
idea.
And on that point,
Representative, um, we are
planning to have a meeting with
a rail theme where we're gonna
be hearing lots of
presentations, so your
suggestion is well taken, and we
will add that to the list.
Yeah.
Alright, next we have uh
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I was just curious if there
is an org.
Style chart.
About all the taxes that are
being collected in
transportation and where they.
So, um, Mr. Chairman and
Representative, I am, I, I don't
know of one. I can, I can ask
and and we can see if we can
find you anything, but there's
nothing that I know of.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
I would just like to see, um,
you know, the dollars, where
they're going, counties.
Uh, municipalities.
General fund.
Transportation.
I would love to see a chart if
there is one that exists and if
there's not, there should be.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Next we go to
Cheer Tain.
Oh thank you, I'm sure, thank
you, uh, Joseph for being here.
Um,
On page.
Uh
5
So what, what's the, what's IIJA
funds again. So, um, Mr.
Chairman, the I the IIJA stands
for the infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act. So
that's uh is that the Biden
November 21? Yeah, it's, it's,
it's sometimes referred to as
the bipartisan infrastructure
law, the official name of it is
the infrastructure Investment in
Jobs Act. So you have 2 charts
on that page. On the left side,
I
Assume
That's the Biden bill, which
Total of $1.1 trillion half of
which was a real.
It was only really half only
half of it was really new money
because the other half was
reappropriation.
So that other chart,
The other agency programs.
that money part of the uh
Linville. So, um, Mr. Chairman,
yes, that's correct. So all of
these programs are within that
law, right? So it's just there
are different federal agencies
and different areas that are
covered by that law. So, um, the
ones you see in the right, those
are all US Department of
Transportation programs. So
Federal Highway Administration,
Federal Transit Administration.
Um, National Highway
Transportation Safety
Administration, those federal
programs specifically for
transportation.
Well, the reason I ask is
because the chart on the left.
Well, shortly after the bill,
Came out, LSC came out with it.
Proposed spending chart.
The total uh
3.7
Um,
Bill for
New Mexico.
And
Well, now you're discharge only
you.
125,000 more, 3.8.
And then plus you've got that
almost
2 billion additional.
Money and you say that?
It's
That's part of the Biden bill,
but it's often transportation.
Yes, so is that all part of one
point? So we're getting.
Almost
40% more than the original
estimate. So, Mr. Chairman, uh,
I, I, I don't know, I'd have to
take a look at what you're
looking at there. What I will
say is if this was immediately
when the bill was passed, it
probably wouldn't include
competitive grants.
Um, and so, as you can see on
page 7, I have included um what
what listed here as non
non-formula grants. I only did
that for transportation. We can
get you um the non uh formula uh
grants, um, for the other
agencies as well. Um, that might
add up to the difference. I'd
have, we'd have to take a look
at that, but I'm, I'm not, uh,
extremely familiar with what
you're, what you're looking at
those immediately in the
aftermath, but yeah, you're
Right, it, the, the dollars do
change over time and that's
actually a good point uh for me
to remind you on page 7 when you
see this, this 550 million,
that's what we know as of today,
right? So that number could go
up if agencies are successfully
able to get a piece of those
uncommitted uh federal dollars
that are in the discretionary
piece.
Well, thank you for the answer
that that's totals on page 7
totals 550 million, but.
On the left
And the charter
Page 5, it's showing almost
2 billion additional money,
well, anyway.
OK, well, like, uh,
Follow up on uh Representative
Garrett's about the rail.
That we're receiving no money.
For real, I've seen charts.
A proposed routes east of the
west of the Mississippi.
And the first proposed route
would go through New Mexico,
basically following
Um, Route 40, cause Route
Interstate 40 is a busiest
highway west of the Mississippi,
so makes sense that that would
be
The first, so the point, my
point is, here we are.
There's no apparently no money.
The west of the west of the
Mississippi.
So
We're getting 300.
Originally, we're gonna get $355
million for water
infrastructure.
Now it's up to 456. Some of you
may remember the state engineer
quit in December of 22, and he
publicly stated the reason I'm
quitting because I need over $2
billion for water
infrastructure.
So now we're only getting about
25% of what he says that we
need.
So my point is,
trillion dollars sounds like a
lot of money.
But it's far short.
of what we need. Another
interesting fact is
About 75 cents of every dollar
receiving from the Biden bill.
It's going on the roads and
bridges, even though there's 13
categories. Now I realized loads
and bridges are important, but
you can make a good argument.
We have other needs.
That are
They only occupying 25%.
So why is that? Well, I talked
to my
Very knowledgeable friend,
lobbyist in Washington.
I said, why is that? He said,
the reason for that is because
Highway contractors and the auto
industry have undue influence in
Congress. That's why you're
getting.
So much more money.
In that category and you're not
getting it really what you need
in these other categories.
So in broadband, originally we
were gonna get 100 million.
When I've seen estimates
anywhere from it's gonna cost $2
to $3 billion.
But now I see it's.
Now it's up to uh
1.2.
Billion
Which is a big increase because
we're we're getting this extra
money.
From these discretionary funds,
so that's a good thing, but it's
still half of.
A little less than half of what
we really need to provide
broadband throughout the entire
state.
So
Um,
I guess that's
Um, well.
Um, and just to, let's see page.
Page 6.
Just to put an extra point on
it.
So on page 6, you're saying it
it costs 200,000 up to $200,000.
With no guarantee of fun. In
other words, you could spend
$200,000 and you're not gonna
get any money.
That could happen, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, that's correct,
yeah. That's crazy.
Is there any explanation for
that?
So, um, Mr. Chairman, I think
so, the federal government, when
they, when they, when Congress
grants them discretionary funds,
they have a
Uh, you know, a process that
goes about ranking those
proposals and so to be at the
top of that rank, you've got to
submit the best proposal you
can, and so.
Departments across the country,
you know, have to spend money on
these grant applications.
To, you know, to even just apply
for them. And, you know, and
this is what they say it can
cost, it's not necessarily that
that's gonna cost that amount
for every single one. It, it's
gonna vary by
You know how much the project
costs, but there is an
opportunity cost to going after
those competitive programs. So
is New Mexico ever
Put up this money and not
receive funding.
I, so, Mr. Chairman, I do know
of cases where uh the department
has applied for federal, a
federal grant and not received
it. I don't know specifically if
they had contracted with
Uh, a third party to create that
application. It is something
that happens though. OK, that's
all I have, uh, madam chair.
Thank you again for being here.
Thank you, Mr. Simon. Always a
pleasure to see you. And at this
point I think we're going to
transition to our next
presentation, uh, David Drain
from Pew Charitable Trust,
trends and challenges and
transportation financing.
And I guess first off, am I
audible?
We hear you.
Great. And we see you.
Also great. Um,
And this can the slides be added
or should I add it on my end?
I'm sorry, I, I, we have a
presentation here, are they
slides that you're gonna be
presenting to us as well?
Mr. Jane. Uh, yes, um, we, we
decided that we'd submitted, um.
You know, they're available on
the screen, that'd be great.
Otherwise,
And, you know, if you haven't
have them in hard copy, I'm
happy to talk through what's in
them. We we're working on it in
the interests of saving time
though, uh, Mr. Dre, why don't
you just launch into it
and then we can catch up to you,
um.
So slide one, my name is David
Drain from the Pew Charitable
Trusts. It's a pleasure to be
invited here along with my
colleague, colleagues, uh,
Fatima Yusoki and Molly Mills.
Uh, you know, we're here to
share some of our research on
trends and challenges in
transportation financing.
And if you go to slide 2.
You know, just a quick
introduction to us, you know,
the Pew Charitable Trust is a
nonpartisan not for not for
profit philanthropic
organization, cover a wide range
of public policy issues and have
a particular focus on those of
concern to state governments.
And within that a particular
interest in state fiscal health.
And while we work on a wide
range of topics, all of her work
follows a common approach,
data-driven, inclusive, and
transparent.
Uh, for slide 3.
I work on long term liabilities
as part of our research and
state fiscal health, you know,
began in 2007 when we looked at
the bill coming due for unfunded
liabilities for public employee
pension retired healthcare
benefits, and how states could
manage this long-term costs in a
sustainable way.
Well our work started with a
fiscal lens, you know, research
covered plan design and
retirement security, governments
and investment practices, and
looking at tools to measure and
manage risk.
And we expanded our work to look
at a broader set of long-term
liabilities that can likewise
have major long-term impacts on
state fiscal sustainability,
including the research we're
presenting today, looking at the
bill coming due for deferred
maintenance and investments
needed to preserve and
rehabilitate the infrastructure,
and where the money to pay for
that can come from, particularly
in light of uh pressures on fuel
taxes.
Uh, slide 4, please.
So I'll cover two topics,
deferred maintenance in New
Mexico's transportation needs,
as well as looking at
transportation financing in New
Mexico and pure states, and then
my colleague Fatima will take
over and look at anticipating
revenue trends, I said, with a
particular focus on managing
declining fuel taxes and
planning for future risks and
building resilience.
Uh, slide 5, you know, deferred
maintenance in New Mexico's
transportation needs.
And then side 6. Why do we care
about deferred maintenance?
Well, part of it's a fiscal
challenge, right? Anytime a
state or other owner of public
infrastructure, you know,
doesn't
Adequately invest in preserving,
maintaining, and rehabilitating.
It's assets, but that has to
happen later, it's a claim on
future budgets, uh, and if
deferred maintenance liabilities
increase, it can be a sizable uh
challenge to pay for.
And it's also the case for
service transportation in
particular, that failing to
adequately preserve assets today
can add to long-term costs. It's
a lot more expensive to
reconstruct a failed road than
it is to provide a, you know, a
seal or other uh preventative
maintenance.
It's also a question of
government performance. You
know, if you don't know what
infrastructure you have, what it
needs, what condition it's in.
It's hard to make decisions
about uh prioritizing
investments and how to think
about how you stabilize costs
while still meeting
transportation needs.
Uh, and then additionally
resilience, right? If you know
what it takes to preserve your
infrastructure under current
conditions, you can then ask the
question of what will it take uh
to preserve it under, you know,
conditions of climate change or
other unexpected, uh, or, you
know, uh, uncertain futures.
What does it mean if you're
gonna have higher maximum summer
heats, increased uh thaws and uh
winter or whatever the
conditions that face your state
are.
Uh, slide 7, please.
So why is this a challenge?
Well, partially it's because
this is a big, you know, big
item. Uh, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis estimated the value of
state and local governments,
highways, transit, and water
infrastructure, and nearly $6
trillion in 2020.
So then the question is, are
states doing enough to maintain
and preserve these assets, and a
study by the American Society of
Civil Engineers found a
Collective $786 billion backlog
for road and bridge capital
needs in 2021.
And once again, states that are
making insufficient investments
in capital maintenance and
preservation are putting a
long-term liability on their
balance sheets while also
leaving residents with crumbling
roads and bridges.
Next slide.
And if you look over time,
overall investments, both from
states and from the federal
government have shrunk as a
proportion of GDP, you know,
state and local went from about
1.5% points of GDP down to about
0.5% point from the 50s to
today, the federal government
had a significant increase in
the 60s and 70s, and once again
saw decline. And this is before
IHJ, you know, uh,
infrastructure investment and
Jobs Act to talk about uh later,
but, you know, when we
understand what are the
challenges facing, you know,
states, uh, infras
This decline in spending is is
an important component of it.
Slide 9, please.
So what do we know about states
uh infrastructure conditions,
you know, and one of the
challenges is that we don't
have, you know, a nice
comparable 50 state database of,
um, you know, of what states
have, what their needs are, and
are they on track.
But an important disclosure that
we rely on is the transportation
asset management plans or TAPS.
This is part of a reporting
requirement put in place by the
moving ahead to progress in the
21st Century Act, uh, and it's
now part of federal requirements
for state DOT disclosures, you
know, with a focus on the their,
you know, management of state
national highway system roads.
And the first tamps were
released in 2019, and it's on a
three-year reporting cycle, so
we've been looking at uh 2022
camps, including that for New
Mexico.
Now these don't give us, you
know, kind of a a nice
comparable, uh, you know, 50s
debut because states differ on
what they track, how they track
it, how they assess the
conditions of the roads and
bridges, uh, and a number of
other important considerations.
At the same time, it gives us a
good insight into how state DOTs
are thinking about these assets,
particularly because they
include
Forecasts of future road and
bridge conditions and whether or
not they're meeting a state of
good repair, and in many cases
comparing future needs with
projected spending on
preservation N slide please.
So here we have from the New
Mexico tamp.
Looking at national highway
system pavements and showing a
shortfall between, you know, the
current scenario, what they
think is gonna happen based on
current policy, and where they'd
like to be, the desired
scenario.
At the top in green, this is the
share of lane miles that are in
good condition. You see that's
declining from 2022 to 2031, and
in red at the bottom is the
share of Lane Miles in poor
condition going from about 3% of
lane miles to 5.6%.
Once again, this is current
scenario based on current
projections as of 2022, and the
desired scenario, you know,
shows the trends in the opposite
direction, you know, you see a
greater share of their lane
miles and uh good uh good
condition and a decreasing share
in uh poor condition.
Next slide.
And we see the same situation
with uh National Highway System
bridges in New Mexico. Once
again, based on these DOT
projections from the temp, we
see a, uh, you know, shrinking
share of deck area under current
projections in good condition,
and a growing share of deck area
in poor conditions, you know,
and once again, the desired
scenario would show an increase
in the green and a decrease in
the red.
Next slide please.
So one of the questions is how
can New Mexico address its
anticipated gap for roads and
bridges, you know, you can see
both current performance is
below where they need to be. If
you look at the left for
interstate payments, the desired
uh condition is, you know,
507.2% of debt of lane miles in
good condition. Currently there
are, you know, about 55%, and
that over this 10 year
projection, they're gonna get
down to about 36%. So a 21%
point gap. Likewise, if you look
at the shared, uh,
Lane I was in poor condition,
but right now the state is above
its target, uh, but anticipates
a, you know, a growing gap over
over the next decade.
N slide, please?
So some quick considerations for
New Mexico, you know, as the
state camp shows a gap for
national highway system roads
and bridges, both in terms of
current conditions and future
needs.
And obviously effective tools
for prioritizing needs and
managing projects can be
helpful, but ensuring sufficient
resources is necessary in order
to close this gap. And obviously
this relates to both some of the
presentations you've already
heard on, you know, future
funding sources as well as uh
what we have to share.
Uh, the tamp focuses on national
highway system roads and
bridges, you know, because it's
a federal reporting requirement,
that's what they care about. But
if you're thinking holistically
about the need, uh, for
non-national highway system
roads and bridges, both under
state and local management in
New Mexico is necessary because
residents don't, you know, don't
care who owns the road, they
want to have smooth roads and
safe bridges to drive on.
You know, and I think as
hopefully we've shown, you know,
the New Mexico DOT provides a
lot of information through the
TAP process, as well as um
You know, has a, a significant
amount of additional
information, uh, at its, uh, at
its fingertips. The question
then is, what information is
needed by the legislature to
ensure that policy is fiscally
sustainable and meets
transportation goals.
Next slide.
So that's, that's the challenge.
Where does the money come from
to address this challenge,
whereas money at least currently
coming from, uh, to meet needs.
And so, you know, big picture
looking at all 50 states from
Federal Highway Administration
data. In 2022, about half of
highway spending came from
either federal government or
fuel taxes. Uh, that's a drop
from what it was in 2002, where
it was about 58% uh coming from
those two sources, you know, but
about 50 cents of every dollar
in aggregate.
Oh, where is money increased?
Well, the biggest single
increases in the share of
general fund revenues going to
meet the spending need, which
went from 8% to 16% over this
period.
Next slide please.
Uh, now, state reliance on fuel
tax varies significantly, you
know, in New Mexico's case, uh,
that same Federal Highway
Administration data shows that
170% of state highway funding
came from fuel taxes in New
Mexico. The US average was 21%,
you see, you know, Nevada and
California, it's close to about
30%. Texas, Oklahoma, Wyoming,
it's closer to 10%. So
significant differences between
states and both obviously fuel
taxes as well as reliance on
federal government, uh, use in
bonding and uh user fees, uh, as
well as other sources.
Next side please.
So, infrastructure investment
and Jobs Act really boosted
investments and uh
transportation and water
infrastructure by a total of
62%. Uh, you can see that the
proportionally biggest increases
were in water and electric
vehicles, you know, the
obviously the uh service
transportation and the transit
increases were significant as
well.
Next slide.
And then where does money come
from for New Mexico? Yeah, and
this is, you know, from that
same, uh same temp, looking
ahead for uh through 2031, you
can see that anticipated that,
you know, a little under half of
the money is from federal
sources, um, you know, mostly
the national highway Performance
program and the state
transportation uh block grants,
and then, you know, the funding
for uh from state sources from
the state road fund.
Uh, but I totally we see that
expected increases, um, you
know, get to above 1 billion
annually, and, you know, as that
split about half, you know, half
half between federal and state
sources.
Next side please.
So how can states assess their
conditions, assess their needs,
assess their shortfalls, and
then try to arrive at something
that's gonna come up with a
solution. In one case study that
we've been looking at is in
Pennsylvania, where uh the
governor by executive order
created a transportation revenue
option Committee to assess
revenue shortfalls in
transportation and offer
solutions. Fatima will talk more
about what that uh committee
report found on the solution
side, but they offer a useful
example of how to frame and
understand their challenges, and
they found
Looking at needs both for
highways, bridges, and
multi-modal transportation in
the state. At the state level
that a $9.35 billion shortfall
annually, and then an additional
$4 billion shortfall for local,
uh local infrastructure, you
know, because after all, when
you're thinking about the state
residents' needs, thinking about
um
Both state and local
infrastructure is important to
how they actually get from point
A to point B.
Uh, you know, I said this, not
only did they identify problems,
they then looked at potential
solutions and offered
recommendations, you know, but
this is understanding what's the
gap you need to fill, then lets
you assess.
The different ways you have to
fill it. Uh, and so it's an
important step of the process.
Uh, next slide, please.
And I'll turn it over to Patima.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
Madam Vice Chair and
distinguished members of the
subcommittee. My name is Fatima
Yofi, and I'm a senior officer
with the State Policy Project at
the future charitable trust.
Thank you again for your time
and opportunity to share our
work. Um, I'll be picking up
where David left off and
focusing on how states can
anticipate and plan for future
revenue trends and costs.
Specifically, I'll be discussing
3 related physical challenges.
The transition to electric
vehicles, declining fuel tax
revenues, and the cost of
climate impacts on
transportation infrastructure.
So starting with uh slide 21 and
then transition to electric
vehicles as a sub subcommittee
well knows the transportation
sector across the United States
is undergoing a significant
shift with the rise of electric
vehicles. Historically, fuel
taxes have been the primary
primary source for
transportation funding. However,
with the increase in fuel
efficiency of newer cars and the
shift towards electric vehicles,
this traditional revenue stream
is steadily declining.
Additionally, as there's a
growing number of electric
vehicles on the road, which are
often heavier than conventional
cars. There's an expected
increase in the wear and tear of
roads and bridges leading to
higher maintenance costs. There
will also be substantial upfront
higher investments needed to
make um charging infrastructure
along the actual highway system.
All while these fuel taxes are
diminishing. In response, some
states are proactively examining
the impact of these shifts on
their finances and are exploring
alternative funding options to
offset these declines, um, and
to manage the transition going
forward. Next slide, please. So
a good example of states
planning ahead is um example we
came across in California in
2023, the California Legislative
Analyst's Office studied the
impact of greenhouse gas
reduction policies, including an
accelerated transition to
electric vehicles in the state.
on gas and diesel tax
collections. The analysis found
that California could see up to
31% decline in transportation
revenue potentially reducing
funding by about $4 billion
annually as fuel efficient and
zero emission vehicles replace
traditional ones. This decline
in revenue could severely limit
the state's ability to find
essential infrastructure
projects, highlighting the need
for early planning and
examination of alternative
revenue sources.
Next slide, please.
Although it's important to note
that the electric vehicle
adoption rates across the
country vary, leading to
different financial impacts and
implications for different
states.
Um, as noted, coastal states
like California have seen higher
EV adoption rates with nearly
26% of new vehicles registered
in the state being EVs in 2023.
On the other hand, states like
North Dakota and Louisiana have
seen a much lower adoption rate.
New Mexico, uh, in New Mexico,
the EB registration rate for new
vehicles was slightly below the
national average as of the third
quarter of 2023, the slower
transition presents both
challenges and opportunities as
the state plans for necessary
investment in infrastructure to
support EVs, while also
navigating the revenue
implications to the state's
transportation budget.
Next slide please.
So how are other states
responding to potential gas tax
for shortfalls, um, states are
actually exploring a variety of
strategies to close this funding
gap. Um, Oregon and Washington,
for example, are piloting road
user charges where drivers pay
based on the miles they travel
rather than the fuel they
consumed, which offsets which
offers a more sustainable
revenue stream over the long
term.
Another strategy that we're
seeing states implement um is an
annual EB registration fee,
which has been adopted by 32
states. While these fees
generate some revenue they may
not fully offset the decline in
fuel taxes and could deter EV
adoption over the long term.
Raising fuel taxes is another
option, but it often faces
public resistance and is less
reliable as vehicles become more
fuel efficient. Alternatively,
states like Montana are
exploring electricity sales
taxes on EB charging.
So the implications of this need
to be further studied to assess
its effectiveness.
Additionally, some states are
considering expanding tolling on
highways and bridges. This
method directly ties revenue to
infrastructure usage, but would
require significant upfront
investments in tolling
technology and may face public
opposition.
Next slide, please.
Excuse me.
All these strategies offer ways
to address revenue shortfalls,
their effectiveness in managing
the transition to electric
vehicles depends on building
assumptions and using accurate
data and applying forward
looking projections, states like
California and Michigan have
started modeling the budgetary
impacts of declining fuel tax
revenues, helping policymakers
understand the quality, the
understand and quantify the
financial implications of EB
adoption rates and to guide
future decision making.
Enhanced data collection and
monitoring is also crucial um
for other reasons. For example,
quantifying the potential, the
portion of fuel tax revenues
from out of state vehicles is
vital in states with significant
through traffic like Tennessee,
up to 40% of the fuel tax
revenue comes from non-resident
drivers.
By improving data quality and
using forward-looking
assessments, states can better
anticipate future budget impacts
and develop strategies to
mitigate potential budget
shortfalls.
Next slide, please.
And going back to the example in
Pennsylvania that David um
briefly went over, um,
Highlighting the importance of
monitoring the transition
impacts and assessing various
options to addressing these
potential budget shortfalls. The
state's transportation revenue
Option Committee identified key
revenue sources to reduce
reliance on fuel taxes,
exploring options like
mileage-based fees, congestion
pricing, and increased
contributions from the state's
general fund towards
transportation. They also
mentally, they ultimately
recommended a blended approach
using multiple revenue resources
to create a more resilient
assistance.
Sustainable funding system going
forward. Um, these strategies
offer valuable insights for
other states to consider, um,
including adopting a similar mix
of revenue sources to ensure a
more sustainable transportation
funding.
Transition in the future.
Uh, next slide, please.
Of course, the transition to
electric vehicles is just one of
the, one of the physical
challenges states face due to
changing climate conditions.
Another major challenge is the
need to strengthen our critical
infrastructure against shifting
environmental risks. Next slide,
please.
For example, climate change is
threatening our aging
transportation systems across
the country with potential road
damages estimated to reach 200
billion by the end of this
century. States need to prepare
for both the immediate risks of
climate change, such as higher
costs for emergency repairs and
surface disruptions due to
extreme weather events like
hurricanes, wildfires, and
storms, as well as the long term
costs of more frequent repairs
or complete redesign of
infrastructure assets to make
that these
This system is more resilient to
persistent climate stressors
like extreme heat and sea level
rise. At the same time, and as
we've discussed, new policies
and technologies aimed at
reducing greenhouse gas
emissions such as the rise of
electric vehicles could put
additional pressure on
transportation budgets.
N slide, please.
So how can state and local
governments make cost effective
investments in resiliency.
Effective resiliency planning
starts with a structured
approach to assess and
prioritize infrastructure
investments.
Collaboration is key, with input
from stakeholders, including the
public transportation officials,
resiliency experts and policy
makers is being essential
throughout the process.
Policymakers in particular can
play a pivotal role by
developing resiliency plans for
their state transportation
infrastructure and making sure
that these plants talk to each
other and are integrated into a
statewide climate action plans.
Considering ways to prioritize
critical adaptation needs in
existing capital budgeting and
asset management practices.
As well as exploring sustainable
funding options such as
increasing capital reserve funds
or creating disaster accounts.
Next flight, please.
So an actionable example of this
is what's going on in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Um, Massachusetts's approach
provides
Integrated
Sorry, Massachusetts DOT
Integrated Cli its climate
vulnerability assessment into
its transportation asset
management plan, guiding their
inspection and replacement of
vulnerable bridges and culprits
throughout the Commonwealth.
This risk-based approach helped
the state prioritize investments
to strengthen the most at-risk
areas of its transportation
network.
Um, next slide, please.
And as we'll see here that the
state actually linked this
highway resiliency improvement
plan to the risk analysis that
was done in the tamp and
connected the findings to the
Commonwealth's capital budgeting
process.
Um, this plan includes a
dedicated capital program for
resiliency projects, ensuring
funding to address
infrastructure vulnerabilities
throughout the Commonwealth, um,
through grants and other state
dedicated funds.
Next slide please.
Another example of
Planning and preparing for cli
costs is California. Starting in
2018, the state DOT conducted
vulnerability assessments across
its 12 transportation districts,
identifying specific climate
stressors for a given area. By
2021, these assessments is
established district district
specific adaptation priorities,
helping each area focus on its
most pressing vulnerabilities
and necessary investments.
To support these efforts, the
transportation, the California
Transportation Commission
created the local transportation
climate adaptation program,
providing grants to local
governments for adapted for
these adaptation and resiliency
needs. As of 2023, the program
has awarded over $300 million to
15 resiliency focused projects
statewide.
N5 please.
So in summer in New Mexico has
made significant strides
compared to other states when it
comes to tracking and
understanding its transportation
needs. However, projections show
a substantial performance gap
over the next decade due to
existing maintenance shortfalls
and expected funding declines.
Currently fuel taxes and federal
funding account for about 50% of
New Mexico's highway spending,
but with the rise of electric
vehicles and improved fuel
efficiency relying on these
sources is becoming increasingly
risky.
To address potential revenue
declines and maintain
infrastructure, New Mexico could
consider forward looking
assessments and explore
alternative funding methods
tailored to the specific needs,
as highlighted in the examples
that David and I went over.
In addition to these revenue
challenges, states also address
infrastructure gaps and build
resilience against future
climate risks. These investments
are in resilience are essential
for long term, the long term
sustainability of New Mexico's
transportation infrastructure.
As we conclude, we would welcome
the subcommittee's request or
input on how Pew's research and
insights could help you address
some of these challenges and
other challenges ahead.
Thank you again for your time.
Thank you very much, uh Mr.
Drain and Ms. Yofi and Miss
Mills for your informative
presentation, um, I know, it's
unfortunate that we, um.
Last one for DOT folks in the
room, but I do think it would be
an interesting inquiry for the
subcommittee to ask them what
climate resiliency plans they
are building in to their camp.
Um, and if we can maybe make a
note somewhere to ask them
perhaps the next meeting, I
think that would be useful. Um,
do we have any questions from
the committee?
Thank you very much. It's very
informative. Enjoy the rest of
your day. We appreciate you.
Thank you. Thank you. OK, and
with that, I think we're gonna
move to our final item of the
day, which is the National
Infrastructure Bank and that is
our own chairman, Mr. Thoman.
Oh, and we also need to make, we
need to approve the minutes from
last meeting and I believe the
rules are such as if we
Had a quorum this morning. So
does anybody uh have any
opposition to the approval of
the minutes?
Right?
So approved.
Now we'll move on to Sho.
National Infrastructure Bank.
I'm gonna exercise discretion of
the chair.
Uh, take this.
Made them up at a later meeting.
I did, because there's only 4 of
us, not only 3 of us, 4 of us.
because I didn't bring my two
handouts.
So, that is the chair's
prerogative, Mr. Chair.
If you want to adjourn early,
I'm sure uh we, no one will have
a problem with that.
members.
So what I have to say is so
important that you need more
people here. Then we will do it
in another future time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you all for
coming. We appreciate all of
your time here today.
We're joined.
