commercial tobacco includes
things like vapes, jewels,
e-cigarettes.
Vaping is extremely common among
youth at games and school
events, I often see younger kids
like middle schoolers vaping to
look cooler for the high
schoolers.
1 in 4 of New Mexico high
schoolers are using
e-cigarettes, and almost always,
nicotine addiction starts before
a person is 18.
The involvement program has made
a huge impact since its
beginning. Youth volunteering
save the state money and
involvement partners with 16
schools across the state every
year.
The development program
continues to make an impact in
New Mexico. Since 2020,
evolvement youth have worked
160,020 hours, which equates to
approximately $442,526 that they
saved the state in hours
donated.
Some ways that I've been active
are by doing events at isotopes
games. I've educated about
flavored nicotine products and
I've spoken with my principal
about our nicotine policy.
Evolvement works by partnering
with high schoolers high schools
across New Mexico every year.
High school students attend the
training that informs them about
the dangers of tobacco and
nicotine use as well as the big
tactics that companies use to
target youth during training,
youth also learn about how they
can become advocates against the
fight against big tobacco and
advocacy for health equity.
After training, youth then have
different opportunities to
participate in campaign events
and projects to educate the
community.
We also have a chance to meet
with key decision makers like
state legislators, principals,
and school boards. For example,
I attended the evolvement day at
Capitol and talking with state
legislators made me realize how
much, how many of them have
personal experiences with
tobacco and have helped me to
see that they care too.
We also have a leadership team
for members like Jackson and I,
we receive extra training on
topics like public speaking and
how to craft our advocacy
message.
involvement, we focus on
educating our community, raising
awareness and capturing data to
cultivate policy change. We do
this by hosting local events. We
collect support cards and photo
pledges, and we conduct
presentations to our community
members.
We utilize this model for 2
campaign policy campaigns. No
minor sale and 24/7. These
advocacy and education campaigns
that focus on bringing awareness
to tobacco and nicotine problems
with real implementable policy
solutions. We are going to dive
into a bit more about each
policy campaigns and their focus
in the next few slides.
I'll be talking about one of our
campaigns, no minor sale. No
minor sale is a campaign that
educates community members about
the dangers of flavored nicotine
products, and our goal is to
reduce the sale of nicotine
products to minors under the age
of 21. This is required by law
and is ultimately meant to
protect youth.
Flavor nicotine products are a
major issue due to their appeal,
according to the 2024 National
Youth Tobacco Survey, NYTS.
There are currently 1.63 million
using e e-cigarettes. Nearly 9
out of 10 that use wow,
nearly 9 out of 10 use flavored
e-cigarettes with popular
flavors including fruit, candy,
desserts, other sweets, mint,
and menthol.
One flavor that we're really
concerned about is menthol.
Mentho is naturally found in
peppermint and can also be
produced in the lab. It has a
smoother flavor. It is heavily
marketed by the tobacco
industry. It is the last
remaining flavor to be sold in
combustible cigarettes. All
other flavors were banned in
2009.
According to a recent study
conducted at UMass Medical
School, Mental is believed to
cause stronger dependency. The
study found that adding menthol
to nicotine increased the
communication between a brain
area in the reward pathway.
And one involved in memory
already associated with nicotine
addiction and withdrawal.
Because of this, menthol
cigarettes are easier to start
and ultimately harder to quit.
The marketing of menthol
cigarettes is a huge health
equity concern.
The tobacco industry uses
marketing tactics such as
discounts, coupons, and
advertising to target specific
populations. As a result, this
targeted marketing efforts, over
80% of black individuals, 30% of
LGBTQ plus people and 40% of
middle and high school students
report using menthol cigarettes
because of this, health equity
is another major major concern
that we're fighting for.
As we were working locally in
New Mexico, there are some
federal regulations that we're
paying attention to.
The FDA submitted rules
restricting the manufacturing,
distribution, and sale of all
mental flavored cigarettes back
in April of 2022.
But the White House has
officially withdrawn this rule.
That's why it's so important to
continue gaining support and
doing the work in our state.
Even with the flavor ban back in
2009, mental remains on the
market, but this can change.
7 states and almost 400 local
governments across the country
have actually restricted some or
all flavored nicotine products.
This shows how important the
issue really is, and in Mexico,
it could be next.
We have a lot of work to do, but
we hope that by raising
awareness regarding how
dangerous flavored nicotine is,
we can ultimately help encourage
change. The states that restrict
some flavor that restrict
flavored cigarettes are
Massachusetts, New Jersey, New
York, Rhode Island, and
California, and the ones that
restrict some are Maryland and
Utah.
We strive for achieving our
campaign goals by educating our
community members at local
events. During events, we
discussed the dangers of
flavored nicotine products to
community members and collect
support cards. In this past year
alone, we've collected over 2000
messages of support from the
community members across the
state.
We conduct partner presentations
where we ask local organizations
to sign on as a partner to the
campaign. We have 40 local
organizations who believe in our
work and have decided to sign on
as partners showing their
support.
And we attend city council
meetings where we ask local
elected officials to also sign a
support card. Since we began
this in 2023, we've conducted 11
local elected official meetings
throughout New Mexico. Over 30
mayors, city councilors, and
county commissioners have signed
support cards, and the city of
Socorro actually passed a
resolution 24-09-17C in favor of
nicotine flavor restriction and
preemption repeal.
This shows how important it is
for us to continue advocating
for policies that protect our
youth and committee members from
lifelong nicotine dependence.
The next campaign we'll be
talking about is the 24/7
campaign.
The 24/7 campaign exists to help
New Mexico schools adopt 100%
tobacco-free policies that keep
campuses safe 24 hours a day, 7
days a week.
Recently, we've worked directly
with the NMPED on a new and
improved statewide rule
mandating 100% comprehensive
tobacco policies. The new policy
helps protect students, staff,
and visitors of schools from the
harmful effects of tobacco and
nicotine products. Rule 61241
NMAC applies and improves
tobacco and nicotine policies
for 129 school districts. This
was possible due to the
partnership with this committee
and Senator Lopez.
As students, we have been able
to make a huge difference on
advocating for a better tobacco
policies at schools in New
Mexico.
Since the campaign started in
2015, here are some of the
things we've been able to
accomplish. We've collected over
70,700 school assessments and
support cards and hosted
hundreds of events. We've
presented at more than 200
school board meetings and 200
more principal meetings.
All of this effort led to the
most recent collaboration and
win with the public health uh
sorry, the public education
department of NM and thanks to
opportunities like these,
speaking with you today, we know
that together we can accomplish
so much more.
The updated rule has a few
changes that strengthen the
health of all students, staff,
and visitors on school campuses
or school sponsored events. Some
of the main updates include
covers all commercial nicotine
and tobacco products applies to
everyone, students, faculty, and
visitors on school property or
school events, 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. Requires
progressive and supportive
disciplinary action for those
students who are found vaping or
using nicotine products, like
providing them with
Quitting resources.
Despite the new NMPED rule that
requires all public school
districts to have a
comprehensive tobacco policy. We
still have a lot of work to do
in order to make sure these
policies are adopted and
implemented. We will continue to
work with school districts and
schools to help implement the
new policy and ensure that all
schools are in compliance. Our
first and biggest priority is to
help an entire school district
make sure that their policy is
up to date with the new
standards set in place.
Secondly, we help individual
schools by providing free
resources to communicate.
and enforce tobacco-free school
environments.
When it comes to helping school
districts update their policy.
We aim to make it as easy as
possible.
24/7 actually offers policy
language to make these updates
easier for schools, and 24/7
provides free bilingual science
and toolkits with resources on
how to enforce the new
guidelines. 24/7 also has
faculty training resources as
well to educate school staff on
the new policy.
And lastly, 24/7 works with the
NM Department of Health and can
provide schools with the most up
to-date cessation resources.
As we advocate and work towards
the state level change, it is
also important that we work at
the local level to educate our
leaders and build their support.
As high school student
advocates, we spread awareness
to make it make progress for the
24/7 campaign through principal
meetings, school board meetings,
and events.
This year and last year I met
multiple times with my principal
and the middle school principal
and I've had very good outcome
from those meetings.
We're really excited this year
because the program has
additional funds from additional
funds from the jewel settlement
with these funds, we have the
opportunity to grow the
evolvement program and focus on
us educating younger generations
about nicotine use.
Younger kids start to use
nicotine, so it is extremely
important that we start
prevention efforts early and
hearing from high schoolers like
us is the perfect way to educate
others. You can always support
us in a healthier New Mexico by
supporting tobacco and nicotine
prevention funds. We are excited
for what is ahead and want to
look beyond one year for growth
and success opportunities. Thank
you for always supporting the
nicotine prevention and
collaborating with us on
creating a healthier New Mexico.
Thank you very much. I will go
to the committee, um, unless
there's anything else you'd like
to add.
OK.
questions.
Thank, thank you, you do.
I'm the Mike police sometimes,
um.
And vicious as a chair of what
it was called at the last
meeting, so, um, so thank you,
thank you so much, um, I, I, we
always appreciate hearing from
you all and seeing you all in
the Capitol and this morning in
our meeting, we kind of, we
talked about how.
How, uh
What a big giant we're fighting
against with with little money
and few people and but no voices
are more important than yours
because we got to stop it
before, I mean, by the time
you're an adult, if you've been.
You're addicted, so, so I just
wanted to thank all of you,
thank you, thank the folks who,
who work with you, thank all the
students, um, and tell you,
yeah, we're gonna be the, the
little engine that could. We're
just gonna keep on going and we,
we take our victories small and
as we can and but one of these
days, one of these days that the
legislature's gonna say, hm, you
know, maybe these crazy people
know something, so, so I just
wanted to.
Thank you so much for all that
you do.
Thank you, Madam Chair. OK.
Senator
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation,
um, the, the rule that they
presented, um, was actually part
of the testimony that we had
received two interims ago in Las
Cruces.
And it was an opportunity when
they were the young people who
were there with us, um, had, I
think, uh, you all bring a
certain level of enthusiasm and
you are living through and with
um the influences of, you know,
the tobacco industry.
And so even though we couldn't
get a bill passed, Madam Chair,
there's always another route.
So I had an opportunity to work
with, with you all and some of
your, your leadership to work
through the public education
department to get a role
adopted.
And you all were phenomenal
working with, um, doing your
presentations that had to
happen, public comment and the
whole process, and now we have a
standing rule.
Which is uh really wonderful to
your credit and the others part
of your team, uh, as to how we
can still affect change.
And Madam Chair, as we know
sometimes if you can't get the
bill, then there's always
another way to try and work
things and again, just.
Uh, happy to work and honored to
work with each of you and your
leadership too, so, um, and
then, you know, part of to add
on to um
Representative Thompson is the
uh.
The information we received, of
course, shows that there's still
some disparity of the use of
nicotine products and
Um
As I had shared, I have a middle
school student and, you know,
middle schoolers are.
Exposed and using also.
And I'm hoping and I with, with
the rule adoption and more
outreach and what I call
education of the educators, um,
that there can actually be, I
think, a unified.
Program process across the
state.
That there's a realization of
how impactful, right, how it
hurts with regards to the use of
the nicotine.
Tobacco products, but again, how
do we resolve it? And there was
a, um, a program, uh, well, not
a program, but just a present
part of the presentation earlier
as to instead of a student being
suspended that maybe they would
be um quote unquote directed to
participate, oops sorry in one
of these programs, um, you know,
for cessation, education and
such too. So I'm hoping that
they're working with you and in
your leadership roles and stuff
across the state.
Um, for our young, our youth,
young leaders to be able to also
help for the implementation and
advocacy.
I had also mentioned too, and I
noticed that you have here,
Madam Chair, where you're in
front of school boards.
Um, and I, I did mention that
also to, uh, the persons who
were here from the Department of
Health.
That there also needs to be
outreach to the association of
school board members.
And I don't know if you've
thought of that or you have done
that also to present at their
conference. They have an annual
conference as well as the school
administrators.
And those are the persons that
the administrators, of course,
are like the principals and all
the others, they have to
implement all the policies, so I
just wanted just to mention that
we did, uh, briefly mention that
this morning.
Um, just for information.
But again, thank you for being
here and thank you, Madam Chair
and um we're here to work with
you.
Thanks.
I left mine on.
Um, thank you too. I have a few
questions, um.
Uh
Do you feel like you're
supported enough, um, with
activities in the schools.
Do you think there's enough
funding and we heard from DOH
that they're going to expand
from 16 to 18 schools. So do you
think there's enough things for
you all the students that you,
um, help get trained and
You know, to be able to
participate with outreach. I
feel that there's always a need
for extra funds to increase our
work.
To do better jobs and to make it
healthier in New Mexico.
Great.
I do wanna add on to that and
yes, um, funds are always
helpful and I think more funds
can help us expand to middle
school and educating middle
schoolers because right now this
is all like high school based
and working with high schoolers,
so I definitely think we could
do that.
That's a great, yes, as we
learned that more kids start,
you know, younger too,
especially with vaping in the
bathrooms and things like that,
um, and do you feel like you get
to coordinate enough with um DOH
and their marketing and some of
the um.
You know, initiatives that they
have going on, do they
coordinate?
Well with what you want to see
done.
You can be honest
could you restate the question,
please? Sure.
Do you feel like Department of
Health and their initiatives for
marketing, you know, they have
certain, uh, campaigns. Do they
coordinate with you about what
and does the messaging
coordinate with what you want to
see in the schools.
Yes, it does. They work very
well with us.
Great. Are there any things that
you'd like to see different or
better.
Not that I can think of off the
top of my head. OK, you can tell
us later if you want.
Um,
and also, uh, when you're
looking at, you know, going to
school board meetings and um
also uh to um different city
councils and things like that.
Have you, uh, asked Las Cruces
to do a band, or they already?
Cause that's where I'm from.
You know?
OK, they, they do have that
policy adopted.
Oh
Thank you.
Um, for the 24/7 school policy,
Las Cruces public schools are
under that, um, and I'm not sure
if we've presented to their
city, we have, and we've also
presented to their local city
council about preemption and
flavored nicotine products. Have
they been able to adopt.
Kylie, could you state your name
so we know? Yeah, sorry, my name
is Carly Hausbeck. I'm with
Rescue Agency, um, and I'm
actually going to pass it to
Andrea to address the city
council.
Hello, I'm Andrea McNeilly. Um,
no minor cell campaign manager,
um, so yes, we have done the
presentation with La Las Cruces
City Council, but um because of
preemption repeal, we haven't
been able to see anything get
past at the the city level as
far as flavor restriction.
I hope that answers your
question. Yes. Thank you very
much. I appreciate it. Of
course, um, OK, and I
Along that same line is Donana
County. Have they done anything?
Oh, sorry, I should have asked
that sooner.
Thank you.
This is Andre. Yeah, this is
Andrea McNeilly again and um no,
we haven't been able to present
with Dona and a County
specifically, yeah, um, just
like I mentioned with Las Cruces
City Council, so nothing that
that we're aware of has been
adopted as far as like actual
policy goes, um, just like
Jackson mentioned, the city of
Socorro, um, passed a resolution
just stating that they support,
um, nicotine flavor restriction
and preemption repeal, but they
haven't been able to move
forward with.
that because of preemption.
OK, I got it. Thank you. Of
course, um.
Alright, and so with 247 tobacco
free, um, this is a national
campaign, is that right?
I can, I can hop in the back
here, sorry, um, it has been
implemented in other states,
including Oklahoma and Virginia.
However, it is only to my
knowledge, but in a few states.
So 24/7 New Mexico is specific
to New Mexico. OK, and Kayleigh,
do you also know why they say
tobacco free instead of nicotine
free, so they they get across
the idea that it's against
vaping too. Yeah, we've been
slowly working to update
language to nicotine free when
the campaign was developed over
10 years ago, tobacco was
industry best practice, um, and
moving forward, like which has
been updated to nicotine, but
the brand itself and the logo
itself says tobacco, so, um,
most of the language throughout,
including signs for schools now
say nicotine free campus.
OK, thank you. Um,
Think that was everything I had
anyone else any updates, OK,
well thank you students very
much, um, uh, Jackson and, uh,
Andrea, we appreciate um your
efforts to be here, um, and, and
thank you for all your work in
the schools, um, and with your
fellow students to, you know,
try and keep them from, you
know.
being
Using vaping or or tobacco, it's
really important that they, the
prevention part of it is the
greatest part and um.
And then also if they need the
cessation, you know, support the
quit line, I think is really
important too, so working with
DOH and and the different things
altogether, I think is really
your crucial part of that, you
know, as you yourselves, so
thank you again for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members of the
council.
Thank you, I said it on, but
thank you.
You're welcome. Have a good
summer.
OK.
That's it. OK, with we already
took care of public comment, um,
no one else has come online to
ask for it, is that right? OK,
um, the people online on uh the
zoom, um, if you have any public
comment for 2 minutes, uh, you'd
like to make, please raise your
hand.
No? OK. Anyone else in the
audience that has come in and
expected to, would like to make
public comment.
OK, that sounds good, um, we,
um, are canceling our August
15th meeting because we pretty
much, uh, taken care of most of
the issues, um, whatever, um,
evaluation and different updates
we're going to have will be in
our November, uh, committee
meeting in Santa Fe, um, so
thank you all for being here.
Thank you to our presenters and
everyone working so hard on this
issue, we um appreciate.
You know
Things going forward and
progressing. So, um, with that,
um thank you and E and Lina. Oh
yes, thank you,
yeah, thank you, especially for,
for providing such a great place
to meet and for the the hosting
the food and lunch. It's greatly
appreciated.
And our staff, it was great, um,
Sean and um our webcaster. I'm
sorry, I forgot your name.
Hebert, yes, I'm sorry. We
didn't even introduce you and
yeah, uh, Andrea.
And, um, so the meeting is now
adjourned. Thank you.
