Um, I just wanna say two lanes
on 285 is just not enough
anymore. It's, it's unreal, um,
there was so much construction
traffic coming here today and it
was just bumper to bumper,
literally Mr. Chair, and we
talked about that on the phone,
um, because I knew it was gonna
be a few minutes late, but I, I
just want to point out how um
the need for transportation.
Uh, in our, our highways are in
a day, it's great to see uh
that, you know, it, it is
construction traffic, but on the
other hand, um,
H HOV lanes might be something
we want to talk about in this
committee at some point in time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee, glad to be
here. First of all, I want to
thank DOT and for everything
they do.
Every time we've had an issue in
eastern New Mexico, uh, you guys
have been there and
Paid attention to what our needs
are and stuff, uh.
My house district covers the
south half of Curry, the north
half of Roosevelt, Dubaca,
Guadalupe, and touch of San
Miguel County. I'm glad to be
here today. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Hi, Rebecca Doo, I'm from down
south, uh, have, uh, the
northern part of Donana, a
little bit of Sierra and a
little bit of Socorro County and
um I'm really excited to be on
this committee. I think
transportation is a very
bipartisan issue. Uh, it's
something that every citizen
cares about, safe roads and, and
uh I'm excited to learn more.
Good morning, Mr. Chair.
Everybody gathered here and
online. I'm Joe Garrett from the
west side of Albuquerque,
District 29, uh, where roads are
a way of life, and airports and
I'd like to see more trains,
actually, because I just came
back from South Korea, where in
30 minutes I could go from Seoul
to my former countryside
universities. So, um, it's just
great to be back on this, uh,
One of the best interim
committees in the legislature.
Thank you.
Representative Later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ray
Lauder, House District 34,
southern Donana County. I look
forward to working with everyone
and uh.
Questions that I have with them
with the funding that's.
Up in the air right now and I'm
hoping that uh that we can do
our best to make sure that our
roads, uh, and any projects
continue to get funded.
Thank you.
Good morning, everybody. Uh, day
in, but I go by day Hoffman B
Hill District 15, North Valley
of Albuquerque Representative,
um, I echo the sentiments of my
colleagues. I believe this is.
The best. Well, we'll put, we'll
say one of the best, or I'll get
in trouble otherwise. Uh,
interim committees in the
legislature, transportation
permutes through everything that
we do and infrastructure and uh
couldn't be more thrilled to
return. So, thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you. Good morning,
Mr. Chairman. My name's Antonio
Maesta, a state senator from
District 26, which is on the
West Mesa of Albuquerque, uh.
North and south of I-40 up and
down the Coors corridor, which
is a state road. uh, but anyway,
I'm thrilled to be here. I know
transportation's big, but
infrastructure, that's the sexy
word, uh, for this summer and
fall is infrastructure, and how
do we build it and, and parlay
it into a wonderful quality of
life for generations to come.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, everyone. I'm
Representative de la Cruz. I
represented House District 12. I
always proudly say, and my
colleagues are probably tired of
hearing it. I represent the
heart of the South Valley.
So it's a pleasure to be here
this time of year, folks, uh.
It's a tough time because people
are on vacation, uh, some of our
members are doing just that.
Some of them are not physically
not well, and so we don't have a
quorum, so we will not be voting
this morning on any items, but
we will proceed with all of our
presentations nonetheless.
So, that being said, Mr.
Chairman.
Yes.
Oh, I apologize. Patty, I didn't
know you were there. Go ahead
and introduce yourself.
Uh, thank you. Good morning, Mr.
Chairman. Good morning,
committee members. I'm sorry I'm
not with you today. I'm in
Gallup working away and with me,
does that mean you still don't
have a quorum, Mr. Chairman.
We do not have a quorum.
Uh, darn it. I, I was hoping I
could make your quorum today.
Thank you.
Representative Doo, you want to,
I'm sorry, representative
Lindstrom, you want to introduce
yourself, your district.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
Representative Patty Lundstrom.
I represent House District 9,
which is the west side of Gallup
and I represent 9 Navajo
chapters, and I have served on
this committee since it was
started. I've been on uh house
transportation and public works
since 2001, and it is a great
committee. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, uh, Secretary Serna,
are you ready?
Good morning. Yes, Mr. Chairman,
thank you very much. Um,
pleasure to
Seawall, um,
For those that I haven't met, I
think I've met everyone. Ricky
Stern as secretary of Department
of Transportation. I appreciate,
Mr. Chairman, your flexibility
allowing me to be here
virtually. I've got to be in
Hobbs, a little later this
afternoon and so I was gonna be
there and then drive a little
over 5 hours, but uh now I'm
taking advantage of our rural
air service enhancement program
uh at Albuquerque Airport and
flying to Carlsbad, uh, by way
of advanced air. So, I thank you
for your flexibility. We'll
start with the PowerPoint. I
think they were gonna put that
up on the screen.
so that you didn't have to, uh,
to see my face and so you could
see the slides. I'll go for the,
I'll go through the first couple
of slides and then our uh chief
economist Michael Morrison is
with you all, and then he'll go
through the remainder and we'll
be available for any questions.
And so while the slights come
up, um, I don't know if I have
to share them I can. I'll just
apologize in advance if you hear
that announcement, uh, behind
me. It's just a reminder that I
can't, uh, smoke or vape while
I'm here presenting to you. Uh,
let's see here.
All right. So I'm ready for you
all to put the slides up. Just
let me know when they're up.
We have this slide that.
Oh, great. OK. So, um,
Go over a couple of slides that
are essentially going to provide
an update and overview of the uh
legislative outcomes for 2025 on
the second slide or the 2025
legislative summary slide of our
priorities here, of course,
coming into the 2025, 2025
session, we had a couple of
bills, the first of which was an
agency bill, Senate Bill 241 was
uh was drafted and introduced by
Senator
Gonzalez, it was aimed at
authorizing the New Mexico
Department of Transportation to
place automated speed
enforcement cameras on an MDOT
owned roads. You may recall from
some of the discussion that we
had over the course of the um
session, um, that, um, current
law allows for local governments
to approve a local ordinance and
to make a request to the
Department of Transportation to
place speed cameras.
DOT owned infrastructure. Those
local governments can do
likewise on their own
infrastructure. And but what law
does not provide for is for DOT
to place automated speed
enforcement cameras on, on our
own roads. And so it's a
peculiar limitation of ours. Uh,
we, of course, are very
interested in increasing the
safety of the work zones to
protect uh both NMDUT workers
and the workers for our
contractors. This is an
increasing issue for us, um,
and, uh, just as
recent as 3 weeks ago, we had uh
two workers within uh
transportation District 4 on
I-25 south of Las Vegas were hit
just minutes after completing
traffic control set up on a work
zone. And so it's a situation
that um you know, we, we, uh, we
need to address and we're
hopeful that although we're
moving into a 30-day session,
perhaps this could be a bill on
the governor's call to get done.
Um, it got through Senate Tax
and Business Committee with no
issues. It got tabled that
Senate Judiciary. We have
made some modifications based on
that feedback in our working on
a model similar to Washington
State, um, that, um, that we
think can be uh digestible. The
our big bill, House Bill 145,
also a governor bill, um, was
aimed at providing the state
transportation commission with
bonding authority to the tune of
$1.5 billion for major
construction projects. Big deal
for us. Uh, I wanna thank many
of you on the committee were
part of at least one.
Um, uh, one boat on, on this
bill as it made its way from the
House Transportation Committee
with the unanimous due pass, we
made some changes there, of
course, to provide for some
guardrails that ensure all
projects are priority regionally
significant and of course in the
sip, um, and, and, and it
provided for some annual
reporting requirements. We got
to do pass with no amendments,
uh unanimous to pass in-house
appropriations and finance
Committee. Um, it was a un
miss pass on the house floor.
Uh, thank you for, thank you,
um, Representative uh or leader,
um Hockman B Hill for, for
putting that on the floor. Uh,
we did get a unanimous due pass
on Senate tax business. In fact,
it was placed on a consent
calendar, all the while behind
the scenes, uh, we had been
working with uh Senate
leadership, House leadership to
ensure that um we created an
opportunity within this
legislation for debt service
revenue, uh, just before we got
to Senate Finance Committee.
um, we, uh, conjured up a pretty
good strategy for generating
about $72 million in new revenue
for the Department of
Transportation, uh, by
increasing vehicle registration
fees, wait distance fees, and
establishing an electric vehicle
surcharge, and that 72 million
was going to be utilized for the
debt service payments on the, on
the debt. And so we got that
amendment in on Senate Finance
Committee hearing, and we got a
do pass there. There was one
nabo and uh
And, uh, the bill made it to the
floor the Wednesday of the last
week and didn't get heard, um,
ultimately before the end of the
session. And so along the way,
some things that happened um
were some concessions on the DOT
part that, uh, you know, mean,
we weren't gonna see one time
appropriations for construction
funding because this bill was
gonna support our construction
needs for the next 8 to 10
years. And so as you'll see on
the next slide, if you'll go to
the next slide.
Um, but ultimately occurred was,
um, you know, the, the
leadership or, or legislators in
general saw that House Bill 145
was making its way to a pretty
good outcome and uh a lot of the
non-recurring resources that we
would typically receive didn't
materialize as a result. And so
on this table, you'll see that
we did receive um uh from the
governor's executive rec, we
were looking at $150 million for
at least a couple of major
construction projects that are
attached to federal awards. One
of the largest of those projects
is the border highway, the
border connector project that
fundamentally would increase,
uh, and, and, uh, facilitate
traffic flow from the border and
deported Santa Teresa to
Interstate 10 on the Texas side.
And so right now, uh, we're
sitting with um at a pivotal
point for getting the resources
we need for that federal grant
by September 30th.
of this year. Otherwise, we may
be exposed um to, to return the
$45 million in federal awards
that we received. Um, we, with
the governor's rec did include
$150 million for maintenance,
and uh, the sum of that
recommendation on special
one-time appropriations was over
320 million. If you look to the
to the last uh column, you'll
see we did receive 8 million for
beautification and litter
pickup, which is paramount. Um,
we received 16.5 million for
rural air service. No.
uh one time appropriations for
construction projects, um, 60
million per district or 65
million for maintenance, which
equates to about $10 million per
district. Um, there was a surge
of nearly 40 million to the
transportation project fund,
which supports local projects,
um, and $50 million for the
wildlife corridor Fund. We did
also request 20 million, 10
million for equipment and that
materialized, uh, actually we
received 12 million.
If you look at that bottom table
or capital outlay requests, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, um, we continue to
lead the state's effort to
electrify our roadway system by
way of electric vehicle charging
stations, uh, the 10 million
that we received will help us to
get a, you know, additional
chargers outside the
requirements for our, our navy
funding. Uh, we requested uh
over 30 million for capital
outlay support on our patrol
yards. You all may know
you drive around the state, we
have over 80 patrols across the
state, uh, together, they
combined to make up the 2nd
largest footprint of all state
agency, second only to New
Mexico Corrections Department.
And so the 32 million that we
identified in our IIP were
fundamental needs for our
patrols, everything from roofs
that leak, bottle of water,
tying into public utility
systems, real dire needs, so
we're, we're hopeful that in the
future, we can start to see
additional investments in, in
getting our physical facilities
at the agency up to par. Just a
note there for our capital
outlay and building maintenance
and equipment. All of the money
that goes towards both salaries,
building maintenance, uh, and
repairs, upkeep, all of that
funding otherwise comes out of
the state road fund. So the
state road fund, of course, is
predominantly supports
maintenance activities. And so,
if you see the maintenance
appropriation of 65 million, uh,
10 million per district.
When you look at the cost of
major maintenance, uh,
rehabilitation at $450,000.
You know, a mile, each of those
districts with that $10 million
is identifying something like 20
miles of maintenance that they
can get done, many of whom are
working to, to maintain our, our
interstate system. So, um,
that's just an overview of the,
the outcomes, Mr. Chairman, and
I'll defer to you on whether or
not you wanna stop for questions
there. I can have uh Mr.
Morrison go through the
remainder of the presentation.
Thank you, Secretary. Do we have
any member questions?
Representative
Thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Secretary, so some of these
charging stations that we have
across the state or
And maybe in our cities, people
can go up to them and charge
their cars for free, and I don't
remember what we did through the
legislature and all that. So how
is that working and, and why is
it set up that way, Mr.
Secretary, do you know?
Yeah, uh, Mr. Chairman, I'm
sorry, I, uh, and, um, I can see
the PowerPoint, but I think that
was uh representative correct,
um, Zamora.
Yes, sir, Mr. Secretary,
I'm starting to recognize voices
now. This is good. So, um, so
right now, the, the electric
vehicle charging stations that
we are putting in place through
the various funding sources are
not providing that charge at no
cost. And so the structure that
we have created is similar to a
public-private partnership where
uh we issue an RFP, a call for
proposals, um, those private and
public entities can apply for
funding.
In some cases, we require that
they come to the table with
match investment, but they have
to have a site identified, a
partnership identified for the
placement of that electric
vehicle charging station. Um,
they can recoup the cost of
maintenance and the cost of
electricity. So, the users will
be paying for electricity and
the cost of operations and
maintenance. The agreements we
execute with those individuals,
provide for them to do that for
5 straight years. And so,
there may be some private public
facing chargers, for example,
when you drive up to a hotel and
the hotel is placed in there,
they may allow you to plug in
and charge for free. Uh, but the
ones that we're, um, that we're
installing and funding, um,
allow for those partnerships to
charge for the electricity and
uh the cost of maintenance and
that's happening, I believe, at
100% of the ones we support.
Thank, thank you for that, Mr.
Secretary. That's all I have,
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Before we proceed to
Mr. Morrison, I was remiss. Oh,
representative Borigo, I
apologize. Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank
you, Secretary, for that report.
Um, one of the, the red flags in
this report to me is that the
fact that there is no
construction funding.
2025, um, and I just wondered,
um, for projects that are, you
know,
In progress.
And
How do you, how do you deal with
that?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, that's, that's a
great question. That's a big
concern for us too, especially
as we were overhearing the
beginning of the meeting, some
of the things about increased
rail, uh, you know, uh,
carpooling lanes, other, other
things that we, you know, would
love the opportunity to start
discussing as, you know,
realistic possibilities from a
financial resource perspective,
but that's just not the case.
And so, um, fortunately, at the
department, we
Don't move a project through a
phase, whether that's planning,
design or construction unless we
are fiscally constrained, right?
Basically, we don't, we don't
get into a phase of a project
unless we have the funding to
get that done. And so for
construction in particular, if
we don't have a project funded,
then we don't move to
construction. And so what the 0
does for us there is limits our
ability to move forward with any
of the construction priorities
that we had been sharing.
You know, virtually for the last
3 years. And so we'll, we'll
essentially maintain momentum on
the projects that are currently
under construction. We'll
continue to get projects through
planning and design and on a
shelf for construction, but
every year that a project sits
on a shelf funded, uh, when we
pull it off that shelf, it's a
lot heavier in terms of cost,
right? And so, um, you'll see,
for example, one of the projects
uh that I have listed here, the
Border connector highway at the
of the 2025 session, the gap on
that project was 85 million.
Today, the gap on that project
is 125. And so, uh, we just get
further away from getting them
done and are asks, our ask of
you all continues to go up, but
the number of projects
associated with that would kind
of remains the same.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you, Mr. Secretary. um, that is
a very concerning, um, issue, I
think, um, I mean,
It's one thing to get things
planned and designed, but when
they're sitting on a shelf, um,
for 5 years or however many
years, the cost of um materials,
um, the cost of is, I mean, it
usually it doubles by that time,
and I think those are those are
issues that we really need to be
concerned with in this
committee. Thank you.
Vice Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Mr. Secretary.
So I'm looking at the page of
January 25 State Road Fund
forecast.
Um
And I'm looking at FY 14 to FY
24. Those are, those are the
years, correct? Those aren't
just January.
Do you have that in front of
you, Mr. Secretary?
Uh, sure. Let me, let me pull it
up. And uh OK.
OK, I have the forecast in front
of me. And so, um, Mr. Chairman,
Mr. Secretary, so, so columns B
through L where it says FY 14 to
FY 24 actuals. That's the entire
fiscal year, correct? That's not
just January.
Correct. uh, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, that, that represents
the fiscal year 14, uh, so that
would be basically July 13th
through June 14, all the way
through, um, fiscal year 25 in
green, for example, call him N.
So this shows the revenue that
goes into the state road fund.
So you'll see over the last 11
years, the state road fund has
grown by a little less than 200
million. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
men, Mister Secretariat. So I
just asked the committee to look
at
Rogue one.
The gasoline tax 10 years ago
was approximately 108 million.
In
2024 was approximately 110
million, so that's remains
steady.
What is inflation done to
building roads in the past 10
years, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary. uh, great question,
Mr. Chairman Senator. So, um,
you'll see in one of the slides
that we present in a little bit,
go all the way back to 2003, the
cost has tripled, more than
tripled, and so, um, the Federal
Highway Administration back in
2003 started indexing the cost
of construction then about 1
million a mile. Today they index
it at over 3.18, which means
that it's over $3.1 million a
mile, right?
It's tripled um going back to 20
years. We use a conservative
estimate of 20%, um, between
2019 and 2025, basically, I, I
hate using the term pre post
pandemic because, um, you know,
it's hard to attach a
You know, uh, a real cause, but
over 20% Mr uh Mr. Chairman
Senator in the last 5 years.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Secretary, and then if folks can
look at um
Row 11, which is the motor
vehicle excise tax.
We did two things, Mr. Chairman,
as you recall, we, um, we raised
the excise tax, I think, from 3
to 4.
I think we're trying to raise it
to 5, but we raised it from 3%
to 4%.
And then we switched it over
from the general fund to the
road fund, but that's pretty
much the only adjustment we've
made on this uh revenue stream.
That's, that's what's a bummer,
Mr. Sherman, when we put dollars
and cents in the tax code, it
does not go with inflation when
you put a percentage, you don't
have to mess with it, uh,
because the percentage, you
know, is the percentage of, of
the inflationary effects or
whatnot. So we've had a 17 cent
uh gasoline tax since 1992, I
think.
With inflation, I think it's
maybe 37 cents today. It's tough
to deal with that, given the,
the
The budget overflows we've had
the last couple of years, but we
need to think about that deeply,
particularly if in the next
1010, 2030 years, more and more
and more cars are electric.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, before we go to
Mr. Morrison, if I could have
our staff attorney introduce
himself in this and our support
staff.
Good morning, everyone. Uh,
Martin Fisher, I'm a staff
attorney with the legislative
council Service and my
colleagues, you can introduce
yourselves. Thank you so much,
uh, before we move we we have
another question, Representative
Monto. Oh, to introduce himself,
there we are.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative Montoya from uh,
San Juan County. Um, I, I think,
uh, I think the secretary
directly about the the
Building of the uh bridge there
in Farmington and the how we're
gonna finish that project, so
I'll I'll I'll do that offline.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Morrison.
Good morning. My name is uh
Michael Morrison. I'm the chief
economist for NMDOT, uh, we're
going over the remaining slides.
So, uh, we've already discussed
the state road for state-run
forecast.
State road fund forecasts,
sorry, uh, from January, uh,
just to quick hitting that we
have been seeing the some steady
growth of in the state road fund
going forward, but I'll hold off
on discussing you know the um
major revenue sources until the
next slide actually.
And that's, um, you're just
looking in a graphical format,
kind of looking at our um
Revenue is the big thing I
wanted to point out is that the
growing importance of our
commercial vehicle revenues,
specifically we distance tax,
which is
Attacks on the weight and
distance traveled of um freight
and um then the uh special fuels
tax or diesel tax. Those have
become much larger component of
our state road fund. If you look
at the gold and blue lines going
forward, um.
Special vehicles became the um
Largst revenue sources for the
state road fund back in uh FY20
and the um
Wa distance is set to become the
2nd largest in FY or this coming
fiscal year is based on our
forecasts.
Um
Gasoline and vehicle
registration of it has been
stable, but and growing a little
bit, but it's mainly growth in
these commercial vehicle uh
Revenue sources that have caused
it to become the major source.
We haven't seen any declines in
gasoline or vehicle
registration.
Uh, moving forward, I just want
to get in, uh talk a little bit
about our long-run forecast that
we've been, this was done, um,
back in October, uh, using a
nominal dollars, so not
adjusting for inflation. We are
looking at a decrease of about
15% by 2050. So I see it in uh
increase in funding and then
Even turn around 2030 and start
to decline.
However, I do want to point out
that we do it looking at road
construction cost increase of
about 160% or what forecast
between now and 2050.
However if we incorporate
inflation.
The numbers too far.
Uh, the numbers start to look a
little worse.
Um, once we incorporate
inflation, we're looking at
about a 51% shrinkage in uh the
uh spending power of our state
road fund.
Along with that 160% increase in
our road construction costs that
are going forward.
So that is where we saw a
decline or increases or
initially we're gonna see
declines and just
Yeah, it declines at an
increasing rate as well.
Um, that feeds into a lot of our
challenges. I think we've talked
about, I've shown this slide
before another presentations,
uh, don't want to mentioned that
our gasoline tax hasn't been
adjusted since 1996. It's at 17
cents. It's one of the, I think,
what are we looking at 5th and
lowest in the nation. Um, we
also have our diesel tax is the
10th lowest in the nation, uh,
and that hasn't been adjusted
since 2004.
The, I think there was a a
question earlier that one of the
major drivers of uh the
Declines in our gasoline tax.
is less of the electric
vehicles, but more so just
increased fuel efficiency.
Uh, we're looking at just, um,
Wanda.
1.5 MPG increase in average fuel
efficiency every year since 2019
at least as far back as our data
goes right now, um.
Additionally, uh, something that
secretary mentioned earlier,
we're looking at the um
So I get this name right, uh,
the
National Highway Construction
costs Index, that is the
secretary mentioned goes from um
$1 million a mile in 2003, the
3.18 in 2024, we're projecting
by 2050, that's gonna be um $8.3
million a mile.
So that's that 160%.
Some of the things that we've
looked at in the past in terms
of addressing these issues going
into the long run is, uh, things
like the additional registration
fees on electric vehicles. Uh,
we also looked at uh road user
charges that have been adopted.
Um, now I want to talk a little
bit about kind of current events
and what's happening. Um, so we
have a short timeline of the
tariffs that are, are instituted
that seem to be have the largest
direct impact on our state-run
road fund revenues. Um,
I put in the full uh timeline,
but I'm not going to go through
everything. I just want to hit
some of the highlights, but I
wanted to include everything to
show just how quickly things are
changing and how much is
changing.
So we're looking at uh in March,
we did have um
25% tariff on steel and
aluminum, as well as uh actually
uh automobile and automobile
park tariffs were introduced,
uh, 25% that's from all
countries, no exceptions. So
that uh has been added. We also
in early April, we had the uh
liberation Day announcement that
put 10% tariffs on all imports,
as well as several
country-specific reciprocal
tariffs.
Uh, shortly thereafter, those um
Shortly after the 10% tariff was
implemented. There was a 90 day
pause put on the country
specific reciprocal tariffs that
90 day policy is set to expire
here fairly soon. Um,
We also at the same time, the
tariffs in China were increased
to 145%.
Um
China should tailor to our
tariffs and um we did eliminate
the de minimis exception for
Chinese and Hong Kong imports.
So that means any before any
imports under $800 in value were
not uh a tariff wasn't imposed.
Now a tariff is imposed on
anything that comes in
regardless of the value.
Early May, dropped those tariffs
for 30%.
And um
Trying to lower their chairs
from 30% to 10% shortly
thereafter, the US Court of
International Trade is uh
overturned the
International economic emergency
Powers Act tariffs. So those are
the 10% tariffs in all
countries, the tariffs on China,
the 145 or now 30% tariffs on
China and the non-USMCA tariffs
on Canada and Mexico.
The next day after that uh court
decision, appeals court
reinstated the um tariffs
pending pending appeal or
pending the hearing of the
appeal, which is happening
today.
Additionally, another 25% tariff
on steel and aluminum was
announced, uh, and has was
introduced yesterday. So now the
tariffs on steel and aluminum
are up to 50%.
So to go to the next slide,
there's the um
Nearly the current status. Uh,
we're looking at 30% tariffs on
uh
I actually put everything I've
gone through there. There is a
um
An update for the section 232
tariffs, is the legal authority
for those tariffs. Those are up
at 50% now instead of 25%.
Everything in the upper table
is, um, subject to the appeal uh
uh to the CIT, the Court of
International Trade decision.
Which we'll find out later
today, uh, how this is going to
impact, are these tariffs really
going to directly impact the
road fund we're looking at lower
imports, lower exports, um,
that's reducing the commercial
vehicle fleet through New Mexico
or movement through New Mexico,
um, so we'll see reduced weight
distance, weight uh uh reduced
special fuel taxes, uh,
additionally, we expect to see
some impacts on national income
and uh New Mexico income, that
should have ripple effects in
terms of lowering uh
consumption of
All goods, which will also uh
reduce weight distance and and
diesel taxes are.
Less consumption of all goods,
less movement of freight.
Additionally, we should see some
minor impacts on or
additionally, a reduction on
motor vehicle excise tax,
vehicle registration fees, um,
gasoline tax and vehicle
registration fees actually
should seem minor. They don't
respond too much to changes in
people's income, um.
Although if they're depending on
the impacts on unemployment
within New Mexico, that could
have a much bigger impact on our
gasoline and vehicle
registration, the gasoline tax
and vehicle registration
revenues.
Um, one of the big things I
wanted to hit, uh, as far as
Talking about the traffic that
we are seeing across the major
trade routes or movement of
trades is along I-40 and I-10,
that going from the from into
the port of LA either through a
distribution center or directly
to um Port of Long Beach in LA.
We do have um some
Annual average daily traffic
numbers there looking at the
expected growth as well, um.
I'm not gonna go through those
numbers, but we're looking at
around uh average of about 3 to
3.5% growth every year, uh, for
traffic along I-10 and I-40,
that works out until 2050 to a
growth of 135 and 140% for um
20 by 2050.
Now look at uh some projections.
These are provided by uh the
Bureau of Business and Economic
Research. I attached to UNM as
well as S&P Global for the
national forecasts.
Uh, we'll say in uh
Might be a little hard to see on
the on the screen here, but the
green lines represent a no
tariff or um tariff overturned
scenario, depending on what the
CIT or the appeals court decides
today, red is our tariffs or
scenario so if terrorists do
remain in place. Blue is the
pre-tariff, so this is coming
from um
January forecast that was
provided.
We're looking at imports, they
had um a sudden spike in the
first quarter of the as people
tried to rush their orders in
and get as much as they could
purchase. Part of the reason why
we haven't seen too much in the
way of empty shelves and price
increases, yet most retailers
and importers kind of planned
ahead, but it's some question as
to when those will the stocks
will run out.
With the under the no tariff
situation will return back more
or less to the uh pre-tariff
scenario, but in imports would
remain significantly lower if
tariffs remain in place.
Exports.
took a uh big uh dive after the
terrorists were instituted as
including the retaliatory
tariffs, but also um just
changes in consumption patterns
as attitudes towards the United
States kind of.
Shifted, um.
Some improvement with the no
tariff scenario, but both of
them are going to show um,
Significant declines throughout
FY 26 and beyond.
That, yeah, as we talked about
will have impacts into our
weight distance and and special
fuel.
Um
We're looking at national income
forecasts under um both the
tariff and no tariff scenario
for both nationally and New
Mexico, incomes will be lower.
That's uh improved case, things
will be slightly better if the
tariffs are overturned, as we'll
see some bounce back in our
imports and um.
Employment and overall
consumption, but that
Where it's going to be rougher
overall going forward is the
forecast.
If we're looking at our
unemployment and consumer
sentiment forecasts if you want
to mention that that's New
Mexico unemployment, um,
And consumer sentiment based
order um measured by the
University of Michigan's
consumer sentiment survey.
Sentiment is down significantly.
In fact, I think it's uh
bottomed out at 52, measure the
uh record low during the
pandemic was 50, so consumer
sentiment is
Very low. Uh, it's
Recovers a little bit depending
on the tariff situation, but
it's still going to remain much
lower than 4 than originally
forecast.
Uh, Mexico unemployment is
Forecast to remain higher, uh,
what this indicates is that
The impacts to our state road
fund forecasts as well as.
Uh, New Mexico incomes are
unlikely to be short term
might last a little bit longer
than just the year, and be a
short lived.
Is the current forecast.
So I want to talk a little bit
about some of the other
potential federal impacts that
we're looking at, uh, one tied
to the, uh, one big beautiful
bill where uh it's under the
bill, there's termination of the
clean vehicle uh
vehicle tax credit, um, that
would end December uh the end of
this calendar year, we would
expect to see a reduction in our
electric vehicle adoption, uh,
without the um tax credit.
Additionally, there is a
provision for a federal lux.
vehicle surcharge of $250 per
year. Uh, that wouldn't start
till 2031, so it wouldn't have a
major immediate effect on
electric vehicles or minor
effect on electric vehicle and
uh purchases, but, um, as we get
closer to that start date in
2031, it's expect to see a much
bigger impact. There is a
deduction for car loan interest,
uh, proposed in the one big
beautiful bill that would expect
to increase um motor vehicle
excise tax a little bit, though
I don't.
have uh uh fullest.
We're looking at eliminate the
one beautiful bill also
eliminates the neighborhood
access and equity grants,
environmental, um,
Review and implementation funds
and low carbon transportation
materials grants, um, under the,
the uh administered by the
Federal Highway Administration.
Those are all going to have uh
impacts on our ability to or
access to federal funding for
projects. Additionally, there
are some potential recessionary
impacts associated with the one
big beautiful bill believe uh
this congressional Budget Office
projects a
Uh, last I saw was a $2 trillion
deficit forecast and um a mild
recession, OECD says they drop
or
Growth forecasts have dropped
about 1%, um, in the latest
forecast from OECD.
Another federal impact is
separate from one big beautiful
bill is that there have been a
lot of um
Cuts in staffing from, uh, from
Department of Treasury and
Department of Transportation
federally, so that could delay
the implement or um distribution
of funds and execution of
funding agreements as well. Um,
last part with economists love
to mention is all the caveats to
what I just said. Um,
Our forecasts, they were
provided at, with the
information that was available
at the time of the forecast. The
Bieber forecasts were were
published in March of 2021, S&P
Global, published in early May,
so.
Anything that's happened since
then is a little bit more
difficult to forecast. Um,
Only enacted policy was
incorporated in the forecast,
um, although excite from the
tariffs, we had the no tariff
and tariff scenarios, um, how
those transfer into impacts on
our straight road fund are gonna
be difficult to forecast just
because of issues of uh changes
in consumption patterns both
within New Mexico and
nationally. Additionally, there
is a 20 to 40 day delay as ships
travel across the Pacific, so.
A decision made by importers now
won't show up in freight changes
or or on store shelves for.
More, uh, up to a month or more.
There's um
Additionally, um,
There's gonna be changes in
expectations for both consumers
and and importers as to how
things are going to change. We
don't know how, um,
Domestic production is going to
impact based on importing of um
Inputs into production.
Finally, and overall, I think
with the shortened timeline of
terrorists of the tariffs, you
did see that there was quite a
lot of change going on, things
are changing.
Daily that increases our
forecasting uncertainty and
makes it more difficult to
And predict what will happen
going forward.
That is it for the um
for any questions.
Representative Hopvill.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
this is half question, half
comment, um, so thank you for
this detailed presentation, very
helpful to um see what we don't
know is going to happen, um, and
so, Mr. Chairman, as we continue
to um.
Deal with this forecast or lack
thereof.
Really difficult for a
legislature that meets once a
year to pass our fiscal policy
to be able to know what it is
that that our state needs.
And with fiscal policy changing
on the federal level daily, what
it seems like, um, we're gonna
have to think about different
ways to command some sort of
certainty, um, even if it's
based on conjecture.
So, Mr. Chairman, um, has, is
DOT, I mean, do you, are you
employing any?
Outside sources or consultants
that might help us kind of dig a
little deeper into this data and
and find some sort of.
Plan, even if it's just for our
own edification, Mr. Chairman.
Excellent question, Mr. Chair
and Representative, um, so we
do, uh, work, we are working
with um Bieber and S&P Global to
try and get some updated
forecasts. My team of economists
have also been working on trying
to quantify the impact of the
tariffs, um, not just as they
are now, but trying to build a
model that will predict as
terrorists change, uh, there are
a few.
Gaps in our available data that
are making it difficult to
really get anything firm. So
far, I can't say that our
estimates are looking at
Under the 30% tariff where um
Expecting a decrease in or
imports that travel through New
Mexico of between 3 and up to
11% depending on the tariff rate
at a 145% tariff would bring up
up to 11% reduction in imports
traveling through New Mexico,
um,
I believe, um, elimination of
almost all tariffs would give us
about the 3% drop in imports. I
don't have an estimate for
exports at this time, but we
are, uh,
That is our, our the list of
things we are working on and
trying.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
um
Mr. Morrison, so, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I, I would say as we
kind of go through the interim
and as we get closer to the
actual session, um, uh, house
transportation committee, which
is, you know, tasked with
development of the first draft
of the budget for DOT Perhaps we
should think about um picking up
point in time in which that is
the time that we're going to
start formulating the budget and
build in some wiggle room, um,
so that we can again
Take certainty where there is
none.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. I appreciate that. I
agree. I think I always
described the interim as when we
prepare all of the, the uh
various ingredients so that then
we can cook them during the
session. So I think it's an
ideal time. So at this
representative Garrett.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. uh.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, Mr.
Morrison, on, um,
On the other potential federal
impacts, can you just clarify
the federal annual proposed EV
surcharge of 250. Is that
Would that go directly to the
person who purchases the EV and
then every year they would pay
that to the federal government.
Can you just clarify what that
means it would be a fee that the
that the owner of an electric
vehicle would pay every year. I
believe as it's currently set up
in the bill, they would pay them
money to, uh, tax and revenue
division who would then pass
that on to the federal
government with I think a 1% for
uh
his expenses.
And that would be so uh like uh
effectively like a federal
registration fee.
I see, so Mr. Chair then.
If we, I mean, we've been
talking for several years about
an EVP ourselves.
So at least for 5 years, we
could do a fee.
That would stay here completely.
And depending on the federal
legislation, we'd have to adjust
it or sunset it.
That is correct, Mr. Chair. OK,
thank you very much.
Thank you. And now we're gonna
go to Gallup, uh, Representative
Lindstrom.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and, and thank you for the
presentation. It's uh very, very
interested in, and incredibly
important. I do have a couple of
questions, Mr. Chairman, and uh
this is uh for the our secretary
or his economist, when you're
building your uh construction
contracts to be let this fiscal
year. How are you dealing with
contingencies in that.
Based on what we just heard.
So, uh, Mr. Chairman
Representative, thanks for the
question. Right now, we're not
doing anything to modify. We
have heard of some local
governments that are, um, for
example, just a couple of weeks
ago, uh, OK we get Pueblo passed
a resolution that stipulated new
contracts must include a clause
that would require the
construction company to provide
documentation on any cost
escalations. um, that would
arise from a claim that tariffs
are impacting project costs. So
far we haven't done.
too much of that. Um, we do
continue to build contingency
budgets or contingencies into
the project costs to ensure that
any necessary change orders or
cost escalations as they get
approved, um, can be funded and
supported. So we right now in
general aren't seeing an impact
of the ups and downs with
tariffs on any of our projects,
but that could start occurring.
Yeah, and I think we need to
understand how you guys are
gonna address that because what
ends up happening, there's only
uh 10 number of dollars that go
into the department for
construction, whether it comes
from our part or our, our road
fund or from the feds, and I'd
be interested to see how they're
dealing with that. I'd like to
understand how these federal
construction projects now based
on the big beautiful is uh
dealing with those escalating
costs for steel. The other
question that I have
Uh, Mr. Secretary, and to you
and your economist, is it
possible for one of our future
meetings that you can provide a
model for P3 that does not look
at toll roads as repayment. I'd
like to see what we, I know you
and I and our Representative
Garrett had been kicking this
around for a long time, but I
really like to see what that
might look like, uh, for a
future um opportunity in terms
of construction.
I also wanted to let the
chairman know that under the
trade port Development Act,
which was signed into law this
last year. It allows for state
level P3s inside the trade port
district. I know here locally
we'll be working on a local P3
policy to um
To enhance that, that particular
incentive.
That's why I'd like to see what
DOT may be looking at, uh, in
terms of P3. The other thing I'd
like to ask Mr. Chairman of the
staff is that we get a listing
of all New Mexico tax abatement
and credits associated with
transportation. I think, uh,
certainly we'll be looking at
that under our federal funds
subcommittee. We wanna see, you
know, what, what's out there? Is
it working? What kind of
assessment, uh, we need to look
at in terms of
Any type of abatements or tax
credits that are associated with
transportation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Next, we have
Representative Borego, followed
by Representative Dow.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, Mr. Morrison. I, I
really appreciate the economic
forecast. I know that you don't
have a a magic um.
A crystal ball
But in looking at in and this
doesn't have page numbers, so
I'm just gonna refer to the
title, Mr. Chairman, um,
In looking at your state road
fund long-range forecast, and
the second page, The Real
Estate.
Road fund long range forecasts.
There's a lot of, um, there's
one increase by 6% by 2030, but
if you look beyond that, Mr.
Chairman, decrease of 9% from
2030 to 2040 decrease another
11% from 2040 to 2050.
Decrease 8% by 2030 decrease 26%
from 2030 to 2040, decrease
another 28% from 2040 to 2050.
And I'm, I'm reading that
because what I'm seeing,
especially as we're moving
forward with your budget, um, is
that there's a lot of decrease
and um and I, this is a very
concerning to me, Mr. Chairman,
and
And uh Mr. Morrison because when
I think about your budget moving
forward, especially as we
Place more EV vehicles on the
road, and less gasoline, um,
vehicles which um refers back to
our tax, or gasoline tax.
We're losing, and your budget,
the, the road, and I'm sure our
deputy, I mean our secretary is,
is probably getting white hair
over this, but, uh, you know,
your but this budget is gonna be
very upside down.
And it's not a very far, it's
not very far away when I see
that upside down. Um, and I
think the questions that are um
Our, uh, representative from
Gallup raised are significant
because our task is going to be
Mr. Chair and and um and
secretary.
How are we going to make up
those those revenues.
And, you know, um, especially,
and then to top that off, we
have these tear-offs, and we
have other things that are going
to influence New Mexico's
budget.
Um, so I, you know, I raised
that because I know we don't
have a crystal ball, but I am a
planner and I look for the long
term, and I'm very concerned
about this, and I just want to
put that out on the table. I'm
sure everybody else here in this
room is very concerned as well.
Um, the other thing that I, that
I wanted to ask you on under
your caveats page, um,
The, about the middle of the
page it says impact of ferros
will vary depending on on route
through New Mexico I-40 or I-10.
What is that? What exactly does
that mean? It would vary
representative, um,
unfortunately, with the data we
have, we're not totally aware of
um which routes the uh or which
interstates the um imports are
coming through New Mexico.
So if they're taking I-40,
that'll have a much bigger
impact than if they were taking
I-10 through, um, New Mexico and
into Texas, um, so it's barely
which, which of the two routes
they take the route, the, the
roots that are carrying goods is
what you're referring to here.
Is that correct? OK. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
I've made my points very clear.
Thank you.
Representative Do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Um, I,
could you explain to me what the
special feel I'm, I'm looking
at, um,
This page that says that since
the pandemic, commercial
vehicles revenues have become
the largest contributor to state
road fund special fuel became
the largest contributor. Can you
describe the special fuel fund?
How's it generated special fuel
is um basically diesel tax on
diesel fuel that is paid uh
either uh by the distributor as
they go to the gas stations here
in New Mexico, but they're also
paved through a program called
the International Fuel Tax.
This agreement in uh GIFTA where
um basically any diesel fuel
that is consumed within New
Mexico by commercial vehicles,
whether the fuel was purchased
in Arizona or Texas, California,
Colorado.
Any other member, um, states or
provinces.
If the fuel is consumed in New
Mexico, then the taxes paid to
New Mexico.
So, uh, every, I believe every
month or every quarter, um, tax
and revenue Department will uh
receive a payment from the other
states and Jackson River will
also make the payments out to um
the IFTA organizations who
distributes.
The revenue from diesel
purchased in New Mexico, but
consumed in other states.
OK.
Thank you, and thank you for
that. And is that, OK. And then,
um,
We're
Did you take into any
consideration or do we project
increased weight and distance
fuel.
Coming in, you know, us
experiencing increased because
there can be more activity maybe
around oil and gas production
from the federal level. Did you,
I don't see any.
scenario and if we might see
increased weight and distance.
Uh, we did incorporate within
our forecast for weight
distance, uh, specifically, um.
On, uh, this.
Back here and in the state run
in the uh previous with there is
In our forecast input based on
uh forecasts on oil production
within New Mexico, oil and
natural gas production is an
input into our forecast model.
That makes sense. OK, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and, I mean, maybe it
just wasn't the focus, the focus
seemed to be tariffs. So when
you're saying there's going to
be a, what percentage did you
say we could lose in the
special, I guess it's a special
fuel. So we, I don't have a, a
specific uh impact on special
fuel, but we are looking at,
because of uh tariffs, a
decrease in imports that travel
through New Mexico, anywhere
between 3 and 11%, um,
how that transfers into our
diesel and uh we distance will
depend on a lot of factors. Um,
The um
Impact. I haven't updated our
forecast for weight distance to
incorporate any um provisions
about um
Oil and gas production due to um
changes in policies since
January. We are working, or we
will be starting here next week
on our summer for state road
fund forecast, and so I should
have something.
In July, that will have um
Updates based on any new policy
changes since January, I guess.
Thank you, thank you, Mr. Chair
and thank you for that. And so,
I mean, I can only relate this
to COVID. I'm on a high learning
curse. I'm sorry if these don't
make sense in my head, I'm
trying to wrap my head around
this when there are restrictions
on flights or people or people
can't afford to fly or the cost
of flights go up and people
travel more in state. What was
the
What did this look like during
COVID? Cause I'm sure there was
an impact during COVID.
Yes, during COVID, we did see
because there was a mainly for
our, I'm Mr. Chair, um,
representative, um, for our, uh,
Special diesel or special fuel
tax, we did see a decline and uh
actually.
Maybe pull up the previous page.
So during the pandemic, we
actually did see an increase,
um,
Uh, in our, uh, special fuel tax
rate that was partially because
of more in-state travel, but a
larger component was really
about
A switch uh nationally from
consuming um services like going
out to movies, going to see
movies and um restaurants
instead to purchasing goods, so
we saw more freight movement
through the state at that point
as people were buying more.
stuff and so that was uh one of
the reasons during the pandemic,
we did see for a diesel tax
increase. Unfortunately, we're
not able to really separate what
was um
Increase goods consumption and
what was increased domestic or
um.
In-state travel, but uh that was
to um
Contributing factors that we
identified at that point. So for
both um weight distance and uh
special fuel.
But thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for that. And so
basically,
The impact of the reduction of
weight and distance and special
fuel because of
International trade cannot be
made up for in the increase of
weight and distance from
increased.
Um, extraction industry, you're
projecting or in-state travel
because people can't afford to
travel to Disneyland.
I can't say for certain, but
that would be my, um,
Initial assessment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee and and
presenter. So, so my concerns as
a legislator is how do we stop
this monster?
How do we stop the 300% increase
on, on product.
And
I think the fight's going on at
the national level and, and we
have to fight it here at the
state level, and we have to ask
ourselves and, and, and we
always talk about COVID.
And
How it affected everything, but
it it wasn't just COVID, it was
a combination of COVID and and
federal policy on how we were
going to restructure, redo.
All of our infrastructure here
in this country, and then how
money got.
Got put into places.
And handed down and, and how we
spent that money.
And I think we just created this
monster.
That we keep relating to COVID
and now we're, we're relating it
to tariffs.
But we created this monster
where
I believe there's a lot of
people in this country making a
lot of money off construction.
And
It shows in how much they're
charging for the products and
stuff.
And, and before the mentality of
the country was, how can we be
competitive, and how can I make
my prices cheaper than anybody
else, so that I can sell my
product.
And now it's like we can get
this much, we can get this much,
and, and we have seen prices of
everything escalate.
And we, we raised the price of
labor here in the state of New
Mexico to help.
The people that weren't making
enough money to put groceries on
their tables.
But then when we raise the price
of labor.
The price of the hamburger went
up.
So, to me,
Even as DOT as legislators, as
citizens of the state, somehow.
We need to figure out where we
could bring that competitive
back.
Competitiveness back to where
whenever somebody delivers a
load of gravel, the DOT.
That it's, it's a reasonable
price where we can all live with
it if we keep funding.
Through the state and increasing
it by percentage because the
percentage of, of, of inflation.
We're never going to stop that
monster. And how do we
Through DOT through through our
committees, through legislators,
through everything, how do we
bring those prices back down and
make it a competitive market
where we want to sell product.
And and move maybe.
I, I don't think we've stopped
selling them the moving the
amount of product, but how do we
make it competitive and make it,
take it back to where we used to
be.
I mean people at, at, at a
clothing store wanted to sell a
shirt for $10 cause they, cause
if the $12 or $15 shirt.
But the other store was hired
that you'd sell more $10 shirts,
but we've lost that somewhere
along the way.
And is it the way we're funding
it? Is it because there's so
much money around, is it, and
now,
We've come to a place in our
country where
Things are tightening up and,
and we're starting to feel this,
we're starting to feel it in how
we do our budget and, and I
think that the biggest problem
for DOT is
The timing of how things got
asked for and how it happened
and, and how you lost.
How you lost HB 145 and, and
it's sad to see that that
happened.
Uh, I don't think there's really
flaws in the system, but I think
the system kind of failed DOT.
Uh
I, I think there's a lot of hard
work to be done in this
committee in the state of New
Mexico and, and across the
country. And, and how do we get
to that point? We can't just
keep escalating this thing. It
just, it, are we gonna stop it
from escalating by
Downsizing the amount of
projects that we have.
In the state and, and if we buy
less product and then our people
then going to cheapen up their
product a little bit so we can
kind of get back in some kind of
rhythm where we can afford it,
not.
We can't keep taxing the people
more and more on the gas, on
this and that and the other,
and, and make it all work.
Uh
Mr. Chair, I think, I think we
have a hard job to do in this
committee, I think the whole
state needs the whole country
needs to come together.
Hopefully, my hope.
I
That we get to producing more US
steel.
And, and, and then I don't know
what percentage of, of foreign
steel you're using in uh
And how much percentage of, of
you are still using. I know I
started a steel company years
ago and we were importing steel
from Mexico and, and, and
bringing Mexican steel into the
US.
It was a very interesting
adventure that that we went on
and maybe
We, we need to work on how we
import steel or if DOT can
import import it directly from
Mexico to
To your front door, how it
works.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Maybe more of a rampant rave
than than questions, but
I think somehow we need to
change our
Our way of thought and we just
can't keep going that way. It's
just, it's just gonna be crazy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Vice Chair
my.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, uh, so the map of the, the
The map of New Mexico and the
two major interstates, I-4010.
I think it's fair to say you
can't go from LA to I-40 as we
know, Mr. Chairman, goes from LA
to
To the east coast, but it stops
in Oklahoma City and then from
there you can go to Chicago, New
York, wherever. In other words,
you can't take goods from LA to
back east without going through
a 40 or a 10.
Which goes, you know, hugs the
The border of New Orleans and
then Tallahassee and all that
stuff. The the the chart on the
left, um,
Is this one-way traffic, the
numbers is this West Coast or or
or Easter or whoever is crossing
the border east and west.
Yeah, Mr. Cha, Senator, this is
uh both east and west is my. OK.
And do you anticipate
tariffs affecting diesel traffic
or or not.
to a percentage extent. We do
anticipate diesel uh affecting
diesel traffic. Um, it's a
little bit more difficult to um
Map onto the diesel consumption
just because there it isn't
solely um
freight that's uh uh purchasing
diesel.
But we are, um, that is
something we are working on and
trying to estimate, just trying
to fill some gaps in the data
that we don't have. Sounds good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
Actually a little
Incredulous.
To this. This is, this is, this
is vast speculation.
Um
We were when, when the tariff uh
discussion started, uh,
A couple of months ago and
started being implemented.
We were told
That we were gonna see prices go
up and inflation and we saw the
stock market.
Really
Take a hard hit because of that,
and then over the following
months,
We didn't see that inflation.
Um
Um, so I, I guess my question
is, are we seeing
Less traffic.
On the interstates now or is
this all in anticipation?
Uh, um,
Mr. Chair, uh representative, we
unfortunately do not, uh,
there's a
month delay and when we get the
um revenue for weight distance
and diesel, so we don't have a
Um
Measure of that just yet we have
seen indications through uh for
uh the volume at the port of LA
and Long Beach, showing that
that is down. Uh, I believe part
of the reason why we haven't
seen the in uh inflation that
was predicted in the empty
shells that were predicted early
on was that initial spike in uh
imports that we saw the graph
who
pushed forward a couple of
months' worth of uh of uh
imports to try and get in before
the deadline that combined with
the 20 to 40 day delay uh for uh
chips to cross the Pacific is
part of the reason why there
hasn't been much of an impact.
Um, I haven't seen any numbers
in terms of
How quickly the um
Anticipatory stock of goods has
been is being drawn down, so I'm
not sure.
If
When, uh, inflation will start
to hit and we might see the um
Empty shells that they're
forecasting, I think for sure if
the tariffs do go back to 145%
for tariff or for China.
That isn't, um, in my mind, uh,
Fairly likely, but I don't, um,
Have a lot of the data that that
can uh say when or if and a lot
of it does depend on the appeals
court decision today.
Um
I did that answer your question,
Mr. Chair representative.
No, not quite. Uh, thank you,
Mr. Chair, and yes, I think it
does. I think there's my
question was, what is this
speculation and grand
speculation, I think the answer
is yes.
I don't know that we know.
Um, I'm, I'm a little more
concerned with what we do know,
and that is, we know that the
price of uh
Uh, of, of, uh, crude oil.
has dropped dramatically.
And our entire budget is based
on crude oil.
And, and I know that DOT, uh,
Mr. Chair, has been looking for
a steady source.
Of revenue and and something I
support, which is a steady
source of revenue for the most
important things, which are
building the important
infrastructure and roads and
maintaining them in New Mexico.
I think it encourages business.
I think it uh encourages the
trades. I think there's all
kinds of things that happen if
we
If we build what we're supposed
to build for our citizens.
And
But even now,
Going for a steady source.
is going to be more difficult as
the price of.
Of, uh, of crude oil.
It is dropped dramatically. So
I, it's just concern, it's, it's
interesting to me that we're
doing this level of handwringing
over tariffs when what we've
seen is
From the president.
Going in like he does and like
is in his books, negotiating as
high as he possibly can, and
then getting a deal.
And then there's disruption for
a period of time, but then it
normalizes. I don't expect these
tariffs to exist like this
ongoing. There there may be a
few, uh, products, Mr. Chair,
that we see these things going
on for a while, but I don't see
them being
Long term, and so
Um, I mean, just, uh,
It's been interesting to me that
without this guy actually
falling.
Um, we've been hearing a lot
from
Folks that the sky is falling,
and I haven't seen it happen
yet. I all I've seen is uh uh
inflation has gone down, uh,
which
Uh, in particular, it's harming
us with the, the cost of, of
crude oil.
Um, so I, I've just, I've been
listening to presentation, we
spent a lot of time on tariffs.
And I just
I
I don't know uh what the actual
results are going to be of that.
I think uh there may be some
spikes in certain products, but
what we've seen, Mr. Chair, is a
lot of the folks that the
threatened tariffs have been out
there. We've made deals with so
many of those countries, and it
has made it to where the
increase of American products
will be able to go out. So I, I
understand the the the the
concern of what might be coming
in, but some of our products may
be going out, and that may make
up the difference. So
I think this discussion is
premature.
And, and I think that uh
is we need to concern ourselves
with making sure that we have a
good economy in New Mexico that
we diversify and build,
diversify doesn't mean harming
the industry that we have in
place, that means adding to the
industry that we have in place
more.
More work, more being more
business friendly to everyone,
and unfortunately, we've not
done that in New Mexico. I, I
don't know, um, Mr. Cerner where
you.
And I heard somebody. Yeah, yes,
if I, if, if I can, Mr. Chairman
and Representative, not to cut
you off, but I, I really wanted
to support uh the notion that
um,
So, I guess the way I'll
describe it is this, if you go
back 3 years and look at the
presentation we've given to this
committee and others, that
inverse operation between cost
of construction and the long
term forecasts of the state road
fund has not changed, and so I
want to be clear, and I agree
with representative Montoya,
that we're not hinging the
demise of the state road fund
relative to construction costs
on tariffs. That is not what
we're doing. In fact,
Because of uh Baba, a provision
put in place by the previous
president, right, as part of BIL
we started, uh, we started
shifting to the purchase of a
major supplies like steel and
aluminum to American steel and
aluminum. And so we've been in
that transition for a while. I,
I just want to be clear. Go back
3 years, look at our
presentation. It might be a copy
paste job, and it's not because
we're too lazy to update the
slides, but the fact
that the state road fund has no
mechanism for growing over time
with the cost of doing business
in this industry is really what
we have to concern ourselves
with as a team of leaders
dedicated to road
infrastructure. We don't need to
respond to the potential impact
of tariffs as a primary concern.
We need to respond to the fact
that for 3 straight years, at
least since I've been here, and
I'm sure my predecessors did the
same. We've been forecasting
that we will
continue to do less work at the
Department of Transportation
because we have the same amount
of money to do that work and the
cost of doing it is increasing
dramatically to representatives
Amora's Point. And so I just
want to be clear as we set the
stage for this interim, we've
got to look at what we were
working on a year ago. How do we
generate more revenue for the
state road fund to offset the
growing cost of construction,
something that's been going on
since 2020.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
thank you, Mr. Secretary. Uh, I,
I think one of the things that
we can do is we can stop.
Um
Continuing toreflexively bow to
the unions, which has made,
that's one of our biggest
expenses in the state is that we
are paying prevailing wage.
across the board, even when
we're uh subcontracted workout
that is within our control.
That is within our controls the
legislature.
Uh, some of these things are not
in our control, and I think uh
we have decided to make some of
our projects 33% more expensive
than they need to be.
And so, uh, I I I I'm, I'm just
concerned that with tariffs out
there that uh rather than us
doing what's in our control,
it's easy to sit back and say,
ah it's.
Nothing we can do about it. It's
all out of DC and, and I think
uh we can do that all day long,
but it's, I think it's a uh
abrogation of our duty to just
say,
We can't control anything that
happens in DC, so
So I believe, uh, Mr. Secretary,
you need to know this very well.
I think this department is the
one.
Department.
That does good all across the
state of New Mexico, fairly
continually, and I like to see
us, uh, to fund it as properly
as we can. Um, I think decisions
that we are making though as a
legislature.
are causing uh some of the, the
costs to go up. Thank you, Mr.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'll be
brief. I know we're behind on
time.
I have a couple of questions,
um, really quick.
Um
Mr. Morrison, the, the special
fuel tax. How does that?
Apply or does it apply to ag and
construction special fuels.
So if it's um Mr. Chair, um,
Representative, so the, uh
If the
Uh, and, um, off road uses are
uh using the dyed diesel, then
they are not paying the special
fuels tax.
Uh, I believe I'm not certain if
they do pay the uh groceryce tax
instead on that I have to double
check on that.
They would not pay special fuels
tax. Thank, thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I just
wanted that, uh, I wanted some
clarification on that. Also, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Secretary, you
mentioned, I don't know if I
heard you correctly earlier when
you said something about each be
145 and some changes that were
made.
Um
I don't know what if I misheard
you or if, if, if, if I, if I'm
thinking of something else, but
did you, uh, did you say
something about that there were
changes made to HB 145, the
language.
Mr.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, uh,
Representative, yes, um, there,
we, we did a couple of things to
uh address, um,
the will of the legislature or
the intent of the legislature.
So those first uh um changes
took place on the House side,
house transportation Committee,
and they were aimed at creating
guardrails to ensure that future
administrations didn't take the
bonding authority and deviate
from some of the principal
priorities, um, for the state
and the, uh, and really the need
for infrastructure upkeep rooted
in, in safety, uh, road
improvements. So those were the
first changes. Then what we
fundamentally did.
Um, at the Senate Finance
Committee was, we wove into the
bill, the new recurring revenue
that would support the debt
service, and that $72 million of
new recurring revenue came by
way of uh increase to vehicle
registration fees. That was $30
million increased weight
distance tax, which we've talked
a lot about today, $40 million
and the phasing in uh of an
electric vehicle surcharge,
which was estimated at 2 million
in year one.
And so, what we did was get a
bill that allowed for the state
transportation commission to
bond over several years, the new
revenue to support the debt
service on those bonds and um
and essentially with zero impact
to the recurring general fund,
zero impact to the non-recurring
general fund, zero impact to the
state's STB capacity zero impact
to the state's geobond capacity
and zero impact to the state's
SpongeBob.
capacity. So even as we're
wrangling with how are we going
to address federal funding cuts,
House Bill 145 wouldn't be a
factor to weigh in on, well, can
we do this anymore because it
supported itself. So, um, they
were all good changes that that
we embraced as a governor Bill,
we, we, we negotiated and, and
worked through all of those
collaboratively.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, Mr.
Chair, thank you. I, that's, I,
I'm glad you said what you said
because it was so important.
Uh, that the work of the house
transportation committee did,
uh, in in in promoting this and
making sure that I had those
guard rails and making sure that
was that it was the set up the
way it was, uh, I think it would
have made a huge impact if that
bill would have gotten sent into
law and many of the much of the
discussion we're having today
would be a very, very different
and uh I hope uh when I
able to see it come back. Uh, I
think this is critical for DOT
and the state as far as the
infrastructure and the roads and
the bridges that we need to
build and maintain, and I think,
uh, once again, I think uh I
wanna thank you and the staff
for continuously working on
this, and I look forward to
supporting it in the next, in
the next session. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you for a second time,
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for the opportunity to ask
just a few more questions. Um,
when
I, I was, I'm wondering, has, I
think this is for the secretary.
Has the department done any cost
estimates, we can't control
what's happening at the federal
level. But we can control what's
happening at the state level.
We can impact the cost of goods
sold, the cost of construction,
you know, by rules and
regulations. So I'm wondering if
you've done any cost analysis on
the Environment department's key
illness rule. I understand they
extended the comment period. Did
you guys do any cost estimates
on what the increased cost of
construction would be for roads
if that rule goes into effect.
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
was that for the, the heat, the
heat exhaustion.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, so we're, we're
working alongside um AC&M, and
we've had some really good
discussions with Secretary Kenny
and his team over at OSHA and
have participated in public
comment, but to be sure, we've,
uh, uh, we're not the only state
agency that of course is putting
pencil to paper on what the
financial implications of, of
elements of the rule would would
amount to. And so we're in the
process of doing that alongside
the contracting community.
And then Mr. Chair and
secretary, one of the things I'm
interested in learning about is,
you know, in, in my community,
we have completed the business
loop, uh, project in Sierra
County that goes through truth
or consequences. And one of
those that started way back in
1415 was the three-way stop
lights that the city wanted at
the New School Road and you're
very familiar with this because
we so many public meetings
there, but, and that was, I
don't know, a couple $100,000
project, but when we did the
study, the safest.
Which was required to take the
safest route was the
roundabouts, which turned into,
I think a 26 $28 million project
and was the ribbon cutting was
this year. So not just time and
money. Is that rule or
regulation that says you must do
the safest option without
consideration of cost. What,
what, what, what is driving that
as well? Because we can
There were less expensive
options, but they weren't the
completely the safest option. Is
that rule or is that statute?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative, I wanna, I wanna
see if, um, if our chief
engineer is there. David can
tell me he can answer that
question. So, it sounds like to
me that the project was, was
federalized and based on the
program that was funding the
project, the design
recommendations, um, kind of,
uh, uh, guided the work of Dave,
you want to address that? Uh,
yeah, uh, Mr. Chair, uh
representative Dallas uh
secretary, thank you. Um,
I wasn't intimately familiar
with the development of that
project, however, uh, if the
budget allows for us to go the
safest.
Alternative, that's typically
what we'll do, um, and really
I'd have to get back with um you
about the details of the
development process and what
happened during the, you know,
phase AB reports when we're
looking at all the different
alternatives and see why um the
roundabout shook out, but I can
get back with you on exactly why
it did, um, but again, the rule
of thumb would be if we have the
money to make it as safe as
possible. We'll do that, um,
without impacting other project
priorities.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair. And
so that would suggest maybe that
there was federal dollars.
And the federal dollars were
tied to the safest
that is, um, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Doll, that's,
that is typically the case. I
mean, if, if an alternative
shakes out um for safety
reasons, um, it is, it, it is in
the best interest of the
department to explore that and
identify federal funds, um, my
guess is there were some highway
safety improvement program
funding that was um allocated to
this project that helped bolster
the overall project funding.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I hope we can, maybe everybody
else in this committee
understands the difference in
those funds and the rules and
regulations or statutes that are
tied to them, but we're spending
a lot more money than we have to
on projects, um, and if there's
something we can do on the
federal side, and it wasn't that
it reduced collisions. It was
that it could reduce fatalities
because of the reduced speed,
and I don't know, it's
roundabout versus three-way
stoplights. That's what the
conversation was. But in the
clean transportation fuel
standard, which is also
something we control.
The dollars revert to the water
conservation fund or the
radiation protection fund, not
to roads, and I mean, you could
theorize that if these tariffs
go through, and we do indeed see
reduced diesel transportation,
wouldn't that have a positive
impact on our carbon, a
reduction of carbon intensity
that we want for our state.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, I
believe so, but I'd have to
double check to make sure. So do
we really want to reduce carbon
footprint or are we just wanting
to charge, we just want to
charge the carbon credits for
people and have increased carbon
impact. So I mean, I, I, I just.
The whole premise is a little
bit frustrating and what we
could do is look at rules and
regulations within our state
that we do control. We could
look at the amount of dollars
that we are generating from
transportation and put them into
transportation funds, not the
general fund. And we do have a
pretty hefty budget with just
from 16 to now, it's gone from 6
billion to $11 billion. So it's
not a lost cause here. We can
pass the bond, people choose to
buy those bonds, we can take
more of the funds that are
reverting to the general and
keep it in the transportation
fund and we can do things.
that reduced the cost of
regulation without impeding
safety or uh reducing the wages
that we pay to the people who
are doing something that
everybody in the state wants.
Uh, improved roads and improved
transportation. Thank you.
Thank you.
I don't think we have any other
number
I keep forgetting your
representative. You have to go
like that to me all the time.
You counselor if you want.
Um,
let me,
um, so, uh, Mr. Chairman, and,
and, um,
And committee and uh staff,
thank you for this.
This
Really important, um,
Critical thinking, I guess is
what I call it, and some of it's
fact, some of it's still future,
um, one of the questions that I
have, um, with regard to this
whole presentation, actually I
have 2, but um and I'll try to
keep it really short, but I know
it's not gonna be short, and
maybe this will be a future
thing that you'll bring back to
us, and so you don't actually
have to respond right now if you
don't want to, Mr. Secretary,
but
On these particular roads that
are identified in your report
here, uh, which are identified
as New Mexico major roads,
Routes for goods and services,
and you have I-40 and I-10.
Is there already an existing
needs assessment for the
conditions of these major
transportation quarters. Do we
already have we already done
that?
Um.
Yeah, absolutely, um, uh,
Chairman uh Representative. So,
and I saw David and I'll let him
chime in there, but in
particular for I-40 from Arizona
to Albuquerque, we've, uh, we're
in the midst of conducting a
study that's providing
recommendations on how to
address the numerous traffic
delays, the crash data, the
safety improvements of that
corridor understanding its
significance to trade from west
to east and vice versa. But, um,
absolutely
And and going back to House Bill
145, we can, we can identify the
routes in particular within
those corridors that were going
to be principal and primary for
us. Um, this year, we anticipate
spending $65 million on, on
repair work on I-40 alone, and
so the, the team at DOT has done
a phenomenal job identifying the
conditions of those routes, the
priority areas, whether they be
pavement, bridge work, drainage
work, etc. um, and
We could likely quantify that
amount, but I'll let, I'll let
Mr. Quintana expand on.
Uh, yeah, a representative, Mr.
Chair, thank you for that, uh,
secretary, thank you for that.
Um, we are actually, uh,
concluded the I-40 corridor
study, and we're um ready to
actually present it to um
elected officials, uh, this
month, um, that are impacted,
um, but, you know, they have
their districts within that
area. Um, we're also doing some
analysis on I-10 and looking at
the drainage structures along
there to improve those increased
capacity, make sure that they're
functioning and staying in a
good state of and keeping in a
state of good repair. So you eat
answer your question, we are
absolutely ensuring that those
major freight corridors are
staying um in us or or keeping
up with the state of good repair
that they need to and that's why
I prefaced my, my question, Mr.
Chair, um, with the this would
maybe be something you.
And I'm sure you guys already
have this plan because knowing,
knowing your departments, you
guys are one step ahead, um,
hopefully we'll be able to see
those conditions, uh, existing
conditions to to let us know
what we're really dealing with
when it comes down to brass
tacks, and I mean brass tacks, I
mean funding sources. Um, the
other thing, Mr. Chair, that I'd
like to see as part of that
discussion as you bring that
forward is how
The cogs in these areas are
supplementing any, any of the
funding that may, or if they
are, um, if any of the cogs
along the rough routes are being
supplemented by any federal
funding or funding that's
already pro pro programmed.
Um
For future improvements, so
that, that's the one thing that
I, that I am concerned with, Mr.
Chair.
I I really want to see those
existing conditions, um, as we
move forward. And then the other
thing.
My second question, Mr. Chair,
was why is 285 not included on
this map? Isn't is 285 not in
fact uh uh quarter for goods and
services.
Mr. Chair Representative, so,
um, that map, I, it's a heat map
showing the amount of freight
traffic along within New Mexico
and areas of US 285 is
considered a freight corridor
for sure, but really I-40 and
I-10 are carrying the majority
of, of that freight freight.
traffic and just um and if, if
it pleases the chair and the
committee, we can present the
I-40 um corridor, uh findings at
a future interim meeting if, if
you would all like to do that
and, and we can have the um
existing conditions
as part of that. I would love to
see that. I think that would be
very telling to us about, you
know, presenting the existing
conditions to see what we're
really dealing with in dollars
and cents at some point in time.
Um,
yeah, and I will tell you that
my nephew lives in the East
mountain area, and I go visit
him regularly, and that road,
the conditions of that road
between Albuquerque and, you
know, some of those areas in the
East Mountain are are.
There's some issues out there. I
will just mention that, but
thank you. I thank you, Mr.
Chair, for giving me that time.
Thank you, uh, before we move on
to
Preservation District 5,
correct? Uh, I want members to
please stay focused. We've been
a little bit on soapboxes this
morning, and it's heating up in
the time we're running a little
behind. So if you have
questions, please keep them
focused.
All right, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everyone. Rick Petilia,
executive director. Um, it's
good to see everybody this
morning this summer, um, we're
gonna present District 5 to you
all. Um, if you're ready for
that, we'll get started.
Good morning, uh, chair, members
of the committee. My name is
Rhonda Lopez. I'm the District 5
engineer, um, and you should all
have your packets with the
presentation. So, um, I know
there are some new committee
members, and so there's a brief
overview of the district up on
top, um, the District 5
encompasses San Juan, Rio Reba,
Taos, Santa Fe, Torrance, and
Los Alamos counties and the
districtive head.
Waters is located here in Santa
Fe, Districtive is responsible
for maintaining approximately
5,375 lane miles of roadway and
is compromised of 21 maintenance
patrols, 5 construction offices
and 7 special crews and the
district also works closely with
10 tribal governments and 17
local government entities in
order to meet our transportation
goals.
Um, on the front page, um, I,
our, our commissioner or our
district 5 commissioner is Mr.
Tom Taylor, and um since we're
right at the tail end of fiscal
year 25, going into fiscal year
26, I kind of included both of
um those amounts on the cover
page just to kind of see the
differences, and you'll notice
um and looking at that, there is
uh our budget for this upcoming
year is less than it was.
for FY 25.
Um, and as far as our employee
breakdown, um, for our support
section, um, we've got 45
positions, 32 of those are
filled, 13 vacant. Maintenance,
we have 194 positions, um, with
uh 32 vacancies are construction
group, we've got 65 positions
with 11 vacancies and our
engineering group has 20
positions with 5, so that
equates to a total of 324.
positions within the district,
and we currently have an 18.8%
vacancy rate.
Going on to page number 2.
Um, I have a summary of all of
the House Bill 2 or special uh
appropriations that we've
received that are due to expire,
some of them expire now at the
end of June, um.
Or extended. Um, so all of the
uh projects that we received for
lots of 2019, we have completed
all of those projects, um, the
laws of 2019 chapter 271, um,
the first project was completed,
um, New Mexico 68 project that
that is showing fully expended
that project is essentially
done, um, except for we do have
some posting cable barrier that
um will be in.
installed, it seemed there's
another project that's in the
same location that they're doing
paving and detours and that
needs to wrap up before we can
install that posting cable
barrier. And so, um, that will
be installed once that other
project is complete, but the
House bill funding associated
has been expended.
The house spilled two laws of
2021, all of those projects have
been completed.
Going on the page 3.
two lives of 2022.
And 2023, all of those projects
have been completed.
And then we go to House Bill 2
lots of 2024 Section 11, um,
that was funding that we
received through the legislative
session last year, we were able
to complete 4 of the maintenance
construction projects during the
summer, last summer, and we're
set to start and complete the
remaining 3, and then there's 3
other projects that are more the
funding was more delegated for
design and we're in process of
doing that, and there's kind of
a status on those.
3 projects on the table.
Page number 4.
House bill
laws of 2024 section 11. This is
also funding from last year's
legislative session, we were
able to complete 9 of the
maintenance construction
projects during last summer, and
we are set to start in complete,
um, the last one that's at the
very bottom, New Mexico, 95, um,
is set to start this summer.
I did list the um house Bill 2
laws of 2025, Section 11 that
was passed with this past
legislative session, um, once
the funding becomes available on
July the first, the district is
planning for 3 maintenance
projects, um, as well as
utilizing some of the that
funding for striping and fill
supplies, um, and our field
supplies, um, that stuff that we
use for like attenuators,
guardrail, um.
Also, it helps us get our
cinders for snow removal during
the winter.
And that was a total of $10
million.
Going on to page number 5, we're
going into, um, this is our, uh,
construction projects that we
have available. Um, so this is
currently all of our active
construction projects, the top 3
projects are ones that we've
started this year. The remaining
projects are ones that were on
like last year's list and that
have just continued that maybe
we're on winter suspension and
they're currently still working
on them.
From page 5 on to page 6 is a
list of the completed
construction projects, um, and
all of these are ones that reach
substantial completion within
within 2020.
On page 6, then we're also gonna
go over the contract maintenance
projects, um, so.
I apologize, I didn't realize
there were 6. Yes, OK, cool.
Thanks, Rick. Um, so FY 24, um,
we have complete the completed
contract maintenance projects,
um, I also included 25 since
we're at the tail end, um,
they're at the bottom and you
can see, um, in 24 we had about
$12 million.25 was about 8.7
million, um, and, and on the FY
25 list. These are all the
contract meeting and.
maintenance projects that we've
completed so far in FY 25, there
is one that I uh became aware
of uh in between submitting this
and the presentation today that
we had, um, a bridge
preservation project that was on
New Mexico 502 that um had a
cost, it was at mile. 15.9 and
um it had a cost of a little
over half a million dollars.
was $554,000689.60.
OK, going on to page 7. this is
the list of projects that we are
in progress, our contract
maintenance, uh, projects, the
top 3 were currently in progress
and we anticipate having those
um finished either by the end of
this month or or next month, and
then the other three are ones
that are associated with the FY
26 funding, and so we will um
start.
Those come July 1st, um, and
those will be the ones that we
are looking. OK.
And then pages 8.
And 9 have our, um, the list of
all of our district 5 step
projects. Um, currently, the
district has 2 projects that we
expect to let um in and and in
this one it's actually really
more based off of the federal
fiscal year just because a lot
of the funding that we have
associated with the projects is
federal. So, um, for the federal
fiscal year 25, we have two more
projects.
Um, that you can see it's S10730
and uh 5 1011, 75, um, I just
kind of want to kind of point
out a little bit about the 5,
1011, 75. That's the 4th phase
of the US 64 project that's in
the Shiprock, um, area, and
that's gonna kind of tie to
something here um as we go into
our uh.
FY 2627, um, in FY 26, the
district anticipates letting 9
projects that can be seen here
that's in the fiscally
constrained years. Um, I just
want to also point out that
several of these are bridge
projects that were able to um
take advantage and utilize um uh
federal bridge funds that we
received through the bipartisan
infrastructure that we're
expecting to get done. We don't
have um as many.
significant road projects, um,
coming up.
Because we had to move when I
was putting this together for
this presentation, I had quite a
few projects that actually had
to move from our uh fiscally
constrained years into page 9,
where we have more of our
planning years, because we don't
have the construction funding
available to keep them within
the fiscally constrained years.
Um, so one of the projects
though that still is within our
fiscally constrained is um 5,
10, 1.
76, that's actually the last
phase of the US 64 and the
reason I really want to point
that out to uh the chair and the
committee is because um that
whole corridor project that
we've been uh building the last
few years, we received grant
funding, uh, federal grant
funding for that project. Um, we
received 59.6 million, and then
in additional 25 million. But as
you know,
Part of receiving that grant
funding, we have to have a 20%
state match. So that 5, 1011, 76
project is basically the project
that we're planning on building
is our state match. So if we do
not get the state funding in
order to build that project,
which at this point is um a
little less than $34 million we
will need to return that round
funding that we received.
Um
I think. Um, so I just kind of
want to point that out. Um, and
then, uh, just really a few of
the larger significant projects
that, um, like I had mentioned,
I had to move out to the
planning years cause they're not
physically constrained. So
everything that's in the
planning years either we are
partially funded or we need
funding for, and you'll notice
most of those are pretty
significant projects. I mean
like well over like $25 million.
And, and
We're at at least sitting at
like 800 and almost $40 million
in our planning years.
Then moving on to page 10, um,
our transportation project
funding this actually did not
change, um, I couldn't update it
and the reason being that um
it's the same list and
everything for last year, but,
um, and that's the reason the
TPF deadline for applications
actually was last week. So, um,
the project selection process
will be taking place over the
next few weeks. Um, the
important thing to note on this
though.
that the TPF program did receive
additional funding through the
legislative session this year,
and, um, so the district's total
cost for the new TPF projects
will be approximately $16
million versus the 9.7 from FY
25, which is great for all of
the applicants that um are
trying to take advantage of TPF
then on page 11 and 12, we have
our local government road fund
kind of seems.
similar situation that I um
wasn't able to update all of the
projects in the map because we
are currently in the project
selection process and the
contract execution process, um,
the important thing to note here
is that the amount for LGRF
essentially stayed the same um
as an FY20 um 5 um on the um
map, you'll see, I think the
differences I can kind of say
that um we're a little bit.
I think really the, the total
amount was, um,
In FY 25 was 5,480,000291 and
for FY 26, it's 5
million,461,160. So it's
essentially and then moving on
to page 13 is the equipment
needs. Um, I'd like to, um, I
know in um,
The secretary's presentation, he
had kind of touched on that uh
we did receive additional
funding, um, through the
legislative, um session this
year of $12 million so each
district received an additional
$2 million for equipment. So
thank you for that. Um, as you
are aware, the cost of
everything has gone up due to
inflation, the cost of equipment
as well as the repairs. So
anything additional is
definitely helpful for the
districts, um, and then uh above
is just a list of additional.
equipment. I wanted to keep it
at approximately 12 million, but
I do want to point out that we
definitely have probably more
like closer like 25 to $30
million of equipment needs just
at District 5 alone. So, um, I
guess with that I can stand for
any questions.
I appreciate the presentation.
I don't know what to do.
Thank you. You don't, uh, just
briefly, last week I had the
pleasure to have been invited to
participate in a panel
discussion at the New Mexico
Trucking Association.
And
It was very eye opening for me,
and I, I actually invited them,
maybe to do a presentation for
us at some point in the near
future as part of the interim.
Uh, but you know that after the
panel, I had to uh one trucking
company owner and a couple of
truckers actually approached me.
And talk about how important the
roads are now obviously they're
important because they're on the
road all the time.
And then, and it involves
economic development and
everything that we discussed
about at the legislature.
But what what was surprising to
me and it's anecdotal, but
nonetheless was that they, the
group that I was speaking to
said, you know, we don't mind
paying higher taxes and fees,
whether they're related to
registrations and all the fees
that we charge, if
We get better roads.
And I was amazed by that because
you always think nobody wants to
ever pay a higher fee on
anything, right? But no, they
actually said, no, we don't mind
paying it.
But as long as you get a better
roads and I think that nobody
knows those roads better than.
The truckers.
So I really appreciated the fact
that they took a moment to, to
talk to me.
And I shared with them, the one
thing that I'll share with you
is that, you know, not everybody
goes and takes advantage of of
uh state services like going to
a lake or a park, or any variety
of things that people can can
access.
But everybody
Every citizen, every taxpayer is
gonna be on our roads.
So, you know, I'm preaching to
the choir here, but I just felt
like I can just say that because
that's how important people see
our ropes.
Thank you for the presentation.
Thank you all. Appreciate it.
So,
Secretary Serna, thank you as
well.
We're gonna move on to
Our last item, which discussed
the work plan and the meeting
schedule. Uh members any
questions, discussion items. I,
I don't see any, but I will like
to mention this.
I will try to be as flexible as
possible with our agendas if
there is an item or an issue
that you wish to discuss, please
feel free to, to let us know so
that we can include it on the
agenda.
Representative Garrett.
Um, can we do that now?
Sure.
Yeah.
Um, I think, uh, one thing that
was mentioned to me was funding
for local government roads.
That may be included already,
but, um, P3s, um,
I know that P3s are part,
they're contained within the
trade port.
Um, and Representative Lindstrom
and several of us have been
doing P3 legislation every year.
I talked to the governor's
infrastructure person. It may be
heavy lift, but we're gonna work
on that so if we can include
that.
Um
And then there was an issue on
to establish customs at Ports
Adventury, New Mexico. There has
to be passenger air service. So
if that can be incorporated when
we do airports, customs, um, and
then I'd like to see a national
infrastructure bank update. Um,
many of us have, we don't have
to sign a letter of support or
something, but
The National Infrastructure Bank
doesn't rely on federal
budgeting, and we've all seen we
need enormous amounts for
infrastructure, and I'd like us
to get an update on how that's
progressing. 3 of our, well, 3
of our congress people have
signed on to the bill. Uh, we've
presented it to both US
senators, but if we could get an
update from the National
Infrastructure Bank.
Seeing if their efforts to
establish it are going, um, I
have to laugh. Bobby Gonzalez
couldn't even pass a one cent
gas tax addition, looking at
that, uh, let's see. My, you
know, ideal world, I'd like us
to have a mobile committee
meeting.
On an air conditioned truck that
would take us to the port of
Long Beach, the port of LA.
That I, I mean, I'm, my my son
finds this air flights like I
come up with $350 and he gets
them for $120. I don't quite
know how he does it, but he does
it, but it, it would just a a
road trip on I-40. So that's my
super wish list to see these two
ports because we're directly
affected by them, sanit Teresa
is affected by them, the I-40
trade port route is effective.
So that's just my super.
Wish list, but, but maybe
including the impact of what's
happening at the 2.
Uh, Southern California ports,
how it does directly affect us.
So those are some things I'd
like to see.
Thank you. Members, if, if
something comes to mind now or
later, just feel free to shoot
us an email and representative
Garrett, if you would, if you
wouldn't mind taking those
little notes and shoot us an
email would be very helpful.
Martin was writing fast and
furiously, but just to be safe,
it wouldn't hurt.
Mr. Chair, I, I send all sorts
of stuff to,
some of which I copy you on,
some which I don't.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, uh,
maybe this was about a week ago,
I think.
There was a truck that turned
over in New Mexico 28, and it
was hauling hydrochloric acid.
And so it affected ag.
And residential, both.
And so having a conversation
with my district engineer. He
goes, well, representative, we
don't have anything really as
far as designated.
As his cargo.
And so I would really like to
bring that topic up and discuss
what it is we can do or at least
look at.
You know, the hazardous cargo,
and I know it.
Yeah, I was given different
things, you know, they, they,
they can be hauling different
things, but uh I think uh this
really, it scared me, knowing
that they were hauling
hydrochloric acid.
And they were going too fast and
it would do.
And so, um, and maybe we can
have some discussion about that
or perhaps a presentation on
hazardous cargo because I really
like to consider something maybe
um.
Uh, something legislative wise.
Thank you, Representative
Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, as I
mentioned before, and maybe on
item B,
adding existing conditions,
which I also already mentioned
on my 40 and I 10 and 285.
And how it relates to the cost
of improving those areas, and
then, um, um, and this maybe an
item J related to um HOV lanes
in the urban areas.
And what that maybe there's a
study or something that they
could present regarding that. I
know a lot of people that are
not in favor of that, but when
we have people driving one car
and one person every single day,
and we're talking about reducing
emissions, um, we really need to
talk about it at least and and
this is the appropriate
committee to do that. The other
thing was
Um, if I may, bike lanes.
Um, yesterday or this morning, I
guess I was behind a guy on a
bike, and he was in my lane, and
it was fine, you know, I
I had to wait
But, I mean, I think there's a
lot of pedestrian fatalities
regarding bicycles and what are
the rules and, and do we need
more bike lanes or at least
consideration for that, because
that is an alternative uh mode
of transportation. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Mr. Cha Clovis is uh open uh for
suggestions. We'd like to host a
meeting if, if anybody backs
out, I don't know how solid
this, this location deal is, but
Clovis is open and waiting with
open arms for anybody to come to
Eastern New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Doll, did you?
Yes, Mr. Chair, I just wanted to
also say, Sierra County is open
and if you come to your county,
um, you will get to see the
completed DOT business loop that
has within like a 3 mile radius,
3 roundabouts, 2 lane bike.
Paths
And what they've done to Lane
bike paths, yes, and what
they've done there and of course
we can land at spaceport and I
would even offer to um transport
members by water device if they
chose choose to do a river float
or kayaking or tubing, but also
if we do go to Spaceport, you
can see the railroad there that
needs a spur in order to have
industrial opportunities, as
well as what it looks like and
the reality of these high speed
rails that people are really
asking us for. They want to.
Complete the rail runner, and it
would go through the area where
the spaceport is out at Ingle.
So, um, lots of reasons to stop
by TRC on one of these trips.
And
Thank you. It's uh one of the
limitations that we have is as a
subcommittee is that we, it's
kind of a hard set on the number
of days that are available,
we're kind of pushing the
envelope already a little bit,
uh, but to representative Doo,
uh, I had actually wanted to
host one there, but it turned
out we had almost all our
meetings and and and MDOT's
district one, and so we're we're
now in 1 and 2, and we will be
in 5. so that's, that's made it
a little tough, but I
Also asked and, I don't know
that it'll go anywhere, but just
that you're aware. I asked that
we be allowed to create a
subcommittee of our subcommittee
to assign some members to
actually go down to TRC and
visit. So I'm, I'm working on
that, and let's see if we can do
that.
Mr. Chair, and only because
Representative Virago brought it
up. Um, it's, we, we do have,
uh, the river be willing to host
us to, to see what they've been
doing as well, so.
however, however, I will assure
you this Clovis is on vice chair
is here, he'll be the chair next
year, uh, and he's, he's already
agreed to some of these
locations that I don't want to
say anything yet because he'll
be the guy, but uh we are, we
are looking at uh Representative
Garrett.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, I just want to
note that um NMFA oversight is
meeting in Demming in September.
Um, so when it says dimming
Silver City, what does that
mean?
OK, cause uh the border
authority reports to NMF
Oversight and that's why we're
meeting at Deming cause we're
gonna do border issues.
So just a heads up.
OK
Maestas
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No,
this is great, great plan, um.
But I ask us to
To look at is a couple of
things, one is uh like transload
facilities where trains,
vehicles, planes, kinda, kinda
gather, we don't really have
that, we don't have that
quintessential transload
facility as our highway as I I
4825 in Albuquerque, but our
kind of our trains intersection
is down in Berlin, but I think
we could overcome that. 2 is um,
Transportation safety.
Roundabouts are kind of tricky
politically, but
Nobody gets killed, you know,
um.
So we definitely got to do some
education, maybe take a look at
What commercials DOTs running,
we have a great film industry,
and we could have like the
coolest commercials around, you
know, dealing with DWI or.
Or whatever else, and then also
um
I'm really happy we're going to
the trade port down in Sunland.
Speaking of someone of
You know, until Chaparral
incorporates, there's about
30,000 plus people that are
living in unincorporated areas.
In, in the, in your neck of the
woods, my, my Southern district
of South Valley has about 40,000
people that are unincorporated
and the unincorporated areas
really get shortchanged big time
when it comes to.
Uh, governmental infrastructure
services, whatnot, uh, so I
take, I, I really want us to
come to um
Come to Santa Fe in January,
harness the support of our
colleagues on, on really taking
a deeper dive on the local road
fund and how the local road fund
can uh can go to those
historically under, under a
represented communities to
really make a difference, you
know, we need to, I was shocked
that we had no um
Non-reoccurring funds in this
year's budget. I mean, we're
sitting on piles of cash.
I think we could come up with
some really great ideas how to
spend one time moneys to to grow
our economy, so I look forward
to those conversations with
regards to the city, I'm really
happy and and commend you, Mr.
Chairman, on the, on the
locations, if you look at past
past uh transportation
committees, they're all Santa
Fe, Santa Fe, maybe Albuquerque.
So it's great that we're going
down south, but assuming I'll be
the chair next year, I, I don't
count, I don't count anything in
this.
in this town, but anyway, um,
but I'll commit, uh, to our, we
have a lot of friends uh on the
committee, they're not here
today, but a lot of friends who
live in the Permians all commit
to going to the Permian Basin
next year, but definitely Clovis
TRC TRC is the truth. I mean,
love TRC, um, I'll definitely
keep those, those towns on the
short list, uh, and we should
definitely take this committee
on the road, so I commend you,
Mr. Chairman, for, for doing
just that.
