Thanks.
OK, we'll resume our um
presentation and um this is a
presentation by evolvement, um.
Miss Andrea Gupaha.
Go paga, OK, um, and thank you
for making the trip from Cuba. I
know that's a long drive, um,
and also Jackson Simpkins, um,
yours is across town from El
Dorado, so, um, thank you and
If you'd like to go ahead and
start.
Members of the committee, my
name is Jackson, I go to high
school at Eldorado High School,
and I've been with involvement
for 3 years.
Hi, I'm Andrea Goripaga. Uh, I'm
a senior at Cuba High School and
I've been a part of the
involvement leadership team for
3 years.
Today we're speaking to you
about evolvement and our tobacco
prevention and advocacy efforts.
Evolvement is a youth engagement
movement funded by the nicotine
use and prevention and control,
also known as the new PAC
program. Since 2010, we've
trained more than 4000 high
school teens to be advocates in
their schools and communities.
Evolvement to me is a way to
advocate for my peers who are
stuck in the nicotine addiction
cycle.
One important thing to note as
we move forward is that
evolvement is and our campaigns
focused specifically on
commercial tobacco and respect
and do not regulate traditional
or ceremonial tobacco.
Traditional traditional tobacco
is and has been used in sacred
ways by Native Americans for
centuries. There are no chemical
additives in traditional
tobacco.
