Do we have a closed captioning
or.
Re.
There we go.
OK, I'm uh Representative Joanne
Ferrari. I can read that from
here.
And I'm from House District 37.
I will be the chair for this
committee this interim and um
Senator Martin Hickey, who could
not be with us, is vice chair.
Um, we can go ahead and have
committee members, um, uh,
introduce themselves. Do you
want to go ahead, Senator Baca?
Oh thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for having me. My name
is Brian Baca. I represent House
District 8 in Valencia County.
And Madam Chair, I'm Senator
Larry Scott.
From
Lee Eddie in Chavis County,
representing Senate District.
42
Pleased to be here.
You, um, and, uh,
representative, I'm sorry I
called you Senate Senator.
Deepest apologies.
So I'm representative Liz
Thompson, House District 24,
Northeast Tights of Albuquerque
and 42 was my number when I
played basketball, so that's a
good district.
So thank you, um, and everyone
in the audience for being here
today. Um, we probably won't
take a long time, a lot of our
issues, um, have been here um
for a long, you know, time, uh,
and our follow up of um as an
oversight committee of the
tobacco settlement is just part
of our um our job.
Uh, if you'll look, um,
We have the uh proposed work
plan and some of the ideas that
um people have already, um, what
we've done before, what we
wanted to add, and then we'll um
see how that works with if there
are any additions that you all
as um committee members have.
Um
Let's see. So, in addition to
our statutory duties, um, we
have, uh, during the 25 interim,
we'll also look at updates from
agencies receiving funds, vaping
legislation, retail licensing.
Um, some of the, um,
Problems with um Senate Bill 20,
which was, I believe, um,
raising the.
Nicotine tax, uh, to be
equivalent to um our cigarette
tax.
And funding enforcement through
regulation and licensing
department, uh, progress of the
nicotine use prevention and
control, um, program is also
known as New PAC, um, through
the Department of Health Review
of available funds, review of
the state Department of Justice
settlement preparation of
recommendations to the
legislative Finance Committee,
um, for program funding levels
based on the committee's program
evaluation process and
Jay is make findings and
recommendations, including
proposed legislation available
to the legislature as part of T.
Rock's final report.
Um, so, uh, we can, uh,
Mm
Go around uh the table, um, if
there are any additional um
Things that you think we need to
um address.
So Representative Thompson, do
you have?
Um
Increasing the taxes. I'm not
really, I don't know if that's
under something else, um.
But that's something we've been
talking about.
Since I started on this
committee in 2013, so.
And just for those folks who are
new, um, what the research shows
us is that though.
The one thing that will keep you
from starting youth is price.
They're very price sensitive and
the only way we can have
anything to do with price is
through taxes, so, I mean, it's
to pay for the, the things that
tobacco or nicotine cause, but
also to try and prevent our
youth from ever starting. Um,
we, Doctor, oh, he was head of
UNM Health. I can't think of his
name right, Zadonni was an
addictionologist and he said
tobacco.
Nicotine is the gate.
So that's why we're trying so
hard to keep our youth from I
mean, among other reasons.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, as
far as for my
One, I've got to, you know, get
an understanding my, my focus as
you guys may know, is about
education and about kids, and I
think that as we, where we can.
Create awareness, make sure that
we have
As far as uh deterrence with
students, including packaging
and those types of um things
that do not make it easy for the
students to have that is an
area.
For me, Madam Chair, and also as
far as, you know, with the
settlement and its role into the
revenue as me being on.
LFC and house appropriations, I
want to see how that, where
that, where it kind of meets and
comes together with that. So
those are my two things, but I,
I do have some uh
Definitely a learning curve to
get caught up. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you again, the, the
packaging was one and the other
was LFC and how we work with
them to get these into the
budget. Yes, thank you, Madam
Chair. Yes, it was really about
as far as how this, how these
funds are dispersed, how these
funds are kind of handled in as
far as targeted for specific
uses is, is my question, Madam
Chair. OK, great. Thank you.
Senator.
How much money comes into that
fund.
Annually
Do we know?
We get a report every year and
that's what we will have, um,
Uh, from the State Department of
Justice, and they can tell us,
you know, how the settlements
going, what different things um.
You know, are being assessed if
they're going to stay with the
main settlement or what plans
they have
and if I could just add to that.
So, um,
We are in litigation.
Or every year. I, are we in 2006
still 2006 litigation. So big
tobacco, the, the um
participating manufacturers.
Are we, we always um deny what
we think we, so.
So the Attorney General,
Department of Justice attorneys
have to go through these fights
and we're only in 2006, so we
really don't know from year to
year what it's gonna be, because
we don't know what the courts
are going to find in those are,
I mean, it's, there's a ballpark
range, but, but, um, it's,
that's why it's so messy because
we're still battling 19 years
ago, um, on what we should get.
And, and just kind of, I'm, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, but um,
So one of the things that that
the the the p.m.s and argue is
that in the past, we haven't
collected all of the taxes that
we should have of tobacco
products sold in New Mexico.
It could have been, you know,
$500 from a Chinese company.
They sold 500 and they owe us
$10 in tax or whatever, and the,
the participating manufacturers
want to decrease how much or
sometimes they're allowed to
decrease how much we get because
we didn't go to India or go to
China to, to get those taxes and
so it's a, it's a major, it's a
It's a mess.
Madam Chair, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Year over year is there a trend?
Is it about?
Level increasing, decreasing.
Do
Do we have any statistics.
Yes, and we do have past, uh,
you know, um, presentations, um,
that we might be able to get and
show you, um, even before they
rep uh present for this year,
but we had one year where they
made the projection of what they
thought it was going to be, and
then there was a shortfall, so
there was, you know, um, the
drop in funding for some of the
different programs. Um, so they
try not to um over project and
make kind of a conservative uh
assessment of what they believe
is going to be, um, in that
year, like 2007 now, um.
Uh agreement.
So the disposition of these
funds year to year.
is completely dependent on.
What that settlement number is,
or does that
As does the legislature make up
the difference when it's below
projections.
Um
Sometimes they do, um, make it
up, but we don't know exactly
when they come in the settlement
agreement, um, and it's, yeah,
we, we do try to make have the
um different agency programs
such as for youth prevention,
things like that and cessation,
um.
Uh, I, you know, the funds, uh,
made up, yeah.
And I'm sure if I may add the
tobacco settlement fund was
intended to be a permanent fund,
it became kind of a piggy bank
when we didn't have money
elsewhere. So the general fund
actually, we did pass a bill
that that can't happen anymore,
finally.
But the general funds still owes
the tobacco settlement fund,
millions of dollars that they
took to use for other things and
have it repaid when it like all
the permanent funds we're hoping
to have it big enough so that
The, the, the income that we get
from it will help us provide
services regardless of what the,
the settlements are with the,
with the PMs. I would presume.
But most of the expenditures
coming out of this fund would be
Try to get people to quit
smoking, is that.
An accurate statement. Yes, for
smoking cessation and also for
um prevention, youth prevention,
especially, but, but again, I'm
sorry, I've been on this
committee for so long that um
we, the American Lung
Association has recommendations
of how much we should be
spending on those programs and
we are never anywhere. I mean,
we, I don't know at most.
Like at 20% of what we should be
spending or something so.
Madam Chair and representative.
I think that's
Situation is common to almost
every program.
that we administer in this
state, including Rhodes. So I
can certainly appreciate the
shortfall. Thank you very much
for the education and uh I'll
look forward to further
conversations.
This list looks very
comprehensive to me and uh I'll
look forward.
To the conversation. Thank you.
Thank you. And um I'm sorry we
didn't have uh think of having
it, um.
Kind of indoctrination, you
know, what's going on, um,
introduction, yeah.
um
OK, that was it, um, cause we
usually have, um, so many of our
committee members who have been
on this, you know, um, for a
long time and Representative
Thompson, um, and Senator Lopez
had been there, um.
since you've been elected and um
and then I got on it too.
Um, so yeah, we'll try and, you
know, get you as much
information, you know, as we
can.
Um, there, uh, it was.
I think there's another, and it
might be kind of um as we talk
about funding enforcement for
regulation and licensing
department, um, but we also need
to know the federal funding.
Um
For, uh, tobacco prevention and
Um
Probably Medicaid cessation.
Comes to our state, um.
We need to find out if um the
federal funding is going to be
dropped.
If it is, we're going to have to
Um
Be more realistic about what we
can do and what we need from the
state to um make up for that
because there are programs that
are critical to, um, especially
for youth.
Um, and the
And we have a new um new pack,
the nicotine use prevention
Control Program, um, a new, um,
Administrator for that program,
so we'll uh look forward to
having that, um, report from
Department of Health.
And also.
With the um Senate Bill 20, um,
the tax on vaping, that's really
important for um as
Representative Thompson was
explaining.
Or youth prevention.
As, um, we've seen um
cigarette use going down by
youth, but vaping is going up
dramatically, and I was just
speaking with um a um person who
teaches social emotional
training at walking, um, schools
and she was saying how 38% of
the youth are vaping and they're
getting suspensions, there's
trying to be enforcement, um,
hopefully it's in school in
force, you know, suspension, so
aren't really missing school,
but
It is something that as a
gateway drug to other um
problems and
You know, addictions that we try
to change that.
And um getting the support for
Senate Bill 20 or what, you
know, for raising the taxes on
nicotine to be elevated to um
what the success of raising it
for cigarettes has shown in the
big drop in cigarette usage, but
we need to um keep them level.
Um
And then also, um, as you
brought up the packaging, um, I
think some of our other issues,
um, on flavors. We might um also
be um getting information more
about how um the different
flavors are impacting uh tobacco
and nicotine use. Uh, should we
go around again? Do you have
another? Well, I just, um, I
recently learned from someone.
So for years, we, we give the
MCOs for
per member per month for tobacco
cessation.
And what they were doing for a
really long time is rather than
having their own programs, they
would refer them to the state
quit line, and when the
resources run out of that, then
no one can get them. So we're
paying the, the MCOs to do the
service, but they're pushing it
back onto the state to do, and
we thought that was um
Not the case anymore and I heard
within the past month that
someone with on an MCO ask for
cessation, and they were sent to
the quit line.
It's still happening. OK, so
would that be um a report from
Medicaid director.
OK. Let's, let's put them on the
list.
And not just what someone's
reporting, but actual um
Uh
Monitoring or tracking or you
know, secret.
Um
Person to follow up just like
you heard.
OK.
And do you have any other things
that came to mind?
Thank you, Madam Chair, really
just.
Right, Madam Cha, just the
prevalence of the schools. If
there's any information that we
can get from the public uh
department, is this something as
far as
Um
The numbers that we're seeing.
And also the, the
Maybe the kind of nurses visits
or something like that because
that, I mean, as we're talking
about, if we're talking this.
Truly being the gateway.
Then we need to get some,
whether it be through the youth
resiliency survey or something
like this so that we can hear.
Just what, how big a problem
that we are, but we have them in
our school system and also Madam
Chair, as far as what types of
activities can
Can these funds do to
Hopefully curb that.
And that's really a good point.
Um, we would have that under not
only new pack, but there's other
youth groups, um, like 24/7 and
We've had reports from
Evolvement, yeah.
So we can um make sure that we
hear updates from them. I'm glad
you're interested in that. I'm
sure, I, I think isn't nicotine
use part of the um resiliency.
Survey, the state, I believe, I
believe it is, yeah, OK.
So why are RS? Yeah, yeah.
Great.
Anything else, Senator?
OK.
You'll have lots of questions as
we have these general
presentations and we'll catch
you up. Thank you.
OK. Yes, go ahead. Here I'm
checking my text, um,
counterfeit vapes. I'm not sure
exactly what that means, um.
But my DLA might be able to tell
us.
If you would like her to.
Um, sure. Yeah.
We need you to come into my.
Uh, Brittany Barreras, um,
counterfeit vapes in terms of,
uh, if we're only focusing on a
tax increase to keep them out of
the hands of kids, um, how many,
how many vapes are actually
counterfeit, tax would have no
effect because they're actually
making them and how much more
dangerous are they, um, and then
also maybe
when we're talking about like um
Criminal charges for like adults
that are making vapes that end
up in kids' hands.
Because a lot, I think a lot of
times, um,
You know, it's it.
They they're, they're getting
them and it's not the legal way,
it's not going to to a store
and, and, um.
And oftentimes it's not even an
adult buying them for them.
They're
They, they know somebody that
manufactures them, so.
That's something to think about.
Thank you. Thank you. So we
might need to have RLD, um,
regulation and licensing
department, um, talk a little
bit about how they would do
enforcement, um, and black
market, basically is what
you're.
OK.
We'll call it counterfeit.
OK.
Um, any, any other, I guess we
could, when we go to uh public
comment, we could see if anyone
has any other things then, um.
So the dates we're looking at
for uh that we've been assigned,
I should say, um,
July 7th.
And August 15th.
And I'm wondering, we only
requested to um
But
I
If we had 2 full days.
I think we could get
Pretty much through our
discussions.
What do you all think?
Because we would group them
together.
Um, you know, like,
Um
Department of Health with some
of the youth underage, um,
prevention.
And then then another one with
available funds, Department of
Justice and
And then another part of the day
for regulation.
And um
Licensing, things like that.
Um, representative Thompson, do
you think we could do that in 2
days?
If you're as mean as me as a
chair.
If, if we have strict
I'd likes.
OK. And then if something comes
up, uh, we might be able to just
add one in.
Um, well,
November.
is usually we would have to be
back up at the Capitol.
Um, let's go ahead and request
another one.
In case we do need to have um we
have a lot of bills that we want
to endorse.
Madam Chair, this is back on.
The topic of subject matter but
has uh
His tax and rev done any?
Work to try to determine.
And the term black market.
Kind of picked my interest.
As to how much.
In the way of tobacco products.
Or being
Sold on the black market, is
that?
Something that you guys have
Looked at
And
Recent history
I don't believe so, since it's
such a big unknown. Do you
remember anything? Right?
Um
Yeah, if they, if they know
about it, then they would have
to do enforcement, but we might
get RLD to give us a report
about it, and that's.
One we'll do that.
I would think tax and riff might
if.
Some sort of investigation as to
What kind of compliance
percentages out there that.
Might be interesting numbers to
know.
Regulation and licensing is
under.
Tax and rev, right?
No.
What is it under?
Oh, OK.
Oh, that's right. I'm sorry, I'm
thinking of something else, um.
So, uh, we could ask tax and
rev.
And then if there is something
that they could report, ask
them.
OK, on that. My guess would be
that because of what I talked
about before with the
settlements with the
participating manufacturers that
the
Attorney General,
whatever the office is these
days. They're the ones who do
the, the battles in court. So if
there was data, I would guess
that they would have access to
it and they do that we do a
closed session where they report
to us what's happening with the,
the settlement um battles, so.
I mean, I, I would assume if
there was data, they would have
it.
Yeah.
OK.
So, um,
If, does anyone have a huge
conflict with those dates July
7th or August 15th.
Yes.
OK.
I'll make him chair August 15th.
No,
I'm just, he's vice chair.
Yeah.
Um
OK.
All right. Um,
Whoops.
Um, I guess we go, do we do
public comment too?
Yes, OK, um, seeing that.
I'm sure, I'm sorry, um.
Are, are we looking at, are you
gonna decide on places? Are you,
are we gonna discuss?
Locations or uh just, just a
reminder. Yes, thank you. Um, I
didn't even think about that. I,
um, do we have suggestions for
um our July 7th and August 15th.
Reading.
I would like to suggest August
15th to be in Albuquerque, um,
because, um,
We have a
Another commitment on the house
side, um, that evening.
So, let me check my calendar.
It's, it's a house.
Caucus.
Oh
So we could, we could meet in
the morning.
And be done by noon.
Uh, or just go late.
OK, so let's, and I think, um,
Senator Hickey wanted to have it
at UNM, I believe.
At some point where they
Always offer at the cancer
center, yeah.
Anyone have any problems with
that?
OK.
And how about July 7th. Any
suggestions for where we should
go. I think we should go to Las
Cruces in the heat of the
summer.
Just kidding.
But we'll, we'll think about
that and then just let everybody
know.
OK.
And we'll check other committees
that
Uh
I don't think we have any um
Sometimes that we need to be
careful of during that.
We
Except
Fourth of July weekend would be
right after that.
And
Economic rural development.
And STTC, that's the uh tax.
Oh, it's science technology.
Thank you. Yeah, so
We'll, we'll find out where they
are and.
Then you and have conflict with
or being on both of those. OK.
Well, all of us that are here.
OK, we'll figure that out and um
but August 15th, let's go ahead
and plan on Albuquerque, um, and
then in November, we'll, we'll
come back to the Capitol. We'll
request that for just a quick,
probably a quick meeting.
OK. Anything else? Anyone before
we go to the public comment.
All right.
Uh, let's go to the audience. Is
there anyone who has um.
Uh, comment, uh, quick comments,
I'll give you.
2 minutes.
Go ahead.
Come on up to the, you'll come
up to the chair, then we'll be
sure to have you on the webcast.
So high committee Linnea Montoya
representing UNM today. Uh, we
look forward to hosting you on
August 15th. I will reach out to
our cancer center folks and see
if that is available. Um, we
definitely would love to take
you on a tour of the cancer
center because they're
undergoing a lot of new
construction and so it would be
great to have you guys down
there and see what we're doing,
um, and yeah, that's about it.
If you guys ever need anything
else, let us know. We're always
here. Thank you. Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Come on up, now, if you wanna
use your machine?
Madam Chair, committee members,
advocates and the public. My
name is Nadine and I am a
disability and healthcare
advocate. I'll speak for some
bullet points. One, the
promotional materials need to be
more attractive to youth and
communicating what the benefits
are to not begin the addictive
process. 2, the quick process
could be more highly effective
if the shame factor could be
reduced in some way, although
it's hard to know what that
proverbial carrot might be. The
most effective method I've found
is when I equate what the person
could buy with the
money they've saved by
identifying something. I know
they really want, but can't
afford and help them calculate
that in real dollars and cents.
3, there is a lot of
misunderstood information when
people tell me they've swept out
to all organic native sun
products, which they believe
will be healthier unquote, but
the testing data shows that the
levels of dangerous and
addictive substances are even
higher than other brands that do
not label their products as
organic, or we need more
cessation programs that go
through more options besides
only Medicaid.
Thank you for your time. I look
forward to collaborating with
all of you as the interim
proceeds.
Thank you, Nat.
Is there anyone else in the
audience?
OK.
All right. Thank you. And I
failed to introduce our staff.
Um, you wanna go ahead?
John? Yes.
One, my name's Sean Dolan. I'm
the staff attorney on this
committee and over there.
Hi, my name is Andrea Lazaro,
and I'm gonna be staffing this
committee with Sean. Thank you.
Great. And thank you, um.
For helping us get this so well
organized so we could do this
quick and easy. I've got to get
to Las Cruces.
For 6 o'clock
Sports banquet for my grandson.
Anyway, any.
Yes, really. Um, so thank you
very much. Um, appreciate, you
know, being able to have quorum
and um welcome to the committee
and we hope to get you more
information even before the next
committee if that'll help.
OK, Madam Chair, just to make an
offer if you have questions or
feel free to reach out to me. I
love to.
Great. OK, thank you and
appreciate everyone for in the
audience for being here. And on,
oh, I forgot to check Zoom. Was
there anyone on Zoom? No, OK,
great.
