really see you know well i'm
from here and i'm from there
from there I think we we have a
a very united front
I also want to think the city
staff for sitting this up to
setting this up
as you can see the behind us the
background you know the regard
is behind us and beyond that is
sort of are the franklin
mountains in the city of the
house of the west side of all
parcel
my mom list maybe about ten
minutes from here no password so
my most home is down there and
you know this is something that
that were really proud of and I
want to think the chairman in
the vice chair for a
accommodating us and having hit
us here in someone park at this
facility to have the second day
of our of our meeting
that's it mister cherrobea if
it's appropriate I do have
something that i'd like to
present to the chair and the
vice chair
are a gift from the from the sea
of solomon park and our friends
at the past local motive I know
they're be some united fans here
but we we we do a the the
citizen park as a partnership
with the with the with the local
motive and all I ensure the city
matter has something has more
information regarding that but
this is something that
is a small token of our
appreciation for coming down to
solid park.
And having having the meeting
here today and I want to I want
to
to thank you mister chairman
mr white chair for for allowing
us to have the meeting here
today and and this is a small
gesture from the city folks the
solemn part and from the i'll
password look at mode thank you
for for for accommodating us and
and thank you for having a suits
there thank you
thank you represent the
there's there's a lot of
different kind of
representatives but there's the
kind of fallen two classes one
is just strength back home and
and power and moral authority
and also cloud and leadership in
santa fe and represent a lot of
your balls but I appreciate the
local motives.
And appreciate them spanking
been acts every chance they get
representative thank you so much
for this token it's going to sit
proudly in my office and santa
fe as you know but I got to
share something with everybody
because representative lot is
tends to be a humble guy he's a
very capable guy but he's humble
and he never mentions that he is
our caucus chair and santa fe
that's significant and he's also
advice chair of transportation
and so he's a hard working guy
we appreciate him as want to
thank him and all of you for
hosting us
mr chair if I may
be other members of the
committee will also be receiving
these at at at a later date will
work with the with with martin
to get the the addresses for for
the other reps so we can
uh send those suit to their home
addresses.
Thank you that's very kind i'm
representative or the lacrose I
represent district twelve
district twelve is in the
location if you're even vaguely
familiar with the south valley
as part of all the kirki
represent roughly the center
portion of that I call it the
heart of the south valley very
proud of represent my community
it is a very tight nit community
always describe as as he and
unincorporated village everybody
knows everybody and I tell
people you know I can hide
mandates she met the walmart
so very proud of that i'm very
close to the community into my
constituency and I appreciate
that that ability to do that so
without further ado we're going
to go ahead and stick to the
schedule.
Welcome representative proceed
into his result please
thank you mister chair i'm
jennifer jones a representing
district thirty two which is
hidogolon and luna and part of
doing yeah it's good to be here
this morning thank you
thank you representative.
We're gonna have a welcome now
uh from madio waters in front of
the city manager of city of sun
and park and also market.
Good.
Please proceed.
Thank you.
Thank you for the chair.
The.
Thirteen just right
good one.
Okay.
Is there a chair okay
well again the benefits
my name is mary what is in
fantasy actually grew up in the
area from what is
spent most of my career here in
in new mexico and across the
four border states we've been
very honoured in privileged over
the last three years during my
ten year to really work with the
group of wonderful partners with
them
a heart of serving her
very humble group is is one
legislator described here of of
our representative and also
we've been building capacity and
with me today you know
monitoring privilege to have a
deputy director's only bit or
excuse me departy city manager
who's only been here for just a
few weeks i'm gonna ask him to
introduce himself
a mister chair and then when
it's appropriate I i'd like for
the represent from the local
motors to have an opportunity to
also just introduce himself and
talk about their partnership
with the city.
Yeah.
Good morning mister chair
members of the committee i'm
market that I hear that some of
you are may remember me from my
days that the new medical border
authority I lead the border
thirty four you know refor you
four and a half years and glad
to see this and my products are
still moving forward you know
now i'm happy to be here as part
of the team at the city of
someone park i'm excited about
this opportunity.
I will say you know my role has
changed by my commitment to the
border region that remains an
unchanged so I look forward to
working with this committee
thank you so much.
The.
And mr chair i'm gonna introduce
a lease
from the local models.
Please come on
up introduce yourself again
thank you board members thank
you
city a solemn park staff city
manager
uh mr swites for the invite
i'm the used soccer director for
all passage local motive
I am the
the air or the replacement for
ivan who was the former u soccer
director for all possible
commotive I have been to two
months into the replacement
inheriting what is
a fantastic in beautiful
community partnership with the
city of selling park I don't
pass a local motive on the u
side we've we've embarked on
this journey to create.
Quality and unseen opportunity
for the youth of of sudden park
as well as the city of our
parcel
this home base are here at the
sports complex has been housing
our most delete teams that have
provided scholarship opportunity
for
high school seniors graduating
and and taking their their
talents and abilities to the
next level we had a total of
eleven seniors graduate and and
have been barking on their
college it athletic careers
the city of selling park is also
home to our US l u twenty
academy team this serves as the
reserve team to the protein that
you all see on tv that you know
I guess um gets the good around
of a phoenix rising
the more importantly for us
though it's also the home base
for many camps and programs that
we've been able to provide the
city of someone park and its
community
currently it houses southern
park little locals are technical
academy we also work with the a
local daycare facility and and
program here called the hive
where we run a weekly and
monthly
programs for a refer the for the
use there that involved that the
higher believe it's thirty plus
kids.
Um we are also are on our second
annual community clinic for the
city of selling part coming up
on august second so this is a
free
a free opportunity for the
community members parents
families kids to come out and
partner with us at this free
clinic that we offer
we also have a partnered with a
local soccer club that's home
grown and based here in the city
of southern park the name of the
club is sun cities so looking at
every single opportunity to
partner with you know the
considerations of the city but
also with the individual members
has been a fantastic opportunity
for us and when we hold very
invery high regard with an
organization um and i'm just
excited to be here in front of
you all representing a you know
organization and humbly you know
thank in each and every single
one of you that are involved
with the city someone park for
the opportunity thank you so
much.
Thank you for your work.
Thank you mr chairman
if you'd like we can dive into
the presentation sir I will
follow please do ok very good.
Next line
so
i'll just give you a an overview
solemn park really we are we are
moving in a direction of a
multimodel transportation city
and there's some unique
opportunities here that are
unlike many other places but uh
our priority roadway projects
are maturity drive it's the
entertainment court or are we
recently were
made aware that represent
congressman though kabaskis has
a worried fifty million three
million in his top fifteen
projects or hope we're hopeful
that that will come through this
this uh late year so that we can
begin that project we're also
part of the real grand the
tromaster plan this is an
initiative that you all began
back in twenty fifteen when the
when the commission was was
created um and then new mexico
two seventy three also known as
magnat the the road that gave
you access on to this complex
here is about ten miles long
also has a trial court or master
plan that recently was adopted.
And the south connector wrote
that the dot he talked about has
some influences in some local
streets as well so we'll talk
about our partnership with the
dot there which has been great I
love the fact that we have a
couple of planners because you
know planning is is is so
important right you've got to
have a vision so you so you know
where you're heading so next
life
next.
So we all know about you know
smart landings development we
wanted to be walkable bikable
drivable uh transit is important
for us in this region were
served by the south central
regional transit district
whether just an incredible
relationship with that
organization we assist them we
at times will serve as technical
staff for them if they need
something some it support some
some technical support on the
engineering whatever they we we
we do that for the men and
return when we have a need to
get a bus down here right
because we want to host our our
guests they they will they will
make no comes about it they will
be here so those are the the
type of relationships that we
enjoy why is the real run this
home portal next live
next.
So for most of you that traveled
here from up north and I spent a
lot of years up north there
really are only three
geographical locations where you
can really embrace and take
advantage of the program the uh
someone park is one the other
two I would I would argue that
as williamsburg tierc and in the
third would be town berlin
because when you really look at
the geographic location of the
program that throughout the five
hundred miles of the state it's
not centered we have the
advantage of its heart heart of
the city.
The city has embarked and
adopted a an entertainment
district that's the overlays on
there in red
that really starts to capitalize
on two existing
the casino
in race track and then also
western please and so we start
to look at what opportunities
like within their the green area
on the left graphic is where
we're sitting here today and of
course we've got the real random
so we've got ten miles a river
of five hundred miles a trail
that new mexico has engaged in
and developing this incredible
program the trail are we look at
is we are the gateway into the
river on the trail we recently
completed about one point two
five miles a trail and the
southern end and we are
currently in design to fight
more miles in here breaking them
into packages and then we're
looking then in into
construction funding to begin to
develop the rest of the phases
next line.
So the idea of the entertainment
district is really to make it an
inviting family oriented
environment want to make sure
that we embrace culture because
it's unique here it's by
national
you know we to by national tracy
region with a civil parcel
solemn park rate and and we look
at even though see that what is
and so everyday crossings is is
very normal I know that we have
at least two a t members with
the city solemn part that go
across each and every day to
come to work right so it's it's
a normal way in environment so
the security road you see the
project limits there on the
screen extend from what we call
restructuring.
On the eastern of the uh casino
and then a uh continues west and
to derby road next line.
This design integrates again
art.
Place making
n
culture in this area want to
make sure that we're
representative of this region
when people come here it's a
unique experience because people
travel based on experience right
we all do that and will go back
if we had a great experience.
Next like.
So you can see that we weren't
really closely in this unique
design with our some of our
state holder partners including
western playlight in the race
track which you're seen there is
an entering of a race a
crosswork really again promote
the pedestrian traffic as a
priority as opposed to a vehicle
or motorized traffic.
Next like.
These are some of the early
renditions before we got into
more final a renderings of the
design
that project is was recently
completed in full design
because of the effort that the
city city has a uh from a
community development public
works perspective we we believe
in planning designing and
constructing and sort of that o
life cycle to ensure that
projects are competitive when
we're competing when you're a
small community like someone
park of twenty thousand people
and we're competing sometimes
for some of the large urban
funding projects at the federal
level we have to be ready we
have to be prepared so phase one
we were recently was recently
announced three million dollars
as I said earlier with
representative gay baskets
through the cds is one of the
serious tough fifteen projects
and so you can see the early
renditions of the planning
started to identify some really
breaking of the imprivious
ground creating some shade
making a pedestrian friendly and
creating that
local environment that unique
environment here in some park.
Next.
The.
Next.
So again with the opportunity of
getting a hidden design one of
the issues that we have here is
the intersection of filling part
drive in future so we broken
that out into its own design
package i'll show you some of
the statistical data with the
issues that were having but
really some part drive is a
gateway from texas center new
mexico.
On the upper right hand corner
there you'll see the yellow that
I ten and then someone part
drive if you went to the top of
the screen you'd be heading
towards us on the part more
next.
So a couple of graphics here you
have six little boxes on the
right hand side really the lower
left box is the most important
and all that sign is that we
have a problem during the p and
p hour with traffic we have a
level of service for the
planners in the room you
understand and effice failure
rate so we have issues already
as it is with traffic congestion
so that's why this important
this traffic was traffic safety
improvement project is so
important
the graphic on the left there in
the yellow that's the
intersection and that's a heat
map in the yellow's
representative of an area where
we're experiencing quite a few
crashes nineteen in the last
from twenty eighteen to twenty
twenty two next like.
So here we show some facts level
of service as we talked about
twenty eighteen to twenty twenty
two crashed out of show that
there was nineteen reported
crashes nine of which were rear
and collisions for those of you
that have been a router you know
the the you know that a signal
is intersections I get it so
often people think can you just
put a signal up there actually
the severity right goes up but
single eyes intersections
roundabouts were much much
better right on the right you
can see a letter from the
congressman dated may twenty
third twenty twenty five
requesting a three million
dollars for the city selling
park and so we're very proud of
the relationships that we have
with all of our partners because
without those relationships
projects like this could not
come to fresh and next light.
So we're also very proud of not
reinventing the wheel for those
of you that into new mexico
state university you'll
recognize this design right here
were duplicating their designer
bringing it down here to faculty
and someone part drive again we
want to make sure that when
people come in this is the
project that would be
constructed the roundabout with
with the funding next like.
And another sort of aerial
rendition of what the uh two
lane roundabout would look like
once we start construction next
line.
People want to know when is
going to get done so typically
this sort of funding once it
comes and once it's awarded it
takes about it takes a few
months right after this new
federal fiscal year so we're
anticipating some time in the
fall we would have the funding
agreement in in uh actually
awarded and maybe an agreement
in in that's fully executive
where we can start uh the
project of sure to draw down and
find somewhere in the spring of
twenty twenty six star
construction around summer of
twenty twenty six this time of
year next year we hope to be
well under construction and then
in twenty twenty seven we would
be fully completed with the
project next.
Next
so for those of you that may not
be yes familiar with some of the
statistics on texas side the or
parcel county has sixty seven
miles a trail
spanning it's a entire county
they're currently about two
thirds fully constructive we
take their sixty seven miles and
then new mexico's five hundred
miles and now we have a very
unique opportunity for those
that like to bike whether it's
nationally an international we
want to be a destination right
and so we have a very good
relationship with parcels not
there on the texas side and are
actively uh meeting with them
every couple months and are also
supporting each other where
opportunities lie at least right
at this at the state line to be
able to find some of those
projects that are related to
trail the numbers these numbers
should be familiar they come
stream from new mexico economic
development department or tied
to the importance of the outdoor
recreational economy next.
Again just continuing to carry
through the unique opportunity
here by being a binational
region next.
And way finding is important so
ten miles of the real grand the
trail were developing ten miles
and in mexico two seventy three
we're developing the way finding
to communicate with itself so
some of you who are familiar
familiar with tarvinos few
writing on a on a bike and you
want to go and have a nice class
whine you should know how to get
the right if you want to go out
to montana want the crystal you
should know how to get there if
you want to get to the multi
generation of park there should
be way fighting to directly
there so we've we've been
working very closely with the
order
the outdoor recreation division
to make sure that our way
finding speaks to the states a
vision away finding for the for
the five hundred miles of of
trail next.
Next.
We master plan the ten miles on
magna.
It's so important right because
once we get this adopted by
council becomes policy so now we
have a way to uh require
development along to seventy
three to be able to design and
construct their portion of
infrastructure frontage that in
accordance with our master plan
with our vision next.
You can see some of the
amenities that are captured in
the master plan
it's not surprised it's on the
park on on the signature looks
like if you're going to
uh concount right everyone
travels to make or you see those
color letters and what do we do
I got a bunch of selfies going
on we want that to help in here
right what we want to continue
carry that that their culture
onto the border side on this
side of the states text.
So again our first trail I I
show this is the master plan
that you see on your screen the
letter be
that is the building that we're
sitting in right now behind us
you can see we have some soccer
fields planned down there we
have some baseball fields that
will also double the software
fields over to our left and
what's important about here is a
long make not to twenty two as a
segment of trail and we're
getting to get in ready to break
ground here right around the
corner in august next.
Here's the design that was
approved by the dot
again partnerships are so
important we're building
infrastructure on the d's right
away we've of course the city
commits to long term maintenance
but but they're
their engagement and and
willingness to work with the
serious one park is is important
if we're gonna if we're going to
turn the the direction in which
this area is going in terms of
quality of life in terms of the
humanities that we can offer in
terms of the resources that we
can take advantage of so we're
gonna be taking your names and
inviting you when we have a
ribbon cutting here at the end
of the year when it's much much
much color next.
And these are just some of the
segments obviously these trails
don't get built overnight it's
five five miles for this segment
we're working on design ten
mouse total
so I appreciate you guys coming
down now you know someone park
is seriously engaged in
developing their trail system
throughout the community we have
put policy in place beyond what
you've seen here and every
master pine development that
comes in must develop their
trouble systems to connect on
two hours next.
Next and finally the last
project as I said earlier the
department of transportation the
border though represented
yesterday the south connector
road that road and the
roundabout that you see on the
graph there is actually just
south of here it will at the
roundabout turn uh north entire
into the intersection of magnut.
In some import drive and so one
of the legs to the right is an
upper road we've been working
very very closely with the duty
to make sure that we're sharing
files were coordinating drainage
we're coordinating utilities
that were providing access and
so it's a it's a a project
that's been well plan will
design along the way so we
appreciate all the partners uh
that have been involved with
with this project and last line
this is a segment of road that
comes off the roundabout with
the south connector road
we are working through design
now next spring will be
submitting for the uh tpf the
transportation um
program
working closely with district
one and so we're very hopeful
that next year will be
successful in uh drawing down
those funds as part of the
application process so that we
can go ahead and develop this
project in in concert with with
the duty so without mister
chairman uh is it was a little
quick but I I want to make sure
we're sharing just the important
information.
Thank you members any questions.
Represent your thank you mr
chair thank you for that
presentation in put a honor
light i'd come here i've been to
the donation could a college
place i've been here i've been
there but it's really great to
get the silver view up my only
question mister chair is the
state has been working on
providing funding
mechanisms for affordable
housing has someone parked been
able to access that how is your
affordable housing situation
going
mister chair representative
garage and members of the board
as you all know last year the
state reported forty thousand
our uni- shortfall across the
state someone park is no
different what we have in in
embarged on is a priority to
develop to bring medical
services here
we we have made a lot of headway
since july twenty twenty four is
part of our medical project
working through a customer
agreement with a private land
owner we have developed the land
youth plan in a unique concept
just south of here that france
make not in the real grand they
where the ground level is retail
and commercial second third and
fourth floor is is gonna be a
multi family housing
now that the land was
transferred in this was as of
two weeks ago we are issue in a
purchase order to do the medical
market analysis that'll be done
this fall and then we will start
working in early twenty twenty
sixth with mfa and others animal
fee as well right so we have m f
a now animal fa through
the twenty twenty four
legislation when the some of the
set aside to start looking at
how do we partner to bring in
some of the multifamily housing
here um and and start to bridge
that gap and that is a one of
the top by priorities for a city
council so so we are working on
addressing.
I think it was sure that's great
to hear that you're combining
the medical resources as well
thank you you're welcome
representative.
Thank you mister chairman
so
your money or wider the straight
I am remember for I thought so
uh in fun to see your last name
and fun what is in fund to fund
it um thank you for your
presentation mr chair it's
really great to see that.
The process that you're
following because it's so
important to getting the funds
even if you have to fees them at
some level
at the connections that you're
making between you know up
especially when it comes to
multi model and getting people
around is really important
especially to our environment
I love that you guys are
connecting the trails and and
working through that whole
process
I think that you know it's very
clear that your planning
department or whoever is working
with you on this
has a very clear vision about
how your community is going to
develop and I think that's
important when you're
you know
to the community because then
they get to see what that vision
is and it really is their vision
so
was there a planning process in
the beginning to achieve all of
this I guess there was right
community and put yes absolutely
we do have we have a number of
of master plans
everything from the trails
master planning to the make not
master plan to the government
the
week we've
we we respect and in really
embracing idea that if we're
going to go after funding we
we've got to have the data.
Mr chair I think that if we
envisioned the city in twenty
years with these concepts you're
going to have a very thriving
city and I you know I I almost
see like in the future another
sort of you know kind of phoenix
sort of place but what's really
important is that you have those
identifiable features is like
this is our city um you know
these are the markers that make
it important and then that you
also value the the real good on
this part of that hole so I I
really commend you guys for
this.
Thank you.
The.
The.
Thank you.
Representative lotter sorry i'm
kind of hit and over here mister
mister frontier i'm gonna ask
question any relation to better
important
sort I would be retired if I was
thank you for that so I just
don't mister chair thank you
mister chairman so I noticed a
bunch of other several uniforms
people that were walking towards
the back I think there was some
was that we're police and so may
have been security from the
school district i'm assuming
can you speak about their
relationship or though the
relationship that you have with
the school district when it
comes to school security is and
school reasons officers
absolutely and and thank you for
that reminder mister chairman
and representative of latin
members of the.
Of the the committee first of
all I failed to recognize my
team I do have a number of
directors on the back room and
and if it wasn't for their
committee effort to for public
safety for the library we have
an incredible library for a
parked director who set up the
venue today for every single one
public works everybody I don't
mean to leave anybody else we
wouldn't be where we are not no
one does it alone so I really
want to thank them we have an
incredible relationship with
just about every entity we work
with the school district is no
different there is for just as
an example and it's difficult to
see in the in the rendering we
have a connection that's going
across the school just north of
a second extra road on the two
two seventy three right that's
important because we can acquire
an easement and not have to pay
for that to having those
relationships with the school
district with the school board
so that we're all swimming in
the same direction right we're
all moving towards better
quality of life amended he's be
our law enforcement department
has been providing school
resource officers that the high
schools and at the middle
schools
they're they're you know just an
incredible team to make to make
sure that we're taking care of
our kids
it's a priority our fire
department also is very very
much engaged throughout the
community so for us it's very
important to make sure that
they're being seen that we're
interacting that we're
communicating and they weren't
listening and we by the way
although it was an aspect we do
have a number of town hall
meetings i've got two coming up
next week you know one of the
neighborhood associations are
reach up and we've gotten this
and not everything is is perfect
right everyone always has wanted
to three legitimate concerns and
so we listen and we're always
driving to get better but that
that's a
it's a testament to to our
directors really being committed
being able to listen and and
being able to
work towards making things
better with the committee in
building those relationships.
Thank you mister van den and
mister
wanted to ask it this is going
but yesterday's meaning and I
wanted to ask
you and your staff is do you
have any updates that you could
share with us or any new
information regarding the the
the the drinking water situation
and what's happening with cruel
in the city of someone parks of
roll in that infrastructure that
that there is critically
critical to the to the to the
residents and to the economic
development of the of the city
mister chairman representative
letter members of the of the
committee yes absolutely so
preference that may just say uh
i'll share with you on on behalf
of the cities on a park
so the notification for the
termination and jp was a mate
thirteenth a few days afterwards
we got former notification by by
letter by the county we have
since had three meetings with
the county thus far they the
meetings have been very
effective
I can share that
there has been a verbal
commitment that any investments
within the city water system
infrastructure will remain the
city any investments made within
the county will remain in the
county I can also share with you
that on june fourth our council
passed a resolution
to give clear direction it's all
about clarity write the plan and
so the serious only park make no
mistake is going to create its
own utility department
we just recently reached a
significant mousetone towards
that the county boring county
commissioners the crew aboard
and the city council all
approved a novation which is an
amendment to the joint powers
agreement that uh allows for the
migration of fiscal
administrative services cities
on the park so it's public
information we believe that
that's important because ninety
percent of the customer base
actually is within the city
limits when there's a complaint
to come to my office right and
so we have to be able to quickly
respond.
Um so we've continued to have
really good progress moving
forward on friday we do have a
presentation that's coming up
tomorrow's matter fact the ba I
will also say to you that the
executive director and I
although I do work for the
citizen park I have to disclose
that i'm also the current vice
chair for crewer in so wearing
that vice her hat we look at
what is also in the best
interest of service areas or
tomorrow we'll be talking about
some of the capital projects
that crew would recommend to
continue to service
the the county area whether or
not the serious servicing that's
not part of of of the importance
of it but what's important is to
make sure that we continue to
provide reliable water clean
water and enough capacity to
meet not just domestic comments
but also fireflow demand and
then enclosing i'll also point
out that uhm it's important for
all of you to know that the uhm
the current arsenic issues
despite where you're hearing in
the public i'm happy to share
the consumer's confidence report
were complaint
we're a complaint if there's
ever an issue the represent has
my contact information i'm glad
to provide it information that I
provide you will always be in
writing and came because I want
to make sure that you have
documented facts not here so
thank you mister representative
thank you mister mister chair
that said so in the end and I
appreciate you saying that that
you would provide service to the
port parts of the county that
are that fall within the serious
online park in particular the
cases lean his neighborhood and
that's I have family that lived
there so they were directly
impacted by what happened a
couple years ago with the with
the with the disaster with the
arsthing and so
the customing does never heard
of mr chair and and mr in fact
it is like done at hold
so we have the city that the
citizen parks arouses this one
neighborhood that's still in the
county so what you're seeing is
that you would you the cities on
the park would still be
providing.
That critical service to this
neighborhood uh mister chairman
represent line of latter members
of the committee we we have
provided a resolution which
clearly states that the serious
column park is a creators
utility department and begins to
operate we are more than happy
to support the county in any
which way or manner the the c
fit if they ask us to provide
any service we will certainly do
so they have also committed to
support us in any endeavor so
that that is that is a written
declaration sir make the mistake
about it we will provide it if
we're asked to do it
thank you for that
misreport then mister chair
because it's it's important that
that the public know and that
they hear today that that you
are working on that and that you
are are willing to be a part of
the the solution on this because
I mr chair I get a calls I do
are you calls I get emails
people so many pictures yeah
this is what's happening at all
water line broker whatever it is
and and you know III have that
responsibility to my considerate
and that said it it really makes
me feel it gives me covered
knowing that you're willing to
work with the county to make
sure that that those residents
still have water and was water
service and that that service
will remain uninterrupted
because as we know.
Mr chair and was to invite the
building the trust rebuilding
that trust with the community
and the drinking water is
critical is critical you know a
unit i'm gonna are going to be
honest I think we transferred
here yeah I was that a baby
shower less saturday and people
had iced tea eliminate and it
was being made with water water
and so we we still have a way to
go as far as
uh trust within our community
within the within the
neighborhoods but I want to
commend you and on your work as
far as the transparency is
concerned and keeping people
updated as to the situation what
the water I want to thank you
for that that's all I have thank
you mister
senator vice chairman thank you
mister chairman thank you german
very much couple
quick questions I learned just
couple three years ago.
That the border between our
parcel and southern park is not
the real good i'm there.
But it was where the real done
there was back in you know
eighteen forty eight and that's
kind of cool so that as you know
the river is shipped it so it's
fair to say that we're gonna go
through some impart correct that
that is crixical and then I like
what you said about the
opportunities for for enhancing
them.
The quality of life as it
relates to the river I would add
up all the cricket to that list
of of the real only goes right
through the middle of our cook.
And so
so there's there's chances to
enhance it in the north valley
which is a hundred percent east
of the river and in the south
valley which is like eighty
eighty percent western river but
and and albuquerque assigned
more you with with the
conservative district which runs
from valencia berlin sound of
all counties are and it's
essentially a city park.
Legally but the city doesn't
treat a such an announce has
neglected it for decades and now
it's going the boss gets dying.
Um
but in conversations with the
environmental leaders and and
community leaders there there's
five things folks agree on so
just keep this in mind cause
there's an opportunity here but
everyone agrees to removing the
hazardous fuel has been several
fires in our currently and I
don't know how bad your boss
gets but has there is fuel by
removing the jetty jacks are not
I don't think you guys have
jacks down here but we do an
albuquerque are doing dirt
trails are putting benches and
tables but also removing non
native species it's
it's eligible I believe it's
prior eligible for cap loudly
keep that in mind uhm but
but to not use the river to
enhance the the quality of life
of the citizens of the city as
it is a missed opportunity so
i'm really excited that you're
looking at at the road and then
had a how to bring the river
closer to the people in vice
versa the.
So I look forward to your
leadership on that and learning
from you guys and maybe we can
duplicate it in all the correct
you're vice versa.
Also that the misterman
gentleman that you have what's
your city government of five
counters or seven and is the
mayor part of the council how
does that work and mister
chairman I miss price chairman
says in members of the committee
it it is seven we have the mayor
where pedel and mayor protemp
leader so it's it's really a
mayor city council uh city
manager of government tap a
government so i'm their only
employee so this chairman german
so
so seven city counselors and a
mayor and an i'm sorry six city
countries and in the mayor I see
and the mayor of votes on
occasion on a tight breaker
interested
in but the kids who live in a
selling part was chairman they
got a school at center there is
a high school they do and what
what size high school is that
oh I don't know someone's here
for the score district you know
that michael population.
In terms of like I I would
venture to say they are probably
somewhere in the fifteen hundred
population so it's as big mister
cruce's higher no cruises crisis
is private closer to twenty two
hundred and eighty high school
they're like three thousand
kilometers but it turns of the
the division chairman in terms
of their
northern class
that's a class five okay just
getting a feel for the city was
chairman gentleman the
and then lastly r.
So I I tend goes through texas
but is there plenty of exits on
I tend to get to
northern cells and department
how does that is our work I am
going to heart to drive through
texas to get it to some
important
that's a great question
mister chair mister vice chair
and members of the committee
that's an excellent question.
There is a need.
To begin to fund a the next
bridge crossing and our location
crossing one of the things that
i've verbalized to our partners
including the passage and others
is that uh city about give
rentally struggled for you know
a couple decades
even just waiting west I bought
our great just directly west of
intel
when you don't have some more
transportation planning it'll
catch up to you and that you get
landlocked up north with the
tribal lands you dealt with
really some of the other those
are just another incorporated
areas and so those create a
challenges down here if we don't
begin to look at our our
challenges are are different but
there's still the same in the
sense that we have to coordinate
with our parcel river crossings
just to get him permit as a
minimum of ten years across the
program and they just gonna
permit it even if you had all
the money today right so it is
something we're pushing it is
something that I should mister
erin television I have also
discussed and so to your point.
We must be thinking about in
this in my very strong opinion
something that will be uh
looking at we do I will say we
do have a great a partnership
where the duty the city don't
have a county
the border authority meet and
this is something that we began
to start to discuss about how do
we look at long term initiatives
are important to the region and
that is one that we're certainly
looking at is is making sure
that we have more connection
points on two I tend over the
real random and that we don't
suffocate ourselves because the
reality is the only direction
for cities on a part to grow is
west and north.
And so we have to be mindful of
that long term.
Fantastic thank you mister
gentleman thank you for your
presentation really appreciate
thank you appreciate cheaper
before we go to our next speaker
I want to take a moment to thank
uh uh the gentleman that
provided breakfast this morning
it's very much appreciated by
everyone and every member of the
public is also welcome to
participating have some some
patients or whats available uh
what I think we'll see mode with
border plex digital also I think
the story government wants
others with a password electric
so thank you so much for
providing breakfast this
morning.
Next we have a guest from the
sun and park restricting casino
mister on margaret.
Welcome.
Nnj.
Yeah.
Am I on earring good morning
mister chairman good morning
vice chairman of steam committee
members uh my name is amber
mugname with some apartments
tracking casino and I just
wanted to welcome you to someone
park.
Um some are practice restrict
casino has a rich history
the began in nineteen fifty nine
when it opened as a thorough red
race track we now run both
thursdays and quarter horses and
with the passage of casino
gaming in the nineties of some
approach restricting casino as
generated over a half a billion
dollars and tax revenue to date.
Twenty six percent of the
casinos revenues goes to taxes
which in turn goes to the
mexican general fund an
additional twenty percent of
revenue goes towards horsemen's
account.
All moneys in a horseman's
account contribute to horse
racing purses at someone park
and has a profound effect on the
quality of our live receipts.
We are one of the largest if not
the largest employer in some
apart with approximately two
hundred full time employees and
each year to climb into three
hundred in the horse recent
season.
The.
Our casino open seven days a
week as a week for a total of a
hundred and twelve hours awful
also offers many electronic
table games including relate
blackjack and texas holding the
someone parked restracting
casino home of the sun and derby
offers a wide variety of live
racing and action from third red
and quarter horse racing with
year round similar cast wagering
available from tracks all around
the world i'm some apart looks
forward to participating and
open dialog that advances the
growth of someone park and the
donate a county region and I
just like to thank you for your
time and i'd also like to
apologize that are gm was not
parcel we had another commitment
so be in the needless
representative here
thank you mister jerk thank you
for being here enjoy the hotel
there my question is real does
so downs is now as of last week
was under five feet of water
they were already recovering the
last year's floods how did will
that impact someone parents
track like where races be moved
here is there any impact to
what's happening and really does
soon down
mister chairman and a
representative of gerrit I can't
speak to what they're talking
about when are currently in a
recent commission meeting today
but generally what happens is as
those races are moved to other
race tracks to ensure that
because those persons have to be
allocated throughout the year so
it will have some movement from
a racing perspective and and we
try to be good partners in that
and whether we have to host
horses or something just from a
safety horse perspective so.
Represent are you done
representative love thank you
mister chairman.
Thanks ringer it's good to see
you again
I do have a question regarding
so I
I can admit that I forget the
casino quite a bit
and one of the things that I
enjoy seeing at the casino in
the parking lot or all the
license place from texas I
really like seeing that I really
like to seeing our friends from
texas even our friends from
mexico spending their money in
someone parking do you have that
information or can you speak
about the economic impact from
outer state or even from other
country here it's on the park
with all the the people that
come into to play eat and watch
a racist
mr chairman and a house raymond
return i'm hurt by you saying
that you forgot about it so
nothing so please start by see
the hundred hour machine there
yes listen ninety five percent
of revenues coming in from texas
any time you go into the parking
lot and ninety five percent of
those are texas license place so
so it's clear that it's a bi
fricated area where in a corner
that just tucks right into el
paso exit thirteen directly gets
to us so it drives the majority
of the revenue at the casino.
They'll thank you for that III
appreciate it because you know
they that that's that places
that the restract in the casino
in a perfect.
A situation where it's easily
accessible off the intersect and
minor people could come in even
from from outer state as far as
others i've i've heard that
there's a lot of people that ah
go in the going to tour of
different restrict casinos and
solompark is one of the stops
you see the arvies out there and
stuff like that and I just
wanted to to recognize that and
the economic impact that that
has on some park and and in your
mexico and general so thank you
for that thank you mister
center in my assless thank you
mister geremen thank you for
making it wouldn't realize that.
We appreciate you being here
considering there's a horseman's
meeting
racing a mission in this this
morning but also
repress our memory they so
gambling is not allowed in texas
correct
mister chairman and vice chair
that is correct and enough in
what as does what is having
casinos do you know mister
german advised sure yes they do
they have somewhere between four
and five percent we don't shots
and then it's during the but
what is does not have a horse
race track.
They did not okay thank you saw
the out that's up great
opportunity for tourism just
picking up on what ribs and
lotter was mentioning that some
it's a do you do all of the bulk
of your advertising mister in el
possible area I miss a chairman
of vice chair we advertise the
bulk of it yes and in the el
past or area we try to do a foot
four hundred mile radius
but the majority of it is in the
last crucials and our parcel
area and we try to push a little
bit to the reados area so to
create and restaurant so when
folks and it would boax turn on
their tv and they watch the ten
o'clock news itself pass on news
correct.
Uh
yesterday so it's.
No it's it's near german
it's kind of a mix and we have
also waters news and no passive
news come up now thank you sir
it's a it's fun being from
operator care try to explain
some part to folks it's
essentially like well do
specifically a suburb of a
passal it's one community that
includes waters are and
tremendous opportunity I think
i'm.
You know five ten years from now
when when the when the anti
immigrant rhetoric subsides
hopefully I think there's.
A plenty of up to me for up for
a rebirth of.
Of a friendship and economic
activity and I think that
someone park will be in the
center of that wonderful
phenomenon so anyway thank you
chairman of my share of yes to
your point um i've been here
twelve years most of my careers
been in new mexico has meant ten
years and harbs and the apparent
ten years and read also another
five years and in a moment guard
so when I got here one of the
things they are we said was is
somewhere per concern
restrict casino people have
lived through their entire lives
you know kind of get into their
own communities and they never
leave a five mile radius now I
don't want to get on the
interstate then want to or so
it's definitely good to have
that messaging out there and
disconnect bring a bring us to
the floor front for the for the
donating county regions
representative borrow thank you
mr chair good morning sir thank
you for your presentation
I don't know a lot about horse
racing in a little bit my one of
my brothers is to have a horse
than he reased and sound a fee
and so we can follow him around
a little bit I was my extensive
understanding the horse racing
business but I just wondered
the industry and and you know I
know this is true for the
casinos and new mexico is we
have a lot of sort sort of
connection till I speak.
Novada and people come here to
work and you know is that true
in the horse industry as well I
mean do we have that.
Is or are we hiring more locals
mister chairman and represent
borregal generally because
they're only five restricts in
new mexico that rotates are
those it's it's almost a corner
like rotation of a personnel
because once you're qualified to
do something whether you're
loading a horse or your training
a horse some all of those
representatives kind of travel
around so so it's have to find
those people locally generally
it's it's a generation it's
passed down from generation to
generation so we hire as many as
we can within that local local
community and we set the same
faces every year so if that
whether they worked at rear
readous of their season or hops
for their season and some
appropriate season they all kind
of just come through so and mr
chair thank you for that and you
know I kind of bring that up
because it seems to me and I
know that the the race track and
sound if he has closed and it's
been closed for a number of
years but it seems like this is
an industry that you know I mean
horses are natural sort of in
the way to new mexico and it
seems like an industry that we
really need to be looking out to
support more
especially for the work for sin
such because I think it's an
industry that sometimes we just
take it for granted a little bit
that it's there but we don't.
You know and I I think that this
is something that definitely
sparks my interest
because I grew up on horses
basically
and so I I think that you know
it's probably something that we
need to take a more in depth
look out and see how we can
support you all to continue what
you do here in new mexico so
thank you for being here this
morning.
Thank you mister mcgarley thank
you for the presentation but I
have an easy question for you
does what is still have a reason
that a dog racing track I miss
your chairman they do not they
do not and those casinos that
they have over there are
actually very small casinos
that's kind of.
Card if you will at she load up
themselves now that the dog
races are are over so how you
had occasion to visit the
casinos and what is.
Mister chairman yes some my wife
says I have to go every two
weeks ago
I wear the panson she tells me
where part of the
I think most of those thank you
so much for the presentation.
We're going to move on to the
border industrial infrastructure
and update mister jerry but
check what president of the
border industrial association.
Are you ready gerry
proceed when you're ready.
Members of mister chairman
members the committee welcome to
beautiful someone park isn't
this a wonderful facility we got
the franklin mountains behind us
here the real grand bosket's
beautiful facility indicative of
uh all the progress at someone
park is making an advancing its
cause here so I will present an
old review of what's a korean
here in the industrial base in
the region a lot of which we saw
yesterday on the bus tour so all
go through some of that stuff
very quickly mister but check
out before you go on to that can
you briefly describe your
organization is general says
you're a role that sort of thing
short and all the local types of
or what we represent out of our
office we run the new mexico
international business
accelerator which is part of the
small business development
center's network we help
companies export an import any
new mexican company not at no
cost were funded through the
higher education department
through the lead center which is
a santa fe community college and
our fiscal region as western new
mexico university
we represent the border
industrial association we
represent the biggest industry
base in new mexico we have about
a hundred and thirty members so
we worked with government at all
levels and we ever keep with the
legislature obviously uh to
bring capital outlay down here
in decrease special legislation
one of which I have in the
presentation and also uh twenty
two years down recruiting
businesses for the new mexican
partnership we primarily do
business down here at the border
but we put companies that we
recruited in the last crucial
industrial park up there and
also an anthony and chop and
also and in the last thing that
I don't have on here we have a
five one c three charitable
foundation called the santa
trees and charitable foundation
for we raise money for the gaza
school district representative
lot as very familiar with us we
send kids on field trips if they
wouldn't contest to go to
orlando and the culinary group
at a gasten we help finance a
trip.
A uniform donations we spots or
teacher the year and then we
identify and recognize students
of the semester so previous to
covered we're giving a students
a brand new bicycle that was the
top performer in each class
level now we're sending them to
urban air which is a a place
where kids love to to go and
have hang out and have fun here
at the moment so that's what we
do it and not show mister
chairman.
And i'd like to recognize a
health staff membership joshua
has been working with me but
twenty four years credit stand
up please receive.
Susie than working for me about
two years.
How many years.
But eight years right seven and
then we also have two uh high
school interests from the
sanitary sir high school we have
on a he and we have email here's
the working with this in the
summer and kinda getting a a
lesson in some some experience
in in business and working with
with companies so so gerry are
they paid in terms and i'm gonna
hope that you say yes
yes yes
so let's go on mister chair you
we are in the border plex area
which is west texas northern
china and southern new mexico
we have a group we meet on a
quarterly basis with our
counterparts on the other side
of the border the sun had only
more services group uh to talk
about infrastructure to talk
about marketing to talk about
politics we want to keep that
communication going with the
other side of the border you
can't develop one side of the
border and avoid you have to you
have to cooperate
we saw fox guy that's an aerial
of fox gone
yesterday it's hard to see it
from the ground but you see the
number of buildings that they
have there it's a but two point
seven million square feet of of
production space we have gmc
paper tech which is in east
indian own paper mill are are
donally does circuit boards
about a hundred and eighty
thousand square feet and then
you've got sunrise confections
in that one building you have
two as I mentioned yesterday
gummy bear factories one of them
is doing eight hundred and
thirty thousand pounds a gummy
bears a day uh so they're
distributing all over the
country.
Sanitary so.
Senator says the turkois colored
area of the green colorado is
our counterparts on the other
side of the border if you'll see
there is a red dot right at the
bottom of the turkois
section that is the senatory
support of entry to the right of
that is the bridge of the
americas uh which runs in
central passage then the last
dot further down is the island
of a port of entry which is the
second largest port of entry on
the entire US mexican border but
i'm gonna go back to the bridge
of the americas we call that
boat border is receiving six
hundred and twenty five thousand
dollars of construction moneys
they're going to redo that
bridge but gs of the federal
government has decided because
of some some pressure from the
local congresswoman and and
various committee groups the
city of a parcel in the county
of a parcel that they're gonna
take off commercial traffic off
of that central port of entry
there so it's like it'll be
squeezing this osage the traffic
that would have gone to that
central bridge is now going to
be diverted to a slatter or to
senatorisa and his slatter on
the mexican side is pretty much
saturated for commercial traffic
so we can expect to see higher
crossing figures commercial
crossing figures that senator
resell here in the near future.
We have four industrial parks in
san atresa in addition to the
senatory suggest port and then
we took a tour yesterday of the
union pacific project but were
the love struck stop was where
you saw that that's the airport
park that's the oldest park uh
in in the industrial base to the
west of that park is the private
irm of a private short line real
road park that we saw yesterday
with the the companies having
the rails for to the facility to
the west of that is the west
park resouther the spec
buildings and and one being
built over there and then we
have a smaller
park at the border there is you
can see the port of entries that
are yellow dot surrounded by red
ring and then that jagged line
is more or less were the border
highway connectors going to go
which we are knocking on wood
that we we get a special session
to make up the funding on that
because if you notice our major
form of ingress in igress to the
industrial park is our craft
slash peak diminishing highway
off of it ten we need another
way to get in and out of the
industrial parks
this is marial of the union
pacific project which is we saw
yesterday and again emphasis its
crew changing station diesel
refuning station but most
important for us it's it's the
intermodel yard this generates
our ability to bring other
companies related to this
project to new mexico
we saw the interview of the
container yard yesterday
we saw the cattle yard and
unfortunately we don't have a
date as to when that's going to
be reopened as I mentioned
yesterday both sides of the US
in mexico border are owned and
controlled by the chien wall
cattle min's association they
were slated to do six hundred
thousand crossings this year so
you can imagine the economic
impact this closure is having
honest because of the screw worm
ec epidemic.
Some logos of companies that we
have in the industrial base
always always ask committee
members mister chairman you do
realize new mexico hasn't has a
major automotive industry and
i'm not talking to catalog the
ship for the chevy dealership we
have automotive production
automotive distribution in san
antrisa we have fxi which makes
your headliner and all the soft
of new car vites goes from
germany auto sensors d ink is
from japan they do plastic
injection from toyota steel
technology's portion of their
steel goes into automotive
applications see and wire is
that turkish company we say
yesterday that huge huge plant
eighty percent of the roughly
seven million pounds of copper
wire they make a month eighty
percent goes into the automotive
industry on an on an honor not
so new mexico actually is a
player in the automotive
industry were big and
electronics because what's
happening in fox gone across the
border we have a bott eight
hundred and forty thousand
square feet tied to fox and
supplying fox gun with
components and ram materials but
we have metal stampers metal
fabricators we have the state's
largest cold storage facility
i'll get or get you picture of
that
we have third party logistics
firms we have about everything
you need to make an industrial
base.
Special legislation I mentioned
that we have work with the
legislature
center treasure is the eastern
most land poor of entry
everything to the east of us
crosses water it crosses the
real grand so I had a eureka
moment about twelve years ago
because mexican trucks can have
a total weight of ninety six
thousand pounds if they want to
cross into the united states and
it's a divisible load they have
to get to eighty thousand pounds
so either have to offload or if
you bring it in two double
traders you gotta unhook them
and two tractors have to bring
them in so if uh you know
anything about logistics every
time you touch that load it cost
you money so if you can save six
cents seven cents on a dollar
you're ahead of the game so I
thought to myself quite why
can't mexican trucks cross you
while state police who inspect
the commercial shipment said
well it's the law and am DO t I
asked in a road support ninety
six thousand pounds of course
they can't firms can get a
special overweight permit to
carry like a big bulldozer or
something well why can't we let
the mexican trucks come over
it's the law so we do we change
the law so uh back in the day
representative mary helen garcia
was our sponsor in the house and
senator mary keep even in the
senate and we created a six mile
overweight zone this was one
senator bobby good solicitor was
a representative he's a senator
now and I thought we were the
six miles on would encompass
what you saw yesterday the
intermodel your I missed it by
two miles union pacific city
morning we are with two miles
north of the six miles on so I
had to go in the next year to to
chairman going solicitors
committee and I said I need
another two miles and I I
reminded him last year because I
he asked me about this and I
said don't you member what you
told me
he said gerry want you in front
of this committee with this bill
last year and I said.
Yes mister chair was he says
well
mister pocheco we don't want to
see you or this bill in front of
this committee again just double
the zone and we have a twelve
miles or now so I always kid and
when I see him about that this
is a major economic development
tool because
the people ask who won't you
want the heavy mexican trucks on
your roads because they set up
warehouses night the difference
between ninety six thousand
pounds and eighty thousand
pounds is fifteen percent so you
buy an annual permit and all of
a sudden you you do fifteen
percent more fifteen percent
more than after six point seven
loads the next load is free
commodities
fresh produce
steel cement all are using this
port of entry as a performed
port of entry to cross and to
warehouse because of this bill
so I I want to think the
legislature on their support for
this.
This is a chart of the major
ports of entry we are the six
largest port of entry on the US
mexican border based on the
value trade going in there look
at the ports of entry lorados
the the biggest followed by a
sletter here in it all parcel
but those numbers did not how
much trade increased through the
ports of entry last year yes who
was number one at forty four
percent increase in trade value
all along the us fex border was
the sanitary support of entry.
We asked to enemiss you and
twenty twenty one to do an
economic impact study in the
value that the sanitary she
industrial base provides to the
state of the new mexico's
economy because when I testify
in front of committees it's a
fair question to be asked
you're asking for money what are
we getting for that money what
do you provide to the economy so
they did their initial study in
twenty twenty one then they
updated it and a twenty twenty
three beginning twenty twenty
four they conclude that we do
about two billion dollars worth
of revenues to the new mexican
economy a year and we support
about seven thousand jobs to put
that in perspective
two other very important
economic development industries
in the state or space board and
film space board at the same
time we did our study did their
study they concluded that within
fifteen years they do about a
billion dollars they did about a
billion dollars of trade or
revenue to the state rather film
did their study they concluded
that they do about eight hundred
million to the state economy
every year this industrial base
is bigger than film and space
were put together but we are not
really
recognized as such because we're
we're not sexy we're not rich
richard branson we're not
breaking bad right or not you
better call solar netflix we are
meeting potatoes we recruit
companies that do stuff that you
don't really want to know what
they do metal fabrication
plastic injection they set up a
few civility spend millions of
dollars inject that money into
the economy hire a bunch of
people pay good wages and stay
here long time stock a gig job
they stay here so
we will continue to work with
airline center and the center
for more economic development it
enemiss you to keep updating the
study
exports are a very important
economic indicator because it it
it reveals what is being made in
new mexico and being exported.
Ah across the world exporting
based jobs pain more than just
regular jobs so this is a short
of all fifty states exports to
the world yes who leads the
nation since twenty ten in
export growth percentage and I
will say this when I ask people
new mexico leads the nation and
what and it's usually a negative
response right recitivism child
poverty education lack of
education when we can see that
were number one in the nation
because we're leaving the
national export growth
percentage it's something to
celebrate our exports last year
one up a hundred and forty one
percent
this is a chart of all states
exports to mexico since around
twenty thirteen new mexico has
lead the nation and export
growth percentage to mexico that
that red line is oregon that's
an aberration they they really
don't ship a lot to mexico but
they more than doubled what they
did you're from one year to it
that excel that's an aberration
our exports to mexico last year
one up a hundred and one percent
is my favorite shark that green
line is new mexico's total
exports to the world we do about
twelve billion dollars and
surprisingly we're getting very
close to the value of exports of
arizona which I I didn't think
i'd ever see that the red line
is new mexico's exports to
mexico and the blue line is done
anna county's exports to mexico
look out the blue line almost
totally covers the red line well
if you don't do any of the
county lost crucials is our
biggest city
the economy's primarily based on
the university white sands
government jobs retirees and
tourism we don't make very much
in los cruces that figure which
is more than sixty percent of
the states total exports is
represented by the senate recent
usual base.
These are the ports of entry uh
the largest ports of entry I
mentioned to you that we are
sixth were about to catch eagle
person I hope to to see that
happened in the next couple of
years
recently completed projects
since twenty twenty one we have
recruited three taiwanese
companies and one chinese
company were the poster child in
new mexico for reshoring and
bringing business from asia here
so the first company in the
upper left hand corners admiral
cable they do extension cords
power cable three computer for
power equipment uh
I I need to see every time we
put a new company in the parks
or exports tend to go up because
the shipping new mexico
we have symmetric which is a
barclayed label manufacturer and
then urge motion is the world's
largest supplier or manufacturer
of adjustable bedding this was
originally a warehouse but
they're actually doing
production in the inside there
we have doubly super recycling
which we say yesterday the
recycling plan areas logistics
is the third party logistics
firm and as I mentioned we're
getting more
a produce imports because of the
overload so
we talked about spectation
yesterday we found a spec
builder out of dallas did the
first spec building of three
hundred and fifteen thousand in
twenty twenty one filled up did
the second spec building a three
sixty five filled up by our
emotion then we saw the two twin
buildings that are local
entrepreneur mr paul foster
built at a hundred and eighty
three thousand that both of
those buildings in the almost
their entirety are tied into fox
supplying foxker
we are getting more value added
agriculture the upper left hand
corner is auto l o c the process
onions then we saw the
mitrature I think you were the
only person i've ever met that
you would chilly mash what's
that is the chili mash of a
production plan there.
Uh the vats a hundred and twenty
vats then we get coast aluminum
and i'm mentioned to you
yesterday the the finish their
facility last year seventy five
thousand square feet.
Fifty percent and and there are
an aluminum distributor fifty
percent tariffs on a lubanon
have prevented them from opening
up their branding facility so
it's a heartbreak
we got monty the law left hand
corner out of cincinnati metal
for application could power
coding for scheduler electric
you need and then we have mister
paul foster again expanding the
footprint of a coordinating
plant yet another hundred and
fifty thousand square foot
building holder is the third
time in these company they do
years power trains for
various big williams
we sad we I didn't point out
yesterday we did there is there
is a silver line in the economic
and certainty we did recruit a
huge german company called
teasing crop they do automotive
components aviation components
if you walk into an elevator you
probably see their name there
they're global so they are
operational in our park or the
industrial beach I
I asked you guys to remind me
yesterday about a heartbreak
story you might have seen this
announced in the news
uh we recruited an eve school
bus manufacturer that has a
plant in los angeles and one and
was virginia i've been working
with this company the better
part of a two years they hooked
up with the polish battery
company you can see the battery
right there to color catering
the facility to do every school
buses the state has even
committed five million dollars
on these buses
the steel and illuminated
tariffs are making each bus
seventy five thousand dollars
more expensive so I got the call
that I would did not want to get
that I was a new one was going
to get from the side selection
consultant saying it's not like
we're saying we're not ever
going to come but we can't come
out it doesn't make any sense so
put that on the shelf for now.
You had the presentation
yesterday by more flex digital
assets and talk about that and
then a little more monday we got
the rost dress for less
warehouse so if you guys are
wearing rostress for less
particular friends from the
south of the coming out of there
valley cold storage huge
facility it's the biggest those
my friends from northern new
mexico that love one of brand
chile and you go to the frozen
isle and he get the bundle brand
chile that read chile comes out
of that facility they do picans
all opinions onions and that's
one of two native as I mentioned
to you guys yesterday one of two
native new mexican companies
that we have in the park all the
restaurant from outer state or
there are from out of the
country
we have a new distribution
center a hundred thousand square
feet going to the west park
new spec under construction we
saw this all yesterday uhm we
saw the the respect in the west
park abbey oxes the mexican spec
builder they're planning to do a
twin building once we get that
one building filled up which was
the building we were going to
put the eve bus company in and
then we have an investor down at
the border that is becoming
active on their land to do their
own spec
that is one of our new spec
buildings we saw that yesterday
a hundred and sixteen thousands
were feet right by the airport
that is under construction that
is already off the market it's
not even fully finished and it's
already leased out.
Mr paul foster with frankly
mountain up industrial as a
pointed out that ron land by the
airport plans to build his own
industrial park.
And this is a a planned
industrial park right at the
corner of stress and uh p
diminishing highway I talk to
an investor that's coming in to
do that park in fact this
morning.
And across the street from that
park is a twelve hundred acre
development that's residential
it has several fees the first
fees will be two hundred and
fifty houses most likely
starting by the end of the year
but they'll have commercial
retail uh residential there it's
really important to us because
with particular with asian
companies the asians are used
to very tight quarters okay so
they seem western movies in
their entrance by the west but
when it comes to taking them and
showing them industrial land or
industrial space or like where
the workers was everybody to
live or down off the scoreman
but warning so once we have
houses up there that's going to
solve that problem to a certain
extent
or a short line railroad
continues to admiral rail they
just recently completed thirty
three hundred limit
we saw the solar farms yesterday
that's pictures of the
developments in son had only on
the other side of the border so
he add up which recently been
completed what's under
construction what's going to
slate it for construction maybe
but
uh more or less but two point
five million square feet on the
other side about one point five
million feet for a total of
about four million square feet
of a construction under of
industrial space under
construction part
the jet port we got twenty
million from the state two point
five million from the feds the
runway has been widened two
hundred and fifty feet and it's
been reinforced we can now land
seven fifty seven cargo jets at
the airport that gives another
motive of logistics in
sanitarisa once we do the cross
runway which is the green line
at the top we will be able to
accommodate any class of cargo.
Erica aircraft
we've been working with animals
you for about six or seven years
on a desalinization project the
the study was completed last
year I didn't know this with new
mexico southern new mexico has
the highest reserves of brackish
water of any place in the world
we are sitting on a sea of
brackish water which is a game
changer it's generational if we
can do desalinization here we
will have a water source for
generations to come ensuring
development and and the health
of our communities
with all that's happening all
along with not through along the
not here you'll see housing
developments apartments for
plexes beautiful housing that
all tied to the industrial base
all tied to the growth over here
that being said infrastructured
very important to us
particularly a water weastwater
treatment system are we say that
our model is we meet we have to
keep infrastructure ahead of
development the day you can't
flush your toilets is the day we
don't recruit new companies or
new people
are there infrastructure we
talked you saw how we the train
blocked our bus yesterday the
overpassed goes over that couple
new parking lots at the border
authority
you saw the watertake yesterday
that's been built and then gsa
of the federal government
delivered a study on the
modernization and expansioned of
the sanitary support of entry we
currently have three northbound
commercial leans in four
passenger leads gsa concluded in
the study that we go from three
commercial aids to fourteen it
concluded we go from four
passenger leans to twelve with
this indicates is the government
has designs on sanitaries to
make us one of the major ports
of entry on the entire US
mexican border we're already in
the top ten but this could be a
game changer the next step is
environmental remediation the
design and genering.
And we are slated to be on
what's called the priority list
for port projects going forward
so not going to would i've been
in touch with senator hynrick's
office and they're confident
that we're heading that
direction
are the infrastructure we are
very close with the school
district we have to keep up with
schools
housing I discussed in of all
things
counselor days leader who
represents someone park here has
daycare centers through the
region and i've learned so much
from her about day care and how
they're bursting at the seams
and sometimes
once pounds goes to work in the
industrial base the other spouse
would go work if they had a
motive of of child care and it
could increase our likelihood to
track more labor to the
industrial base which is always
a challenge uh so they care is a
major issue for us and mister
chair I mentioned the supply the
supplier program we interview
and survey the industrial base
we find out what each firm is
consuming whether be pallets
shrink wrap in her gases
lubricants landscaping services
and we put it in an excel
spreadsheet I then provide that
expert excel spreadsheet to
every economic development
organization in the state and I
say we've done the work find
somebody new community that can
supply this entered date with
elect electricians with ocea
companies one ocean company out
of alba crookie environmental
remediation on a chap at all are
are the electric out of las
crucials general contractors we
have now uh generated sixty
three point six million dollars
worth of contracts across the
state that are tied to santa
teresa through this program.
And mister chair
that that is it
thank you jerry center my estus
thank you mister chairman thank
you very much mister particular
work and dedication I want to
talk about the airport real
quick if you if you can who the
up the jeopard who who owns the
jet poor tell me how is that
structured mister chair senator
the done in a county once the
general.
The.
Okay.
And the.
Is that used a lot in the
supplied chain or that's mostly
kind of private planes and then
onto burners mr chair senator
masters mostly private I mean we
do won't have what's called hot
shot cargo that sometimes leave
the airport that means let's say
a load of tools and dies that
are at emergency item are flown
in to this airport or they're
flown out
we have a substantial amount of
hanger hanger occupation by the
passwords the way texas charges
taxes on equipment like aircraft
is based on the value of the
aircraft in new mexico we we
base that on the the weight the
weight almost inevitably is
cheaper so a lot of the the the
more influential wealthy you're
a passwords have their airplanes
yet santa teresa and we have the
last time I talked to the
airport director there was a
waiting list of something like
eighty four
hangers needed to house aircraft
out there.
Interesting interesting and
then.
And
so the so
I don't think it assuming it's
not stopped and assuming the
commercial traffic through the.
The bridge america is is all
date.
Then the you know obviously the
commercial trucks can go
anywhere from all over the two
thousand mile border but if
they're if they're into all
whether going to go.
Either through texas or through
through santa resta how do you
think we can is that a good
thing and it and if it's not can
we turn it into a positive how
can we capture that market of
commercial traffic mr chair
senator it is a positive thing
the more traffic the more
commercial traffic and passenger
traffic you can push the report
of entry the more love you get
from washington okay cause your
your your your carried more
traffic you need more facilities
you need more infrastructure you
need more boots on the ground so
now that that port of entry in
central and past was closing
down we have a prime opportunity
to capture
permanently capture a lot of
that traffic coming in here we
are capable of doing that
because one if you were called
couple of years ago a governor
of greg avent station his d PS
officers north of the ports of
entry to do secondary
inspections what happened in
texas we you had twelve hour
lines.
And you have truckers sleeping
in their truck overnight while a
lot of them were coming to santa
teresa as a reliever root and a
lot of that traffic state here
because a lot of the companies
got angry and what texas did so
and they found out that yeah we
may be a little further from
central apartment and central
waters but it's a three it's
generally thirty to forty
minutes across a truck here
versus two hours to six hours
sometimes at deal passive
bridges so we always promote how
rapid we are in commercial
crossings and I can't see enough
about the cbp the customs and
border protection people here at
the port they are are partners
uh they work with the sand in
hand we notify each other about
certain things uh they've been
just wonderful and they're
professional in crossing the
commercial traffic and so mister
german was to protect the so
even even if they're headed back
east even if a commercial truck
is headed back is going through
santa fe jumping on it ten.
And going east say that's an
hour out of their way it's
better than twelve hours sitting
there for for a.
Double inspection mister chair
senator absolutely and the.
A mischair in the arm
misprotector we don't we don't
use.
Are tolls reasonable or or or do
you think we should we don't
have a tall through st that I
say you think that's good policy
at this time mr chair senator um
that's that's a black hall and
let me explain that to you
good question
um we don't have any kind of
tools saturday recent versus
latest saragosa the bridge of
the americans is a free they
call up the free bridge because
they don't have tools there but
a truck at saturday is playing
twenty dollars plus uh across
him to cross
i've been told cause we
researched we thought maybe
having a tool etc would be a
good income stream and we can
actually bond against that for
infrastructure and we wouldn't
have to be going to santa fe
happen hand begging the
legislators the fund is some
money for capital oddly projects
but I was told back in the
senator bingham and days that
because federal funds were used
to build the peace diminishing
highway that you really kept
told that the state kept all
that but then I came up with the
idea if the state would build a
little connect right right above
eventually we can told that but
no to date mister chair said we
don't have adult sounds good and
mischairman miss pickle the.
The reason I ask is cause that
that revenue stream you know we
got a commitant.
Folks.
You know folks are from central
and northern mexico and even
south issue of my school about
the economic benefits to the
state of these road projects
and there's a whole host of them
we when it comes down to crunch
time we speak with you about
prioritization but as of right
now they're all in the list.
And they can all
we can all justify that
expenditure because you know we
got a get in the frame framework
of
we've never been in this
position and santa fe mister
mobile to spend money to make
money.
You know we're we're patching
holes and and redoing roads as
opposed to building new roads
for new new economies and new
economic ventures which then
pays for itself and then some so
so please help us with that of
with that dialog in the coming
months in yours thank you mister
representative johnson
thank you mister chair thank you
for the presentation do you mind
if I call you gerry
mr
not at all
met recently your name is a
household
I don't know if that's true all
over new mexico but I know
having the other two ports in
the state and representing the
southern part of new mexico
everyone knows you so it would
it feels offered to say mister
picheko so I appreciate mister
chairs i've been here i'm as old
as the wood over here i've been
my thirty fourth year work it on
this industrial group will and
thank you for that it's it's a
it's huge for new mexico and and
for them and for the country but
the also thank you for the the
ture yesterday that was so
impressive yeah I I really
enjoyed that quite a bit and for
your presentation I am I am
going to look at page seven the
the number thirteen slide that
shows twenty four important
expert values as selected land
port of entries along the border
I was really proud to see that
columbus port was second yay for
new mexico to at twenty six
percent and growth from twenty
three to twenty four which is
really great i'd like to see a
breakdown of that and and
especially on the next uh on
page nine where we have that
comparing selected regions
exports uhm
new mexico to the world new
mexico is compared to mexico and
then done yeah but you don't
have the twenty twenty four
breakdown which would.
Reflect columbuses
contribution to that I would
love to see that if if we have
there is mister chair represent
their sometimes a lag of months
before we get that data and that
probably is what's reflected in
that cap there in mrperiod chair
representative just so you know
that i've been working with
chris brice luna county in his
team the visitors visited us
numerous times to discuss how we
can develop the columbus port of
entry
with mayor skinner over there
and in columbus she's good
friend of mine so I I let them
know they have our support
whatever we can do to to do that
I understand they did get some
infrastructure funds basic ones
to try to develop that
industrial park down right by
the port and working together on
that as well and I appreciate
that I think it's good to
compare us to texas and and we
have kind of a state state
competition but when it comes to
ports new mexico winds when we
both do well while all three of
reports someone mentioned
developing analog wells
yesterday and I thought that
that's an exciting thought but
uh we'll work on this for now
there's definitely a need to
with the closing potential
closing of the bridge of the
americas to to really invest in
senators and appreciate all
you're doing for us thank you
thank you mister chair.
Thank you next up per reps an
apartment
thank you mister chairman and
i'm thank you gerry for all this
information in the tories rates
and really great
I too want to talk about the
airport a little bit
went through this slide which I
found really interesting jet
port improvements twenty two and
a half million dollars so gerry
first of all
can I talk me through a little
bit more the vision for the
airport I know that you talked
about expansions for a three two
one and ten twenty eight talk a
little bit more about that
mister chair a representative
you tied specially about the
report cracked so the vision for
the airport is to have cargo
shipments out of there number
one we can attract business by
having that ability at the
airport number two we can
service existing the provide
that service to existing
businesses can imagine how much
let's say a company like foxkon
brings from asia to the united
states a lot of that is my barge
on containership but imagine if
they could ship directly from
beside the plant and in china
it'll land right here five miles
north of the plate and
sanitaries it's a game changer
so that is a major economic
development tool for us and i'm
very excited because we got the
the the trucks we got this
beautiful rail in a model yard
now we're going to have the
airport which we can make into a
major cargo airport on the
border so it's very exciting
thank you mister chairman think
you're doing so it looks like a
hundred and twenty million and
new funding for three twenty one
and twenty million and
additional state funding for a
ten twenty eight ninth I think
you said that would allow the
jet port to land have landing
capacity up to like a seven
fifty seven will it take to get
to go beyond that because I know
fatex has large operations here
they be fly a three thirties
you know and be twelve.
Mr chair representative if you
look at that slide there is a
green line at the top there that
is a future across runway that
needs to be built for us to have
full capability of doing any
classic cargo jet because of the
crosswords here so once we prove
that we can we can attract cargo
here we can approach the fa for
up to ninety percent funding to
do that cross running so that is
in our plans
thank you mister chairman jerry
jerry you read my mind
money from the birds let's talk
a little bit about the the
aviation division hangers I mean
is that purely for citiviation
for
commercial activity or is that
also for private activity as
well mister chair representative
is primarily private aircraft
we have so many texas want to be
headquartered with their craft
over aircraft over here we just
don't have the hangers so if you
go to the airport we didn't have
a chance to go right into the
airport yesterday you see a huge
hanger being built there for one
other I think it's a golf stream
aircraft probably a fifty
million dollar aircraft some of
these hangers are a million
dollars
I have friends who actually that
you could go in their hanger and
you could live in the hanger I
mean it it's it's a second home
away from home but yeah there is
a great need for private
aircraft that would we get to
the point of of generating cargo
we're going to need facilities
for that also
they can just determine and i'm
yearly eight
it's like a gold rush down here
for hanger space and I know a
bunch of people that were
talking about doing it privately
but it sounds like commercially
there might be a some
opportunity there as well
and it also looks like you have
an mro here is that
maintenance repair operations
mr chair you're you talk like a
fixed base operation yes.
Yes we do at the airport and and
mister chairman jerry who
operates
mr chair representative
the gentleman that owned the
spec buildings that I told her
mister paul foster
thanks mister chairman and
that's an fa certified facility
mister sure representative yes
thanks you thank you mister
chairman thanks jerry I i've
second vice chairman
my assistance comments that you
mean infrastructure of roads but
i'd also say this runway would
be a game changer with
everything going down down here
I mean you really would be able
to have connections all over the
world if you can have heavies
landing cell good thing there's
some people on appropriations
here
representative latter
thank you mister chair jerry
thank you
thank you in and what you're and
everything there's your team
does to to promote the the
region to promote the to bring
business it's an industrial park
mr chair
my very first growbreaking
herself freshman lawmaker was
for the admiral cable
facility and I added an object
of email but I think I I kept
that shovel
I kept that so
mister chair jane
we talked about infrastructure
you mentioned infrastructure and
we this something that we've
been talking about these past
couple of days
and a
I really don't like to ask this
but mister chair jerry how many
opportunities have we lost due
to the lack of ins restriction
how many opportunities and we
lost for a new business is
coming there decided to relocate
to to all parcel instead of
coming into south of the lesser
mr chair of representative
i'll just rattle off a couple of
opportunities.
We had to
uh companies involved one in the
lumin can industry the other was
steel related company that
would require a an insane amount
of water on a daily basis though
the water authority could do it
but that means we would for
forego other recruitment
opportunities so you have to you
know we have to choose i'd
rather so always say it rather
hit a single redouble than a
home run because home run means
we got to find a lot of people
that we have to get a lot of
instrument infrastructure in
place but we have we have had to
make hard decisions on that and
it's it a road to beautiful you
saw how wonderful a router
fiber optics are right there the
gas companies got all of its
lines in there agreed to work
with a parcel electric scrape to
work with
in the case of our industrial
base it's a water wastewater
system that is our achilles heal
that's what we need to invest
that's what we need to be ahead
of the game because as this
region gets more and more
recognized in fact somebody sent
me an article on on the
potential for tariffs on copper
and it had a picture of c and
wire in our industrial base
there you know and i'm thinking
all my goodness you know
we're getting
nationally internationally
recognized here in the past six
months we've been in the la
times the new york times we've
been on US a today the words
getting out but we got to be
prepared for that and sometimes
you get about the bullet and
spend money on infrastructure
ahead of time not at the last
minute when you really need it
but it's water waste water that
would be the the the the the
factor here the limiting factor
thank you thank you mister
that's and that's critical and
we've heard that you know we
heard yesterday where you know
we're talking about it today and
it's something that are that we
really need to.
Focus on it and I agree with you
one hundred percent mr chairman
the jury that we have to be much
much more proactive with that
infrastructure water with
swatter infrastructure in order
to
continue to bring in that that
business and then development it
into into the industrial part
you don't want one of the things
that are that I I remember I
think maybe I mister charitary
maybe was three or four years
ago I think the bay had
put a bit in for the what was
that the amazon was that amazon
the the so
would you mind speaking about
that was I also believe that was
another loss opportunity that we
didn't get mister chairman
represented a lot yeah that was
more than three is prepared
democrat this is when jeff
basels wanted to put a second
amazon
corporate center whatever city
somewhere else in the united
states so we thought to her so
they had certain conditions you
know quality of life you get
have good infrastructure to have
this in that so we came up with
the idea of you know are we
really going to be able to
compete with dallas or atlanta
revenue denver so we had the we
had to come up with a
concept you that would really
get their attention to we can
put the concept of across border
campus there was at architect
the three famous out of mexico
that that saw how we were trying
to build a by national city in
the said he let me design this
and we came up with this
beautiful design where and we
even had we we use fiver to find
a designer out of pakistan of
all places that did like a run
through video of what this would
look like and I thought well
this could be great we're going
to get in the local press we
were all over the press because
this was the most unique thing
that they got you know atlanta
is going to say okay we got this
we got that dallas can see the
same thing who could say they
had.
You know that they have the
ability to create a bid national
campus for amazon so that was
really neat we had a good
running on that we got so much
press for that
thank you mister the reason I
asked for the wind the reason I
see to to explain that was
because I want my colleagues and
everyone listening into
realizing impact that the border
into some association and your
team have bring these businesses
in proposing and pitching the
area of pitching not only some
of our considered that as other
pitching new mexico it in
general and so I really want to
to do every other props for that
because it's really the work
that you do is really important
in doing that mr chair of the I
have another question regarding
the trade ports act.
Recently we we had the treat for
sacked governor signed it until
law how is that going to impact
what you're doing in such an
impact or in hence what you're
doing at the industry mister
chair representative of the
sanitary's industrial base was
designated a few years ago as a
trade port by the us department
of transportation what that
means is that we're we're set up
to receive federal funding for
everything from electric
charters infrastructure to
become a hub of logistics if you
will
but she got a figure it out
yourself so the trade ports bill
that pass the legislature is big
because now we have access to
capital where we can for example
one of things we've been
discussing is could we connect
the jet port to the rail and
that way you have let's say
cargo coming in landing getting
on the rail and going directly
to companies or company shipping
directed by rail to the airport
that's the kind of stuff we can
do with the the funding in that
build so we're designated to
trade forward albuquerque is
also and I know
this representative lunchtrom if
gallup is tied into the
albuquerque effort so and I
think she she created or carried
the bill I think from the trade
port so it's very important to
us here for for capital for
projects we just got a sit down
and figure out where we get the
biggest bang for a buck from
that legislation
I think thank you for that
during hours as curious to see
how that was going to impact
which are working on it was
going to enhance what you're
walking on and to be obviously
you know if getting that rail I
connected to the airport would
be that would be huge that would
be huge one other thing this
year as a you there's a meeting
tomorrow you know you have you
have one to
advertise and maybe we can get
some books to attend that
tomorrow mister chiero
represented a lot of we have our
border industrial association
general meeting we hold it at
the casino in the mall room
we've got without grown or
of previous space so we're going
to be discussing water
wastewater.
Uh tomorrow so anybody is
welcome to join us tomorrow
it'll be from a twelve clock to
about one thirty and i'll be
giving pretty much an update
like I did the committee and
will have a
mister body of waterson fonted
minister j c cross we speaking
of for us we always have
customers in border protection
they're giving an update on the
port of entry and we usually
have border patrol given a sop
update but unfortunately as are
agent that we have contact with
has been reassigned so we got a
skip meeting with the mortar
patrols of tomorrow twelve at
the casino
thank you I appreciate that in
and also I just wanted to
have you see that because it's
going to
your association and all the
stakeholders are actively
actively working on a common
development on other impacts not
only ignorance in new mexico but
also in the region and I want to
pre our one and thank you for
that thank you thank you mister
chair
representative
thank you mister chairman
gerry at the such a pleasure to
meet you
not only because you're from
espanola but because you're a
bob cat yes
that was quite a pleasure when I
found that out
what when I saw yesterday with
our our bus tour
is truly a game changer for new
mexico
the work that you've done and I
have to commend you because I
think you know
senator omalin I were just
saying you're like a one man
show but you have done an
amazing thing
the fee to create the industrial
park
and to see the names that you're
bringing into new mexico
is truly international trade and
I was I want to point to your
page.
Twenty two
because one of the things that I
always look for is what are your
asks and i'm page twenty two in
case everyone hasn't looked at
that he has defined some of his
asks to the legislature
but I want an on that page I
want to point to
the five hundred k for port
redesign moderatisation study
and I think that's important
because
err what you're I mean the goal
that you and your group or
working toward that
international trade that's
already happening
you know it's like the study
should come and then the should
happen but it's it's okay to do
the study I i'm totally
supporters I think that it's
important especially when I
think about places that i've
been where i've seen internet
international trade
those ports are fully developed
like
when I was in montreal when I
was in toronto when I was in new
york I mean i've seen these sort
of port international trade
boards fully developed and I
think you you know and in twenty
years or whatever even ten years
from now you guys are going to
be like
like rock and roll and you know
and it's hopefully recalled the
jerry per check go
international port
but just all throw that out
there but one of the things that
I think about when I was driving
around out there
was a you know people are having
to travel to those jobs and I
think that it might be really
significant to think about where
you could locate some housing or
maybe do some mixed use type of
developments out there so it's
not just you know industrial.
Um manufacturing
areas but you have maybe some
mixed used some housing some
commercial because that are and
you might want to think about
that you know group is you're
talking about your future in
your planning because you don't
want everybody to kind of
unfortunately new mexico is
known for the car but
unfortunately too I mean they
have a lot lot of low writers
and stuff like that but
travel and all those emissions
that are coming out of the cars
traveling to those jobs that
could be significantly
significantly reduced what if
you think about where could we
build multi family housing where
could we build you know that
that sort of thing that
incorporating
a mixed use design in some of
those areas so I think that's
something that I would I would
kind of throw out is that
because you don't want people of
necessarily traveling long
distances all the time
and mister
chair one other thing I just
wanted to ask you
well short of pointing out that
port design I think that's
really important that study and
I would love to help you on that
the other thing is I wondered
about the tariff situation
yesterday when we were driving
around how it a facts and you
briefly touched on that but
could you just sort of for the
public talk a little bit about
how that's impacted you're
industrial park mister chair
both every company we have
operated in the automotive
industry's feeling and I talked
to fxi
monday and they are struggling
they have a plant here they have
a big plant in mexico city and
my my my contact there said
they're about to leop some
people because of the tariffs.
Um the we'd ask the e v one I
should not see that the bus
company project is postponed
because of tariffs as long as
they're that high on steel
aluminum any company that we
have in or industrial base that
uses steel or aluminum is going
to be affected by tariffs and
what's even more disconcerting
is that the president is floated
the idea of imposing the thirty
percent tariff on goods from
mexico let me let me give you
the idea why that's so difficult
and this is a real real example
there is still a steel text
slits steal then you can slid
steal into like a rectangle like
that it goes in the mexican were
the punch holes in that steel
comes back to the united states
the powder according goes back
to mexico now it's incorporated
into a a swap court that's one
cooler's exporter to the united
states how many times are you
going to get quacked with the
tariff at thirty percent and
who's going to figure that out
so each
everybody's shutters and
everybody goes to neutral and
everybody postpones hiring
everybody postpones expansions
i've had three plants in the
industrial base that i've been
working with to expand the
footprint all of them propose
ordered this point in time uh
each it's just too hard to make
a strategic decision you you saw
those buildings to build a new
building is both eighty five
dollars a score foot you can
imagine the millions and
millions of dollars he spent
that you have to make the
decision to spend and then what
happened let's see let's see we
recruit a company here i've tied
to mexico now all of a sudden we
have thirty percent terrorist so
a lot of companies are saying
we're just going to wait we're
gonna bite the bullet we're not
going to expand the tyson crop
of example that german company
i'm very proud of that because
that happened in the midst of
economic and certainty but it it
does were the poster child for
the effect of tariffs in in this
state.
And mr character the reason and
I bring that issue up is because
we have a congressional
representative here today and I
think that they probably already
know this information but I
think that we need to express
this
two or congressional delegation
so that that issue can be raised
because it's not only affecting
new mexico it's affecting all of
our ports across the country
but I think that you know that
that has a significant impact on
the development of a of a group
that's trying to bring an
economic development and so I
wanted to point down out so
thank you jerry for that mister
chair represent one point one
industry sector that's doing
very well because of the tariffs
or the public warehouses that we
have because very importing
product anticipation tariffs
have been preemptive and so our
warehouse is a pretty full
because they want to avoid the
terrorists beforehand so that's
what a bright spot in the
industrial
thank you for that the shared it
thanks miss
representative gear
thanks mr chip mr current and
thanks cheery I regularly ten
years ago I was a no name
candidate for office called
amount because he is great
articles in the other visits
section she spent three hours
with my husband and me and when
I see how you traded treated me
who at the time really had
nothing to offer I know that's
part of the success you meet
everybody talk to everybody and
you don't have a concept and so
here I am today according what
you're doing so thank you for
that attitude
going off of mr chairman what
representative rigor said
actually my favorite slide in
the whole thing is on page
seventeen slide thirty three
because it's the automated
states and i'm.
It's obviously mixed use it
supportable house seen are you
meeting any obstacles in getting
this accomplished and can you
give us status update well
mister chair represented a
guarantee the first fees has
already approved uhm there's
subsequent fees that we're going
to need water capacity and waste
order treatment capacity that is
going to be the limiting factor
there
most of the development monies
is going to come from private
development
so it would be water wastewater
that would be the limiting
factor in subsequent faces
oh thank you for that
explanation should current
obviously anything we can do is
legislators please let us know
because that's vital and I just
want to compliment you and
everybody we've heard because
this is a fine national thing
and in a time when it would are
at risk and all the stuff is
going on I feel like this whole
area someone santa trees said
going on at
the whole center is operation
there's this embrace of
we're not there's no border so
thinking for that attitude and I
hope we can eventually influence
people that not see it that way
I also want to thank you for the
supplier other supplied the
supplier program that's terrific
on my question has to do
with a printer ships and
education my question is you
know there's a lot of unsee
titles as you said it's not sure
if you talk about
recycling or this year that are
there jobs here that you
desperately need that simply
people don't realize that that's
a job
mr chairman representative some
monday jobs include forklift
operator they had paid pretty
well and there's always a
shortage of forklift operators.
Building maintenance people are
supply cheap managers for
example purchasing managers uhm
union pacific has been very
generous because they have
funded for the last five years
or so the industrial careers
academy just write down the
street at the donatic community
college their trading people to
to a run for class they're
training people on industrial
applications and getting a
certificate so they've been a
good partner in doing that but
those are some of the jobs that
are needed and let me tell you
something i'll give you an
example the guy that runs fedex
ground that we saw yesterday who
you tarasses started working
part time there as a grunt on
the floor lifting boxes onto a
convenient vehicle did it just
as a part time job in college
got out of call they said hey
wanted to come in here you know
lower level management today he
runs the warehouse and he's a
relative lead young man so if
you are good at learning you
keep your nose clean you work
well with other workers she show
up when you should show up you
could you can have a career with
benefits in this industrial
needs and that's what we're
trying to get the work around to
particularly the use in our
communities here
but thank you mister share and
thank you dear cuz my next
question was programs that doing
you've already answered that
so thank you very much you've
been through my questions
thank you jerry for the
presentation appreciate the your
time in your hard work thank you
mister chair members committee
thank you
next we have the border i'm
sorry next we have the real
infrastructure of california so.
Last but not least
look at introduce yourself
please and and your guests as
well and proceed when you're
ready.
Hazard's materials are operating
safely that they move safely
from point eight to point b but
I have to start mister chairman
vice chairman
and also vice chair lada
thanking you so much for
bringing this meeting here to
the border
it is very difficult for me or
jerry to explain where is going
on here what we have here and I
know that all of the other
committee members it's a long
track five and a half hours or
more
but I would probably
better to say that you've seen
something that in new mexico
that you've never seen before
the activity
and of course the jobs that
support that activity but most
importantly is our culture there
are a lot of lines that are
blurred boundaries but we are
one community and that's what
makes this place special so if I
may i'm going to go ahead and
start with my presentation I
like to start off basically
letting people know what is it
that union pacific does and that
as we move the goods that
families and businesses depend
on every day from food and
beverages to lumber to build
homes to
the close that we were and even
the vehicles that we used to get
here this morning
and our mission is very simple
it is to ensure that we are the
safest railroad in north america
and we do our business based on
safety
service and operational
excellence and that translates
into growth so we have to be
safe we want to make sure that
we have the bright services for
the businesses that are counting
us to move their goods and we do
it with excellence gone or the
days of when the railroads were
slow.
And and late
today are customers are
expecting amazon like service in
fact some of the packages that
arrive in your front front porch
move by rail most likely more
most of them did so i'm going
now to slide number
they've decided with our map
and
basically this is what union
pacific is as a whole we have
worked because did you say you
have people to put on I did work
do you have the power point
martin we can't show it on the
uh we can probably get
let's get it up to to look it
will be helpful some members of
the public is it as well
so in the best thing that effort
to to save us some time we'll
see the map here shortly but
union pacific has thirty two
thousand miles of track in
twenty three states waste of the
business
we have thirty thousand
employees across our network
about eighteen percent of our
employees are veterans so we
also
pay very well union pacific is
one of the very few companies
that i've
met in and know of where you can
have a high school diploma or a
ged and make six figures they
are not easy jobs our
train cruise and our support
that all of the people who
support them work twenty four
hours a day seven days a week
the railroad has to be moving
and we are we are successful
because of their efforts but it
is a great company to to work
with we are investing this year
three point four billion dollars
on our infrastructure those are
dollars and go to renewing our
rail lives.
Putting a new ties putting a new
rails and also investing in
technologies the technology that
we use is not off the shelf we
have to develop it ourselves and
people don't really think of
technology when they think about
railroads but we are actually
pretty pretty tech
as you'll see in in my
presentation a little bit later
the map will show you that we
are the only railroad to serve
the six rail gateways to mexico
those gateways are in colexical
nogaless elparcel you go pass
ladel and brownsville
and
if the mexico business makes up
about eleven percent of our
overall business and we have
seen our volume grow at the
gateways about seven percent
since twenty eleven so that
makes a statement on what is
happening in mexico and with the
near shoring phenomenon that
we've seen in in in mexico.
We
in this area the closest gateway
is ill parcel the largest
gateway is not all followed by
your pass and then el parcel.
This gateway has existed there
for decades and a lot of
companies have invested their
own dollars to build their own
real facilities at better serve
so that they can move their
products I mention that because
there are efforts and sometimes
conversations that talk about a
real bypass moving the trains
from it parcel two stand at
their srn and son here anymore
that is not something that union
pacific is interested in
pursuing we have a real gateway
we have the customers that have
invested in that area and
there's a lot of information
that that that needs to be
looked at because if you do that
just thinking about it and how
much good luck there is if you
think you have bridlock in on I
tend to day when you look at the
the number of trucks that you
would be bringing here and and
then one in the girl parcel
that would make today's traffic
look like the fast lane so this
is the map here as you can see
it there so are our gateway here
is a pass so it will be it will
remain a parcel but again here
in new mexico we have
significant infrastructure that
supports the state and this is
what we look like here are new
mexico you can see we've got two
rail lines one heading from
senators it to lordsburg and
then the other one going toward
the east inter to comparing
we have six hundred miles a
track we have over four hundred
employees and we
invested in our infrastructure
about thirty two million dollars
here in new mexico last year
when you look at the traffic
i'll just like to point out you
can see the impacts of covered
when you look at the traffic in
twenty twenty and then in twenty
twenty one you had that dramatic
shift the dramatic decrease and
the number of cars that
originated and terminated here.
The product said that originate
here
are wholesale in a model
products auto parts call and
then of course the receive items
here are also intermodal auto
parts and assembled vehicles and
you start a at art or train at
our guard yesterday
this light here
talks about or said that there
is sight intermotal terminal
in twenty eleven
union pacific fueling and real a
pro interchange operations were
happening in a parcel
we spoke with the state of new
mexico and big granted us a
local modern fuel tax deduction
in twenty thirteen and in twenty
fourteen the sun that there is
not intermodal terminal open
here and so the the state has
has capped its word and
continued to to honor that and
we appreciate that and that is
what allows us to continue to
bring businesses here and so our
business is that we talked to
you they want to stable business
environment and that proves that
in new mexico we have that so
i'll just i'll just point to the
picture after the left before
the intermodel terminal that's
what senators to look like it
was just dirt and the pennies
dinner that was there to to feed
our art cruise as a as they came
through but it is it is a great
operation that's where we fuel
are our local motives as they're
moving from the west after the
east this the shipping
containers that you saw arrived
by boat in the california ports
and then they're placed on a
train and come over this
direction
next line
I want spend too much time here
but jerry tucked about the
sanitary serve
railroad that's our short line
here and
this company is sort of the
smart business of railroading.
They invest their own dollars to
build the infrastructure and
serve new customers and is
through their efforts that we
can continue to diversify new
mexico's economy one of the
things that that that that the
organization is moving is is
chilly and also onions so it's
it's it's it's a very important
part of new mexico's
infrastructure even though
taxpayer dollars are not used to
to build their infrastructure
next slide so this is our our
court group here in in
sanitarisa there's this group
that is continuously working to
look at what businesses we can
bring in what do we need to
attract new businesses and after
the left you see
and ban
the chairman of the the border
just for association jobing to
now from our
organization whose job is to
continuously go and find new
customers as well as in the back
to borrow who runs the senators
railroad and we brought our
special rare historic train to
new mexico with president beth
wide and we hosted some meetings
here to continuously talk about
what can we do to brow this area
and of course there I am I had
to stick myself in there with
with representative latter who
has done so much for our
community and we thank him for
that it's hard to sell sanitary
sir when people have not been
here and so we appreciate his
his support for that and then in
the middle you'll see my my
college you're ray bosca's with
the
firechief of a send them park
and then the fire marshall for
doing it on a community college
and you hear more about our
partnership there but one of the
things that i'm most proud of in
my role here at union pacific is
the establishment of the donate
on a community college it.
College
trade academy the work academy
that we established
I was the one who took that
concept to
corporate office in omaha and
and they said yes I grew up in
the rear grand valley along the
border and back then if you
lived in the border you needed
help and no one was coming
because we were disconnected but
now with the near showing
phenomenon and continued growth
along the border that has
completely changed and so union
pacific believes in bringing our
communities up and this is our
effort to
ensure that we are helping the
people who live around our real
lines we need to bring them up
this is a humble community and
my experience as well as for
some of you has been that
education is your ticket up it's
it's a ticket not just for you
but for your family and that is
what we have done here in the
community college here and and
in sunday park and i'm proud to
say that since the academy
opened there have been a hundred
graduates from this program
these are people who are now
working hopefully in the sun
that there is a complex we want
to home grow are talent here we
have the talent we have what we
call in mexico the ghanas which
means the will to want to move
up and and I think that that
it's it's serving as well and
i'm not prepared to make an
announcement but I think we're
about to take this partnership
up to the next level
as as we continue to work and
collaborate with with the
college
next slide
we spend about
ten million dollars a day on our
infrastructure that means that
we've got to make sure that are
more than
our ties that are.
Equivalent to a hundred million
in breakshape along with all of
the rail infrastructure to
ensure that our trains are
operating on the safest tracks
and in addition to that and will
we we are successful with that
because of our employees are
are
tracked apartment is
continuously looking at the
health of our real lines we have
good old fashioned inspections
by our track inspectors who go
on these high real trucks and
they get out and they measure
the the the the rail and and
make sure that everything is
level and and prepared for
trains to travel through the
rail lines and we use a lot of
technology to make sure that
we're addressing issues before
an accident count occur that
includes using technology that
uses a camera's lasers and sonar
to ensure that we can see
imperfections inside the rail
they cannot be seen with the
negative eye and it's it's
something that we have to
continue to do and it's helped
us reduce accidents dramatically
so in addition to the high tech
inspections just for the rail
lines were also using drawns to
inspect our real bridges which
keeps r employees safe because
you know getting up there can be
a a risk obviously so that's one
of the other things that that's
pretty exciting for us we also
have positive train control
which is a technology that is on
local motives that basically
have technology including gps
that will stop a train before a
collision can happen with
another train that means that
are we have two people in the
local motive and the engineer
who's actually at the controls
is operating the train but that
person is getting a alerts and
if they don't acknowledge the
alert that they received or they
do not.
Slow down when they're supposed
to the train what automatically
slow down and start to prevent a
trader train collision from
happening
next I and of course we also
have our lines outfitted with
sinceres and lasers and and
cameras that ensure that every
train that's traveling has a
good health inspection every
inch along the tracks machine
vision allows us to capture any
defects as a train is traveling
at whatever speed it's traveling
it doesn't have to stop or or
slow down the machine vision war
take a look and make sure even
if there's a a strap that came
lose and again when we we use
the technology to help us
determine whether we need to
stop the train immediately or
continue to to to move forward
and then stop it at the the next
rail facility to check something
out or to make the repairer
so my colleague here re
is going to talk to you a little
bit about the response that we
have when emergencies occur we
do everything to prevent
accidents but again we want to
make sure that our communities
are prepared and we are prepared
if something should occur.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
remondaboscas and the hazardous
material managers safety manager
for the state of arizona the
state of medical and now the big
state of texas so as you can see
one individual being able to
handle a huge territory it takes
a lot of of of relationships for
us to be able to do the things
that we need to do are in our
company especially when we're
transporting hazardous material
commodities through our system
one of the things that that
I came to my career starting
from a firefighter of two one of
the specialists in the private
industry of responding to the
address of materials is joining
union pacific growl road i've
been in the company for almost
eight years and that of those
eight years one of the things
that has really cut my eye was
being the leaders and being able
to handle hazardous materials
through rail safely and assuring
that their secured property and
ensure that their communities
are safe when chemicals like the
what we transport in the real
are being transported as safe as
possible
uhm one of the things that we
have in our in our group or in
our team are for paliarts in our
mission one of them is our
prevention site the preparedness
side the recovery and then the
the the the response and then
the recovery one of the two key
factors that I want to do
explain more than in detail is
part of our prevention the part
of the prevention site that we
do in our group is to inspect
every hazardous material
commodity or rolling stock will
be called rolling stock or tank
cars that are being transported
water network that means that we
climb these cars to assure that
the feedings are properly
secured we make sure that the
markings on the tank cars are
described properly and to assure
that that whatever the manifest
of the way bill.
Is assuring that whatever
commodity is in that
car or rolling stock is listed
to compliance to our federal
government so we are kind of the
the the auditors of our shippers
are because we count on a
shippers that everything that
they are transporting is done
correctly but we are also their
safety blanket and that's one of
the parts that we even as a
transportation company we are
sure that these commodities are
being transported property the
next thing is on our preparent
aside because we do anticipate
that we might have an incident
in boeing hazardous materials
during the rail so part of that
program is in our preparency
site here in in in this state of
new medical last year we already
done trainings enrorcement
damning and actually
a month ago in june arms are in
june we did have a training with
done in a count academy to
certify the new has met
firefighters that were going to
graduate to assure they have the
proper training dealing with
rail uh what is this training
involved classroom for sure
second is hands on we've bring
specialty trailers to to these
participants there are are are
involved in the training and we
actually actually bring the full
size cars like you see down
there so they can have real
world
a training dealing with these
hazardous materials
uh I am very very proud to be
part of this community because
to be involved with our local
fire departments are border
patrol our first law enforcement
is a huge huge big plus because
like I was saying to rock and
many times is that when you do
come to these incidents they
know who I am and they know who
are teamers because not to be
able to have that relationship
during an incident.
Becomes very chaotic during that
time so having that partnership
is very very important so having
this this this relationship with
our locals first responders is
is a big part another good thing
that that i'm very proud of is
having that relationship with
our border city with medical are
we do brain what call and this
is the only territory where we
bring the binational event which
incorporates the firefighters
from the US and firefighters
from making that is a huge
success for us because in
reality if the incident of real
car or a hazardous material
release happens on the border we
are not able to respond but if
we already have provided that
training that gives them that
edge to be able to mitigate that
situation as as quickly as
possible so for that i'm very
very happy that we're able to
provide that that preparedness
programs for them are on get we
also provide tools for them are
we have that app which called as
rail which every first responder
once they take our horse or
allow to have that app where
they can enter the tank car
itself and right away it's going
to provide them the commodity
that's in there it will also
provide him the way bill and now
that we have this new upgrade it
will provide on the consensus
and you can see what what's the
concentrate it's the manifest is
the manifest of the whole train
because in reality even if we
have one hazardous material
release on a car we need to know
what's on the rest of the train
that can affect that commodity
so having that that asterile is
very important if you see that
number ninety nine point nine
nine of has meant shipments
compare for for the safety of of
our company that is a very good
number because
we right now or classified as
one of the safest railroads in
in in the industry so for that
were very proud of that and that
not just.
Is because what we do in our
company but what are community
members or even our first
responders they are incorporate
to that ninety nine point nine
so thank you
the thing is more important to
union pacific than the safety of
our employees and the
communities that we serve that
ninety nine point ninety nine
percent percentage that that he
mentioned does not happen by
accident it does not happen by
luck it happens by dated day
looks at what we're carrying
ensuring that that we also keep
or track safe but that we also
have these partnerships in case
something were to occur and just
as as is information that ten
cars are built with layers and
layers of steel that basically
ensure that the product remains
in the tank car is something
should happen but again we know
the possibilities of the
possibilities but the benefit
here is that you don't want
these these commodities moving
by truck next to you on I ten
and you know that risk goes up
dramatically on a potential for
for an accident and we recognize
that we're the safest mode above
ground and we take that that
that that commitment and that
that responsibility from the
federal government very
seriously
next slide ok so stay with me
here I know that you've been
here a while but I think that
it's important that we focus on
this next topic which is black
crossings
union pacific does not want to
block
people from going across the
tracks
we were blocked yesterday at
industrial road and I made a
phone call right away as soon as
I I had some a long time and I
called our superintendent
announced what happened.
So the train was making a
delivery to one of the local
customers
that takes time that repairs
stopping we can't come in at
fifty miles an hour so in this
area the train has to deliver a
cars to the center that is
a
railroad the short line but we
have three companies that
invested their own dollars to
build their own real spir and
they are expecting our cars we
have to deliver those and
that is how some of the black
crossings occur so in this
experience that you've had here
over the last couple of days you
seen the growth with the complex
and all of the other
organizations that have have
located here and you've also
seen trucks when when roberts
commend that repairs it
increased to trucks and then of
course you've got the regular
cars and so now the sun we've
got a traffic situation
but I the good news about this
is that it is possible to have a
strong industrial economy added
mobility for drivers and
pedestrians it can be done
and that is by prioritising
public infrastructure around
real lines
several years ago we knew that
we were going to continue
growing in something that saw
and I encourage the county to
apply for federal funding for an
overpass ad industrial road
listen we've got a lot of trucks
coming in going it's only going
to increase
will you submit an application
for federal funding and they did
receive the funding to the turn
of thirty seven million dollars
a little bit above that are and
that is again the effort to try
to build the public
infrastructure before we need it
but this area has grown so much
that.
We're now having to quickly move
ahead and we're working with the
county they have designed that
over passed up to a thirty
percent design and we've given
them the green light to design
to sixty percent so they're
moving fast and and hopefully
you'll beat your way before that
that over passes build but
we certainly want to do our part
to make sure that that moves
ahead
but yes over passes are
expensive but there are other
solutions that can help
communities and I have put some
of these here
that includes the
picture off to the left it's a
it's a blinking yellow light
their basically said there's a
train at the crossing and that
sign is located eagle past texas
we interchange trains there are
with
the railroad and be the doesn't
us and so several blocks before
I can get to the crossing I see
that there there's a train out
the crossing and I can make a
better decision i'm going to
turn and take the overpass
that's one thing that can
benefit communities and then we
also see communities using
technology to let people know
which crossings are blocked
which crossings are open
allowing them to make better
decisions
and you know it's unfortunate
when communities are struggling
with black proceeds
and when we look at it it's it's
it's important to look at how we
got there
many times of road road was
there and then as a community
group the community city or
county came to the grill road
and said I want to build my road
across your rail line and we
said okay and put together an
agreement they could put the
road but any changes are any
maintenance that was needed by
the road had to be funded by
that road authority.
And if anything changed from the
road roads perspective and that
road needed to change they would
have to make those modifications
at overpass is another part of a
road and it's the communities
that that are responsible and
look forward into the future
that build great separations
that have that you topia of
where they have a strong economy
with industrial companies that
senate received their their
goods by rail but people can get
across attracts the city for
worth is a great example they've
got more over passes and they do
proceeds.
And when we look at the the
communities that struggle with
backages
there's one in particular where
we looked at okay there there's
a struggle with bike pricings
how many overpasses have they
proposed to us and it had been
decades since we received a
request for four
as to work with them aren't
agreed separation and overpasser
interprets but they did approach
is about a quiet zone let's
build him a first structure
because we are tired of hearing
the train horn and and we want
to silence those so we're going
to spend these millions of
dollars to outfit the cross
things so that we can stop the
train horns here we don't decide
where part zones are implemented
by the way it's the federal road
roaders administration that does
that so we'll have communities
approaches about all these other
things about working trues which
are important as long as they're
safely a safe distance away from
from the real life but it
requires a priority it requires
funding and the state of texas
made a historic decision this
past session and they passed a
law that establishes a great
separation funding program that
authorizes tech start to fund
roads that are either in cities
or counties that need over
passes or under passes
that is a first for many states
and I hope that other states
continue to to follow that model
because a lot of times it comes
down to funding and a lot of
times that where the real yards
are located are located in
humble communities and
communities that have probably
been overlooked for
infrastructure so I would
suggest that if I had one ask of
of a view
is not to provide funding for
operations.
We we don't need public funding
we will build our own rail lines
we build our own infrastructure
but I urge you to consider doing
something similar to ensure that
your communities are able to get
from point eight to point b
regardless of whether it trained
to stop to deliver a shipment
for a customer regardless if the
train had a mechanical problem
that is critical and I think
it's vital and and and probably
my my most important
ask of of communities especially
if they're struggling with black
crossings
next slide so
one of the benefits of rail is
that one we help
the public mobility by reducing
the number of trucks on the road
it takes three hundred trucks to
move the same mail on a freight
as one train and we're also four
times more fuel efficient so we
release
a lot of fewer emissions as we
go through we have the power to
move a lot of freight
and
it a gallon of fuel that that
that can move the freight five
hundred miles to some one gallon
a disor and and there that's the
the other public benefit is that
it allows these goods to move
without
parming the environment as much
as if these products were
traveling by truck
so without I appreciate your
time your effort to come here
and am happy to answer any
questions that you might have.
I think you covered it very ok
thank you so much for the
presentation both of you is very
and likely thank you
hold on we do have a question
okay representative sorry
I do have a question restriction
for kill this wasn't on the
agenda but can you just give us
a k on the port of one beach and
lack the impact on united states
a big with the tariff send me
imports just briefly so we are
currently in our quiet period
will be releasing our are
earnings report here shortly but
we've heard gerry talk about it
and I think it it it's something
that that that affects a lot of
businesses
where
the tariffs are basically a tax
on the consumer and companies
are are are looking to to build
facilities but they want to make
sure that that they're billing
it in the right locations we
continue to see growth we see
there's a lot of of need to move
the goods from long beach to to
decide of the country and we'd
continue to do that and provide
great service truck like service
to ensure that we are able to
meet those needs
a missure but is there I heard
as of now they're getting fewer
container shipments
you know i'd have to check those
numbers in circle back with you
on those.
Senator myerson's thank think it
was chairman miss basket are
missus being also rather mister
thank you so so much but the
presentation for the
relationship that your company
has with the state the um but
educate me a little bit does
union pacific up missus been as
a own track in mexico that's a
great question mister chairman
uh I sure masters that are great
question and out something I
should have covered union
pacific service all six rail
gateways to mexico but we do not
operate trains in mexico there
are
they have their own railroads in
a parcel and even passweener
changed with the federal max and
been in later though and some
other locations we we
interchanged with
cpkcs there was a merger and so
now you have sort of an off of
bets soup but we do not operate
in mexico but we obviously work
very closely with the mexican
real roads to ensure that these
products are moving quickly
simultaneously and an
efficiently
mister charles miss is been used
that the is there a
does mexico in the united states
share a rail line for example
can can someone drive a train
from the mexico in t and a
states on the same track
so
at this time there is
program that is based on
international crews which means
that proves from the mexico can
come across the bridge and
deliver the train to a short
distance away from the bridge
cause right now the trains have
to stop in the middle of the
bridge and and that when
cbp inspects
the customs and border
protection inspects every train
every row car and before they
can do that the.
Us based crew has to go to the
middle of the bridge
the mexican crew exits local
mode the us crew comes on the
local motive and then that is a
delay that
that is something that we want
to eliminate and that's
happening in a buster word
mexican crews can't move the
train
over to the united states we are
pursuing that
in in other gateways because it
has worked well but at this time
that's the only gateway that
that operates in that manner but
thank you mister so that gateway
so I guess describe it to me I
referred to your facility as a
translate facility what what do
you call it the facility that we
tour yesterday
that was that's an intermotal
terminal intermodal terminal
yesterday
so that's where the boxes
that are come by shipping or put
on trains
processes of matters and the
number would I describe
like a transloader or a you know
we're essentially trained
structured planes meet each
other and I describe it as like
a shoulder where you're on a
highway and then you get off on
the shoulder for a mile of
trained to load unloaded these
two get off on adjacent tracks
or isn't clugged the main track
and doesn't in peeve the flow
where
you say that there's a a port
and it's parcel this this
train traffic that that crosses
the border it crosses the border
where here incentive that is our
or in the city of what is
impossible it the there is a
border interchange in basel and
quarters
union pacific ambience of cross
trains through their bn has its
own track and we have our track
that the that will bring the the
trains to the bridge of came so
mister there's no.
Would there ever be a reason or
an occasion to build such a
such a place in santa fe as or
or the possible water
interchange this is kind of
there to stay there passo
parties interchanges is is there
to stay for for many reasons
first billions of dollars of
investment not just by
universities but the many
companies that that have been
there for decades they were as
well they can't pick up their
facility or their warehouse and
move it somewhere else so it's
important that we
have that continuity but we see
a lot of mexican traffic in some
of the disaster but it's like
the chillies they are trucked
across through a quarters and
then in two el parcel and they
come to the sanitaries a short
line and deliver the the chiles
there and then they're mashed up
into the product that is shipped
on you pacific to that you where
it goes into our favorite to
basketball sizes in all sources
that we love okay and I
understand thank you so much
thank you mister
president
thank you mister thank you
recall thank you
it was it was a really good
presentation I really
appreciate the work that you do
bomb though I would like to
especially see mr chair and
I really appreciate the
investment that union because
made
in my communities that in the
community college i'm glad to
know how many people have
graduated from the from the
academy and I look forward to
hearing about the expansion to
help about about that because
going to providing these type of
jobs is this track of training
for these jobs is is critical
and a so important to the
members of my community to give
the opportunity to get the
training that they need.
For a good ping jobs that will
that will help them help them in
their family sold I just wanted
to make any have a question to
jokes wanted to make a comment
that I appreciate the investment
that you need pacific has made
and I look forward to work with
the in the future and I look
forward to seeing what the what
the future brings with them with
a training thank you mister
thank you represent I think both
of you for your presentation
thank you mr shimmer from
donate community college
has kindly provided letters from
the students and
they make you tear up they make
it here up when you grew up like
I did and maybe some of you did
where
this is not just life changing
for you before your family and
you've got a lot of people here
who are talented and my favorite
part about this colleges that if
one does not have a good command
of the english language or a
good command of technology the
college will teach them
simultaneously so if people are
ready to work this community is
ready to provide the resources
to ensure that they have a great
paying job and stay here at home
thank you mister chair thank you
members for coming
thank you again members thank
you for your participation I
look forward to seeing you at
the next meeting
martin will get that information
of very soon unless you want to
show that now more to be
demanding in silver city damning
and sovereign city yeah
