We're gonna convene now
can be start
okay good morning everyone let's
get started
restart first with the having
introductions we're going to
start with representative jones
good morning everybody i'm
representative jennifer jones I
represent district thirty two
which is just west of here all
the way to arizona and it's luna
county hit all going part of
done yeah great to be here this
morning we had a wonderful
helicopter tour and got a aerial
visual of um the infrastructure
so excited about doing some good
work thank you.
Let's go to a
representative
i'm gonna have you just interest
yourself when you talk hi good
morning when is the
joy i'll agree a
from the west side of
alba kirki if you go to alba
kirky and you see the volcanoes
that's my district and it's just
wonderful to be back here.
Center of alley.
I'm new to the senate as you can
see I did forgot to turn on my
microphone but I was on the city
ca- album city council and I
served in the bureau county
commission so mostly it's local
experience but i'm very pleased
to be here up and I look forward
to this visit.
Good morning all when I was the
s
i'm cynthia bourago and I
represent the northwest masa of
albuquerque um former city
counselor former amount of
current flood control board
member in
if you go to alpha kirky can
visit me i'm over by cotton
would more thank you.
The.
Yeah.
Ok references
thank you mister chairman good
morning everyone my name is
relative I represent houses to
thirty four welcome to house
district thirty four
this is the most southern
portion of of the
of the district the district I
represent our represents has a
historical communities of the
schedules and regain procedure
line such a bit you know down
young and it's growing
communities of someone parking
something that's a I am very
honored to be here today and
mister charley to have a few
words that I have to have here
one of the first things before
we start I would like to if it's
okay with you mr chairman if we
can have a moment of science for
antonio alimon he was a local
sheriff's deputy who was killed
in in uh last week and in in
service to the community so if
it's okay with you mister chair
of moment a silence with that we
appropriate representative i'd
like everybody to stand for
that.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you mister chairman
deputy alabama was a member of
the community and he will be in
turn in one of our facilities
and someone park
good morning everyone thank you
for the tour taking the time to
visit my corner of southern new
mexico it's a privileged host
the transportation for such a
prosecutor submitting and to
show case the people in the
community is that to find this
district house district thirty
fourth will a promised red root
in the strong editions shaped by
diverse voices and driven by
hard working individuals who
believe in the power community
here you'll find successful
businesses that have gone from
the ground up skilled
professionals building careers
and young families investing in
our future american life here
with pride and purpose we're
also for fortunate to have
organizations that are deeply
committed to while being over a
community such as the south that
there is a trouble foundation
which plays a role in supporting
local causes and their work in
education community development
has made a lasting impact the
board in the soul association
continues to demonstrate its
commitment to the region not
only through economic
development through the bit but
the minimal meaningful
contributions that help school
children succeed ensuring that
they have the tools and
opportunities that they need to
read her full potential we're
also seeing growth in interest
from developers and business
leaders who recognize the
potential of this region
many bring with them sincere as
to see your commitment to long
term investment optionship
within the community such as
mister naperiod who will hear to
let from later and the borplics
and border plex digital assess
act assets.
Our public schools are lowbased
on the most decaded educators
who find anywhere teachers
principles and support stuff and
go above them beyond every day
to serve our students as they
are preparing our children not
just for economic success but
for lives of meaning and
contribution we're proud of
what's happening here district
thirty four we know we have
worked to do but we also know
what we're going and and we're
building the future that
reflects our values fairness
opportunity and real investment
in new mexicans thank you for
being here today we appreciate
your attention your leadership
and your partnership as we work
together to develop the
infrastructure that communities
like ours truly need thank you
mister chairman thank you
representative of the
representative person a lot of
left out that he holds a very
key roles at the legislature he
is our caucus chair and also he
is the vice chair of
transportation so what we
discuss here is near his heart
and he knows that well thank you
thank you mister senator mice
this year thank you mister
chairman my name is antonio
masters senator from district
twenty six which is west alba
kirky and it's a privilege to to
beer and be a be the vice chair
this this committee we have
seven dates throughout the
interim and two of the dates are
here in some in park so it's
great to kick off the interim
here we ah
the sentence that is a crossing
are el parcel which is really
the sister city of our below
it's taken to mexico and and
what's happening out here in the
desert is tremendous we uhm we
have a lot to be proud of in the
mexico where i.
What I think we should strive
for in the future is is is what
I call an economic way of
thinking you know we can create
markets we can create a future
we can what what the leadership
of this communities doing is
essentially taking a desert and
building economies from
uh from from those model systems
and arm and it's just tremendous
so anyway I can go on but it's
it's great to be here
look forward to learning from
all the leadership in this and
this part of the state and just
want to commend you cause
the folks here in some impact
reading latter mr chamic and can
live impact for lives
tremendously impactable lives
not only making a difference
here in this committee but that
the entire state so thank you
mister chairman district and so
my district is a west
albuquerque it hugs the boscare
up and down the course corridor
so it's it's urban in the north
and then and then dips into what
we what what we call and I would
cook it the south valley which
is very very rural driving
around selling park at if if
someone blindfolded you and and
through in a car and drove you
around someone argue with think
you're in the southwell so it's
it's it's beautiful thank you
mister chairman on my apology
such as the more thing that I
forgot
if on your way back home or if
you have time please drive down
historically mixed or twenty
eight there are breweries there
are wineries you'll get to see
the heart of district thirty
four or agriculture is to your
left into your right pick on his
king in donate county and we are
very proud of also over
agricultural community thank you
mister
thank you I have been on that
road represented is indeed
beautiful i'm representative art
delicates I represent the
district twelve which is I
always refer to it as the artist
saw valley so you are not
familiar with the south valley
the senator did reference it
if you imagine albert kirki
southern most part of itself and
berlio county which is our
county uh I am right roughly in
the middle of that that's why I
always see a represent the heart
of the south valley.
Proudly by the way proudly that
being said where it's our
pleasure to be here at some
center that is signed here at
the port and we look forward not
only to the dialog today from
our from our delegation from an
mbot but also from the guests
that we have so we're looking
forward to all of that and with
that I want to have a are our
organizer uh mister fishery into
some self answer.
Sure staff turning with the less
than a council service and lead
staff for this
area.
Thank you can do anything
without your guys we appreciate
you.
The.
Op yes and can you tell us who
you are back there with audio
vision
thank you so much.
At this time we're going to
start with the border highway
connector and other border
infrastructure projects around
the federal executive director
border authority and joseph
delaware such air board of
directors border authority.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The.
Good morning mr chairman members
of the committee i'm joe dela
rosa the chairman of the new
mexico bore authority first of
all welcome
and.
Would also I think is a matter
of housekeeping like to announce
the wifi password cause I think
some people are getting on on
the webcast and and kinda need
to to do that so.
Yeah.
And i'd also like to introduce
assistant county manager
jonathan macias and with your
permission mister chairman he'd
like to welcome us to southern
donate county and just say a few
words please proceed
think your chairman delaware so
in terminal delectors then
renewals me numbers run the
musius and I am the assistant
county manager for the county of
donator i've been serving the
capacity for about the last
three years and I wanted to be
here today to reinvigorate our
partnership not only with the
villages and townships and
cities within the counter doing
yanna but also to the state it
is with great pride that I sure
with you that actually grew up
in this community I grew up at
one on one spruce just down the
way over in someone park and the
vision that we're seeing now and
the opportunity to that is a
bound is not the same one that
the actual soft back then it's
true for those you that know me
I exist not only in this
community but also in the nearby
community of all parcel I have
roots into that waters and now I
fall in the love with somebody
in the north in albert so I say
that having said that we are
much more united than the
boundaries that we are aware of
and we are much more connected
especially when it comes to
economic development and the
things that are happening here
in the border can and truly do
mean economic development
prosperity for all of the state
and across the nation and it is
our hoping intent is we renew
our relationship with the new
mexico economic development
department and in the new mexico
border authority that we will
bring that prosperity and show
the rest of the county and
country what we can do so thank
you so much for being here.
Thank you mister chair my name
is get out of the federal
executive director of the new
mexico porter authority
I been under role for about a
year or albeit it'll be a year
in in an august
I was born in no password racing
quite as grew up in new mexico
went to new mexico military
institute for my high school and
then did my
uh my degree out of any misu
production and been leaving the
new mexico since are.
Basically two thousand and two
when they went into new mexico
military institute.
Welcome welcome to today to
southern new mexico to donate to
something that is after someone
park but welcome to the mexican
world authority this is an
agency that is in charge of
developing the the border of new
mexico with you why weren't
sonora
counties from your county he
down goluna with report of
entries until it be wells
colomboos and sent up the risk.
We we have some some members
from our or partners from mexico
that I want to introduce we have
actually supported benefit
directly into me in the subway
my done now the electorate
several economic money should be
as you have quite us
when I said it to the by
national affairs when you should
fill up with us and we also have
a representative from from
canada glass
and then from the state of
chicago we have to let the party
be natural first of all of the
second thirty other the second
that yeah they support
economical and start you and
later we will be joined by
africa's a better who comes from
the second thirty analysts and
it's exciting they will have an
afraid of making cannot as well
as console general my would
issue about a council in el
basel from mexico we also have a
reason matter why isa who is
there substitute ten center
concrete lawyer in the mexican
senate and welcome everyone and
it's a pleasure to have you all
here.
Okay also we we have my strategy
they do a son cheese there
technical secretary for the
commission that center one cut
of later precise in the same way
northern border efforts ah
commission
just briefly on behalf of not
only the committee but the
statement mexico we also welcome
our guests as well thank you
so we're gonna move forward with
with my presentation
sorry just reporting again for
people that need to access wifi
sometimes you have connectivity
I know you need messages it's a
n mba like new mexico border
authority and m b a two zero two
one yes of the password
and they're on the guest wifi
that on the gs wifi and nmba
twenty twenty one lower case
and.
Right sorry
connectivity is important
so I would like to start wait
with some data from the new
mexico border plex
it's it is it is booming not
just something that I said but
also columbus from twenty twenty
three to twenty twenty four
something that is a part of
entry total trade value grow
drew from twenty eight billion
to forty billion that's
important and exports just going
back and forward on these port
of entry that's a forty three
percent increase from twenty
from twenty twenty three to
twenty twenty four.
Column was for a total pre value
group from three hundred
thirteen million to three
hundred and ninety five million
that's a twenty five twenty six
percent increase in just one
year on our bolt on our two poor
ventures that do commercial
traffic
so that the explosive growth is
is one of the fastest across the
country on.
On one when speaking of total
trade value
but or current infrastructure
it's limited to the increase
that we're seeing on on the on
the total trade value that is
coming across the or
parliamentaries every day
we are we serve us
and as a we we do.
I must have of what said I also
poor eventually does on total
trade value they did on twenty
twenty four they leave our round
eighty seven billion.
But they have around eight
commercial lanes here we only
have two and one or seven
oversights are commercially so
we're doing
what we can would want to be
have so
and that's just speaking on the
on the poor entry there's
projects for more initiation in
the sacromo side that the state
of tuan in in in second listen
talk about on later
presentations
but it's it's not just a poor
entry also or roads and in
projects that we have for the
area
we have to invest from water to
was wider
transportation and we we have we
have a several projects one of
them being the border harry
connector
which will connect santa
derasa to all basel the word how
connector is an eight mile
quarter that will connect
directly to someone park and
eventually connect to twelve
bassel they were a furied
together with n DO t.
We did the the first phases
which was there the feasibly
study the environmental fight
and preliminary sign and we
currently at ninety percent of
final design.
This this project will serve
with the closure of both of
breach of the americas to
commercial traffic we expect to
see an increase of our about
twenty to thirty percent of
commercial trucks commercial
trust going northbound in breach
of the americas goal from four
hundred to five hundred trucks
per day and will look into get
at least.
Like two hundred or half of that
traffic true
some that there is that there is
a currently does around seven
hundred trucks.
More or less per day.
So the increment will be to a
thousand trucks that's the
expectation that's not including
then you're shoring effect in
every
all the companies that want to
invest.
Not only quite as but also no
basel and in in some at the
reserve.
So this will create more traffic
one of our partner entry but a
more traffic on new message for
one thirty six there were a
hurry connector if we finish the
for a hour connector.
We will be at fast it's faster
faster route to all basil saving
up to forty minutes on
transportation to get to all
basel then we also we are also
doing a uh the border high
connector face to study which we
have a funding agreement with a
password po.
Which I had one go will speak
about it later today to select
the consultant to look at the
best uh
to trend if I have hotspots on
both new mexico and texas that
the the traffic from the what
water her connector will create
on song and park and we're still
basel
also the state of on the last
year's has as invested on on
beep been doing the cheap
highway it's doing the people
who chair intersection
improvement study which is
underway we did the the
international object but
operates to the donation account
the jet per hearing so that
there is a we have the
overweight oversight scored or
son I now saw their union
pacific intermodel facility
which creates
transportation transportation
and logistical hop for not just
for southern new mexico but also
for another the northern part of
the state of your and in west
excession or basil.
This is the alternative for the
border having connector
will connect santa
on the left a lower hand the
poor of entry and connect to
someone park on as you see just
below where it says more to have
connected is a highway at a
forty a four lane roadway coming
from to up quite as.
Two side here anymore the word
how connector will be a version
of that
border land highway.
The.
Then you might should water
thirty has
different projects on both are
doing you and on dinner county
longer county and you know
county we currently have their
construction this I that that is
a little bit it worked water
tank would so which is a one
million water tang which is
under construction at thirty
five percent we're currently
doing the new mexico were
authority parking lot which is
just next uh next to these
building it's a it's at forty
percent their commercial parking
lot which is on the west side
from this building we're looking
to to start late the summer the
border hire connect professors a
b and c are completed face to
final design is some ninety
percent design.
The water how connect for face
to study the consultant what
selected this at the terrace for
a rental morning station
feasibly study gsa finalize that
study we having had a chance to
look at that study we have asked
for that study the federal
federal administration hasn't we
having get access to to that
fish even though the study but
we continue to work with gsa cbp
and our mexican partners on on
on the more any station and
expansion of this that there is
a second anymore port of entry
and in luna and hit out county
we have columbus **** takeaways
water pun constructions at
ninety percent the column was
flood control project or birm
the phase one construction is
already under construction at
ten percent face to is there the
same is complete and we we have
AAA torfal on on the face to for
face three contractors selected
in in cons- construction is
except to start on on summer of
this year and then
we we want to thank you for for
a wording of for these are
fiscal year twenty twenty six on
the past uh legislative session
that the one point seven million
for their column was water
storage thank that will start
construction on this year.
So the border is ready i'm not
the only one saying that we have
you will see presentations from
our partners and you will see
also presentations from from
from our printers in the past
but don't you know county this
on the park
they ba we we are ready we we
need we need we need investments
on this area.
To to keep up with what you
always do in two hours for
thirteen years in a row has been
the top exporter state of mexico
and we're looking to attract
more businesses to to the
waterplace to widest huawei to a
basel but to new mexico while
southern new mexico
columbus is working right now on
on an industrial parking and and
we being great partners with
them but we're we're looking
there's a lot of opportunity uh
ran out to grow or or or state
and
what we do here benefits are
state it doesn't just benefit
southern new mexico it creates
straight opportunities to always
keep to sound affair in all the
other counties and see these are
along the states
we want to prioritise capital
alien for infrastructure funding
for for hating back border
projects like a bore harry
connector and an in other
investing in the border is
strategic we been working we
want we been wanting to change
it the rarity of the border just
just being chaotic it's it's the
land of opportunities
as a person that grew up in the
border I know
what we are contributed to
do chower capital to ask in and
to san affair it's great we just
need more investment on
transportation
for for communities.
The.
All of these is being done with
a big national beach
later today for at which huawei
and the mexican federal warming
you will see that the the plan
make you go what they're doing
and what their planning to do in
sacred or anymore
I just want to say that we've
been working really really close
with you of wireless I always
with one asset to assisting to
to all of her meetings and
inviting us to their meetings
the same way you'll let the by
the yeah and consult my
motivator um we not not too long
ago we were in santa fe we stand
up to some area and and console
battery shipping sign
we are supportive solve and now
meant you
initiative to more nice I could
only a project and.
And and and and we want to
continue those relationships
with our partners here at the
border
and
like I was mentioned in this
it's it's it's a churbishing of
the border
we want to keep growing you will
see the projects that they have
how they are lane with what
we're doing here
with the me and l and l password
po to to planning organizations
that are building
sent that there is a solompark
southern new mexico or baselines
you have wireless.
Because that's yes
so so thank you mr chair
I have a another presentation
that talk a little bit more
about the borough highway
connector and some of the
transportation issues in the
area which is I think this hand
out which which fooks should
have but before I do that it
also like to recognize my fellow
border authority board members
on the that are with us today
and so we have christian harvey
are from luna county.
We have emily gorgovich from
hedalgo county of the lords
brigaria
alex seada here from santa testa
and they don't know if there's
another anyone else but i'd also
like to recognize a one of my
bass as secretary ricky sorna
from the dot is with us.
And I think maybe those are just
my shout outside how to make
sure I cover cooking
so they thank you for indulging
me in that mister chairman
so I know that we're focused on
transportation infrastructure
revenue in this committee and so
but i'd like to just talk a
little bit about is
to follow up and what harado
said we have the ingredients
right now to really make
something happen that santa tasa
and it's been in the works for a
long time a lot of folks have I
think guided the investments as
you were driving down yourself
very nice I think concrete
highway but I think you also
have the opportunity to see a
lot of construction especially
on the texas site and there's a
lot of work and a lot of money I
think going into their area
which is really i've been driven
by uh for bliss which is grown
exponentially but also a lot of
their border trade and so as
we've continue do I think see
some growth
under developed infrastructure
continues to be one of the
challenges we did with your help
and donate a county's
partnership secure twenty
million dollars that is now
uh providing a cargo runway that
was something that was important
to for their further developed
the foreign trade zone we need
more investments at the port of
entry so we're working with our
federal partners to strategize
on how potentially using some
sort of a public private
partnership we can secure
funding to modernize an expand
the poor and again and
consultation with the plans
regionally including with our
partners in mexico which I think
you'll hear a little bit more
about but we we really need to
kind of I think direct
the resources and be strategic
about it and so to that end
about a year and a half ago the
border authority with the
economic development department
hired the arrowhead centure a
new mexico states center for
more economic development along
with wilson and company.
To start working on a strategic
infrastructure assessment so
that study which is nearing its
final kind of draft and in
basically two phases is looking
at what are
the infrastructure needs from
water wastewater utilities and
transportation uh to help kind
of grow the economy and also
analyzing from the economics
kind of perspective what the
return on those investments will
be so as we look at some of the
needs for transportation so
again highlighting what are some
of the the transportation
investments it can be made that
have a demonstrable effect on
commerce and in business you see
some examples here so one would
be to take new mexican one
thirty six
and constructed to six travel
lanes are with great separations
that strategic intersections I
think I also disorganize orange
hovidy and members of the other
time or here chief engineer they
would contact I think I saw I
mean what they're looking at is
when we're doing everything from
these huge windblades and heavy
equipments we're also have
intersections were folks or you
know on a motorcycle in a
passenger vehicle kind of
intersecting with that and so is
we're seeing more traffic and
and growth.
Where should you actually
separate those whether it's an
overpass or an underpass I still
don't know what makes something
an overpassed under past like if
you're going over a highway or
under it you know I I but anyway
so the the transportation
experts are looking at that and
I think we'll shortly have some
recommendations on which
intersections are going to need
that improvement
i'm not an engineer but I think
you know as you look at the
intersection of new mexico to
seventy three which is make not
the main corporate kind of
developing and sometime park
without intersects with new
mexico one thirty six is
probably i'm going to write
pretty high i'm on that list
there are also some secondary
roads of what donate a county on
that we identify his potentially
needing i'm expansion and some
costs associating with that and
then of course our big ticket
item on which you heard a little
bit about in her artist
presentation is in new mexico
border highway connector which
connects to mexico one thirty
six and this area I to the
community summon park and
eventually texas so to kind of
go into a little more detail on
that so again that's the eight
mile link in this community
there are some benefits and and
the consideration said I think a
relatively intuitive and an
obvious are but the big you know
thing here is that you know we
started this in twenty nineteen
so this legislative body with
the governor support
allocated five point four
million dollars that took us
from the feasibility stage that
could you build a highway you
know through this core door in
the down the may son over a
rabble track
and what would that cost
to basically getting used to
where we are today which is a
ninety percent design and the
hope of a beginning construction
shortly but when we first kick
this off there is an estimate of
a round eighty million dollars
which you know voting being
proactive with the support of
the bore authority and and
everyone could have been all of
our partners applied for a usd
of.
And for a grant
and was successfully awarded are
forty five million dollars and I
think
you know maybe the request was
was pretty close to the forty
five million dollars that we
were successful when in
obtaining.
The problem is between basically
that twenty twenty
one number and where were out
today with ninety percent design
are the project is closer to a
hundred and seventy million
dollars so that's created a
pretty large funding gap
and
the
funding has you know some
strings attached to it which
requires basically obligation
and the state having its
contribution to the forty five
million dollars no later than
september thirtieth of this year
so that's kind of you know where
we're at now um we have
kind of a a timeline of what we
would like to see you know and
in terms of the future of this
project so the obligation of
those funds which is a process
between go to the federal
highways administration and they
are passive medical police and
planning organization which will
hear a little bit about how the
relationship between you to the
npo and the state of new mexico
generally works are but the
right of way acquisition should
be complete
relatively soon where in the
final stages of real
certifications and an agreements
and then this construction sat
for letting at the end of this
calendar
into next I guess calendar year
construction is I think two year
approximate time frame and we
are also simultaneously i'm a
several mentioned are working
with the el passon po on
the the next phase so what
happens once we get the highway
billed into someone park and the
long term goal or the the goal
is to have
essentially that project
starting when this project is
finishing so if we kind of time
this correctly will have the ph
and the the design complete as
the highways opening up between
santa terasa and and some park
and then you start on the
connection from someone park.
I'm to texas so
and then lastly i'll just say
that this is kind of what we
were talking about and we have
the report and more information
from
the the team at new mexico state
but essentially for the dollars
that are invested in
transportation you got a return
on investment which is
calculated both by the number of
jobs and economic outfits and
and i've got you know doctor
kremer winning him here to to
build me out if I you know start
getting some of this wrong but
you know it basically shows you
here what tax revenues are and
what the the differences between
if you do invest in
transportation and promo growth
what that creates and what
happens if you don't and then
the second kind of graphic there
shows and what they've
calculated is the strategic
targets for investing in the
border to create this growth I
am so it's around ninety million
dollars a year and needs for a
water infrastructure another
hundred and sixty hundred fifty
hundred sixty million eight year
for wastewater I development and
then the transportation
improvements
you know I I think are a
combination of this kind of
smaller projects of expansion
but also the big ticket items
and then some drainage
improvements always accompany
you know this type of work so
these numbers are big you know
and I think there can be a
little bit scary and maybe
intimidating right like are you
going to really be able to come
up with you know all of this
money in on the yearly basis and
I think there are some ways to
do that so if you focus on you
know kind of revenue
and you know we have some big
project some of you I think have
heard of the border plex digital
um infrastructure campus that I
think you'll be hearing more
about this afternoon which is
going to generate some revenue
for the area I think we could be
strategic about how we return
some of that and and make sure
that it's growing up the rest of
the infrastructure here to
continue to see those economic
opportunities.
Like job creation and again tax
revenue that's generated
so again i'm happy to to provide
the committee with the link to
that report which I think has a
lot of useful information we
also I think in the previous
presentation had a scam code and
information on how to access the
highway uh border highway
connector website which has a
lot of information including the
different alignments that were
considered and and so on so
without I think all conclude and
I don't know donate a county
jonathan if you have anything
else you'd like to add and then
I could think we can take some
questions chairman dollar or
said the only thing I would add
for the benefit of the committee
is that we were very active
during the legislative session
that we all survived together
but sixty days was a lot and
would that being said we
understand the interconnectivity
not only between infrastructure
but also the subsurface work
that we can do whether it be
trying to put in conduct or be
able to expand the necessary are
infrastructure related to water
and waste water because we are
at the preemited place in the
industrial part to be able to
welcome that new growth working
and lock step with the state we
also were instrumental I myself
as well as our economic
development
director denies carter worked on
the codrafting of hb nineteen
which was the trade port bill
and I think to one of your
committee members we are at the
forefront of being able to take
advantage of that as well as was
a site selection initiatives
from the enemy d d department so
we are not only looking at this
committee for supporting but
also to see what we can bring it
all together so that we can make
not just incremental changes but
actually do true
transformational change for far
too long you looked at us at the
county in terms of being able to
move projects along at
increments of a hundred thousand
dollars hundred and fifty but as
you've seen some of the costs
over here they're going to take
multi million dollars
investments to truly put us at
the forefront of with the nation
is looking at to be competitive
and with that I think that's the
only thing I would mention
because we're here and we're
ready to.
Execute.
The.
Thank you members questions
represent it.
Thank you mister chair thank you
I first toured here and twenty
sixteen with during pachet going
it's amazing nine years later
what's going on
my question and joe you referred
to a public private partnerships
and of course do tease in the
room you guys are in the room
can you extend that it's part of
the trade port
house bill nineteen the actual p
three build doing a framework
hasn't been passed in the last
eleven years can you expound on
that it just seems this is the
right person in the state for
really utilizing
um AP three structure
thank you madam chair I met
mister chair madame terror
representative i'm guaranteed.
I agree I think that's this is
the best place you could
probably develop AP three model
it happens all up and down the
us mexico border from two wanted
month amotos they're doing it
are basically in every other
community other than I think in
the state of new mexico I think
we applied the trade ports
development act and that is I
think the closest we've come to
earth and comprehensive p three
model that will facilitate
investment here
you know we've been having
conversations with nab bank
which has also been looking for
a long time to get a footholder
new mexico and cooperate on a
under development project and so
they actually have two to three
hundred thousand dollars and
grant money available to do
research in the p three needs so
could be everything from the
enabling legislation and what
would be needed to basically
finance a project in addition to
the like revenue streams i'm
such as potentially working to
come from any deal way and
inspection facility which will
see in the tour this afternoon
which is located just an
airfield because there are
revenues collected for something
called the border special fuels
permit on which financially
could potentially finance
bonding or another kind of
provider revenue stream are to
something for app three are but
I think the trade ports
development acts the border
authority actually has.
Sp three type legislation as you
know of providing oversight to
the border authority in the
border development act that has
never been exercise but I think
when we were going through the
session and the question was
asked how maybe the border
authority would interact with
the trade ports development
acton and the the committee
that's going to be set up I
think there is direct cymetry
there and so I think uh as that
gets set up and we start moving
forward there may be it need to
develop or redevelop the border
development act to kind of
better capture what's in the
trade ports development act and
so that's something that I think
we need to analyze as how on the
public private.
Elements of those two things can
work together
thank you so much and keep
whispering in the governors here
for the thirty day thank you.
Representative of johns.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you all so much for your
commitment to developing the
border and you've always been in
columbus when needed and and
appreciate your focus there and
I know that you know we're
focusing on
senator satellite that
I always have questions about
about how it affects my district
I was shocked today when I I was
in the helicopter and I saw the
the port i've been over here but
i'd never actually driven down
to the court.
And the difference between the
columbus port columbus and polos
any millions of dollars an
investment um that have been has
been made there is so
different than I really thought
I would see a similar port but
it's just not there so I mean
obviously with the commerce that
goes on here there's a real need
for that.
Uhm I I have a question make me
or may not be appropriate but um
i'm curious to know how much of
an investment in in the actual
port structure that you see and
columbus was financed refunded
by federal funds rather than any
state contribution
so
thank you for that question mr
chair representative journal the
interesting thing is I think and
to the wells was actually the
first project to be redeveloped
you know several years ago and I
think it's because it was the
easiest one in the whole US
mexico order for them to can it
come in and reconfigure and then
it lead the gsa i'm to columbus
and that project was entirely
financed by the federal
government um I believe it
started with an eighty
million dollars price tag and
ended up costing I think closer
to a hundred million when it was
all i'm set and done are but you
know it's
you know started to their serve
since it opens like in their
early nineties is basically stay
the same there hasn't been a a
huge investment or an infusion
of federal dollars and I think
that's recognized now by the
general services administration
which operates it and customs
and border protection which is
also has ranked at all as one of
their top priorities for future
investment whether or not we're
going to be able to get the type
of federal funding for this
project like we did with
columnists I think is unlikely
is what we're hearing especially
because the bridge of the
america's projects are that was
kind of reference I think the
npo will talk about received
around seven hundred million
dollars to basically do that
project and they're kicking off
and I think you know we're
basically at the end of federal
funding lane for that to
basically be completed I think
before we would even you know be
in a position but we have an
excellent relationship with our
congressional delegation in our
offices and so and a horrar
though and and I I know also
with us today.
Is the former executive director
of the border authority market
graham who during his ten year
also was a a big advocate we're
trying to advance i'm finding
for the federal port and so that
those conversations are still
there but I think the
opportunity for.
You know AP three and getting
some sort of a an infusion of of
non federal funds whether it's
financing through nat bank or
again um you know a concession
of some sore you know it's
probably what we're going to
need to do in order to to get a
port that looks like what you
saw other places.
Yeah thank you for that.
I am
I have lights a questions
actually i'll try to make it
concise here
the bridge of the americans
america's closure how long is it
anticipated that that will be
closed
so they actually
mister chair represent jones
they've actually decided to
permanently close the crossing
the commercial traffic so it'll
have a temporary it'll.
Have lane closures impacting a
passenger and pedestrian traffic
but they're going to keep that
continuous during the full
construction period a commercial
traffic will close
may twenty twenty seven and
it'll be close permanently at
that point so those trucks all
of that congress is going to
have to find somewhere else to
go
again with our partners in
mexico that's concerning in that
you know there are several
places located right across the
border from bridge of the
americas in that area and
there's trucks are going to have
to move somewhere else through
the city to get reach another
port and without and I know
again with the institution
I know we call it immediate for
a reason okay
as I was going to try to get you
to those letter letters correct
but you know there's going to
need to be I think some regional
transportation and investments
on that side improve
intersections and get the
commerce out to places like
something to these are but short
answer is it'll be a permanent
closure starting in twenty
twenty seven
thank you thank you mr chair yes
I think really concerns me
because
it with more pressure on santa
teresa I see the need to do the
real need to develop the
columbus port.
And I know i'll ready we hear
over in colombus that a lot of
times we lack the we lack the
personnel not the infrastructure
we have but maybe the personal
inspectors and so forth to
really move that commercial
traffic through especially
agricultural traffic but we hear
is that when there's a backup
here of commercial traffic
especially agriculture that it
really limits the ability for
trucks carrying crops carrying
produce to
to do that successfully because
if you have a crop you have a
truck full of onions are
attractful of whatever it might
be sitting in the hot son
waiting to get through the port
for hours is is just not
feasible at your produce writes
and so there's there's going to
be a demand put on the entire
new mexico and by the way I have
two ports two of the three ports
about it in new mexico which is
makes me very proud but no
developing that columbus port is
going to be it seems even more
uh important and do you see it
that way.
So mr chair representative jones
I think yes I mean that that's
the short answer we see a lot of
I think opportunity not just for
a sentence to lesser but
actually for
columbus and and even antelope
walls and so to that end we just
uh executed an amendment with
the economic development
department
to receive two hundred thousand
dollars and funding for a luna
headargo county i'm kind of
calling it a kind of consistent
economic assessment to kind of
look at what the resources are
that currently exists that we
can kind of promote and focus on
to to kind of attract more
industry but also again what are
some of the strategic
investments that can be made
aren't to kind of also grow
traffic but also at the
industrial park um you know that
the village of columbus and luna
county have had planned for a
long time that you know the big
burn project that they're doing
down there is going to
essentially protect you know for
those investments so there
there's definitely a lot of
potential and we're going to
a start I think focusing on how
we can you know be more
strategic and effective in in in
supporting that growth
thank you thank you mister chair
and um yeah that phase two of
the bone project
that nine million dollars is
crucial there's nothing else
it's more important for moving
forward on columbus um I just
have another quick comment uh
hopefully it's quick.
You know we over there at
columbus halloween port we
really wanted to see what was
needed and what was what were
the desires on the other side of
of our border in terms of what
it were the demands what what
would cause them to use the port
more and how much demand really
was there for that so we we took
a trip i'm sure you know about
that we took a trip a few weeks
ago and met with um business
owners elected officials I got
to meet with to the wall and
state representatives
community members the mayor of a
quite um
yeah
yeah so and found that um what I
what I got out of all of that
was there is a big demand for
the columbus port to be
developed and not only that but
and senator as well we are
behind the arizona were behind
texas california if we don't
invest now the timing is right
they will find other ways to get
through they'll invest in other
areas and I and I think you know
the the other states will as
well were behind and I just
wanted to point that out the it
really is crucial so I
appreciate you being here and
all of the work that you do I
also want to quickly think and
the border authority
representatives from my district
commissioner christian hervey
and emily goycovic thank you
guys for being here appreciate
you thank you mister chair.
Representative but
thank you mr chair
I just want to think everyone
first of all that is here today
and i'll be insights um
when I was
a flying over this morning I
saw nothing but opportunity
but
mister chair I would just also
preface that with you know if
you build it they will come I
mean I i'm a professional
planner that's what I did for
twenty eight years.
And
you know in looking at all of
that vastness of land and then
also looking out the current
development
one of the thoughts that I had
mister chair was is there a
master plan for all of this
development
in joniana county and.
And the answer that I got was no
and that very much concerned me
mister chair
when I think about how we
develop mesa
in alba cookie which was vast
land as well only had a at the
time only had one way in and out
and then we eventually built
university boulevard um.
With the state the sitting in
the state and cooperation but I
just my thought was you know.
We don't want to become another
houston without proper planning
especially planning that it's
very strategic for you know
industrial commercial housing I
mean providing all of that for
the future cause that's how I
see and I see it as the future
of this area and I only got a
glimpse of it this morning.
Um
actual my first time not now
pass over in.
Someone park.
Um but I I literally saw nothing
but opportunity out there.
And and and the relationship mr
chair between you know mexico
and hassle and
or texas and new mexico.
But I
it very much concerns me and and
you may want to comment on this.
If there are.
Develop master plans.
So mr chair i'm going to to
defer to the county in the
second but I I will just say.
We we did funds in our working
on what we call the strategic
master plan infrastructure
master plan for this area so
you know it's it's as developers
have come in it's been a
happening kind of peace mill so
each development is been kind of
approved independently of a
larger kind of vision of what
the area should look like so we
have created a stakeholder group
and brought together different
you know kind of rolls from
transportation and economic
development and the utilities
peace and then the the private
land owner piece to assemble
kind of a vision for the area
and so that is kind of the
foundation now I think for a
master plan that I think you
know the county can con can
speak to but I think once I
share that document with you
you you're kind of get a grass
for where we're what we're
trying to accomplish their with
with doing exactly what you're
saying preventing you know
growth that then creates
problems down the road where you
have residential places next to
warehousing where there's trucks
cuting in the school buses can
get through and you know all of
those sorts of things and they
were hoping to avoid it again
i'll defer to the county to
speak a little more about the
planning practices
thank you terminal chairman
delicates and report ago thank
you so much for pointing that
out and good to see again I
believe we cross past that the
new mexico energy supposedly i'm
so good to see a friendly face.
I think there are a lot of
things that we've been doing
well at the county and in the
city new mexico but in an
opportunity to share some
vulnerability there are some
things that we've not been doing
right and one of those master
planning efforts the likes of
which you pointed out other
communities are doing is one of
the strategic initiatives that
we did identify in the past
probably here or two what it
happened is that there had been
an enormous smarter growth
actually out within the urban
court and outward proximal
outside the city of los cruces
there been a little bit of a
sleepy gine situation down here
on the border and there had been
plenty of stores that have been
helping push the narrative but
to some degree of the counting
me to second or ship and we are
doing that in terms of looking
at masterplanning efforts we
also do control the
unincorporated unincorporated
areas through our community
development department and we
are being very strategic and
intentional with what is going
on down here but we are also
looking at it is baseline is
needing to look at the utility
prep because that is kind of
part of the opportunity for
flourishment and vibrancy down
here when we talk about economic
development I also think about
quality of life you know the
other side of that and you will
see that a many of our
commission meetings we are
pushing back with developers
that are giving us a painted
picture of are you topian and
then not submitting the same
plans that design so we're
making sure that we push back
where is appropriate so that we
don't end up with some of the
issues and to somebody that grow
up in this community you see
where it is a bit of a patchwork
and we want to try to avoid that
the last thing i'll say is that
in an opportunity for let's see
the big brother of the state to
hold this accountable that is
where they came in and said
we've given you enough time now
we're moving forward with the
master planet which is the
result of this wilson company
initiative it also goes
alongside a million dollar grant
that the county was successful
in obtaining with the US DO t
under their build american
bureau and we are also looking
to implement parts of those but
we wanted to make sure that we
transulate it for the true needs
of the community and that we
weren't in advertently telling
a.
Three part story now we're all
telling the same story and we
all have the same needs and we
look forward to executing that
in and bring in more prominence
to it in the future
and we present if
there's also the the water
master plan that was less
updated at twenty twenty one by
the ot both the mexical
department of transportation and
the board authority participate
in in the g w she j w c join a
working committee put together
by sicd of the mexican feral
government and use t and we've
been in cut a communication with
and i'm duty to update that
border master plan and to make
it truly by national by natural
water mister plant that were
some of the.
Issues that came up at the jwc
insane devil last december so
we're looking to update that but
mr plan and and make it truly by
national we just stay up to hour
and obviously that the or
mexican partners and mister
terra thank you for those
answers and you should be
running for mayor or something
like that I think I think it's
really important that
you know when we talk about
sustainability of communities
that these plans need to be
integrated at some level
because and you know and
remember I was I that's my my
thinking is
you know we don't want people to
have to drive thirty miles
across town to get to their jobs
and me we need to be thinking
various strategically mr chair
and members
in terms of you know
live work play where you are
sort of and that helps
environmentally helps with a lot
of different you know planning
our bus systems it helps and
planning our water systems
and our road systems and i'm i'm
glad to hear that you you guys
are thinking about this but I
think that at some we don't and
I know developers don't want to
hear from planners because
developers want to build what
they want to build
you know but at some level we
need to insure that when we're
building communities that we are
creating pedestrian pathways
that we are creating bike lanes
that we are creating you know a
a sustainable community it's
kind of like an organization or
gannic view I guess but I just
put down on the table mister
chair I think that's an
important thing that underline
as this community grows that
were you really you know.
Take that will by the horn I
guess you could say and and and
make sure that it grows in a
very sustainable way
second thing that I wanted to
mention mister chair is last
night
and we all got settled and we
were sitting in the lobby uhm
senator myester and
representative chair delicates
and I were talking about the
roadways into this area and
um
when I traveled we were talking
about how we had to go through a
parcel to get ten new mexico and
I just thought that like it
didn't computer my brain even
when I was reading it on the map
I was like holy cow I have to go
and I called I was joking with
our chair about that I was like
if I end up somewhere else to
come fine me
but seriously it was good to see
that you guys are looking at one
thirty six
expounding that roadway I heard
some rumblings this morning
which you didn't mention was
four or four I guess
which
and I realize when you're
carrying goods and services you
know you want to be on the trade
routes I understand that but it
just seemed sort of ironic to me
and I just say this out loud is
that
these roadways are not in new
mexico that we have to
circumvent new mexico to get
here and I realize that's a
federal designation but.
By the same token it just seems
to me like.
At some level you know we need
to be thinking about how these
roadways.
Carry you know the goods and
services on the freeways but
also how we can connect those
roadways and I didn't travel
through mercea so I didn't get
to see that roadway but.
You know I would encourage us as
a state of new mexico to really
be thinking about how we.
Encourage some of those roadways
as well so thank you without
mister chair
thank you represent a lot of
thank you is returner thank you
john for presenting your very
good information thank you I
appreciate that the work that I
was gone into it
I would like to ask so mister
chair
either mister
we haven't just down the street
as the largest.
Uh call across between the
united states and mexico.
And you know that's part of
economic development that's part
of what we are inside of the
restaurant so are there any
updates mister chair gentleman
as far as this
screw worm situation.
Thank you mister representative
latter so.
The new world screw worm came
into mexico back in november
around tens giving the border
the border close all for many
months reopened around late
february then reopen.
Ah and then was close again on
me but when he'd reopened in in
in february they only reopened
certain ports one of them being
said that that is a as you
mention is that the biggest
cattle port in the united states
bought both south border in
north order on the southward
rupers and sixty percent in the
north and and both water
represents twenty five percent
of all the cuddle cattle that
comes into the united states as
columbus specifically was close
all the way since november
then it reopened two weeks ago
last week and then he was close
your street days later.
The.
Mexican authorities have been
working with uh using a to to
help
uh contain the the screw warm
down in southern mexico
last week there was a new case
about a hundred and fifty miles
north of the containment so on
that both are senate and and
using it had to be working on um
there's we been supportive of
opening the the border again
because it would be represented
to new mexico and and a new
mexicans are.
For columbus is that the most
traded company commodity on on
that port of entry and he
trickled zone all the way to uh
transportation a tracking
companies
custom brokers restaurants
convenient stores we will be in
in contact with with us day and
doctor timing howard a juicy a
hearing that the lead with the
originally and for the state we
we normally
let them use our offices we have
some of your space here for them
um they come used our conference
room and then they were granted
around seventeen extracted
extractive nations for said that
they are sat column to reopen
column was and douglas and then
part of that reopening plan
included opening douglas and
then this week so these monday
was supposed to be opening
colombers.
And then next month they were
supposed to be opening something
there as a this all just
happened last week ah we worked
together with the young and I
had to see how we can help but
at these moment it's it's it's
up to both agencies sent as he
can and you as yet to come up to
what they want to do and how
they want to move forward with
these we understand for example
south texas is really concerned
since it's right now the screw
worm is only like three hundred
miles from their border so it's
something that we also have to
just start looking at add
options are on and how to invest
on lapse to create those fly
site uh I I think both center
lukan and senator hangrich ah
partner would representative and
I mean congressman tony gonzalez
too to do some
investment on on the west excess
to have some flies available for
what's excess and new mexico.
Thank you for that I appreciate
that now misreturned I hope that
if they do plan on expanding the
others labs for research that
they will consider our area
because I think we're you know
just down the street does on the
road here you know that that we
have that major countercrossing
and I believe that you mexico
could play a crucial role in a
and getting that liable
providing those services and
getting that dark that the
science behind it though we know
that the externalise the mail
prize and that there's a small
process that goes through it and
so and I appreciate the update
so if you if we have any say
whatsoever any input in that
process I trust that uh your
agency won't be able to do that
for us and have to keep for us
and have that impossible meeting
you mexico
I just want to have mister
huawei and so not our.
Two states that it happened the
highest level of animal health
in in in mexico that's where we
get more most of the cattle they
don't have a second case they're
it's to stay there our super
clean and they're doing an
excellent job of keeping it like
that there have been sights of
federal protocol they have state
programs and they're doing a
great job of maintaining
maintaining that.
The.
Thank you any other questions I
have a couple of questions.
Can you briefly discuss I know
you alluded to it earlier but
what are the advantages for the
county the city of sunline poor
quite what are things that that
we can share with our youi
copies uh that you benefit from
and also the greater new mexico.
So.
And I will also like to join up
them to come up with this
because less crucial seas not
too far from the border and is
part of only an account than
diana county covers everything
but.
We what we bring a lot a lot to
the table for for for the new
mexican border place at all the
hallboard replace
we are we collaborate widdle
fastel at all levels not just
the agencies by you that there's
the city of a summer party is
constantly communicating with el
bass or will pass a county and
she applied as well as on
and and I think it's just one
community one community that are
down here we we all see as one
community uh for the border we
we'd know when we understand
that what happens in why it is
drives drives both economy so of
las crue says some embark bunian
account is under there is a
basel and that's why we have to
to to look down a looks south
tour partners and start working
together
not not really confident that in
the past was done
really good.
Ah but that's the mission that
and we'll have and that's why we
we we have them all of them here
today because they're committed.
Two new mexico and new mexico
which committed to them and I
think that what happens here
benefits the rest of the state.
But one example when when the
state of text has the ps makes
extra inspections on trucks.
Sent that there is a service as
a
scab escape ball to and we've
when continuing since in the
other bridges had happened we
can do up to two thousand trucks
per day here obviously with long
wait times but in mexico has
served as that and to keep their
flows that the flow of goods and
services coming through send
that they decide not only said
that they say that they'd some
truck in companies were not when
all the way down to colombous
and that's where why we have to
be ready and and and and I think
that planning is part of that
and with the by national way
national water master plan but
we all we collaborate with texas
on on under met border master
plan as well and we we we have
representation and they'll
password PO which uh anthony son
the part on yanut county are
part of their past when beo and
then some representatives are
part of the board and and do
these part of that board so I I
think
we're coming together and and
where we're trying to do here
it's it's it's for the benefit
of the border but also
represents a big big
opportunity for the states they
probably want to hear and i'd
like you to describe is actually
more the immediate benefits as
an example too bonana county
obviously something's our
obvious more jobs that kind of
thing but i'm talking about more
wrong tax economic development
economic
is it an engine for the local
economic delicates jonathan as
yes yes it is and I think one of
the things that I want to
refrain this from is that
representative drones pointed it
out very secingly there is an
opportunity window here that we
are trying to take advantage of
because it is true that while
many of the other states are
struggling with site readiness
and even sight selection we are
so little bit behind and so what
we're trying to do is unify are
resources and make sure that yet
again the mexico is like it
passed up once more in our
community here in the south.
It made some funny but we've
stopped seen borders we don't
see the border of texas we don't
see the border of mexico there
is so much fluidity here and if
you think it the queuing gets
crazy when you're over at the
expo trying to get into the
radio or trying to get into
believe yes there just way to
see some of the concerns that we
have done here in the south we
don't address his immediate
infrastructure needs I think to
do a quick pivot here we are in
line now with but the new mexico
economic development department
is put out in terms of their
industry sectors that being
aerospaced by our science cyber
security film and television
global trade intellectual in
intelligent manufacturing alter
recreation sustainable and green
energy and then the value added
agriculture and so if I could
give one message to our
community it's don't give up we
are unifying hoping to try to
make sure that we retain and
turn back somewhere that brain
dream because we are also a
community of first resort once
you start seeing some of those
are many views that are here and
the lower costs are living that
is available if we can pull this
off together
though I I actually forgot that
we had to hand out mister chair
that actually goes to your point
so are you you cure this up and
reminded me so i'm gonna go
ahead and um we could get them
passed on to the great
but I I do have another question
related to the road so the
border high we connected um.
Is it fully funded.
Can you speak to that secretary.
So I can say that it is not
fully funded and I am going to
kick that I think over the
secretary so no to either
address an hour maybe this
afternoon when I think he's uh
secretary right we do that right
now.
And while you're working your
way up secretary of second part
to that question is what is the
time line for completion or or
groundbreaking.
Thank you mister chairman
committing
as um
mister delaware so pointed out
that the border highway
connector project which has now
risen to an estimate of cost of
about a hundred and seventy
million dollars is is not fully
funded
the forty five billion dollars
in for grant that we received is
calling for the project to be
fully funded no later than
september of this year which
means that we have about a
hundred and twenty five million
dollar shortfall for that
project.
And
the strategy forgetting that
done initially was with your
assistance over the course of
the last legislative session and
so when we worked on an
executive budget recommendation
with the governor she placed
into the department's budget
about one ten appropriations a
hundred and fifty million
dollars of.
Cash for a projects and district
one in our priority would have
been the border highway
connector and they would have
likely been a secondary
priority title no corporate
replacement which is also
received a pherograph as are as
our binding initiative moved
through the session and we we
all I think you included last
included became very confident
that a bonding bill would would
materialize the that cash then
was redirected out of DO t's
budget two other priorities.
And so that when the binding
bill didn't make it out of the
senate house bill two had
already been passed and so we
didn't receive any one time
construction appropriations to
support the project so now we're
working with their highway
administration on a very short
list of possible options none of
which really focus in on how
we'll encounter or come to
secure the additional hundred
and twenty five million dollars
and the worst case scenario and
consequence for the state is we
don't obligate that project by
september and there is very very
very high risk of losing the
federal award and not only does
that compromise the project but
is you're all aware if you've
ever worked with federal funds
compromises our ability to
secure them in the future so
that's the the position we're in
presently
or taking donations
that's in lightening I think
it's important for the community
now where it said because you
know in my naive day I thought
it was actually funded
thank you so thank you very much
for your presentation.
Yeah.
Representative whatever.
Thank you and mr chair for the
second opportunity to see
something.
In about and I know we're not in
a position to discuss this today
but I need to put this on the
table as the water situation and
how the water situation is
effects this develop all of this
development so I just wanna
mister chair place that on the
table I know that this is not
the water transportation
committee but I wish you kind of
it was that we have those
connections and that's why I
brought up the issue about
mousted planning so thank you
cheered the black room send uh
but a good as the number of the
county I can tell you that we
are under going in advocable
divorce that has been very
public when it comes to the
joint powers agreement that
binds the city of something park
as well as the county we want to
make sure that the second time
around we get it even better and
right than the first time around
and so we are committed to that
the best thing that I can sure
right now is that the amount of
remit to this point with the
city is that any investment made
by the county especially in
industrial part will remain the
property of the county as we
look to bolster that and bring
prosperity and on the other side
anything that the city
investment they will own and
continue to work and and
reconfigure I won't take any of
the thunder of the city cause I
don't want to speak for them but
I suspect they are on the agenda
either today or tomorrow can
provide more details thank you
mr chair and and just the the
issue that comes to my mind is
that we be careful about sprawl
and that's why reset issue thank
you.
Moving on to our next item we
have the interstate and
international border
infrastructure updates we have
to add to california executive
director of the apartment
political planning commission
actor or these or piniel city
clerk city of what is your
letter by the year secretary of
innovation economic development
state of shiwafrica's a better
director border affairs mechan
ministry of foreign relations
being manidos begin when you're
ready.
Yeah.
First of all thank you so much
for having us
a pleasure to meet me to be back
here in
sound that there is a to talk
about everything that was
introduced yourself of course my
name is africa for that the
dictor for four day offers team
is a good that I had a last
instant steady areas
so
braz well it means i'm joined by
our council general in
only zero.
Um so I I want to be very brief
cause I know there's a lot of
people taking today but um
I want to say that for us the
importance of the region as has
been always addressing every
meeting right now we have made
this region all of the
saturation so
right now it's not only the
local government hearing
in middle east you have quite is
but also the the whole country
that we are really aligned in
ringing more um business more
connections in in the area in
that sounds for us is reading
portant to keep growing this
project that it's and across you
know sacred only more some by
the day so in right now we have
been advancing in in.
Making everything happening or
side in getting the fans
in all aim as I said we are
really allowing the feather on
government and the local
government in what i'm here
asking for it from you is to
help us also make it happen on
on this side um
right now with the closing of
border
I think it's really relevant for
all of us in in this room to
make the crossings a more
efficient and also
having these crossing here it's
really important for us
because of two things first of
all is there's no rabor so that
makes it
more viable for.
Big air cargo and everything and
second of all consists new
mexico it's not texas so it also
bring us an opportunity to do
diverse crossings so that's
basically for us I like to
reassure you that it's a
priority for the government of
mexico to make this crossing
happen through the the mother
any session of the crossing and
that
but you'll make it happen a we
also need your help in
the that it sells so a a
priority for decomprehensive
the united states in new mexico
let me just interrupt for just
one second uh i'd like to
announce that cynthia is here
with congressman bosca's his
office there you are with
everybody please
thank you please go ahead.
Thank you
very much my name is motion and
the console general mexico here
in the past.
And why are we here we cover
hotspective personal counties
and the nine new mexico account
to so which will receive the
border he hearing in new mexico
and just weather and by the way
where here is cigarette that
your these from so that is as
well so you're still twelve
we're director were saying the
mexican gore and believes the
border it's an area of
opportunities not we know that
this is a place where there's a
lot of technological development
in the wage and research of case
on.
Everything that is good nobody
necessarily knows about it but
we have all these so what we
want to do is really strengthen
everything that we have at the
border and for that they port
the mother necession of the
board photos and her only months
and the three sides key so
we have been talking about these
forever and as as directors are
better was saying these port is
a priority for the mexican
government
we need to make it a priority
for the US federal government
and they think you guys as later
as you knew mexico you you could
be a very important help because
actually this is going to
benefit the whole region this is
something that we need where
we're a buried by national
community here and they were
thinking they've happens in one
side will help the over and the
sport is very specific because
this is where we the the
oversights loads cross not this
is the only a breach it's a
lamport and if we mother nice
this port as we should the
region you reconsider that we're
getting investment from a
bar all the the near showing and
everything that he's going to
have been here in the next thing
years we want recognize the
region because she's going to
improve a lot so thank you we
just want to assure you that we
are here to support
new mexico to support the new
mexico border and that we are
very much willing to do our
parts on the mexican side to
make the discussion thank you.
Thank you anything else we are
where we're proud to have you
here we appreciate you taking
the time from your busy
schedules to talk to her to our
body thank you so much.
I guess i'm help
good morning my name is a lot of
call on the executive director
of the old parcel metropolitan
planning organization thank you
very much for it for the
invitation that excited very
excited to be here to talk to
you a little bit about what the
what the npo does and represent
the platter you are familiar
with the with the po we miss you
there.
So let me start with some before
get into the presentation just a
couple of things i've come to my
just from what i've heard so far
one thing is that you all let's
legislators are not here in the
border barry often you guys have
to be here
and yet as you will see the the
the opposite people represent or
covers parts of all past a parts
of texas and new mexico as well
and the texas side we have the
same issue right where is so far
away from mastin and from the I
thirty five quarter where most
of the population lives and the
yeah but that's just wait as so
so we are part and we
continuously ask people come and
see us but we also have to go
there and and see that you know
communicate the messages that we
are a vibrant border community
buystate and actually three
states including new mexico
texas and you woke and the and
how important this region is.
To the both countries to the
three states and and so on so
so I encourage you and and apply
to you for it for coming here
and and and hopefully but we'll
see more of you soon.
I write to just want to talk
very briefly about some of the
the password appeal basics even
though we have the name of all
parcel but this is truly a
a buystate and I would are you a
three state the organization
so just a basics and in nineteen
sixty four congress said that
transportation planning had to
follow the three c's has to be
comprehensive in the sense that
it looks at all modes of
transportation cooperative it
means that there is a bunch of
players that need to cooperate
and work together and continuing
it it it never stops right.
So then peels were created by
federal law in seventy three and
one of the key things here is
that are the currently the the
federal transportation law says
that if you want to have access
to federal dollars for
transportation projects you must
have an impo if you are an
urbanized area with more than
fifty thousand people and
urbanized there is her defined
by the stances so that because
of us rate so that this area
covers all about parcel county
plus area areas of southern
donate and other counties rate
so.
So that that's a way it's it's
defined so for us it's a little
bit more complicated in the
sense that we have to deal with
procedurally with two states
even though the federal process
is one rate but states have
different it procedures and
processes and and so on.
Um.
So we are responsible for it on
ensuring that the transportation
planning process is followed
we have our transportation
policy board what it was the the
ultimate decision making body of
of the npo i'm the executive
rate so I need the staff but but
ultimately other decisions are
made but I by our board and and
the board is made up of mostly
elected officials from the two
states right from texas and from
from new mexico as well.
So here's a map of our however
region for guy said it covers
all of it passable county and
the taxes side and then parts of
southern the union of that
counties overall we have a
population of about nine hundred
thousand people
but if we we count the
population of quite as rate
together we are you know close
to three million people right so
we are a huge urban by national
urban area a a little bit
isolated but but we are in a
pretty fairly large and the the
regional key partners in in the
process are the two dots tax
that any mexico do the
municipalities are counties but
transit providers and by the way
the uh one of the new is the
transit providers of south
central regional transit
district is doing some really
really good things here in sun
in southern new mexico and then
of course you know we coordinate
with the emip and with the city
of what is and actually we need
to do a lot more coordination as
we will hear later.
Are the we also have
participation of the private
sectors we we need to get the
private sector involved and
again representative what I will
to your point about sprawling
it's one of the biggest concerns
that we have here this region
because again there's a
functional relationship between
land use decisions and
transportation decisions we have
no control overlap rate and so
developers that as you know you
know drive a lot of what goes
on.
Array so one of the things I
wanted to highlight is really
the some examples of the great
coordination that we've had
between the two states and one
of the projects are which with
though the new name is now
though the portland expressway
if you see there on the map it's
a it's a a project that includes
a piece in new mexico and a
peace and taxes so on the new
mexico side if you look at the
the starting at the uh the
interchange of item for four new
mexico dot is currently
finishing the the upgrades to
four four and the upgrades to
two thirteen
again a lot of ct issues in that
quarter you know that it's a
it's a great thing that they're
upgrading but when you look at
it from the regional perspective
that that peace connected to the
texas piece will create a very
important bypass to the urban
area of all parcel so
on the on the new mexico side it
was estimating that between all
the pizza since about two
hundred a million dollars
investment construction cost and
the texas portion which is new
location it's a completely new
facility it's in the ballpark of
about three hundred and twenty
million it's fully funded now so
that that's a great thing which
is need to to get it done.
Oops.
You probably side right now
in construction.
The other texas side state
highway one seventy eight which
is are crapped so these are the
improvements from the state line
going going east white ten are
you saw right now there's going
to be great separations on west
side and upper valley drive but
then the big chunk of the
project will be the major
improvements of the enter change
of it ten and an art craft.
Again one of the the importance
of this quarter
is that it it combines the with
the work that new mexico dot
already did on on the peter
managing on the new mexico side
to do all the upgrades putting a
concrete paid men for the over
overweight oversize of
facilities.
But what is strategically very
important about this is that
this is right now the only
connection that something that
is a house to wait time right
and and you were you know
earlier.
Expressing that that you know
concerned right that to get to
from our new mexico to said that
the decision you have to go
through texas right well I mean
I tend as the interstate you
know traffic gravitates to item
right so this is right now the
only way to get there enhanced
the importance of the border
highway connector because I
would provide another connection
from the sound that there is a
uh port of entry to your going
east right.
Sure it will connect to to where
the city of some apart but all
that traffic that wants to go
east into our parcel whether
it's commercial traffic or
passengers and so on that's
vital important strategically to
have another connection
here is just a slide of the of
the alignment to see the the
limits of the project connecting
uh peter manity on the on the
western as a western limit and
then going in a pretty much in
the eastern direction in
connecting to two seventy three.
So we we we are in full support
of this and we really hope that
the funding situation can be
resolved so that we can get this
project because it's of
strategic important as a region.
Um the other project that I
wanted to talk about here is
what we're calling face to is
that really face to of the of
the board of how we connect her
but it it's a
it's something that that came
up.
Um with you understand if you
see and green that's a border
high would connect the right but
when when said it connects to uh
two seventy three and the
percentage of some of
the part really that the concern
is well all that traffic once
you connect their wear that
traffic and go right because it
really is connecting to a local
network right both in in in new
mexico and then once you get
into the state of texas well the
city of all parcel so what we're
doing in this study.
Is analysing and trying to be
proactive on identifying where
these traffic hotspots are going
to happen right so it could be
the intersection sub son and
park drive with it with
donophone as you know traffic
tries to get to white ten or
other other ways the race track
and donate fine or continuing
through mark not cry I mean
crossing the year through the
christian bridge getting into
into a bicymon and and so on so
this is a something that the new
mexico legislature funded and we
have an agreement with the new
mexican border authority to get
the study done and the.
On friday at the board meaning
of our of our board will get the
approval hopefully of the first
task order so that we can get
working on this and again that
project needs to have a lot of
cooperation between state
callers and the texas side new
mexico silent and to work well
because at the end of the day
most of the people of that that
use these facilities
is traffic coming in from from
wireless rate so we have to
include that robust coordination
are with them as well.
All right so the final thing
that I wanted to talk about is
well where calling the the
international border crossing
strategic plan.
So in our region and the empure
region starting you know on the
west going other way to to the
far east of about uh of opens of
county we have six crossings
rate something that are sir then
we have two downtown that are
owned by the city will parcel we
have the bridge of the america's
right smack in the middle that
is owned by the two federal
governments then we have he's
lead the satellite also also
owned by the suitable parcel and
weigh out and and the far east
side is the weather loop which
is owned by the out by l parcel
county rate so you see some of
the margins passengers we have
for a a truck granting
still until they shut down
bridge of the american spring.
So
this is really what what is what
is driving this strategic plan
and I hope you you agree with
with the the premise this year
first of all that the cross
border the status square was is
unacceptable I mean are our
border crossing times are are
long they're not very reliable
and that is not a good thing for
for industry the so we ask
western are we ready for near
shoring to take advantage as a
region and again i'm i'm all
about the reach right so as a
region are we ready yes or no
because the competition is going
to be really really tough.
Also understanding that when we
talk about acrossing trip
there are multiple bottlenecks
it's not just the inspection
time from you know c v p or from
the mexican other one there you
have multiple bottles
of course you know we love to
pick up on cbp and and you know
rightly so in many cases right
you see and some of the crossing
square where there is you know
fourteen both and only five or
six are open you know why is it
that we don't have that that
would expedite a lot of the and
solve some of the issues that we
have right.
Um the next thing is that the
complex ownership and control of
the six process rate so yep so
that there is as a state of new
mexico but even the five
pricings and and on the texas
site while they're owned by but
different people right so that
does not allow us to really see
the crossing sense of system and
that's what we're trying to do
here with the strategic plan you
know just forget about any
political boundaries and
ownership and all that what if
we look at the massive system
what efficiencies can we find.
If we look at a massive system
and we have some tools of travel
demand moral some it a pretty
call sophisticated tools that
we're working in coordination
with you meet and the city up of
what is when it were now we can
model the cross border traffic
with with quite a bit of detail
so that allows us to run
multiple scenarios and see what
if.
For example now that the
situation where the bridge of
the americans is going to shut
down commercial traffic well
where those trucks can go rate
so we have the ability to to
estimate to forecast you know
with a pretty high level of of
certainty and and that allows us
to be proactive and and and and
identify solutions right or come
up with with ideas right.
But
one of the biggest issues that
that we have here in an hour
region and a strongly feel that
it's it's a big shortcoming is
that we do not have specific
projects that we can say here is
a project to improve you know
crossing a or crossing b or
crossing seat right there plans
for example then on the mexican
side for the the head on email.
Um but there's not a
corresponding plan on the on the
US side gsa did a very very
it'll simple feasibility study
and that is a problem right when
one side does something in the
and there is no action on the
and the other side you know we
need to coordinate that in and
that is speaks to the to the
need to have this continuous
enrolled bus coordination
between stake holders from the
three states two countries and
from the public sector and the
private sector and all levels of
government federal statement and
local
again bridge of the americas
going back to to that in when we
look at the at at the entire US
mexico border.
We are the only region that is
closing truck capacity I mean to
me that is.
It's not a good thing right
there may be reasons for y gsa
chose that alternative and so on
right but when you look at it
from the bigger picture where
the only ones larry though for
example they're they have
projects to expand capacity the
other on the bridges right
there planning new bridges but
we don't have that right so we
must as part of the strategic
plan one of the things that we
must do is identify specific
improvements for all of the
individual crossings rate
hopefully within more about of a
regional system wide you know
perspective rate but we also
need to be as a region we have
to be very strategic because the
federal agency some old sides in
a both in the mexican setting of
the usa they don't have the
resources for everything.
Right so sure the state of new
mexico is is is focused on
something that is a and that's
rightly so but then you have the
county of all parcel sake no we
want the traffic to go to the
need you and then you have the
city will pass the same well no
we want to make improvements to
have said i've also saw that we
can get more traffic right and
the texas side of course there's
the incentive of of charging
talks right so short I mean tall
revenue is is is great for the
city the county would love to
have more traffic to get you
know increase up reverence
agreement and someone but but
again one of the things that
bridge of the america really
exemplifies is the lack of
coordination it feels as a very
one cited decision you know
their decision to close
commercial traffic even though
they will say yeah well we did
public out reach as part of the
the neighbor process yeah we
have meetings and quite as an
and and there is truth to that
right but then you also turn
round and say what what happened
to the community
were asleep right but it feels
that it that it's not a real
coordinated
action for such an important
project seven hundred million
dollars
so you know we we as a region
collectively we cannot afford to
have those those missed ups so
so again the you know
my my call as an mpo as a
regional agency is really to get
everybody on on the same page
you know talking developing this
plan so that we can identify
priorities because.
You know we can't do everything
right and as a region priorities
so that we are more effective
and fighting for funding and the
us side on the mexican side but
with a you know with a list of
priorities and and in consensus
that that the other thing that
they look at right if as a
region one group says one thing
the other group says something
different
and and i've been there and in
in many of these meetings you
know in a nice way they'll tell
you you guys as a region.
Go get your act together before
you you waste our time because
there is not enough money to do
everything right there's.
A huge demand in on both
borders.
So just very briefly the other
highlights for the strategic
plan there is going to be a huge
element of stay caller and in
public engagement we're gonna be
initiating with the the the
evaluation but of the current
conditions of our system.
Are look at future system future
system white scenarios that I
was explaining with our with our
models we can play with which an
errors like what if we close
this what if we build a new
board across what if I don't
multiple different scenarios
right and i'm and from there
identify those specific projects
that that for each individual
cross
looking at economic development
opportunities or at the cost of
not doing this right you know
what's going to cost us if we
don't get iraq together and and
miss out on these opportunities
for for whether it's near
shoring or other local
initiatives.
And and again finally this is
maybe a little bit the
controversial right but but also
looking exploring at what what
would be the benefits that what
would need to happen if we could
develop some type of up of a
port authority right of a group
that could look at the six
pricing sim and operate them and
manage him
I know it's.
You know politically there's a
lot of challenges started with
the fridge of the americas as
well I mean some but the federal
governments there's a treaty
well you know.
What needs to happen for for
that to to become more about the
transfer of the ownership to
work to also ask local scrate
and and so on so
we are kicking out the study in
in july and august many of you
are already well here on the
table of course as you like what
is the state of ouchihuawa your
mexico texas all the stake
holders or there is a a big kick
off meeting that we have planned
for august sixth at the charming
son
that's a big kick off to let
everybody know that we're doing
but in addition to all these you
know the meetings with a lot of
elected officials and photo
opportunities and all that we
need to establish work groups to
get really the work that right
and that's what we're going to
be doing you know kicking off
with those work groups and
working through november two
established the the the
condition the current conditions
the analysis develops an aerials
and so on and be ready in
september of next year to
present the draft final report
and and finalise the work in
november and see where it goes
but I really really would love
to work everybody to participate
and and the support from the new
mexico side the legislature
and it were doing the same other
texas side at all levels but
again this is so important for
us because without a strategic
plan.
You know we were we're not in a
in a very good competitive
you know
condition so I think that's all
I have them happy to answer any
questions where if you have any.
Or want to take him at the end
or whatever.
Representative of meli I mean
senator or melly.
I'll usually call me
commissioner melissa
thank you mister chair
I guess I agree for better that
are npo is in one state
the one in arking in the
community I represent
because there is going to be
competition even if it's within
the state but I can imagine that
kind of competition.
In the region that I include
several states
I just wanted to kind of go back
to the
this connector so
which obviously is is still it's
very much a priority even for
the npo right though there are
other projects
and that
that funding understanding
someone get this clear is that
if
if the funding is in a place for
some september I think it is
that this money will go away the
state has already appropriate
was forty forty five million
year old effort to the year he
mexico dot folks but my
understanding as you had like
most federal grounds have a
clock so you must obligate the
plans you know before a certain
deadline and I believe that the
deadline for that specific round
is september of this year.
Okay and and by by obligation
i'm in spite well I guess we'll
put in just
circle back to that at some
point that that's not something
that you really focused on I
just well first of all I guess
i'm kind of embarrassed for the
senate that they didn't I don't
know we didn't pass the that
particular I wasn't even real
wear that that was a big project
and I just want to say this way
I think it's important i'm
sometimes it's very difficult to
to get to some of these
communities this is up you know
five hour drive and you know I
know that isn't that big of a
deal for a lot of people but to
get out of the metro area and to
see what's going on the set the
communities is really important
otherwise I think you don't get
that sense of really what's
going on in the community and
the importance and sees to meet
the people writing and you see
what's going on so I just want
to say that that that's really
important to
you know i've learning about
this I think this is really
good.
And
so I also just want to reiterate
what my colleague said a
representative about eggl and I
know that this was bothered to
was the importance of up you
know long range planning when
you're doing things like this
and and you we have a disconnect
to between land you sent and
transportation and we keep
trying to bring those things
together and water and all these
other things that it's just not
an easy thing to do.
And we are the west right so
it's like
the world less so it's like
about growth growth growth and.
But it's just so expensive to
try to retrieve it later and
then I just want to say that for
for someone who is in an urban
area that there are a lot of
areas in the communities were
you see
either disinvestment or
crumbling infrastructure and so
we have a lot of needs there and
that that is that that competes
with no growth areas I want to
say that but I I just want to
see that it's really important
and i'm glad that I came I mean
I was
drive by
but
just to see kind of what's going
on here and the importance to it
to the people right and it's it
is a quality of life issue here
for people so.
But yeah I do I guess at some
point we need to talk about of
that money and and basically
what what we need to do
to lose forty five million
dollars for project
thank you thank you mister
charles thank you you got to
continue with the presentation
so whose next
movement is years but american
thing
school by way up there looking
fine I said it okay and because
well my player that I was in bed
or the serious time of movie I
got a seals constant port but I
mean the most beneath are
competitive when as far as
you're in the game that's going
on you could have gone to close
but it's great suddenly I got a
system
seem to be helpful the may have
decided why is in thank you for
the opportunity to be together
today you know sharing this uh
there's a moment would you
but i'm as other than the
important that they're progress
most of the need all CNN
structure on the local cost but
it's quite the the net
established last young and i'll
set a minute for getting a young
on the joke in this i'm not the
same up a lot they'll import and
sell a lot of a hundred months
given we hear neconomica someone
who knock on when you that said
but at the same part of this
economy or can I say the paraset
is a bottom of normal cases we
are we're following the
instruction from the our mayor
of the city cannot to
a company and address these kind
of events that
give us the opportunity to you
know to understand what's going
on the interest on and also to
support all the of all of the
ideas that come from this this
meaning to it enough I mean this
then it has done unless you on
the common customers you know
get relevant to selling almost
yeah we're doing that say I love
concord that is what it was but
i'm required a tenth of done
so number in possible.
And when I said he had the
activities here showing us and
permitted all a continent in
this hour your mother
okay too much information where
I gonna try to
be working together with the
county of dona with the sole
employee with the mayor of some
about an all the actors that are
together building these
relationship with the city or
quite a we believe in
corporation as our major chris
payers quiet always is making
this happen for the future of
the region because we have
everybody said were happening
here it happening why is what
happening where is going to be
affecting or given another
opportunity to the two this
height
there must be for my simple
resolution positive affairs
no easy but they're they
wouldn't have more immense or
can I do is it look and of
affect that in the same day and
look at corner similar spot it's
one of us that are mental
competitiveness yellow here on
some moment okay okay look at
the start could see in the pool
doesn't travel it was a stance
around those of them contrast
and deal better when it's one of
them bleaker and general sucks
you honest I mean the most part
of it but up what are you just
happen
as the closure of the future of
a commission traveling in the
border makers to design
something that their concome
provide for the future of a the
traffic in the city and the city
in the city what is his building
the new projects that is gonna
be connecting this uh these
regions and currently wasn't
that there is a and also these
mobility plan is incredible to
make it happen
if the case we have sent us
august you number records are
there is there a money seep your
lesser than ever listening as
steady artists as you call us a
good thing interesting to
recommend because you don't know
that we have no.
You must anyone else that I talk
about your police a lot less you
get in a lot of conditional
appreciate the claim with your
chamber better meet the couple
i'm also inside a model mister
we're looking for those found to
to
found the the new project sand
uh the good relationship that we
have the the overmade your own
cd has with the present of
mexico and also
uhm boy who would be government
of mexico create the star area
in the sunker anymore that's
good allowed to to make it
happen
you know must but but I conclude
it is the most attendant they
want the native one is that
unless you can be done so
see i'm not your name don't put
a daughter they'll put it going
through solemn park on a napada
but allow me going to yes at the
end of the history yesterday to
decide what part of their the
the making like you serve out
little bit up you'll enter this
also news but I could think I
was just starting
the manual cd of a son and park
and the media could have put his
clio how together looking to to
build the the breach that he is
asking to too do you know to
communicate that but serious and
we like to see you all of you to
support these effort that had up
what cities are doing and put
that
you comment the management your
celebrity recommends announced
in the front of the corner in
this young battle celebrity get
bored pretty much and which is
the most I use on the story
because at the end it does
conduct locus and be all yearly
eliminated guess into acquirers
is done that our handle in my
medical home diameter does take
any cost given if he said ambus
and bus on this and those
estimate it was the most intense
young at the end of what we have
normally seep the concrete
project does go in fishing and
will now tentation of deciding
your question is still working
with mpo eh through email per
where are you investigation from
the mon.
From the city but uh as I say
before and the secretary might
sort of nell a set we are glad
to be working whatever any other
progress that keep us do not
going for the good perf
you know we're not yeah let me
but I think I said we have said
that you have someone but I mean
then it was all they love a lot
of you can you don't equal a lot
biscuit and that I like speak as
you don't have projectors
especially becoming the case as
standard or less you
year
I can open us
hello good morning everybody
I got to make representative
presentation about the prison to
do for some of the I am
negotiable please from a
planning need to do of cereal
powers
as I said uh I want to make a
brief christmas station about
the highway frustrator toward to
border and mobility in the
possible not a region.
As we said that the elimination
of the commercial bakers picture
and facility so bought that we
have some troubles for the
mobility
there in city of wireless uh
there are the commission global
we have to split between the the
other options to make the uh
to make the crossings around
there between their central
there is a or several son or
even uh well better
so the the cereal waters are
planning to make some uh invest
in new roads to to link that the
the police of in prevailable for
for commissioner vehicles.
To link it to the today
to the generation that to to the
generator
some of the lesson of making
less than the making of that
generate all the the trips for
for air
possibility
well they told me that have to
be in english but I don't I
don't know if if I said in the
inspired should better
if english okay if they're going
to their staying something to
spend that I say I would try to
do it in okay
okay all right okay in it and
it's the problem about a few on
the the the quad is that out
there now but he got received a
little torous not sort of
promoted lost port to the
tracker that i'm also that is
particularly in though that the
the long wasting most
something that is a point thirty
percent or the interest I made a
custom but service are el point
today tonight your wild see is
the solar social discussion and
also read that but it'll yakis
is the commercial data they they
produce what a passion articles
portation
comprehensive service are still
a most a commonly got more more
commonly care less what is going
ail pointed out me your santa
point the one who put on me open
nothing to get the name of who
knock on because your own
collector did I mean he could
sell those sitting back it's a
kind of thing is the I will show
us in the meantime a lot of what
they said kind of thing that
can causing him be able to put a
lot local because you on the the
group that kind of got
authorized it's a good idea
that's what I got at the other
the one could be late that
you've got the wind doesn't put
a place to assess it although by
path when you get the there's a
will add independence and so I
quite as.
I said the went there they want
to set out some
unrelatively told you know that
the thought I love you at your
problem to your on the stock on
it that gone ill what I thought
they thought of me you.
I dropped soon as local and
interest you are quite as make
what I know we got lack of
because on interest not quite as
you can go think that I said I
listened to the restaurant see
only that an amazon or not on a
couple of customer not that I
was a look at it that i'm not
elected at there at the end of
the that there is better than it
was now not a sustainability on
the electronic are not practice
when we suggested bumping into
what not so never seen seal gay
in a so you know comments you'll
see those not planning to play a
possibility like that if you get
a little bit equal of no
comments by somebody that that
would have not been always
common so to get it if this is
the project opposite on by past
the same thing that but I see
it's nothing bummy into economy
got it but then premeditable
incoming or real or lack of it
there are a not brought on that
there is a equal most it would
at that point get money code I
mean they are still looked at a
data somebody you can send it
on.
It illoritantly the latter free
time not nor not get a few cases
and and pretty much
my main my horse you know it's
it's fun until now or now
mention they
come what they're set up young
the name was lack of when it got
late la lonely on condela kind
of did I mean a little bit
either I mean a little bit
there's a last one that's what
the interest the quarters a key
asked failing what I mean the
seller similar you can update
connector sort of yet I will
look at all this thus on a gay
is canada what I actually the
the export of us on the market
order on a table connected to
your while I look
estimate or different things
that it's that is that it's been
like a silly but I mean to some
of that you can well look at
better when a little yaris can
and also came quite as guess a
lot my your together was to
cross the intolerance on the
quarters and bother as serious
practice or not that though
installment.
The most coming in la la
connects you on delivered I mean
thought the the intersort
audient thing look on a few on
that the the then we'll ever
independence a look out of there
i'm a huge coparanti single you
want connel fee in the equal
local because they got according
to the
retailer nothing and can try
that thought as a norman
accommodator yesterday and with
the sarah.
Equal estimate according to
stark on estonian plan and draft
direct dominity I went there
silence.
Okay address youngest good as a
star while rundle is lump left
you on
the locate there are a some of
you can get animal what it does
talk about that when that's what
I mean they don't really got in
the web site they look at stop
previous endorsed that live by
your capacity that in try than
believe those current committee
them not going to then I think
what to carry little they all
the winter in this day and it
stops your system any handle
that based on what now not
anymore political pretty well if
I could case I look in the
return this day in this the
travel they they they they they
kind of data talk with we are
saying since I think I thought
you know eh place to date the
what I don't know what also
known as that you need though is
the certain account inside of
the popular system is that in a
career
word load behind schedule so we
have to a little bit quicker
okay this is the latter the the
last that the last the last
third month that we have to do
that
we're on time
perfect time
okay do you have any doing good
with the english star movie and
well the up problem
i'm better with you to spanish
okay well thank you so much any
closing words questions members
one more presentation
if you would try to be brief as
possible okay.
The.
The.
Please introduce yourself.
I'm sorry i'm a letter by the
year from the state of two hours
the secretary of innovation in
in our economic development
it's an honor to be here
uhm on behalf of this data to
huawei I will be presenting the
follow finished project there's
a lot of translation though it's
a poorly for hard so let me let
do some spanish do
okay well the political studies
to support the planned medical
with tax incentive stating
courage new investments in the
geographic area designated as
development ball for well being
or losing this
on june twenty sixth the
president of mexico kloga
chamber and the governor of to
one money complete comparison to
it signed their agreement to
collaborate on the development.
So they government levels are
united in this
but what are the economic
development both for will be
runner
are strategic sounds designated
by the federal government to
drive investment business
relocation and job creation and
it's a key company of the
mexican plan to twenty five
twenty three it's a key company.
It has a lot of benefits like
one hundred percent immediate
deduction for investment in new
fixed assets one hundred percent
additional twenty five percent
deduction for training or
innovation they've benefits are
in addition to existing
incentives on their the northern
bar there
includes an agreement with the
minister of public occasion to
support training any novation
doctors intentive will take
effect once the development fall
is officially lunch.
Well about their proximity to
production hopes and boat
nationality their national
markets will if locate it into
that product to well the
development in poll will cover
sixty point thirty two victorias
and wheelfockers on high value
added strategic sectors
including mobility
semiconductors many
counterprices that the center by
plants in secondary may
am I going to
actually faster okay
sustainable investment i'm for
managing plan well we have to
keep points the investment plan
for well being development fall
components the following
projects mother never show not
that I got any more than that
there is a part of injury and
some good only wasn't that the
resolution stick to a connector
where my colleague just talk
about we weighed with the future
pertain chart to expand to for
wednesday the
gather they're after the number
estimated investment in
one hundred seven point three g
million dollars.
Well about them their decision
number thank you more where
they're both worked we have
to objective in grave the number
of grossing by modifying import
and expert cargo range to
accommodate other size and
number wait trucks and
reconfigured area to create a
full service born their port
with all the facilities services
of staff and capabilities needed
to process both people and goods
off any game any
well i'm not going to explain
you their style line that worry
I just want you to see you the
previous work we we have done
with this project seems to
thousand twenty two
well next phasing the morning
you say shall not sunk anywhere
as with their closure of the
boat that growth in it is
imperative to begin the mother
any session project of some pet
renewal
the government of the state of
two huawei is requesting
outdoors asian doing the
executive project for them are
there any session if I had any
one that must have black and the
terms of reference are submitted
to with the state government
together with this the quite a
few will provide the necessary
resources for the development of
the executive project.
The preparation of the executive
project is expected to take
approximately eight months
following their location of
plants and the selection of the
university to carry it out with
think it's gonna be there when
you were selling on the moment.
Do the signation of their well
being development ball
represents a key opportunity to
advance their mother nice
section projects
thank you
you
thank you that concludes
presentation correct yeah we'll
go to memory questions uh
representing bottom
thank you mister chair i'm an
attempted
on our
saturday and i'll be honourable
senor us you send yourself
with your goods to their start I
keep going to sort through
estamana er no where the blood
most status we rapidly don't
weather when intended
we've been lockers does the
handle in
relationship
then lost coming us commerce so
it comes out
processed their tenant those
authors are key corner status oi
with that mr
I want to thank mrperiod kobo
i'm i'm really happy to see that
we have an a I c p planner
in this homex because that was
one of the points that I raised
earlier and for those of you who
don't know what a I c p
the planners take
to be
more than certified
yeah i'll most planners are
without I wanted to ask
mr covo a couple of questions
one is what's your thinking of a
what you're thinking is for the
closing of the americas and the
other and I know it's political
but
the impact of that.
I hold on so I can all need you
by the microphone because it
won't run with cast
so and and members like i'm just
going to caution everybody
please try to stay on message
related to our committee i'll go
ahead let this question go for
now but I will receive it
right so I feel comfortable
speaking up about this because
of the policy board of the
sent the letter to gsa
supporting the other alternative
the the one that kept the it was
like a hybrid that keeps a
commercial traffic and then
designed it in a way that in the
future whenever we have more of
a plan then we you know we can
move to trucks out to
so
total so that that's that's
basically at your other the
biggest concern that we have is
that we we don't have a a real
plan we have ideas and we have
will say that they have the
capacity to to take those drugs
and the other crossings but it's
not just a crossing itself it's
the access point right and me
you see it to hear something
that is I guess you don't have a
upgrade over the river right but
you still have to cross the
river somewhere right and and
that axes is dominican are craft
right so so you don't that's
going to be a a choke point one
of the biggest concerns I think
it was mentioned earlier today
is that we have we're gonna have
construction of the arcraft
interchange of it at it at the
same time as a bridge of the
americas is building a sole
you know perfect starm right I
mean that's going to have a real
real impact on
you know the movement of
specially of trucks thank you
thank you mister chairman thank
you it is on the on the list
here and I just
and I that's what I thought is
that you're going to it is going
to have an impact because you'll
have five.
And not six I guess is what
you're saying but the movement
of trucks across that is going
to be significant
okay and then the other question
could you
expand just really quickly about
the port of entry authority and
what you envision for that
well we it's a
again we we we want to see what
the advantages would be of
having we call it a port
authority could be something
different rate but we see that
for example there there are
examples in the canadian border
where you have good coordination
between both sides in and you
know who charges a toll
splitting the tall sense of and
someone a similar example of
it's not a done deal yet your
time projected in california
that's again it's a quite so
bear are very good and close
collaboration between both sides
where the us side would be doing
although collection of well
tolls or whatever they they
they're going to column and
split it on what sites we have
also in in in the US for example
the port authority of new york
in new jersey right between two
states that operate ports the
operating transit service pat go
and so there are ways of of you
know doing this rate now this
would be a lot more challenging
because now we have you know we
have the federal government
state governments you know to
countries and and and a lot of
interest so in order for this to
happen it it has to be a wind
win for everybody to to give up
but that's where again i'm i'm
so focused on looking this as a
region the region has to win for
this to to be feasible right so
well we've got idea so thank you
thank you mister chair that's
really an important point thank
you.
Representative
thank you mr charity may goes to
much ok I much as much here is
to a humbroba hundred go better
note they make a dresses
my first question mr chair is
win does the bridge of the
americas actually close to
commercial traffic what's the
date of that
I think what you mentioned it so
I don't remember the day but
it's twenty seven may of twenty
twenty seven and an and let me
just say that it's not just
northbound we have a big issue
with southbound trunk traffic as
well because a bridge of the
americans have a lot more
traffic southbound the
northbound right because of it's
free there there are no tolls so
they're multiple ways of doing
it but but it's in both
directions that we have a real
real concern thank you site kept
thinking instead of done deal
and then you gave you a timeline
and so we do have two years to
figure it all out
my second question really
pertains to
both the metro political parcel
planning and to our
because when I think of our
border cross seems I immediately
include columbus and so.
We can find out more about the
us crossing but in two hour from
son her on a mode to credit
though palomas is there roads
how how is the roads situation
south of the border it's like
what about fifty eight miles.
Concern.
In the medical site we have the
the uh mexico those highway I
could too much of two hour that
ran from quarters to case a
grand is to handle speaker eh eh
from the from these roads from
these highway that it's our
two lanes highway
I want
to pass the beat the the
connection to the palomas a
point of entry
in this this route is why two
lanes uh wrote
thank you mr chair is there any
plan can that take heavy trucks
i'm is there any plan to expand
that road
though I I don't think you did
the near future I have planned
for that we have planned for
that for the
far family you got hit
highway
right thank you mister
obviously it's most immediate
but
i've just looking into the
future on our side end
it seems very very important to
do that and that is that my
questions thank you.
Representative johns
thank you mr chair and I
appreciate all your
presentations very informative
in it for you mr calvo I do have
pretty similar question as a
representative of gear it asked
my concern would be including
you know from a new mexico
perspective including pull our
columbus and polomes in this
planning I do believe exactly
like you said very much so that
that when we all earn work
together collaboratively and the
columbus would be part of that
plan that we all benefit and
everything that happens who is
senators effects columbus and I
think you know the same
alternatively so what would be
would there be a possibility of
I mean
how do you feel about including
columbus in your plan for a poor
authority the answers yes we met
presentation here to though to
the border a couple weeks ago
that the mayor of colon of
columbus was your and he
suggested that it and yeah we
will definitely do it even
though technically it's outside
of the pure region but you know
here we go again you know we
this is a a region so there is a
a real you know reason to
include colombia send below
massive on of the study so will
definitely do that yes thank you
and mr chair and mr cover I
think it's important to see
columbus as a gateway to not
only to the north but to the
west because you know if you
look at the map
having that for an and
developing that would it would
allow a lot of commerce back and
forth that that goes to
california and those
northwestern states so I think
it's very important thank you so
much thank you mister.
Thank you for a presentation no
for their questions
thank you again.
As I said we're a little behind
so we're gonna have to try to
speed everybody up and please
members keep your question
succinct and focused
next we have border plex digital
assets l c f d on border
infrastructure land of need beer
chairman
begin when you're ready.
The.
And as a reminder as you begin
please introduce yourself so
that everybody and webcast
landlords who you are.
Mr share members of the
committee my name is jennifer
brad few number representative
of border place digital assets
and native new mexican from
albuquerque and if you could
give us just a moment we're
going to get our presentation
put on the screen.
The.
Mr chairman members of the
community my name is a sorry
members of the committee
my name is land of napure on the
chairman of border plex really
appreciate the opportunity to be
here with you today and share
our perspective you know we
think that uh the border plex
region is having a magic moment
in that there's an incredible
opportunity to develop some
infrastructure here that will be
a long term engine for economic
growth.
N mr chairman members of the
committee is you've just heard
from the excellent presentations
that we've had this morning
transportation and roads are the
life to economic development and
border please digital assets is
presenting an opportunity to the
state of new mexico
with just interrupt center or
melody would like to know what
you are what is your
organization how is it function
you would do a brief descriptor
of that so that everybody
understands what you're doing
absolutely um and actually
senator omali mister chair I was
just getting to that so that's a
perfect suggest border please
digital assets is a company that
is building digital
infrastructure campuses up
throughout the united states and
is very interested in building a
campus in the santa treesa area
as well as potentially one of
their campus within the state of
new mexico some of the lands
that you are flew over today and
include the area where border
plex digital assets would like
to construct its first campus in
the santa teresa area roads in
that area are very important and
all that are ceo lanimay pure
introduce the concept of what a
digital infrastructure campus is
so you guys get a better idea of
what's included.
Thank you
the the way to think about a
digital infrastructure campus is
the following
in our country right now yeah we
are short of infrastructure
generally you know were short of
water utility or short of
electric utility we are short of
a road and transportation
infrastructure and we've reached
a point where this underlying
infrastructure is now a
constraint on growth so that the
basic of these and focus of our
company is that combining your
power of systems they the
underlying power infrastructure
the underline water
infrastructure in colocating
that with end users intenance is
a way to accelerate development
so like yesterday there was
announcement about the state of
pennsylvania you know credit and
a I know which is a combination
of electric utility availability
a long with related
infrastructure that's an
essential what we're talking
about when we say digital cappus
it was combined in those
underlying infrastructure
elements with data centers in
advance manufacturing to create
a real economic ecosystem this
powerful in in my perspective on
it in happy to really get out on
the stuff like I got a lot of
you know no point to ten a lot
of energy on this one alright I
I think that yeah these are
countries most vible assets in
is the type of asset that will
come to this region you have
twenty years ago these assets
were not located what's happened
is because the country's now
short of the simple structure
any place where infrastructure
can get built rapidly dot com
like we've have a shot here that
we've never had before and I
think these are assets worth
billions of dollars that will
collectively change you the
economic objectory of
communities and families.
Yeah.
So as we jump into the the
specific about border police and
why we have fallen in love yeah
with the region it comes down to
just a few simple things number
one yet we think the people and
cultural really special your
number two it apps to be located
right next to our number one
trade important or mexico your
number three within that region
of mexico within this region of
a new mexico in texas there's a
lot of industrial manufacturing
taken place all right in the
number four I just think that
with the efforts we've put out
here you know I feel the state
of new mexico really leaning and
I feel the community really
leaning and the county leaning
and to make these things happen
and I think you we basically
have a magic moment in a special
opportunity to deliver this in a
way that really will accelerate
economic growth here for
generations like this isn't this
is not a boom yet this is a
durable thing these assets when
they get constructed or going to
run for thirty and forty years
you know so it is so it really
is a generational opportunity.
When you look at this map you're
this is up.
Not new information your but we
look at the transportation
systems and just the logistics
of the region of the border
plex as a special ordery between
the US and mexico in a special
order within the up the
southwest us so just look at
that map you were four her miles
from the next two hundre.
The region is special given that
geography its special given the
underlying bones and
infrastructure that it has in
its special because the
industrialization it's already
happening around it.
Or trying.
Okay so this is a trade point I
know you know right now there's
a lot of discussion in our
country about all right my
forecast would would be that
trade will continue the it it
turns out we are economically
dependent upon trade important
or so I think it's going to keep
on happening all right now I
think this place especial port
so when we go to the east to
trade between the us and mexico
one has to cross a bridge in
bridges or natural child points
near their talk about the bridge
of the america's being you know
shut down okay and I think here
we are in the eastern most land
cross in between the united
states in mexico so I think this
is advantage new mexico yeah I
think this border crossing over
here is something that ought to
be invested in I think if it's
expanded you will nationally you
know attract a portion of that
traffic that's going to cross
bridge the americas and so are
perspective when we look at this
and it's highlighted on the
slide is that like it is in a
great spot to to leverage and
capital whites on its position.
So this is the point about the
industrialization so if if we
pause for a second and we say
you an entering economic
opportunity that will persist
for decades is the development
of underlying infrastructure to
power your digital outcomes
whether that is a I whether that
is a regular you know cloud
computing center or whether it's
advanced manufacturing in this
region or a lot of right players
already I mean when we look at
this slide and we see names like
western general electric your
fox consider electric and eaten
those world class companies yet
like those companies some of
those companies literally
producing the computer servers
either producing the computers
that sit in the dataset actually
do a I calculations others of
those companies producing the
underlying electric
infrastructure the switch is the
breakers the panels the
transformers so I I think.
All the underlying ingredients
are in place in an analogy I
would use is it's kind of like
you know constructing houses out
of lego is meant no way goes one
of my favorite toys when I was a
kid thing a lot about a legos or
modulary take those legos
assemble anything you want what
i'd say is we have the modular
inputs for incredible
infrastructure outcomes here
like it's on that map like those
are the world class vendors that
make it available and make it
possible.
The.
The.
So I wanted to take a moment and
talk about ai artificial
intelligence is kind of a hat
buzz word right now and it's
something that some states are
leaning in towards and this
investment opportunity in areas
like senator is is happening
because of aa there is a boom
right now in the united states
there's a boom internationally
there is a race to place these
data centers and make these
investments in large areas where
artificial intelligence is
processed and santa traces one
of those areas that's attracting
a lot of attention we've seen a
lot of investment in new mexico
from meta and the data centers
that they have put in and what
an economic boom that has been
tipped and see a county and the
last slowness area but just
talking about can of what ai is
in and how it is currently being
used airs here it's among us
today it's something that my
kids get something when we run
our google searches we now are
forced weekend a option as our
first option that pulls up on
google but it's been used for a
long time in many different
interfaces um a I artificial
intelligence refers to computers
that can learn recent and help
us make decisions it is a tool
similar to the development of
the internet and how that was a
tool arm of everyday use you
probably see them and your
everyday use there it can create
faster cheaper more affordable
health care access it can help
synthesize data I am a lawyer
and I use that and my practice
occasionally to streamline
writing and summaries are tools
are being incorporated by most
software providers and so few if
you currently subscribe to a
software system like turbo tax
into it
items to run your small
businesses you're going to have
an
a
delivered as part of that
typically today it can help with
job training.
It can help workers form their
resumes it can help them
describe their skills
it helps marketing for small
businesses throughout new mexico
new mexico I think of as leaning
and on its small business
economy we are in economy that
has built on a lot of small
businesses and so it's a tool
that a lot of small business
owners are using it can help
with training support and it
definitely helps with access to
language and translations that
you have out there.
States that are leaning in
towards a I an ai policies are
attracting data center
investment and this is
attracting massive opportunities
for jobs and opportunities for
money that can be used on
infrastructure and really when
we think about moneys coming
back for roads monies that are
connecting us to other cities
like el paso that are connecting
us to waters
you know a I is a driver for
that it is the next
technological boom after we see
new booms like the invention of
roads the invention of the cars
the invention of the railroad
the invention of telephones the
invention of the internet you
see a massive boom within
markets and I believe that a I
is going to be this next massive
boom the states that lean in and
develop policies to take
advantage of that are going to
reap the economic benefits
they're going to be some of
those those early
entry market entrance and so
that's where you're going to
really develop a lot of
investment a lot of interest as
a state yes and i'm gonna let
lane
yep something that the try to
put a fine point on new mexico's
opportunity in this if we look
at the economic outcomes in our
country a lot of the wealth from
technology and general has been
concentrated and collected
between washington dc and boston
on the east coast in between san
francisco in seattle washington
on the west coast in in so if we
look at it where where the
software companies headquartered
where's that wealth concentrated
where the employee is getting
in recently headlines about
signing bonus these are
engineers are getting like all
that is concentrated on the
coast in our country I think
what's happening right now
because of the deficit and
infrastructure there's a chance
to rewrite the script in the
middle of the country now I
think in the middle of the
country which new mexico is port
of is the place where we will
actually build the
infrastructure.
To power those outcomes and so I
think what will happen is yeah
we played the we played our
courage right here your new
mexico has an opportunity to be
a leader in interstructural
development when i'll target in
for such a development like each
on these projects is billions
and billions of dollars it
creates hundreds of jobs you and
the six digits it creates
thousands of construction jobs
and attracts vendors around it
to serve into it it's like these
assets like the fancy industry
terms they have gravity yes when
we get one one of these digital
campuses up and operating it
will attract others around it
and this is the generational
disruption point where the new
mexico right here you and and on
your in a county can attract
some of these assets and
outcomes in a way that it just
couldn't do in what the coast
have monopolised these outcomes
you know my home life like those
corners have monopolies and
monopolized it the difference
now is the energy corder of our
countries in the middle.
Whether it is solar wind or
hydro carbon based or nuclear
base like the court the center
of our country is the corner for
that energy what we're doing is
we're taking that energy and
we're turning into intelligence
through a I in intelligence is
priceless it is the most diable
thing on the planet.
Sorry i'm still going okay i'm
so on the slide you were given
you a rendering of of how we
think about this so the big
macro opportunity is to you
create these campuses it's
already economic development
here in the community the way I
would propose we think about
that as we try to do it a
repeatable fashion so you're
back to legos legals are modular
repeatable where you can snap
these things together I keep
going we want to do the same
thing on the campuses and so
it's a notion of my compo
location there that you
underlying utilities you know
the the power sources the water
sources with the outcomes you
know the day to start the main
fractures that were beautiful
emotion it's a fast motion great
and so the way for new mexico in
this community specifically to
accelerate you because we are
competing with ohio local
competing with pennsylvania yet
that got announced yesterday
like this is a national
competition and want to state so
they're not just going to hand
us a case price like we got to
walk like we had to go when the
thing quite important winning it
is to have a motion that moves
faster that's easier to predict
and understandable so that's why
these can't
that's why I think these
campuses you're really help so
here's a rendering what it would
look like and we are you'll be
the work on this now for a few
months you're in the community
and we're getting attraction
we're talking about leasing
prospects you have their
prospective parties that
everybody in this room would be
proud you know and and happy to
have you in the community and in
just the
yeah
intention in care I think they
will place all right to all that
all that's going well and the
ultimately like you know eyes on
the prize it's about how do we
have a week snap this
infrastructure together you know
we've been working with a pass
electric you know they've been
you know fantastic and all this
as we as we work on it in it so
start wheel from that power
admiral prestructure you attract
these prospects in a way the
rules on locker you know
supervisor community.
And so our call is too unlock
and opportunity and end the
opportunity that was announced
yesterday in pittsburgh was
collectively about a seventy
billion dollar investment for
for this data pencil yet the
state of pennsylvania and so
that is what we are competing
with here in new mexico how do
we attract multiple involved
investments to the state so we
want to unlock that new
opportunity by developing data
centers and we want to have
advance manufacturing located
next to the data centers so that
you've got people making their
computer chips making the
components which has already
happening with them this general
geographic area and we want to
catanact those data center hubs
with the manufacturing pubs with
roads and you're going to need
other infrastructure their right
you need a fund that power
infrastructure it goes into
place and you're getting need to
have sufficient waters the plan
we're gonna talk about that in a
little bit and then you need
sufficient job growth to support
that this area this geographic
area has all of those rate
components to service at a build
out like this which is why we
are developing negative traction
with interest and investors this
could result in potentially
thousands of jobs and
construction and then that would
go into hundreds of jobs for the
data center that potentially
thousands of jobs for advance
manufacturing which is why that
cold location about having the
data center in the manufacturing
is really important build it
together and we weren't attract
hyper scalers to the centratory
set area you're looking at
worldwide companies some of the
largest companies
internationally that are
interested in hyper scaling
these facilities those are major
employers that usually bring
other investments to our
communities when they come they
like to engage in a lot of
community outreach help build
parts help going to community
benefit programs they like to
have benefits for their workers
their employees they're placed
children.
In the communities where they
live in work.
And that billions of dollars and
economic growth we have heard
the reports from the new mexico
economic development department
about the economic growth
influence here county which has
been substantial and you could
see a much more significant
multiplier in this area just
given the fact of how many
manufacturing companies are
already in el pastel and mexico
in the surrounding area.
The.
Sorry there's a lack.
And at least this to power power
is an integral component of
economic development you have to
have enough electricity running
to these sites when you think
about anything computing at
those hand in hand with having
enough electrons to put on the
grid and order to power these
sites last legislative session
the legislature passed
micrograde legislation and house
bill ninety three which was an
environmental bill that was
signed by the gatherner and that
micrograde legislation helps us
get the power online in time to
capitalise on the investment but
more importantly we are
interested and also working with
utilities and making sure that
our utility partners are right
there with a site by side and
that they can get the
improvements that they need to
their systems and the approvals
that they need from the prc
entire tech capitalised on these
investments hyper scalers are
interested and making
investments within the next two
years so if you think about the
prc's approval time lanes right
now they typically run a lot
longer than two years several
pieces of legislation where
passed last year for economic
development areas designations
to help streamline that as prc
approvals and then also the
microphone legislation which
helps enable a build out but
significant micrograde that they
could connect to a utility
screen at the same time
providing redundancy new
infrastructure to an area very
quickly that is built by a
private companies and entities
adding more electrons to a total
area the end result is that you
could end up with more electric
electricity security reliability
within the santa trace at
southern part of new mexico then
we have an other portions at the
state just because of their
interest in the micrograde build
out for this reach at.
Uhm.
We are going to see two test
retirements growth and need it
and are electricity system
nationally so these are national
statistics on this site with the
interest in ai nationwide are
electricity systems are
deficient they need to be built
out they need to be made more
robust you have old
infrastructure out there so
utilities when you think about
going through the pc process
they get approvals first turn
amount of many for certain jobs
that they fix kinda like our
road system you're kind of
patching things along the way
when you think about them now
that you need tue to three times
more than power to power these
systems and and its
infrastructure that needs to be
built.
A patch job isn't going to do it
and that there's just no other
way to kind of put it so you're
going to have to have very
robust systems that get built
then and sometimes are just his
lot large as a utilities
regional service area power
provision and so you're gonna
almost doublicate a current
utility system with some of the
micrograde build outs that need
to take place that will give you
large amounts of power that is
happening nationwide
permitting delays and
interconnection hurdles are the
number one constraint that I per
scalers are looking at
nationwide and having disjointed
infrastructure and location
specific constraints are bottle
neck in some of the end of asia
and so at a federal level you
see that you see congress you
see their new administration
coming and trying to trouble
shoot how do we get a I out
there more quickly that may be
an area where federal funding
and federal matching funds.
Repeats available under the
current administration and that
could be an area where new
mexico is very competitive if it
has an aa and an aa
infrastructure system that is
building out.
Okay so ways to think about
developing the simple structure
mean let's start with you the
existing power grid is an
amazing machine miss an amazing
system itself affordable it's
reliable it consists of
thousands of devices and it's a
complex system that performs at
a high level and that last graph
should help
twenty twenty five years and
agree it across the country we
strong out of it modest rate so
the question becomes as we build
the stuff out now you have to do
in a twenty first century way
and part of the core hypothesis
and insights around this is to
do doing the way that you know
is very energy efficient so what
we look talk about collocation
part of that efficiency is
around now having a day to
center approximate two of a
power source to a generating
source and we do that you we we
produce transmission loss so
today when we have power plants
you know hundreds of miles from
a city center with run
transmission from that power
point of citibank murder
electricity in the former
resistance as a transmitters
across that wire support the
process of collocating these
systems together as we capture
we rekindle that loss you will
support the loss is the same
thing true may think about
cooling systems and healing
systems you're these machines
generate a lot of heat we can
use that he brother outcomes on
the campus like with heating
buildings and a winner yeah
would be an example so so my
collocating systems you know is
just more more efficient so we
think about how to catch up in a
hurry yet there's the regulatory
permitted activities there's
also how you when we do it this
way we think relative to
historical methods we save
twenty percent energy so you
save twenty percent energy in
the base communities every five
times we do we kind of get one
three years of that that's
collecting time right that's
crazy more capacity by simply
being more efficient with how we
do it.
Most of the companies that are
interested in investing in these
digital infasters or campuses
that are becoming their interest
in becoming tenants they want to
build out a data center they
have high sustainability calls
and so there is sustainability
goals on line with the states
calls by and large and so you
see these these drivers you can
look at google statements matter
statements about sixteen ability
just about every company in the
space has a pretty robust
sustainability statement and
goal that they are trying to
achieve we need clean energy not
only do we need a lot of energy
but when he clean energy and
order ten eight thousand
and we talked a lot last session
about how do you have been
slowed power so the other thing
that digital infrastructure
needs to be successful is they
need a b slowed that doesn't
have intermittency and so
renewables are wonderful they
can give you a lot of a bundle
of power to build them out and
keep your load of energy system
you know reliable coming to you
at all times day at night twenty
four hours a day you have to
have a beef slow incase that
intermittently drops off for
such so many hours in so that be
slowed power comes from a
handful of different sources you
have call which we have got rid
of and I think that's that in
lines very much so at the states
calls and emission and schools
and it's very important you have
natural gas you have nuclear and
their son thoughts of maybe your
thermal coming online but those
are your slowed reliable energy
sources that we have available
new killer is a technology that
is developing and it will be
commercially available in about
five years is what people think
and you may think five years
okay that's that's tomorrow's
problem it's not today's problem
the nuclear regulatory
commission has an eight year
side process and so if you want
to have new killer in place in
eight years and the technology
is going to be ready eight years
from now.
A lot of companies are starting
to get out there and start their
permanent processes and starting
to talk to the nrc and what do I
need to do for citing and so now
is the time to start to think
about modular nuclear four
states that want to be best in
clean energy build outs to
secure your baseload power while
you build out more renewables
and have been successful based
load allows you to build out
more renewals because then you
can match the baseload with
larger solar bill doubts larger
wind build outs to match that
intermittency and that will give
you a more robust reliable
energy system and total
so I think this is coming this
legislative session and you're
going to see a lot of interest
not just from companies like
border products digital assets
but other energy developers
force starting to be a lot more
interested in modular killer one
at the first trial projects it
is under way by build gates with
a smaller nuclear reactor that
they have successfully built in
permanent with our seat that is
not in new maxico it's a
different state but how does new
mexico attract similar interest
and as we think about building
out huge energy systems to be
competitive in an a I danced
manufacturing landscape the
states that succeed while find
those power packlays
and so that's something that we
just want to start to talk about
more as the state engagement
meaningful and helpful and
constructive conversations.
We also need water roads and
education systems and I know
there's been several questions
throughout the morning today
about water and water needs
really quickly i'm gonna have a
land share with you some of the
new technologies that are
happened in the cooling space
which are allowed advanced
manufacturing cannot be as
reliant on water we have to be a
little brief only because we're
really really running behind
okay super brief on the the
technology developments around
cooling systems you're generally
speaking over lives your
technology is relentlessly
improving you have to sort of
what it like aviation safer you
know all that all that type of
stuff so I I think there's no
same thing and cooling systems
so you know historically cool
and systems do have approach of
cooling which means it takes a
lot of water we are literally
evaporating the water you in
data now these cooling systems
right on the close system so you
would help wants in it runs now
worse that's the place to quick
break punch wine
so any I is needing less water
than we saw even a year ago and
you started clause as we think
about these build outs which is
very important in this region
and in this area that being said
have been a reliable water
supply is going to be an
important policy objective so
that you can attract these these
digital infrastructure campuses
to the area in this area you do
have significant brackish water
supplies in the mission with her
there's already investments from
the strategic water supply in
that area but we need to fully
characterize that occupier we
need some test wells drilled
very quickly said that's been a
very important policy object app
for this overall best met this
overall project we need road
transportation and access
there's going to be a lot of
heavy equipment that needs to be
transported to this area to
these sites you're in to see a
lot of temporary workers come in
about two thousand.
Construction jobs that come in
and short order it could come in
before the end of this year to
the area that's going to create
a lot of new transportation
during this year a lot of new
users have roads you're not need
to work out some temporary roads
within the area a connection to
that border area the border
highway project becomes very
vital when you're looking at
shipments of heavy equipment
that have to come across when
you're looking at steel and
building materials that are
going to be coming across the
border and then ultimately as
you see if the answer
manufacturing and chip
manufacturers come in to the
area you're not see a lot of
regular transport and so how can
you maxical but come a leader in
this port area especially when
we think about nationally with
the drawings act efforts here
where we see a federal
administration saying we need to
use boats that are chartered in
the US set over ninety percent
of the vessels out there on the
search chartered in china
they're not chartered in the us
so that may drive a lot of free
activity coming up through
mexico in two courts like sent
at the restaurant and so is that
an opportunity for **** to
capitalise to move forward to
become more of a trade a leader
and have a bigger role I think
that it absolutely could be
we need education and msew is
very interested and creating an
a I am campus and aid program
that could service the area and
provide education that community
colleges with and new max cover
excellent leaders also
interested and education
programs this is a chance to
give our students at an
opportunity for working for
international employers really
significant recharges for act
gets to retain new max accounts
and have them come to work here
companies are somewhat to make
investments in our high school
programs and give our high
school cares access to access to
technology.
And those are all programs that
we want and think about
promoting when employers look
for spots they are looking for
locations and states that have
some of these programs in place
and that they can then come and
build the part and so I think
those are also very significant
important investments for
accumulat.
Cleaner.
So thank you for this
opportunity to present with you
today and share these
perspectives in with that hope
we have a little time for
questions
etcetera million thank you very
much is border please i'd say
that you're also an investment.
Mr mr chairman members of the
committee of it we are in
operating company yeah we
certainly have shareholders and
investors in us you'll be make
investments as well but the to
be like the way I would I think
the right way to think about us
is that you know we are building
infrastructure we are active in
the supplied chain securing your
generation equipment and
transformer equipment and
related kit to make these plants
and campus as possible and as
part of that we will certainly
invest around it ok so have you
built other campuses we have not
built any other campuses in the
scale no matter
because I also noticed that
there was a m o u with the
governors
that are going to have done an
email you with you about I have
owned what that's about i'm just
just curious about you know your
company are you operate okay so
you haven't actually built
anything but you are
you're what your idea is to go
case let us just go back a
little bit you talk about
building a campus here is there
do you have sight control over
property here.
It's a mister chair members of
the committee yes we have we
recently signed a project in
ohio that is a you're not in
figure project with the
hyperscaper so we're building a
structural higher so with
respect to campus as we just
haven't built it here with your
question with respect to
psychotroll here yes we do have
sight control of the property
that we are looking to develop
and of course I can talk about
you just have a purchase
agreement or something like that
that's what's going i'm just
yeah i'm just curious as which
you know which in other words if
you're an investment group you
know in terms of ownership of a
camp as or what you're doing or
how you're putting something
together I think I get an idea.
Okay thank you thank you mister
chairman
representative thanks mister
chair by the way cairos power
which does
clear modular is located here
and mexico already and I think
it's been about five years
my question is what's your ask
what do you hope for legislators
are different committees your
what do you want from new mexico
mr chair members that the
committee are ask and what we
really want is we want awareness
that this project is imminent in
new mexico that this area is
very important within the state
of new mexico the serious battle
incredibly within the state of
new mexico and so there is going
to be a variety of asks that
come nut specifically sometimes
important place digital assets
it might come from dynamic
county it might come from border
place might come from the border
authority but we are going to
need significant infrastructure
attention down in this portion
of the state and and I know i'm
from albuquerque abortion raced
and application a lot of
investment in time we focused
central new mexico
to shift in our focus down south
to calculates on this moment and
time.
It thank you.
The.
Representative
thank you mister chair
so I was also reading about your
I guess cooperation with the
governor
how big double account is are
you guys talking about here.
The.
This chairman members of the
committee were talking about a
campus that would be between
thousand twelve hundred acres
you promote dimension from an
infrastructure perspective it
would be
north of a gigawhat
electricity consumption
and on that thousand to twelve
hundred acres you are talking
about a building several
buildings
square footage ways are you
thinking
so mister chairman members the
company with respect to the the
dimensions of the buildings it
would be multiple buildings
average square footage under
rift whip be likely to ensure
two million
and just one last question mr
chair
what okay so let's say that this
type of that I could happen you
guys are building them
the impact that it would have on
um our local
cops
removing that power source I
guess I mean is that is that
something that you have met and
talked with them about.
The.
Mr car members of the committee
in this area we would be working
with they'll pass our electric
so it wouldn't be the
distribution cooperatives I am
under where right now at the
data century that's interesting
and going and a distribution
cooperative area their service
area we have band proactively
talking with the distribution co
ops to pay attention to their
concerns at the matter big power
taker come in to your area what
would that do it could you
connect to a microphone where we
have had extensive conversations
and a lot of partnership from el
pastel electric as we move
forward because we would like
this to doubt telstra seamlessly
with their system where it could
connect with their system and
maybe one day become part of
their system would be ideal
thank you
mr chairman you just add on to
that
we've been deeply engaged to the
past electric during this and
they've been fantastic and as we
talked earlier in our remarks
like we will be bringing in the
infrastructure with us we are
adding capacity not point it off
I were a net input.
The.
Represent everything
yes I am mister chair but I just
wanted to point that out because
you know if these data centers
grew up in the cross the country
I mean definitely that was
called up so be affected and I
think that that's a point that
we need to
you know we need to raise and I
happened to know this martin is
pretty well and I just want to
put that on the table so thank
you
thank you I I have a couple of
questions but before I go to my
questions just one that the
members know that there are box
lunches in the back this we're
going to do a working line as we
move forward so if you want to
do grab a box to help yourself
so my question is is that much a
question I I think it's more of
an observation you're up
proposed facility.
It's not pretty traffic
intensive is it.
Mr chairman members of the
committee in the long run it is
not in the short run though
there are some transportation
demands in order to literally
move all the physical equipment
it has to get there to move
though the folks that will be
constructing it and then in a
long time you have to get the
folks there and work there every
day there so I would say
initially a short term will be
the highest demands on a
transportation infrastructure in
the launch or middle soul down
thank you that's how far are you
from this particular terry a lot
here or any other major old
major
mister chairman members of the
community the site we're talking
about literally a couple miles
of the road here you know right
off the highway so that's the
primary ordery you know to
location
in that that's important because
our primary focus is road
infrastructure so I just want to
make sure that I understand that
aspect in relation to the
proposal for silly what we're
talking about how does a
compared to facebook which is a
muslim city it's a roughly that
similar and and what
we prefer first by saying that
is it if a right centers is that
a data center is that all under
one roof i'm not quite sure
mr chairman members the
committee so questions are so
the medical supermost lunch is
an amazing facility so when one
things about the sort of what
the architecture looks like how
will look to the eye it'll be
very similar right what I would
say here on the campus you are
campus is a series of buildings
so when answered the question of
their about what the area score
footages under roof that would
be your base on the most recent
designs yes recently it's
yesterday that would be four
different buildings so consider
each building itself a day the
center the aggregation of four
buildings makes a day of central
campus the appearance of it will
look very much like every other
day to sound in these structures
right the difference it will be
a campus of multiple buildings
not just one building.
Thank you and so do you have
proposed clients now are you
going to build it in them build
their court infrastructure and
look for plans.
Because I I imagine that each
client would bring their own
equipment right based on their
own needs
yet mr chairman members of the
committee that's a superincipal
question so that the way of the
the market works on this today
the shore and should yes we are
engaged in negotiations with
your perspective parties and
have been for a couple months
these are enterprise sales
processes there transactions
worth in a billions of dollars
so it takes a while right now
the lawyers respectfully get
amazing fees on this you know
type of negotiation there's a
lot of detail in a lot of work
to do all right so that gives
you a feel for what the
prospective process looks like
with respect to the equipment
the data center itself is is a
building it's a structure think
a bit like a supermarket.
No so inside a supermarket go
down the items also serve your
serials can goods etcetera so
data service like that with the
bunch of acts instead of having
serial in candidates there's
computers so the way it will
work the data center design
itself will become standardized
you're back to the legos example
you knock these things out so
each building will be you know
almost identical to the prior
buildings on the campus the
difference will be had the
computers are organized inside
of it.
So easy rule is we are if we
look at in video you know
they're big manufacturer of a I
chips they release a new type of
chip every year when that new
chip comes out that buildings
going to be the same but wait
those chips are connected inside
the buildings going to be
different to take forward
managed to the new chip.
So
i've had the opportunity to tour
facebook and they've been
probably innovative in their
cooling acid and systems it's a
combination of systems that
these include just air moving.
So i'm i'm just fast need to be
that hold effort and for the
members later I am sure most of
you know what happened with
facebook as all the inducements
will front load it it wasn't
like the
had.
And do spends after the fact
they were all from though so was
it was i'm wondering if you're
pointing that direction
mr chairman of members the
committee i'm not super familiar
with the the package in the
industrial that met a hands like
particularly common on that
specifically I would say
generally in our conversations
with the state we are talking
about different instant of
packages for this end of the
punch line there is it comes
down to new mexico versus ohio
new mexico versus pennsylvania
and how new mexico competes you
I I think new mexico
particularly the spot actual
house competitive energies which
we touched on earlier
I built data centers all over
the world you know every content
but africa and amp article and
what happens in in the assessor
these technologies advance you
the configuration changes the
architectural changes in the
incentive scheme around it
changes as well because they
just get more and more valuable
and more impact.
Thank you
well
thank you appreciate it.
So we will bring for a little
bit people grab interest
we we actually start again at
one thirties who have a little
bit of time.
