Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members, um, state senator
Roberto Bobby J. Gonzalez who
represent part of Los Alamos Ria
Riva Santa Fe and Taos and um
now is uh starting to be a very
good time to take a trip north
if you want to see the beautiful
colors, so I invite all of you
to, to do that.
Thank you.
Yeah
Good morning, Madam Chair. Gayle
Armstrong from Magdalena, New
Mexico, District 49, uh, 4
districts, Sierra, Catrin,
Secoro, and Valencia. And, um,
happy to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair. It's
a pleasure to be here with you
and everyone in attendance.
I had the privilege of being an
instructor on occasion here at
the Mon Montoya campus although
this particular beautiful
building was not here at the
time.
Uh, my name is Art De la Cruz.
I'm a state representative for
District 12, and I tell everyone
the District 12 is the heart of
the South Valley. If you imagine
that the northern boundary is
Central Avenue, the southern
boundary is 25 by 25, I would be
roughly in the middle of that
geographical area.
Thank you
Uh, good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Kathleen Cates
from, uh, House District 44 N
MDOT District 3. And, um, so
always, uh, thrilled when CNN is
able to host us and uh I'm ready
to go. Thanks.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Anthony Allison, I
represent the two-thirds western
part of San Juan in the
northwest corner.
Good morning, Madam Chairman.
Pat Woods, Senate District 7,
Curry Way, Union Counties, and
my district.
Borders 3 states.
So, uh, we, uh, we have a lot of
the comments it's, well, it's
done better over there, you
know, but I also have two
highway districts in my
district, 2 and 4.
So I have quite a few roads.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thanks for being here,
everybody. Um, and I am, um,
Representative Dan. I go by day,
Hackman v. Hill, uh, represent
District 15, which is the North
Valley of Albuquerque and I am
the vice chair of the interim
Transportation Infrastructure
Revenue Subcommittee. Um, so
today, folks, uh, before we have
staff introduce themselves, just
wanna give you a couple of
points of information here. Um,
currently we do not have a
quorum for this subcommittee and
so that.
He introduced himself
What did he talk? Oh, sorry, I
didn't hear you. Introduce
yourself right, Representative?
Yeah.
So that means a couple of
things, um, so because we're, we
are in subcommittee, um, we're
going to continue and conduct
the business of the committee in
front of us today. We obviously
can't take any official
positions or taking any official
business, um, under advisement.
Um, I'm also going to ask that
we go through our presentations
and uh work through lunch
because I think that that would
allow us to give everybody in
the committee several hours.
Of your day back, which I'm
pretty sure no one would protest
too. So I'm going to ask
presenters to um please be
clear, concise, um, quick if you
can.
Members can have questions, of
course, but let's try and keep
them limited so we can keep a
quick clip if we could. And with
that, I'm going to ask uh my
right hand woman, but she's
sitting on my left to begin the
staff introductions.
Good morning. My name is Sheila
Kelleher. I'm a researcher with
the Legislative Council Service.
And we have 2 other staff people
here.
N
Sure.
And our other staff person is
Christina Vasquez, and she's a
staff attorney with LCS.
Thank you.
Thank you. All right, let's get
going, Mr. Randolph.
how to work all this. My good on
audio?
Uh, good morning, everybody. I'm
Bob Randolph from, uh, soil or
stabilization Products Company,
uh, really appreciate, uh,
Representative, uh,
Human Ve Hill and Senator
Tollman's invitation to be in
front of you today. Um,
I've been working on and off on
highways and road projects in
New Mexico for 40 years and, uh,
I've been in the industry, so to
speak, for 60 years. I grew up
in a family that had a sand rock
and gravel plant, a concrete
plant, and asphalt plant, and
ran my own little paving company
in Summers to make my money to,
to get through college within
the University of California
system and, uh,
I think we're going to have some
interesting, profound topics
today. Uh, one of them will
relate to highway safety, what
we can do if we stabilize under
the pavements what it could mean
for lives lost on the highway
and the other is.
Uh, savings that are too good to
be true. So it's, it's
embarrassing to even bring it up
and, and one of the things I'll
say about this stabilization
product technology that I've
been working with over this
time.
I it's only worst enemy has
always been that it's too good
to be true. It's, you know, how
does it do all these things? So
let me say that and, uh, so I
think that's, I'm bringing good
news today to say we have a
chance for less money than we
currently spend on the highways.
To get highways that don't
pothole out, and I'm sorry that
Representative, uh, Harry Garcia
is not here today because I know
he's very concerned as a guy
that drives Interstate 40 and
commutes in and out.
And let me just say that uh last
spring, just before
I-40 had to be shut down for 3
or 4 days by the highway
department. I drove it. I was on
the way to the Mescalero Apache
reservation for road
construction project work and,
I was just incensed how
dangerous it was to be out there
dodging potholes along with all
the truck traffic and everybody,
and I just, that brought me back
to say, you know what, I can't
be quiet any longer. I need to
come back and talk about the
history we've had here and what
evidence we have, uh, because
lives are being lost
unnecessarily out there and if I
don't speak up, nobody's going
to speak up. So, uh, starting
from there. And, uh, in, in the
area where I grew up, we had
expansive clay.
meaning they shrink when it's
dry, they swell when it's not,
and if those kind of soils are
under your interstate 40 or
under your house or under your
100 acres of pavement for your
distribution center or you're in
agricultural industrial complex.
You know, in 4 years you're
having to replace your pavement
again and, uh, that's just
unacceptable as a financial
burden to the my cut, you know,
to my clients at that age and is
a loss of natural resources to
keep going, you know,
irreplaceable, what do we call
them, uh, non-renewable natural
resources like the aggregate
supplies are disappearing in a
lot of the United States where
people are having to haul gravel
100 miles now or only use
recycled pavement materials.
So, um,
Well, we know that
I was, I was grown up and almost
born in the industry of
supplying sand rock and gravel
asphalt and concrete.
Failure of public highway
systems are good news to a
material supplier, but I
accidentally got bit by the bug
like there's got to be a better
way. This is just not
acceptable. We were throwing
cement in the soil, throwing
lime in the soil, uh, and this
is we go back 50 years, but, uh,
and, and using plastic, all
sorts of kind of plastic
products,
and they were way too expensive
for the private sector.
And they weren't that effective.
And so as a young, you know, a
person in my twenties, it was
just like, there's gotta be a
better way. So we started going
to the university professors. We
have one here today, Gordon
McKean, he's not one of the
people I went to at that time we
met later, but, uh, from
University of New Mexico, uh,
retired and, uh,
Uh
From, from my
Acquaintance with researchers
doing the, the work at that
time, it came up that Exxon and
Chevron and Coke materials and
all sorts of other major
international petrochemical, uh,
companies were doing research on
soil stabilization. And if you
think about it,
If you go back in mankind's
history,
Sooner or later, people wanted
to take
raw metal and turn it into gold.
So that's alchemy at a modern
level will go back 10,000 years
and you know the Chinese wanted
to be able to take some kind of
potion, dilute it with water,
and make soil stable so you
could drive on it all winter.
And get your farm products to
the market, just the basic, get
your army, get your army to uh
the location in the middle of
the winter, even if you're
driving tanks. So, uh,
I can say that it did fascinate
me and it's no surprise that all
those companies were
Attempting
To their product lines to find
something that would work on in
the soil, they all abandoned the
field about 40 years ago, 40 to
50 years ago, uh, for a couple
of reasons. One of them, none of
them came up with something
really outstanding.
That knocked everybody's socks
off. And number 2, they ran into
the reality that in this
particular sector.
It's governed by the public
agencies and the public agencies
had no interest in new
technology. They just shut the
door. They weren't interested in
these big companies just came to
our office and said, would you
guys like to sell our stuff? And
we went, no, we already have
better, but, uh, they just said
we can't afford, we can't afford
this market. We can't even
afford as a big business to be
in this market because the
receptivity of the audience is
dead. We're just not getting
listened to. Nobody cares. And
so it kind of left the field
open to us. And so we
You know, we're able to team
research chemists out of that
period who no longer had
employment and put something
together that 40 years later I
can still say still, uh,
surprises me with, uh,
All the things it does. So we
ended up with a product that
stabilizes aggregate.
These are samples there.
Recycled asphalt pavement,
recycled pavements, and soil and
expansive clays and sandy soils.
So interestingly, uh, that's a
much broader spectrum than
anything in history. Cement kind
of works with sandy soils. Lime
is used traditionally with clay
soils, neither one mixes to the
other really well. They're very,
very expensive, and they create
cracking just like when you pour
a concrete sidewalk, you have an
expansion joint every 10 ft.
These calcium-based products,
lime and
create cracking. They, they,
they create shrinkage in their
curing process, which ultimately
leads cracking. If you've got a
crack down there in the soil
layer under the pavement, it
comes up through the gravel
layer and then it goes through
the pavement.
So that's the downside, and
that's historically kind of why
soil stabilization isn't used
everywhere. Like, why isn't it
used everywhere if it could make
such big changes? Well, finding
a good match that's more broad
spectrum, and if you, if you go
down the highway, if you're, if
you're the contractor, it could
be every 50 ft if you're in
Texas, the soil changes.
To a different type or out here
it could be every 1000 ft you
run into variations in what the
soil composition is. So that's
been a barrier to soil
stabilization for a lot of
years.
Um,
So if you can, if you can stop
shrinking and swelling of clay
soils, or if you can make them
just stay dry underneath the
highway structure, um,
That you can extend the pavement
life and as we'll see here,
we're going to see a section of
Interstate 40 that has our
products underneath it that's 25
years going on 25 years of
service life without a patch in
it. I've got videos of it right
now on my cell phone. I drove it
two days ago again just to make
sure there wasn't a single
cutout, not a pothole patch,
nothing. And that same section
used to get reconstructed every
3 years, every 3 years, full
depth.
And I just did a cost analysis
using some information from
Florida DOT, which is a couple
$2 million per lane, per mile.
So those two lanes, we did the
eastbound lanes, those are the
lanes out there toward, uh, on
the, uh, Acuma Pueblo across
from SkyCity almost out there
where all well almost you almost
the top of the world. You're
near the continental divide, and
it makes rain there. It's like a
rainmaker spot and then there's
all that malpai lava, Mapai.
Father and the flow of the water
comes downhill and gets trapped
in particular, under the
eastbound lanes, so the whole
maintenance budget of that
maintenance station every year
for 2 miles of pavement went to
those 2 miles of pavement to
survive them. So, uh,
This is let's let's say that DOT
would have advanced their
technology over this time and it
wouldn't have kept failing every
3 years. But if it kept failing
every 3 years, we're looking at
$86 million we've saved.
In 25 years.
For those two lanes not to have
had a pothole even, not to be
full-depth reconstructed. So
that's, it's embarrassing to
bring up, but that's, that's
what we're talking about here
today and those two lanes then
didn't have potholes that people
were dodging and having a car
and truck accidents, and we
didn't have a detour. We didn't
have to stop traffic. We didn't
have to have all the accidents
related to the detours. So
there's a lot significant here
that we're sharing today.
And, uh,
The during that epidemic where
they have potholes where they
had to shut down the freeway for
4 days. Uh, it came out from
their, uh, public, uh,
news public PR representative
that they admitted that the
problem was the clay gets wet
under the freeway. Well, we sell
product technology that's well
proven that waterproofs the clay
or not quite the word like
waterproof, but makes it water
resistant enough in its
functional layer there that
Doesn't get into it. It doesn't
get soft. It doesn't behave and,
and the most important thing if
you can make the layers under
the pavement waterproof.
It cuts off the atmospheric
effects. This is really
interesting. The highway
engineers typically don't grasp
this, but water moves uphill
through Capilaity just like it
does in a tree.
Such the atmospheric effects,
hot dry day are sucking water
from the groundwater all the way
up through whatever's above it.
And if it, if the highways
there, it's going to come up
into the subgrade and the clay
is going to get wet and it's
going to move up through the
clay and all that clay and the
capillary water are going to get
into the base layer. They're
going to contaminate the base
layer. The base layer is going
to be wet. It's going to be
soft. Where the potholes come
from? All the water getting
underneath the pavement. It's,
it's, it's so basic and simple,
but believe it or not, for 100.
years, the highway industry
education has taught people it's
all about strength. You want,
you want a brittle, strong layer
and everything, the magic is in
what the pavement, the expensive
layers, as opposed to the
inexpensive layers below that
have no powerful lobby.
To promote them in the federal
and state agency offices. So,
So it's, yeah, it's a suction
phenomenon and then the trucks,
this is interesting. The trucks
on the pavement are creating the
other pumping effect. First of
all, the, the hot, dry
atmosphere is sucking water up
through those layers and then
the truck traffic dynamically is
just loading that pavement all
day, and that's a pump.
So on top of that water that
wants to come up.
This action on the top of the
pavement, if it's not isolated
by a stronger, strong layers
underneath it, resilient layers
is again pumping water up, and
then we know about freestyle in
New Mexico. We work in
Saskatchewan, we work in Alaska.
I've been on the Pribilof
Islands, Prudhoe Bay, whatever,
you know, we've definitely
worked in cold climates in North
Dakota, the back and fields, the
oil fields, uh, so when you
start keeping
Water out of the layers under
the highway, you quit getting
freestyle.
Frear
Leads to potholes, you know,
it's all, all water related. So
again, if you can keep
sought water out of, out of the,
out of the layers, then it
starts affecting everything else
underneath those layers all of a
sudden.
All the way down to groundwater,
you're not drying out and
wetting up all the time. The
rain's no longer getting down
through and we're no longer
suctioning water up. So it stays
at equilibrium then and a lot of
what makes a highway go like
this isn't within the pavement
layers. It's what's going on
down underneath in the native
soils. So if you can create a
waterproof barrier layer here,
cap it off, then you don't have
water changing. You don't have
fluctuations that shrink and
swell and create all that
movement. So this is from
Underneath the pavement highway
and, uh, so adding cement down
there or adding lime or adding
plastic products is doing
nothing to change that
phenomena. So this rather low,
very low cost, uh,
environmentally friendly
technology is isolating.
The pavement from problem, well,
it's, it's stopping the changes
in stability under way down
deep.
So, and, and as as we go from
here to the Arizona state border
border on Interstate 40, we've
got all sorts of conditions out
there that are challenging, but
they're not unanswerable.
They've been unanswered. I'll
just say that. So we're going to
see some pictures here of that
project in a minute. Uh, in my
time in New Mexico, uh, I've
been been involved in mostly
starting with federal agencies,
we went to Washington DC to
start, got the attention of
federal highways at that time,
and the agencies like the
National Park Service.
The BLM, the BIA, uh, Bureau of
Reclamation, just all the
federal agencies because we
needed to, we needed to take a
new technology and introduce it
nationwide, not just in my
hometown or in my home state,
but it had to kind of start
nationwide. So our first
projects here were BIA, BLM, uh,
Forest Service, uh, and then,
uh, four corners up there doing
the power generation plant
roads, the coal mine roads, uh,
a lot of oil gas roads, and then
finally we did some interesting
projects.
In the city of Gallup that are
within your folders.
Uh, did everybody get a folder
passed out?
OK, and I should.
And I didn't get one for myself.
I should steal one so I can
point things out. Apologies.
Sure
Hm.
So here's a little episode about
all the different things the
city of Gallup did, and that
caused a contractor who was
doing some of those projects.
To bring them to the attention
of the Department of
Transportation along with the
Federal Highways engineer that
had watched, was watching these
projects that the federal
agencies were doing and the two
of them got approval through a
value engineering submittal to,
uh,
To do what was called a federal
highways demonstration project
out on I-40.
So the population of projects
that the city of Gallup did were
what caught ultimately kind of
got the attention of federal
highways and the contractor who
had the contract for this
section of Interstate 40
reconstruction to, uh, suggest
to the state that we should use
these new products. So this is
from the city of Gallup. This is
a core.
First of all, they used to
stabilize their product to
treat.
5 miles of annexed city streets.
With a stabilized gravel
surfacing.
Which perform very, very well,
only as the street department
said everybody felt
disadvantaged that their streets
weren't black. They wanted us to
make them black. So back when
the highway going north of
Gallup was known as 666. The
Devil's Highway, the state had a
huge stockpile of asphalt
millings, and they donated that
the stockpile of asphalt
millings to the city of Gallup.
Well, the city of Gallup had
already redone their, their
warehouse lane where they ground
up the old asphalt, out of this
stuff, drove on top of that for
half a year, then paved it with
asphalt, went on for decades
without a problem. They and so
then they decided, and I think
that was their 2nd, that was
their first project, and then
they just, then they did this
base course 5 miles, which acted
just like asphalt, and they did
on their own without my
suggestion, took those asphalt
millings and added the product
to the asphalt millings. So
first, the base rock went just
fine for 2 years, needed no
repair when it came time to put
this layer on.
And then they took a, a rotor
tiller and mixed in the
stabilizer into these asphalt
millings that the state donated
and these went 5 years before
they got the money to finally
put hot mix asphalt on top and
in 5 miles of these asphalt
millings, they were, they, they
said there were about 12 little
spots, about half grapefruit
size. They didn't eat that they
just put in a little bit of
patch and that was the entire
wear in 5 years of city streets
that had concrete mixers on
them, school buses, trucks.
truck shops, you know, busy and
lots of topography. So that's
just unheard of. I'll just, it's
embarrassing to say again
because it's so difficult to
penetrate the highway industry,
but they use a lot of asphalt
emulsion and cement to treat
millings. They never use them as
a running surface like this.
None of those things reached the
strength of this. There it is.
It was AEC Environmental was is
in Albuquerque based firm that
did all the testing and did
these cores.
So here's, and then there,
here's a look at just a core of
just that asphalt layer only.
So, you know, you guys are
welcome after the presentation
to grab it and then this, of
course, is Fort Fort Bliss. This
is tank trails, military tank
trails. We'll see pictures of
that if we get time. So, uh,
OK.
This is a bit of a last minute
preparation, so apologies, I'm
not a little bit more organized,
uh, in our folder you can see
the fact that the state, the
Department of Transportation
approved this product in 1998.
And then times changed and after
a couple of Interstate 40
projects, uh, for unknown
reasons, it kind of shifted to
the point where they took it off
the list and it hasn't been on
the list of the approved
products since. So that's a, a
reality that we can all just
think about.
Um,
So I've, and I'm gonna just kind
of move as fast as I can through
the presentation, uh, knowing
that you guys all have a copy
and you can always reach me
online by phone, by email, you
got my business cards, so I'll
just get through here really
fast.
And we'll see if I can make it
work. There we go. And the
screen is not visible to any of
you guys. Sorry about that, huh.
OK, OK, so the product has been
in the market for 40 years and
it's been pretty much setting
the performance standard for
liquid stabilizer products for
over 30 years. Uh, we recently
had a, there's a, there's a
folder in your hand out there,
uh, of a minute, the abstract of
a study just completed by
Minnesota Department of
Transportation. They tested 5
liquid stabilizers, the EMC
squad was the least expensive
and it outperformed all of them
across the book. So when I make
statements like
This is the best product and
you, you, you'd be your own
judge, but that's another
example. So, uh,
So we'll just kind of go through
the bulleted items. Uh, it is,
it is a liquid. It's a very
concentrated liquid, and the
name EMC squared is a play on
Einstein's energy equation E
equals EMC squad, it's not by
accident, it's just that this
little teeny amount, like one
truckload of liquid of this
liquid would replace 50
truckloads of cement or lime if
they were being, if we were
talking about mixing them into a
soil project. So the
concentration is already one of
those things that's hard to
believe. So
It's very, you know, very few
gallons go out there and they,
you know, treat miles, so, uh.
That, that, that's where the
name comes from, just that we're
working with something unusually
concentrated.
Fundamental benefits. It
increases strength and it
increases strength in a
resilient manner. So when they
test, do the testing, the
comment is unlike cement being
added to a layer of gravel, this
layer.
retain some elasticity as if, I
mean, asphalt pavement is also
thought of as elastic or
flexible compared to hot mix
asphalt. So I'm sorry, compared
to concrete, so this product
produces a layer that stays
resilient, meaning under all
that truck traffic, it doesn't
eventually crack.
It rebounds to its original, and
we've had some testing done at
the super pave a federal
highways laboratory, sponsored
laboratory that commented that
over thousands and thousands of
testing cycles. It didn't have
any deformation at all, meaning
it stayed resilient under huge
heavy truck military tank,
heavy, heavy sized loads. So uh
it is unique, it is unique, and
there are reasons that, you
know, there's another reason.
Why we haven't seen great
adaptation of cement and
lime-treated things in history,
they just use spotty uh in that
uh.
In that, uh.
The, the resiliency makes a big
difference and under asphalt
pavement, having a layer, the
so-called stiff.
But also has the same properties
of flexibility that the asphalt
does.
is meaningful in the service
life of the of the pavement
finally.
Uh, it's very concentrated. We
just talked about that.
It's environmentally friendly,
non-toxic, in non-tas,
non-corrosive. It's neutral pH.
It gets shipped only in in in
airtight containers, so it's in
drums or uh bulk isotopes
typically you don't see it in
truckloads. You might see a
truckload of the containers
going to the job, but, uh, so
it's shipped in it's packaged in
as a liquid.
OK, here we're looking at a job
in Texas, uh, and this is a very
expansive clay like, like in the
winter, if that had rained a
week and you didn't put a a soil
treatment on it, you'd be 2 ft
deep and, you know, you'd have
to be towed out for sure. And so
I think all of us have, have
some familiarity with soils that
when they get wet.
We're going to get towed out.
And so here we're taking 2 acres
of a farm field and we're going
to build a a working pad for a
concrete batch plant that's
going to be uh significant
enough in scale that it's going
to produce 3 the concrete for 3
freeway paving projects in
Texas. So there we are with the,
the first step is you add the
liquid and we've got a water
tanker there.
Kind of a big water truck and
we've got a mixer, a cross shaft
rotary mixer.
And then, so this is just a
standard application I'm kind of
giving you a look at this
project because it tells us all
the steps. And here we are
mixing this and you can get a
good look at the icky nature of
that expansive clay, how heavy
heavy clay it would be known as.
And there's the mixer working
again and then we're on top of
it with big compactors and we'll
go on and you have a case study
in your package again of this
project. So Texas Department of
Transportation, Dallas District
engineer.
observed this site for a year,
that just that stabilized clay,
uh, supported 70,000 tons of
aggregate coming in and out, so
that's, you know, 40 truckloads
times 70, basically that, that
much aggregate coming in and
then all the concrete trucks
hauling it out and a 5 cubic
yard loader, which is the front
end loader that loads the
hopper. That's the worst thing
in the world to destroy a
pavement layer. So all of that
happened and there wasn't a
single repair. There was no need
to.
Dump some aggregate on it to fix
it. So, so that's waterproof.
This is a good illustration. You
see how bad that clay is, and
you imagine that it was so
waterproof it could support a
major industrial operation for a
year.
And that's what we're talking,
just imagine if we had that.
phenomena underneath every
highway in the state.
As opposed to the water still
moving through shrinking and
swelling or drying, wetting and
drying and freestyle.
So, uh, lots of lots of
applications, El Paso
International Airport, all the
dirt shoulders you look at
around the runways, that's EMC
squared treated, so it's erosion
resistant. You can't do that
with cement and lime. They can't
handle the environment. They
have to have a pavement over the
top. This product is able to,
you know, you, you, we've done
thousands and thousands of miles
of unpaved roads where you're
driving on the surface. You
don't see cement or lime ever
used in those applications, so,
uh, interesting.
And it's even this is even used
for super fun.
Landfill closures because it's
elastic enough that they can
build the soil cap over the top
of the landfill. Landfills are
known to settle. Cement line
would be cracking all the time,
so what good would that be if
you're trying to create a roof
over the toxic waste. This
product in California desert in
Nevada on the Department of
Defense closures where they've
got radioactive waste and stuff
is used as a.
As a to stabilize the spinal
soil cover.
So it's elasticity is
interesting there.
Uh, cement and lime together are
known to produce about 10% of
the global carbon emissions.
They're very, they're heated
fossil fuel intensive, so that
uh and they need about 2000 °F
in the kiln process to be
created. So, I mean, they're 10%
of the global.
Carbon emissions if we can.
Use less cement, use less lime,
cause they have higher value
uses, cements great in concrete,
lime is great in all sorts of
industrial processes. Lime goes
into making asphalt makes
asphalt. So if we can save them
for better uses, we can clean up
our our air in a big way.
So it's less expensive than any
of the current.
Competitors and it's, uh, you
know, I think it's arguable that
it's providing superior all
around performance.
So here we are on Interstate 40.
This is out near McCarty's and
where you've got your, I forget
what you call it, but where the
entrance station is when you
come in from Arizona, you get
checked at the, you can pull
over and there's probably a
trucks we station out there. I
forget what all is there. And
this is a project in done in
2002.
And this is a very busy slide
instead of giving you 20 slides,
I'm giving you one. That big
giant rotor till in the middle
of the picture is going through
and he is rotor tilling up in
one pass 8 inches of old
concrete pavement that's all
cracked up and busted, and 6
inches of asphalt overlays that
were placed over time.
Uh,
And, and, and still all that was
failing, and this is, OK, this
is another bad spot on
Interstate 40. It's not the one
I was talking about earlier.
This is one that they did 2
years later on another quote bad
spot and uh so then on the first
pass that rototiller goes
through and turns the aggregate
in all that concrete and
asphalt.
8 and 8 and 6 is 14 inches in a
single pass and all the rebar
that's in there, all the dowels
between the concrete pavement
joints in those days, and guys
just went through and threw out
all the the machine ground him
up without a problem, and then
people hand labor went through
and threw out all the metal
dowels out of the mix, and then
it turned into a crushed
aggregate that then could be
used uh under the new pavement,
recycled, so this process before
I go on in more detail, the
Federal Highways
Engineers involved in this
predicted that if.
This was used on the I-40
corridor, this process would
save about 50% the money instead
of going down and digging
everything out this deep and rep
and then hauling it all off and
wasting it and bringing in new
aggregate and new asphalt. I
mean, the contractors and the
drill suppliers out there love
it. They love it. They love it
fails every 3 years. Great, but
uh.
The prediction was you do this,
even if, even if it failed every
3 years, it still costs only
half of what you just spent if
you did it, if you went down and
dug it all out, hauled it all
off, hauled all new stuff in, so
uh.
So this is an this is an
interesting project and you've
got the report right here in
front of you by the New Mexico
Department of Highways Research
Department, uh, and I'll, I'll
read a couple of quotes in a
minute, but to just look back at
this case study in the middle is
the giant rotor tiller, so he
and he is, he's making his pass
after another really so that's
an interesting piece of
equipment that's being
demonstrated. And the other
piece of interesting equipment
being demonstrated is a
triangular compactor thing.
And you've seen him used to here
in Albuquerque to bust up the
concrete freeways. It gets
pulled by a tractor and it's a
triangle. It's a really heavy
metal triangle and just goes
bang bang bang bang bang bang.
They just pull it down the
highway and it just shatters the
concrete into the rubble, then
that, then this big rotor tiller
goes through. That's the second
step. So those two things kind
of make pavement recycling
practical, uh, you know, they're
horrendously costly things to
maintain and work, but compared
to hauling everything off and
hauling everything.
Back in, we're talking about
huge cost savings potential, and
I believe the highway department
does do some recycling, but they
don't incorporate a stabilizer
product back in. So the problem
when you grind up concrete and
old asphalt is when you compact
them back together, they still
let water through. They're not
real tight. They're not as tight
as they were when they were
concrete. They're not as dense
and tight as they were when they
were asphalt, so they suck water
through the still, so they're
still not really good players to
put under
New pavement.
So, uh, let's see here.
And so let me read a couple of
quotes here from the research
department. The purpose of this
one mile test section we're
looking at right there, this
experimental project was to
evaluate the overall roto mill
slash stabilization.
In place processing, placing,
and compacting existing pavement
operation utilizing the
following equipment and soil
stabilizer, a triangular
compactor.
The roto trimmer machine and the
EMC squared soil stabilizer.
And then they're.
Uh
Final remark on the last page of
this handout here. Everyone who
is involved on this project
agree that the overall process
utilized on this one mile
experimental test section was a
very good process and believe
the department should pursue the
use of this method on more
reconstruction projects
throughout the state.
Well,
I'll I'll just say that certain
people were very opposed to
seeing this used asphalt
industry wasn't happy because we
were gonna reduce how much
thickness of asphalt you needed
because the layer that was going
to get stabilized is stronger.
It's more like asphalt in its
strength.
The cement industry is not happy
because the, the previous
failures on both of these
projects had cement added to the
base layers.
So they're not happy. The lime
industry that had powerful
people, maybe Senator Domenicci
was bought in at the time to the
lime industry and so one of the
New Mexico project engineers,
Department of Transportation
engineers said, by the way, the
senator, you know, has stock in
that company. So, um, anyway,
we're not doing it today.
For unknown reasons, but you
know, there was quite a bit of
industry and the contractors who
wants to see your work when it
would fail every 3 years,
suddenly go 25 years and not
need to be reconstructed. So a
lot of people's hair suddenly
stood up on end that something
this good was happening and here
we are today, so uh.
I would like to mention right
now again that we do have
somebody in our audience, and I
like the fact that he's here
because I have to mind my Ps and
Q's, but, uh, Doctor Gordon
McKean of University of Nevada,
or University of New Mexico in
the civil engineering department
is a distinguished highway
research engineer maybe the most
distinguished one alive in New
Mexico right now. I don't know
the younger generation, but, uh,
he's somebody that really
understands what happens when
moisture moves through the
highway structure.
And all, and he had some
preliminary involvement in this
particular project, so it's good
to have him here today just
cause so I know that I'm
speaking to a real highway
industry professional, and I
can't pull a wool over your
guys's eyes. He knows. So there
we are.
So, uh, just to come in on I-40
and I don't want to beat up on
the fact that it's happened this
section it's such a nightmare.
It happens to be in New Mexico,
but it has been making the
national news and the highway
industry and uh so I'm just
gonna have a few quotes here out
of a uh a trade magazine that's
a nationwide distribution. A new
study suggests that Interstate
40 between Arizona and
Albuquerque has many problems.
We get about 18 fatal crashes a
year on this quarter and about
17 serious injury crashers. This
is by the deputy project manager
for engineering firm Paramatrix
who are currently doing a study
on the corridor that the state's
paying for. So safety is a real
issue, and that's what finally
got me fired up to come back and
talk to you guys about this
again in spite of the dead end
that we've been experiencing,
uh, among certain parties, and
then uh estimate, early estimate
So it could be as much as 4 4.8
billion.
The reconstruction from
Albuquerque to the state line,
so.
Not all that's going to be the
pavement. There's going to be
new overpasses, move bridges,
uh, new easement's got to be
bought, more off-ramps, you
know, there's other stuff. But
if just half of the 4.8 billion
is the pavement, and we can cut
that in half. That's $1 billion.
So I'm here to try to catch your
attention today that this is
real, these kind of things,
believe it or not, are uh fruit
on the tree, low hanging fruit
on the tree, if there's a desire
to solve them and.
If you can get through and do
these kind of recycling
processes, uh, the speed of
reconstruction is just a
fraction of uh of, and the the
other interesting thing about
what we're looking at right here
is that instead of having to
cross traffic over.
With the detours where you go
take 4 lanes and turn them into
2 lanes. This stuff that never
creates a great big deep
excavation so that the traffic
could continue in one direction
in one lane.
Without having to do the detour
and take everybody into two
lanes. So it's a it's, it's not
only faster to construct, but
it's also it eliminates the
worst of the detour situation,
so it, it has some significant
significance.
Um, in nature, we take soil and
we know that it turns into clay
stone over 1 million years of
consolidation or mudstone,
sandstone, shale stone, silt
stone, if you're in the Grand
Canyon, you'll see old old
riverbed gravels have been
turned into conglomerate cliffs
of old riverbeds that are just
compressed. So these materials
have the capability.
The native soils have the
capability to become more highly
cemented and become almost
rock-like, and we're not out to
create rigid rock. We're out to
create elastic rock-like
materials that no longer suck
water in. So we know in nature
it exists. It's a phenomenon.
You don't need cement. You don't
need asphalt, you don't have to
add, you don't have to add lime.
You don't have to add those kind
of chemicals to create a more
stable soil that'll perform more
like a pavement of its own.
So we talked earlier about the
global carbon emissions earlier
issues.
So when a pavement gets rough.
It's much worse than you think
of when there's a bump out there
as you kind of slam into a a a
dip or a bump or whatever that
that point of impact with all
that truck traffic is suddenly
starts deteriorating the highway
at a very rapid rate. So if you
could keep it smooth, all that
traffic flows through without
impacting, without getting into
this bouncing phenomena that is
really destructive on the
pavement and internationally and
and nationally here. I'm not
sure.
Highway Department talks about
it much. I can't get any
response back about the test
results in recent years, but uh
the international standard for
the quality of a pavement is how
smooth it stays, how long it
stays, and you can take the
highway department here created
a formula where you can take
those test results and you can
then predict the the remaining
pavement life.
And here we are in Texas. That's
the smoothest running section of
Interstate 30, the Dallas-Fort
Worth Turnpike, EMC squares
underneath that.
And there's the, there's the
test results, this, this study
was done by an Albuquerque-based
firm Applied Research Associates
or ARA. So you'll see that this
was after 17 years in Texas,
where everything is like this
and cracking and it's just, you
know, you better have your
safety belt on or you're gonna
be hitting the roof a lot on
most of their highways where
they've used cement lime. So 17
years later, surface condition.
5 of them are excellent. One of
them is just good, and the
roughness, the IRI category, the
smoothness is still good. 17
years later over some of the
worst soils in the nation, so,
uh.
And here's the interstate,
here's the state, the project
I'm talking about out by SkyCity
and the Acama Pueblo, uh, the,
the, the drainage comes from the
right side down and under, and
we're right near that where the
Santa Fe or the BN BNSF
overcrossing goes across,
probably most of you remember
where you sweep through there
and uh so this is this horrific
section that truck, the orange
orange cab truck there is on the
lanes that were the the
nightmare and that we're
stabilized.
Both the base course and this
and the subgrade we're treated
with our stabilizer products and
25 years later we're going on
25, we're at 24.5 years right
now. So we're 6 months from
hitting 25 years and uh.
They stabilize both the soil
layer and the base course layers
to keep the water out of them
and uh and the the uh.
The con the contractor.
And we've his his letter is, OK,
this case study is available
online. I didn't have enough. We
don't do any printed literature
anymore. So we used to have a
printing process, a plant in
our, in our offices in the, in
the day, but this study is on
your uh online you can access it
and uh the the letter from the
contractor and the letter from
the Federal Highway
Administration's project
engineer are both in there
testifying, and I remember the
uh the contractor just said
this.
Soils underneath here were like
organic and stinking, and I, I
don't think I ever been on a
project yet where where I've
smelled stinking soils, but the
the the uh the uh volcanic dikes
would trap all this clay and
organic gunk in in pockets as
the water came down the hill
under this section of highway
and there's like a volcanic
levee almost underneath that
this pot keeps all the water
there. So uh it was impressively
bad conditions, and my guess is
they were digging deep as deep
as 8 ft.
Do
To try to dig these spots out
and then shove more aggregate in
there for extra work to finally
get this section to even go 3
years again. So the contractor
said he didn't think this thing
we did with the stabilized
treatments would last 2 years.
The district engineer of that
time, now retired, said he
didn't think it would last 3
years.
Here we are at 25 years, so they
just had.
Not a lot of faith yet that this
was as good as it as it has been
and as good as it is. So, uh.
And the smooth, you know, so
it's still smooth running, you
can drive over it and you're
there, there's a few dip spots
in the transitions off the
stabilized area and all the
highway on both ends has all
been replaced already.
So if you drove it out there and
you were trying to think through
what am I seeing, you go, OK,
these two miles are have never
been touched and everything else
has been redone.
I don't know how many times, you
know, that's, that's not easy
information to get, but uh uh
that's.
Kind of stunning and the current
district engineer admitted that
it's very.
That it's, that it's a success
story. In other words, there's
no problems with it, but they
just think they have problems.
In the past about something else
that I don't think is even real,
and I've got, you know, written
to their attention on the fact
that they were just misled at
that time. They're just still
operating on disinformation.
Um, but let's keep moving.
So this is.
This is a chart you could spend
an hour trying to figure out.
I'll just say that, but design
life lost the middle set of
colored.
Bars
Take you across and, and it's in
a category, the the percentage
design life loss. So when they
design a highway, uh, yeah,
Americans, I kind of think of 15
years or 20 years, Europeans
think of 40 years. It's and then
that calculates into how thick
all the layers are or how strong
all the layers are, all those
things. So the EMC squared
stabilized subgrade. This is at
10 years. This this chart here
was taken after 10 years of
smoothness testing, so they
drive, they
vans that have all sorts of
monitoring equipment on them at
highway speed over it to get the
ratings once a year because
federal highways forces that to
happen when they give out
federal money so they can keep
track of what are we seeing here
on this highway. So after 10
years, the EMC Square treated
the the section we participated
in, only had lost less than 25%
of its design life. It went 10
years, it only lost 10 years.
It went 10 years and it only
lost 25% of its service life. So
if you take.
25, if you take a quarter x 4.
If we've only lost a quarter, we
could kind of predict that it's
going to go 40 years.
That section out there that
doesn't have any problems.
If you go back to this chart,
you'd go, OK.
15 years ago, this chart was
telling us that this piece of
highway might go 40 years.
There it is. That's in that case
study online and this was done
by the Federal Highways, uh,
area engineer who against
everybody else ignoring it
continue to monitor it, uh, for
13 years and then his letter is
in the case study there.
We're up in Alaska. This is one
of the first things that this is
on the way to Prudhoe Bay. This
section stayed smooth running
for years under all the haul
truck traffic. It, it's adjacent
to it bumps, it, it's tied into
hot mix asphalt. I'm taking the
picture somebody for me is
taking this picture, and they're
standing on asphalt that within
a year was going like this
again, and they have
differential permafrost up in
Alaska. So when they get cracks,
the cracks are 4 to 6 inches in
their pavement. It's serious.
They have, they have the world's
worst soil stability.
Problems as the world is falling
up there, but uh the uh that
that movement in the soil
underneath the asphalt pavement
means that the truckers had to
slow down coming off of our.
Stabilized aggregate when they
came onto the brand new asphalt.
So uh that's the first time we
had to really start thinking
this goes back more than 30
years. Really start thinking
about.
What's happening here? If you
make the layer waterproof.
The freear stopped, the movement
stopped, the embankment started
staying stable. What all are we
affecting? So this is the
project just for fun. This is
the project that woke us up,
that, that we had a phenomena
that the highway industry
doesn't really appreciate or
understand, but that and that we
were just learning, so we had a
moisture barrier and it was
changing.
And finally, when a Gordon's
compatriots at Texas A&M, you
know.
Dealt with this moisture barrier
phenomena, Doctor Robert Litton,
and again, that finally then
gave us the engineering basis,
the testing basis in the lab to
go back and think about why
these highways were suddenly
staying smooth running and not
having roller coasters.
So here's that uh the slide that
kind of talks about resiliency
is better than stiffness again.
And so these products when
they're tested in materials
testing labs, especially with
aggregates.
Often take them 3 to 5 times
stronger or for soils 3 to 5
times stronger in resiliency
measurements and up to 15 times
stronger as a pavement layer
again in resilient kind of
testing. So this pro this is
from Fort Bliss, where we have a
100 miles north of the Neva New
Mexico border that we're
stabilized the tank trails, and
I think you guys have in your
packet again, pictures of the
tank.
Trails. So in total, 117, 116 to
117 miles of military tank
trails were stabilized there.
This is the running surface.
And so since this we're kind of
seeing it behave much like a
pavement.
Then we went to testing the
tests asphalt because asphalt
gets weaker on a hot day and it
gets stronger on a really cold
day. So it's kind of hard to
compare to it because the
testing has to take in all those
different temperatures and
asphalt also behaves very
differently under light loads or
under heavy truckloads that just
like the temperature again, it
makes it behave different.
That's called viscoelastic. I
don't fully understand it.
Doctor McKean would be the guy
that must have a deeper
understand.
of the reality of
Viscoelasticity, but because of
the testing at the work at Fort
Bliss, it went into an asphalt
pavement testing lab, one of the
best in the country, and they
came back and just they, they
commented that, I mean, finally
they come in that this is
favorable.
The test results are favorable
over asphalt to this product if
you're trying to support
military tanks or something
really, really heavy in a
climate that gets really, really
hot, um.
And, and it's almost
embarrassing when you look at
the test results for asphalt on
a hot day, you're gonna go, how
does that even work? So when you
see some of the pavements that
shove up and move.
They just didn't get the mix
quite right to try to have this
fine balance point between it
being elastic enough on a
freezing day and stiff enough on
a hot day, so that's the trick
of asphalt and uh so so this is
an alternative to asphalt if
you're out there in the freeway,
you're using this much asphalt,
maybe you could be using this
much asphalt, and you could this
layer the, the base layer of the
pavement could be this because
it is so pavement like in its
behavior and it's really
inexpensive, so.
And here we go ahead, and we out
of time. Well, Mr. Randolph, I
just want to make sure that we
have, I know that we have one
member who has questions, um,
and I'm sure I've buried you
guys and
stuff to think about that's OK,
yeah, I think they're ready to
proceed to questions and OK and
Representative Kates, Madam
Chair, why we're taking
questions, um, if the speaker
would like to share it, can you
pass, uh, can we have show and
tell and be able to um see those
up close. These things. Yes, OK.
course we always love a good
show on talent and their ears.
All right, well, we'll begin
with, excuse me, Representative
Armstrong.
Is the city
Out of the asphalt millings and.
No
And then there's just the
asphalt.
I'll, I'll just go ahead and
start asking my questions if
that's if that's OK, Madam
Chair. OK. Um, one of the things
is, can, can you tell me what
mile marker they're between on
highway,
and I can even show you the
video if we have a sneak out for
a minute. I'd just like to know
I want to drive it myself.
We're on the eastbound lanes
only.
Eastbound lanes only mile post
94.
And it ends just before '96. So,
and 96 is an overpass. I forget
whether that's to the Akimo.
That's fine. So that's it's,
it's basically 2 miles. It's a 2
mile section. It's those two
lanes. And what was the cost to
put that on there. It was less
expensive than what they were
doing otherwise, that's not a
real answer. So OK, that's OK. I
just can't throw it at you real
quick. I was just curious and
so, uh, uh, I, I after.
Further listening, uh, Madam
Chair, you apply this to the
dirt underneath and mix it in
before you uh lay the the uh hot
mix, is that correct? Well, the
case study here, I apologize for
not having it as a picture of
after that soil layer is done.
Then down here you see a water
truck, and this is the case
where the trucks are hauling in
the bait, the new aggregate.
And so now we're treating the
base layer and you've got a
section of base layer next to
you that light brown that.
So you treat you, it treats, you
treat both layers. There's the
subgrade, which is the soil, and
then the uh maybe like 11 inches
of crushed aggregate.
OK, that's what I, I was curious
about how, where are you treated
and how much, and have you done
any of this specifically just to
dirt in New Mexico.
Like in the oil and gas
industry and it's that's, that's
way back because our focus has
gone into highway work more than
dirt, just doing dirt stuff, but
uh our those days these
companies have all been resold
and have different names, but
Amoco and Arco were out there
in, you know, toward Farmington
out there or him as.
OK, that's fine I was just
curious, Madam Chair.
OK, let me just finish before.
Before
They treated these roads. They
were using D9 bulldozers to pull
the trucks in in the winter to
get to unload the oil product
off the pumpers. And when they
stabilized it, then they no
longer had to, had to, you know,
they had a a solid.
A solid surface regardless of
the weather of the, you know,
the season. Well, I, I was
curious because, um, you know,
we have a a large oil and gas
industry here in New Mexico and
so I was curious if they used it
down in the Permian Basin at
all, um, we've been knocking on
their door for 10 years and all,
you know, it.
Uh, creatures of habit, um.
That's fine, um, I was, I was
just curious about that. I, uh,
represent the largest house
district in the state, Madam
Chair, and so I was curious. I
just got a phone call of a road
that needs to be graded and it's
always an issue, um, and so I
was, I was just curious about
that and we would want to kind
of comment a little bit about
what that current road with the
soil type would be with the
gravel on it might, you know,
we'd wanna visit on the
engineering basis. We wouldn't
just sit here and say, yeah, you
just go take.
This stuff and magically, you're
going to create a whole new
road. We'd need to be involved
in the specifics of it. Well, I,
I understand that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. And um I was
curious how many competitors are
there that do the same type of
business that you are selling.
The Minnesota Department of
Transportation, uh, found 4.
And the abstract I think is in
your in your packet there, and
it mentioned you'll see that the
EMC squared was, you know,
didn't have a competitor.
OK, thank you for that. Um, and
what happens in the incident of
a spill?
What does it actually like if
we if there the the semi was was
got in an accident and all of
this spilled. What, um, what
does it do to the ground and
what does it do to the to the
highway that it spills on.
Unlike oil or cement or any of
those things, it's nontoxic that
one of our slides in the present
day nontoxic, non-hazardous,
neutral pH.
Uh, if, if you put it in your
water truck, you'd end up with a
cleaner water truck when you're
done. Uh, so it's, uh, you know,
we do a lot of work, Army Corps
of Engineers.
California Fish and game on
along the coast in the
estuaries. It's been tested by
the US EPA in Mobile Bay as part
of their national estuary
program. So thanks for asking
the question. This is the clean
product worldwide. This is the
standard if you want to treat
soil with a what you could call
a chemical.
It's that clean as as some of
the uh petroleum industry, uh,
environmental affairs officers
would say before they allowed it
to be used on a drill site or
something. This is so harmless.
It's as harmless as milk.
Well, chair, my, my reason for
the questioning is if it's um if
it hardens a surface, it's a
catalyst.
Like you add yeast to bread,
right, makes a big reaction in
that material creates a
reaction, it's a catalyst. So if
I spill this on the highway or
on the uh on a farm somewhere,
it's gonna harden and so it it's
you'd have to mix it in and
compact it. OK, you have to mix
it in. OK. I was just curious.
Yeah, it wouldn't and so is
there an additional process that
has to be done, um, when paving.
With this product other than.
Mixing it in cause you would,
there's not OK, but I would say
there might be a little bit more
engineering controls going on,
maybe a little more attention to
getting everything right in the
moisture content in the amount
of compaction in the standard of
construction. It would pick the
game up a little bit, typically,
so. OK, thank you. I was
reading, um, one of the letters
that you put in our packet, um.
And it says the approval of your
product is no guarantee that
it'll be used in construction or
maintenance project. The
approval is withdrawn if the
product fails to perform
according to the manufacturer's
statement and performance
criteria. So I'm just curious if
this is such a great thing why
it hasn't been used, uh,
since 1980, 1998, I think this
letter was dated and, and in the
Gallup or.
Grants, whichever one it was,
area.
Why was it? why in your opinion,
why are we not still using it?
Well, your vice chair has asked
me not to get into this subject
today.
OK, that's fine. It has to do
with a certain that's all over
the nation, the highway industry
is stuck.
And they're not adapting
anything new, and I think she's
commented that other vendors
have commented that the door
seems to be locked tight. They
just.
If it, if it's not something
that they came up with 50 years
ago.
OK, um, I would, I would just
advise that you are.
Um, let me see, what are you are
the president and CEO of the
stabilizing product LLC trying
sitting here at the
transportation committee.
Selling a product.
At the same time is throwing a
lot of contractors under the bus
saying they don't want this
product. I mean, being very
negative actually,
in my opinion highway contractor
being, being fairly negative
about the contractors here in
New Mexico and, and possibly
people having, you know, ties to
whatever the concrete, the lime,
whatever. I, I would just.
Say tread lightly because we're
very defensive.
Of New Mexico and the people
here and I appreciate your
product.
And, and if, if it was, if it,
if it does all of you say it can
do. Let's go, let can I finish
please first? You cut me off on
my response that would have
answered you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Appreciate your time.
Clarification on protocol here,
so you have to go through the
chair and one person speaking at
once. Thanks. Thanks, Dave. Can
I speak? No, we're going to move
on to the next question.
Uh, representative de la Cruz.
Thank you, and I'm sure it is
unusual for us to be listening
to vendors, but I'm curious we
have people from NMBOT and if
this product has been used and
since we're going through all of
this time, I, I'd like to hear
from, from DOT staff and and see
what their experiences with this
product and the uh real world
scenario that we've heard about.
Would that be possible, Madam
Chair?
I'm sorry, Representative De la
Cruz, I was having a sidebar
with Representative Kates. Can
you ask the question one more
time.
Can we hear from NMDOT staff
regarding this section of road
that we've talked about and what
their assessment of that is
since we have folks here and
we've already been presented
with this information. Um,
representative de la Cruz, I'd
be willing to do that one if DOT
is in a position where they're
ready to respond if they are
not, OK, we're going to give
them.
A second.
Madam Chair,
The people are all retired.
This goes back 25 years, so
that's the trick is everybody's
retired that was part of that
time.
So, and, and DOT has indicated
that they're not in a place to
respond, Representative, I'm
sorry.
That that really the point of
hearing from Mr. Randolph was,
again, we and this committee
have heard about new different
products being used, um, new
road technologies, the, the
point of the presentation was to
hear about the technology. Um, I
made it very clear that it was
not supposed to get political or
venture beyond that,
unfortunately, um, that was.
Not honored, um, and so we're
just gonna again keep it about
the technology and what it is
and what its potential uses are
in the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
questioning would be along the
line of uh representative
Armstrong and De la Cruz as
well. I briefly looked through
your research paper and there
was a parent participation from
the New Mexico DOT and uh if the
product was so good, why hasn't
it been incorporated yet, uh, I
agree with the statement that uh
Armstrong made that this was in
the early 2000s.
And yet we have not practiced
anything. The reason why I
voiced my concern is that could
have really helped on my Highway
64 and the Four Corners area. I
wish we had known about this, so
I could have pushed it way back
6 years ago, so thank you for
the information. If I can
respond to you, Madam Chair.
That was not a question, Mr.
Rednock. I, I.
I was cut off as I was about to
say this is not New Mexico
specific, the industry
throughout the United States has
just not been receptive in this
category, so I, you know, I got
attacked as if I was attacking
New Mexico. I hadn't finished my
statement, which was this is.
Not unique to New Mexico DOT.
It's definitely not specific to
this state. None of this is
specific to this state, although
these projects happened here and
your question is a good one, so
thank you for that
clarification. I think that's
very helpful.
Anyone else?
All right, with that, we're
going to move on to the DOT
district report. Thank you.
Thanks.
All right.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members, good to see everybody
once again this month. Um, we're
here this morning. We're going
to present District 4
presentation, um,
I'll wait a couple of seconds
here as we get the handouts
presented. Um, a busy week for
NMDOT this week. We are at Expo
New Mexico this week. We have
our state equipment rodeo taking
place, um, about 400 men and
women.
Um, are there competing and, um,
various events, um, so it's a
very busy week and then we have
tears this week and, um,
So it's one of those weeks for
us, Madam Chair.
So I think you guys all have the
presentation. I'll turn it over
to Mr. Adam Romero. He's our
district 4 engineer. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members, um, thank
you for the opportunity to to
present today. Uh, I'm Adam
Romero. I'm the district 4
engineer. Um, so I'm gonna be
presenting on our district, um,
so District 4 is located in the
northeast corner of the state,
uh, we're, we're, we're one of 6
districts, um, so our district
consists of 7 counties. We have
Colfax, Union, Mora, Harding,
San Miguel, Guadalupe, and.
We cover about 22,000 square
miles. Uh, we have 6300 lane
miles. Uh, we have 2
municipalities were made up of
16 maintenance patrols, 55
construction offices. Uh, we
have 4 special crews.
And we have uh uh.
7 rest areas.
Uh, so I am the district
engineer.
Uh, our chairman, uh, Walter
Adams, he is the District 4
commissioner, and he's also
chairman of the state highway
commission, uh, in fiscal year
25 are operating budget uh for
District 4 was 43, uh, about $44
million. A lot of that was went
to payroll and benefits, um,
that was about 23 million and
then we had $6 million for fuel
supplies and in other various
areas. Um, currently
District 4, we have about 315
full-time employees. We have 29
vacant right now, which is about
9%, which is pretty good, uh,
anything under anything in
single digits is is really good
for us.
On to page 2
Um,
So, uh, we're gonna go over the
legislative funding uh for, for
2020s of 2020, um, we had, we
received the district received
$20 million. We were able to do
uh 6 projects and 6, it looks
like 6 different counties and
those projects have been
completed. Um, all of them have
been completed in lots of 2021,
Section 9, the district received
about 28 million.
Um,
Various projects, uh, various
locations throughout the, the
many counties, uh, these are
pretty much all completed also.
There's a few that are just
being are are still being
finished up, but we're in pretty
good shape on those ones, uh.
Laws of 2021, American rescue
plan, uh New Mexico 39, we
received 9 million. Uh, we're
working on that project right
now. Uh, we're in the
construction phase and it should
be completed by 2025. It's uh
New Mexico 39 mile post 14.6 to
19.
Uh, page 3, we go on to laws of
2022 section 9, we, we received
$37.6 million from the
legislature, uh, we had, um,
various projects. The big one
and that one is um a 250
for a ratone pass phase 3, and
we're currently in the
construction phase. The other
projects have been completed.
Uh, now let's go on to laws of
2023. Again, we got about $12
million we did, we did, uh, 6
projects throughout the
district, and those have all
been completed with the
exception of uh New Mexico 434
in Mora we have a $3 million
project that should be starting
soon.
Um, now onto this year, uh lots
of 2024, House Bill 2, Section
11, uh, the district received
13.7 million.
Um,
These projects, uh, we have one
in Mora Colfax San Miguel,
Guadalupe, and Ku on different
routes. Um, one of them has been
completed. The other ones will
be completed in the spring of
2025, um, the one in the bottom
is 80% complete. We're about to
complete that project on US 54
in Quy County, um. So now let's
go to uh uh we also got some
special transportation
appropriations, uh, DOT got 70
million.
District 4, was able to get 15
million of that.
through the Rick shop and um
another 6 projects spread out
throughout the district. A lot
of these are secondary routes
that we really never get to
touch, uh, because a lot of them
are are not eligible for federal
funds. Uh, so we got $15 million
so we, we're doing some, some
projects throughout the
district. Um, a lot of these
will, will be, um, starting here
soon. None of them have been
completed, but most of them
should be completed by next
year.
2025. On page 4.
Um,
So on page 4, we have a map
showing
Our legislative funding from
2020 to 2024. Um, it's showing
that we were spreading this
money out through all the
districts and through the
various entities throughout our
district, um, like I said, we
have a very big district, so we,
we do our best to, to take care
of our roads.
On page 5,
here we have our construction uh
projects that have been
completed. Uh, we've completed
141 million. These projects have
been completed within like the
last year or so. Uh, we have
several projects on uh I-40,
I-25, we have some projects on
US 54 in Tucum carry, um.
Uh, we have some projects New
Mexico 434, uh Coyote Creek.
Through that corridor.
Um, so 141, that's, that's quite
a bit of, uh, that's a lot of
funding that we have have used
to complete these projects. Uh,
currently we have some ongoing
projects in district 4 on the
next table, we have $123 million
of ongoing projects. We have a
couple on I-40, um, again, on
New Mexico 434 New uh New Mexico
39. Um, so these projects are
all in the construction phase
right now, unfortunately.
A lot of them are going to have
to be suspended over winter, uh,
once, once the temperatures drop
and we will reconvene with these
projects uh later on in the next
spring.
Um,
we have a, a, a few upcoming
projects, um, we got about 30
million worth of upcoming
projects, uh, we have one on
I-40.
Um,
We have one on New Mexico 63 and
on I-25.
And the page 6,
so we've, we have some completed
maintenance projects also, um,
we use contract maintenance for
these projects. We've completed
about $25 million worth of
projects within the last year,
um, there's a breakdown again,
they're spread out throughout
the district. Uh, some of the
larger ones are like I-40
million inlays, um, we have a
Nova chip on I-25 also.
Uh.
Upcoming maintenance projects,
we have 3 that are upcoming.
We're working on uh replacing
extruder panel signs on I-25. We
have a Nova chip on New Mexico
434 just north of Mora and uh we
have a meal in any day that it
should be starting here within
the next week or so on I-40.
This is uh
West of Santa Rosa, it's a
pretty rough stretch right
there. We have, we have a lot of
work going on on I-40, um, we
have some rough stretches out
there, so we're, we're trying to
invest a lot of money into 40.
Um, the last table there, um, we
have some.
I'm going wildfire-related
maintenance projects, uh, we've
so far we've, we're at about
$7.2 million that we've used,
um, these had to do with guard
rail replacement, uh fence
replacement. We've done some
overlays and some hot in place
recycles. Um, these are pretty
much all completed with the
exception of one of the
projects, um, so that burn area,
our roads did take a beating
with all the heavy equipment
that was in there.
Um, these are all secondary
roads. A lot of them were just
Chiphill roads, so, so we're
doing a lot of work out there.
We've improved the area a lot
the people out there are pretty
happy.
So on the page 7.
This is our, our, our statewide
transportation improvement
program, uh, for fiscal year
2025, the current our current
year we have $85 million worth
of projects.
Um,
They're stretched I-40, we have
um.
We have a project uh west of
Cuervo on I-40 is one of the
larger ones. We have a Bridge
and I-25 in a bridge that's been
replaced and, and then we have
several others. Um, 85 million.
So for the 10 years out of let's
see, fiscal year 26, we have
8687, about $87 million worth of
projects coming up next fiscal
year.
Uh, currently fiscal year 27 is
at 22, but we'll make some
adjustments. I'm I'm sure it'll
go up, uh, and then out to
fiscal year 2028, we have 105
million. There's quite a few
projects on I-40, in fiscal year
28, but those ones will be moved
up as we get funding for those
ones.
Uh, so right here we have, uh,
on page 8, we have some future
unfunded projects. We're showing
close to $97 million.
Some of the big ones are um a
business loop in Springer.
Um, we have another project on
I-25 near Glorieta to R for
about 25 million and uh Grand
Avenue in Las Vegas, New Mexico,
another, another phase would
cost about 25 million, um, we
also have the study US 54. I
know Senator Woods, you'd be,
you're interested in that study
on US 54, 1.8 million currently
we have an earmark to Senator
Ben Ray Lujan's office to to get
that funding. I'm not sure when
we're going to get it. We're
working.
With our general office to get
that funding to start that
study. Um, so the table down
below upcoming studies we're
showing the study for the the
loop and Springer and for US 54
from Tucumari to the Texas state
line.
OK, uh, so now let's go on to
our TPF funding, our
transportation project funding
for fiscal year 23.
Um,
The state provided 16.4 million.
That was 95% the entity matches
5% for a total of 17.3 uh 15
total projects,
uh for 15 different entities.
Um,
A lot of those those projects
are still being worked on, uh,
so, uh, for fiscal year 24.
Uh,
We were able to.
We have a total of 13, about $14
million worth of projects, 15
projects for 14 different
entities we're, they're spread
out throughout the district.
Various projects, um, the
largest ones are about $200.
Uh, page 10 shows a map of the
uh 2024 TPF projects, uh, the
different entities. Uh, so
again, there's, we try to spread
them out throughout the district
so that everybody gets a little
bit of help.
Uh, page 11, uh, local
government road fund for fiscal
year 24, our county arterial
program, uh, it's about 1.5
million spread out through 15
projects. These are smaller
projects.
Through all the through all the
counties, um, the school bus
routes about $900,000.15
different projects again
throughout District 4.
Municipal municipal arterial
program 1.4 million um
1515 projects.
Uh, let's see, local government
road fund we had uh 92,000 that
went to New Mexico Highlands
University, and that's that
that's a typo. I'm sorry about
that, 15 total projects as one,
the ones on top also, those,
those are in the, those are
typos also, so like the
counties, I said 15, but it was
really 5 projects. Sorry about
that.
Um, local government roadfund
cooperative agreement for fiscal
year 204, another 1.5 million uh
spread out through the entities
listed, smaller projects again,
and then the school district
cooperative agreement we were at
187,000 small projects.
Uh, then page 13 shows a map
where all these projects are.
Um, again, spread out throughout
the district in all the
counties.
So our last page, um, District 4
equipment needs. So we have a uh
we're showing $100 million worth
of equipment needed, um, we
could easily show 2030 million,
uh, if we needed to, um, we had
some notes down there, our
equipment, we have over 1300
pieces of large equipment. The
average age of equipment that
needs to be replaced is 20
years, um, average cost 20 years
ago was 47,000, whereas now what
the average cost is 182,000, so
I mean.
The cost has gone up 3.5 times
over the last 20 years.
Um,
It's the average mileage on the
current equipment is about
2,000,000 miles and our total
annual average of repairs is
about 1.5 million.
That's for repairs, it's never
enough, but we, we, we make it
work. Uh, last year's snow
removal fiscal year 2024, we did
about $5.1 million worth of snow
removal and uh at about 333,000
miles.
That completes my presentation,
if you have any questions.
Thank you very much, gentlemen.
Um, first we're going to start
with uh Representative Garrett,
and then followed by
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. It's good to see you here.
Just
I only keep up with the ratone
pass when I drive it, and I
haven't driven it for 8 months.
How is it doing? It's uh it's
doing good. We've done, done a
lot of rock blasting recently.
Uh, we haven't done the paving
yet, uh, but we plan to pave
next year in the spring and
complete that project. We have a
different contractor now. We
have Fisher sand and gravel,
and, and they are moving the
previous contractor that was
doing the other phases, we had
some problems with them. Uh,
they're taking a long time, but
this new contractor is doing a
lot better.
So we're excited to see that
project moving and hopefully
we'll get that corridor
completed next year. So the
estimated time of completion is
mid 2025,
yeah, we're hoping for the
summer, but just, you know,
things come up. It's
anticipated, yeah, uh, summer,
fall,
um, so hopefully, uh, the last
contractor I would tell you, I'm
not sure, but these guys are a
lot better.
Good news. Thank you very much.
That's it.
Thank you, Representative
Garrett. Next, Representative
Kate's followed by Senator
Woods. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and, and thank you for your
presentation. Um, I am on your
equipment page, you say average.
Age of equipment needing
replacement is 2 years, average
cost of equipment 20 years ago
was uh a little over 47,000
average cost current needed
equipment is 182.
Um.
I, I would like to know on when
you're when you're compiling
these statistics the next time.
I'd like to know what your
Average maintenance budget is. I
mean, um, I take pride in the
fact that I can keep my car
running for 20 years, but, um,
you have to compare it to what
is the maintenance cost on it as
well. Um, and I just feel like
that that's a solid.
Argument as well, um, although
I'm guessing even the
maintenance, I'm asking this as
a question, um.
Given supply cha chain issues is
that in itself a challenge uh
for the maintenance of these
older vehicles. Madam Chair,
Representative Kate, that's a
great question. So about we
average about $12 million worth
of equipment repair annually
from a um a shop from a private,
uh, repair shop. Um, the NMDOT
internally does about another
3.5 to 4 million of its own
repairs. Um, some of the repairs
on our larger equipment, the
heavy
iron, um, a lot of times we have
to send that out for repair
because our internal mechanics
sometimes cannot work on some of
the, the pieces of equipment,
the very large pieces of
equipment, so that's why it goes
out to shops, um, as far as the
supply chain issues, equipment
has starting to becoming more
readily available. What we've
done in the past, and I think
I've I've said this before, if I
can find a vendor supplier that
has equipment on the ground. Um,
we have a tendency just to
purchase it regardless of what
it is, is because we know we
need it
Um, so we've had some pretty
good luck. I did receive, uh,
start receiving pickups this
summer that I ordered 2 years
ago. Um, I did order 50 of them
and they're starting to slowly
trickle in now, um, but I think
this year we've ordered some
other additional equipment, some
oil distributors, some graders,
some loaders, and I'm expected
to get them February, March-ish,
so as you can see things are
starting to loosen up and we're
starting to see uh some
equipment coming in a little, a
little faster, I'd say.
Thank you, manager, and thank
you for that answer that uh was
very enlightening. You're 12
million equipment maintenance
budget is that only for your
district, right, the 3 to 4 is
the D N M DOT statewide. Yes,
when I, Madam Chair,
Representative Kits, when I,
when I, where I'm talking from
is statewide. So $12 million
statewide, $5 million of his is,
uh, obviously from his district.
So and that includes probably
both the repairs that he's
completing in-house and also the
repairs that he's completing
with outside shops. So
statewide.
Total of about 12.5 million with
private shops and another 345
million um internal repairs
within DOT statewide. And thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you.
So forgive me for this, uh,
naive question as well. I'm
assuming England's purchasing
obviously the trucks, but
definitely even the heavy
specialized equipment. Um, are
you still having to go through
the state purchasing and and
having the state approved
vendors list and that is your
own
resources, is that correct,
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct. We use statewide
price agreement we seek bids
every couple of years, um, we do
talk to all our vendors. In
fact, I have 3 of them at Expo
in New Mexico right now for
rivers, uh, might have
caterpillar and one other vendor
there, and we have a close
relationship with them, um, so
we keep, you know, you know,
good ties with them so that way
we can anticipate what we're
looking for next year and start
talking about some of those
pieces of equipment. They can
start getting them in, getting
them on the ground, those types
of things. So that that goes on
your.
Route
And and thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you. I, and I, and,
and if you choose not to answer
this, that's OK. I, I don't
wanna put you on the spot, sir,
but is expanding your vendors
list, would it be beneficial in
the competitive price and
availability, Madam Chair,
representative, absolutely it
would. Um, we're, we're talking
to other vendors, um, as we go
to conferences and other uh
things around the not only
around the state, but around the
country we talk to those vendors
if they're interested in bidding
on our contracts.
Some of them are, some of them
aren't, um, this year we had 4
vendors, which is good, um, but
we look, we'd like to have 567
vendors, that'd be nice. I would
like you to have that too, so
thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Nex
Senator. What's
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. Um,
First on the equipment.
This equipment has escalated in
cost so much.
How much?
Of the federal dollars do we
spend directly on equipment? Can
do we have anything like that?
And, and why I asked that
question is because I was
approached by some other
agencies that the federal
dollars and finding
The procurement contract, some
of this money we're trying to
get out in a hurry. We, we just
cannot get it out fast enough
and it was set up to to revert
if we don't spend it and I was
wanting to think about changing
the procurement code on some of
that federal money.
And making it such that we could
Spend that money faster without
going through the procurement
code, and I know that the
lawyers on the committee will be
saying, oh no, we're not gonna
do that, but as you see the
escalating cost of this stuff.
is such that uh uh a $200,000
and over procurement code.
It is nearly a uh
A good overhaul on some of this
equipment.
And uh you know, it may need to
go up there to $200 on the
procurement code. Uh, there's
many of the uh GSA and different
things that we can think about
there to try to, to uh
accomplish the same thing,
but especially the next two
years while we're trying, you
know, the governor just had an
executive order out, and I don't
know if y'all have read that
executive order or not, but it
was a whole lot about
How do we spend this money? And
of course she's talking about a
lot of it going to employees,
which would help you a lot. Um,
I know that, you know, you show
a vacancy and I know that the
rest of the districts do too.
And, and so, uh, uh.
Any way we can get this money
spent is a is a huge deal and
not turn it back to the federal
government.
And uh the equipment deal, you
know, I'm in the same boat in my
little little piece of the world
too, trying to keep that
equipment up and buy new
equipment and the supply lines
and we all talk about the, the
more technology, the better off
we are until the technology
fails and we can't trace down
why this damn thing isn't
working because
Nobody knows. It's the newest
and the greatest and
And we get the factory guys out
there and they can't figure it
out.
And uh just in my particular
part of the world, it's
generally in the middle of the
night trying to bail hay.
And the damn thing don't work.
It's a nurse thing off the
market should be the newest and
the fastest, and I expect it
happens to y'all also.
That that
not only your mechanics can't
fix it. It's even the mechanics.
They send out from the
dealerships because of the
technology changes and how quick
this stuff changes. Um, that's,
that's neither here nor there,
but it's a problem we have right
now, uh, how, how are you using
AI in these studies anymore, are
we, are we going to uh a system
to, uh.
Use more artificial intelligence
to, to do our studies, are we
still doing a whole lot of it
by.
And, and what I'm asking about
is kind of in the cost of those
studies, you know, I've been
harping for years about Highway
54 and, and a little bit later
I'm gonna, uh, harp to the
district 2 about a super 2 also,
but
All these studies we need to do.
Can we speed them up, any?
Uh, it takes so long to do them,
they're so.
There's so many different steps
on this. Well, I'd like to hear
your ideas on that, sure, Madam
Chair and Senator Woods, if I
could just go back to your first
question and kind of touch on
the federal, um, you know,
buckets of money, if you will,
for equipment, so in general,
the Federal Highway
Administration does not
participate on equipment, just
in general, just general pocket
of money in order to tap into to
purchase like a grader, for
example, it doesn't exist. The
federal highways does have some
programs, um, and some
initiatives for new technologies
and some upcoming type.
Programs where we can put in for
grants and other um buckets of
money that we have committees
for calledTC and we look at new
technologies that we can use
federal funds to purchase, um,
for example, on New Mexico 104
in Trementina on that rockfall
area was setting uh computers up
in the cliffs and that we and we
monitor how much moving is going
on up there, so they were able
to pay for some equipment like
that, but heavy yellow iron, no.
Um,
now AI in um engineering uh
studies and designs. Um, we
haven't really touched on a
whole
of it just yet, and I know the
studies in in your eyes take a
long time and it's true, um, but
you have to think about some of
the things that go into a study,
right? Um, we have to look at,
um, archaeological
archaeological sites, so any
time we can get into a lot of
those areas is during the
summer, right, so we're have a
window open in the summer. We
have to look at endangered
plants and other types of things
and the animals and we have to
look at those things when
they're actually moving around
when the when the flowers out
there actually blossoming when,
uh, you know, the trees are
turning when the birds are
So there's certain windows that
we only have to look at some of
those things in order to bring
them into the study. So it's,
it's over us, uh, you know, the
year period before we can really
get our arms around what exactly
is going out there on that piece
of road, so there's a lot of
little things that we have to
look at in order to pull
together the big study, um, so
that's really what takes a lot
of our time, so if we don't
catch it this summer, then we
all obviously have to go out
next summer and catch the birds
and the bees and those types of
things. So it's very difficult
for us to capture everything in
one year. Once that data
captured, I think AI could
probably come in and package it
up together for us, um, and then
we kind of look at it in the
back end, but I think there's
more to come on that. I know
we'll be talking a lot about
that probably in the coming
years on how AI is gonna kind of
feed into the engineering
transportation world, and we're
we're eager to see that.
Hopefully I touched on on your
question.
And you did, you touched on it,
but
we've got a ride away here.
And we had to do a lot of
studies before we could use the
right away in the past.
And it's kind of amazing that we
can't use some of those old
studies.
To go forward.
Um, and I know laws change, I
know.
But we're reinventing the will
every time we turn around here
now, and uh uh do we use mostly
contractors to do these studies?
Madam Chair, Senator Woods, we
do, we use a lot of consultants
to help us conduct conduct those
studies that I was just
explaining, for example, the
birds and the bees, we have
consultants that are
specifically, um, you know, an
outfits specifically to go out
there and and capture that kind
of data for us. Um, we obviously
have our bigger consultants that
handle the road stuff, uh, the
geometry, the vertical
horizontal geometry, the uh
payment designs, the
geotechnical stuff, all those
types of technical things we
have engineers for that as well.
We can handle a lot of that
in-house, but when you
Looking at the step in our
programs, they're so big that,
um, in order for us to get it,
you know, keep that step moving
year to year, we gotta have
help.
And that's where they come in.
No, I understand we need
expertise to do that. I, I
understand that, um, another
question, uh, uh, we just had
all these wildfires and a lot of
it was in this district and
Has FEMA reimbursed us?
Very much money yet or.
How are we standing on that? So
Madam Chair, Senator Woods, if
you can remember, I think it
presented back about 4 years
ago, maybe 5, and uh Senator
Gonzalez asked us to give a
little presentation on the
amount of money we were spending
in District 4. So currently what
we do now is we have a a
cooperative agreement with state
forestry, and in that agreement,
basically what they do is they
call upon us during a wildfire,
for example, if they need us to
cut line haul water, um, you
know, bring fuel, whatever the
case may be, we'll do that.
And then we will get reim
reimbursed through state
forestry. Now if our roads or
any other of our infrastructure
were to be damaged in a wildfire
or flood, we could go to FEMA
for reimbursement. That's always
an option, but our first option
is always to go to Federal
highways first, um, our state
Forest Street through our
agreement first because that
tends to happen a little
quicker, uh, FEMA, as you know,
it, it does take a lot of time
to to get reimbursed from FEMA,
so if you're gonna go to FEMA to
get reimbursed for any kind of
amount of money, you know, you
know,
Look at anything above 2 or 3
million. So anything below that
3004, 500,000, we can, we can
just consider that um routine
maintenance and, um, you know,
something we would have touched
maybe anyway, so it's gonna have
to depend on exactly what's
damaged, you know, the magnitude
of it, and then we kind of go
back and see if it's even worth
it to go through FEMA. If we go
through federal highways better,
um, we'll definitely do that if
it's something that we work
through with state forestry,
they pay us back almost
instantly. I could produce a,
you know, our, our daily work
reports from our guys and an
invoice and well, I'll tell you
what, 2-3 days.
Later I got a check.
was, I was just got letters from
FEMA and maybe everybody else on
the panel has got those same
letters, but, uh, FEMA was
bragging about how much money
they were, uh, submitting.
To Washington.
And I said, what's that like in
real money? Well, we've
submitted to Washington and then
they decide whether they're
going to pay it or not, right?
And uh
What a world, you know, uh,
Madam Chair Center area is a
wild world, and there's a lot of
boxes to check, um, and a lot of
times we'll miss one or two and
that'll set it back 2 or 3
months. It's not a quick
turnaround, so it does take
time.
What the question I've got
Is what can we do?
To put more
Action more roads, more money
into the roads other than just
money, is there any regulations
or anything like that that could
help you.
Work faster through these
processes.
Madam Chair, Senator Woods,
that's a good question, you
know, for me it's, it's really
has been the money, um,
secretary, uh, may have some
other insight to that question.
You, Madam Chair, Senator, how
are you? Thank you for your
question. So I think there's um
I hear maybe two parts to the
question. The first is how do we
get projects uh to construction
much more quickly. And so the
legislature has already passed,
um some
um some legislation that allows
for us to move into the CMGC,
um, process which is gonna
expedite the project to
construction and we've already
completed the rules there and
we're actually going to roll out
the first project using that.
I'll.
Alternative construction method
in the um
Noga Canyon Bridge project or in
District one down off of I-25.
We now are using design build
for our largest single project
here in Albuquerque for
Montgomery Comanche and so, uh,
what we believe we need to do
next if you're um offering
resources is develop an entire
division around alternative
methods to contracting so that
we actually are, are giving
these projects.
The the resources support and
the engineering, um, support to
actually specialize in focusing
on which projects through a
strong project selection process
makes sense. Get them to a a
place where we can go out to bid
on those contractor design team
packages and move them through
much more quickly. And so that's
going to be the big one. The
second part of your question is
how do we kind of increase the
ongoing funding and, and we did
a presentation recently, um, at
LFC or
Our chief economist did that
really does show where we're
gonna be with state road fund
revenues over time, which is
going to be declining and
construction costs, which is
going to be increasing. And so
we are, uh, we're, we're working
on some measures that we'll do a
couple of things, study what
other states are doing that are
working outside of tax
distributions, motor excise tax,
diesel fuel weight distance, and
looking to see what else is
being done and we'll also be
trying to look at what's being
proposed already and what.
Um, how strong those ideas are,
for example, the establishment
of a trust fund, um, is a
perfect example, so, um,
essentially increasing our
recurring revenues is going to
be the ticket that gets
contractors in the game to
invest and be ready for a surge
in projects.
Explain to me just a second.
We've got a lot of federal money
comes in, but we actually have
to have some match to go with
that.
Uh, so, is that an impediment to
us. We're not having enough
match money?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, um, it
only does become an issue at one
point during the year, but
you're correct. On average we
need about 20 20% match for the
federal funds that we put and
that varies depending on the
program.
And so, uh, what we do is we use
state road fund to cover that
match. And so if you take
$500,000 right, uh, of federal
apportionment on average you're
looking at um uh 100 million,
um, that we've got to put from
state road fund to match those
projects.
And so, um, when the match
becomes an issue for us is
during our calculation of
federal redistribution. So we've
reported out to you that every
year because DOT does a really
good job of of budgeting and
spending its federal
apportionment, it becomes
eligible for the redistribution
of funding that isn't used and
our capacity there is limited to
the match and so this year we
drew about 46 million.
Because it demonstrated our
ability to come in with that
match and get those projects
obligated before the end of the
calendar year.
That's
I know that we have
not increased many of our
Gasoline taxes or
We distant taxes or anything
else and in several years. And I
know that there's been
reluctance to do that.
Um, we, we keep relying more and
more on the oil and gas industry
and, and try to draw that money
out of the general fund to to
finance more and more things,
but it will come to the point in
time where, where you need more
match money to accomplish what
you were accomplishing.
And so, um.
I don't know if there's any
appetite to do that. I don't
know, but uh.
That's a constant.
A constant discussion going on.
Uh.
I guess it might help.
If you could kind of give us.
In the future, at a future time,
give us a, a kind of an idea of
an increase in some of those
taxes and what it might do to
put more money to building
roads.
Because
At the end of the day when
you're running for office,
that's the first topic that
comes up.
Our highways and, and you have
been very responsive when, when
I tell you there's a place on
I-40 that we'd better do
something about you. You've got
out there and, and realize that
it's a critical situation, but.
We have to have a plan, as you
know.
To go
From
State to state here.
On these interstate highways.
They are getting to the point
that
We're gonna have to have a lot
more work, a lot faster on those
just to stay up, right.
And I know that you're trying.
But, uh,
We need that plan brought
forward and the cost of that
plan and I know it's escalating
cost.
Have, has the escalation slowed
down on those costs.
Madam Chair.
Sure, Madam Chair, Senator, um,
as I mentioned in that report,
we've seen and we're using
conservatively 5% year over
year, so 20% going back to the
pandemic, give or take what was
reported out by the revenue
consensus group was over the
next 25 years, 138% increase in
construction costs. So if you do
the math there again, you're
looking at a 5 to 6% increase
year over year. So to be sure,
you know, if you have a project
today that costs $100 in a year
from now, it's gonna.
Cost 106. And so going back to
your point about, um, you know,
your project to kind of kill two
birds in one stone use an
example, the, the project from
Clovis to Fort Sumner, right,
the Super 2 road, a study was
done, I think initial projection
something like $116 million. And
so what we'll work on now is the
funding that we need to to do
the design on that road. That
design will take about another 1
year and 4 months, give or take,
and so from that 116 million
And you can add another 5 to 6%
on top of it as a good estimate
on what the construction of that
project will be a year and a
half from now.
And, and, uh, have we got the
funds available to do that
study? Do we need to worry about
uh uh appropriate in that for
that particular study, what,
how, how do we go about getting
that?
Study done.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, so we
estimate the study to be
anywhere from 8 to 12 million uh
to get that study done, and we
don't have it programmed and
available just yet and so
identifying a funding either
through appropriation or
otherwise would be the next
step.
And so after that funding, it
would still be more or less, uh,
a year after that study is done,
hopefully in a year.
And then maybe we could start
thinking about.
How long would it take to get
the rest of the money. How, how,
how did you get in the queue?
To get that done.
So, Madam Chair, Senator, it's a
great question. So what district
one would do, I'm sorry, what
District 2 would do, of course,
is they would be looking at all
of their priorities within the
district and then prioritizing
it based on um where that
project is relative to others.
There's a couple of different
things that could occur. One is
they would start assigning their
um their federal target dollars
what they get to the district
every year, uh, from, from the
federal side to get that project
done, or 2, we would
identify it as a priority that
we present to you all, uh, for
one time appropriation funding,
much like you all have done
since 2019. And, and I'm
assuming, you know.
Then I asking, madam chair.
I'm assuming the same thing on
54 when we start talking about
uh from Tin Carri to to the
straight line, it would be the
same thing, but we need
another study done on that also.
We, we, or have we got the first
study done. I noticed it's.
We got some money, kind of.
We don't have anything done yet
on yet.
Madam Chara, Senator Woods, uh,
we don't, we don't have a study.
We need to get that funding.
To start it.
OK.
OK.
Madam Chair, I thank you for the
opportunity to ask questions of
The expertise that we have with
DOT is is is evident.
And
I appreciate you guys. I know,
I, I worry terribly about
Who's gonna be at the table next
meeting?
But I'm glad y'all keep showing
up.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Woods. Um, I
too am very grateful for all of
you guys. Thank you for all that
you do keep keeping us up in the
now, um, next, I believe we had,
oh hi, Representative Garcia,
how are you? Thank you. Uh, I
believe we have Representative
Allison followed by
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, just kind of a comment on
how much uh
Cooperation I get from the
secretary when I place a call to
him, he jumps on it almost
immediately.
And uh there was one item that
bothers me that was posted on
social media, where the Navajo
Nation Council, uh, passed a
resolution.
Among the 25 members, they
passed a resolution to expedite
the service on Highway 64.
I hope that does not become a
norm.
Where every time that I want a
project in my district that I
have to go through the Navajo
Nation Council to get any action
started. Uh, I, in that social
media report, people were
patting themselves on the back
who had no direct uh cooperation
or communication with New Mexico
DOT. My colleagues, especially
the ones that are serving
indigenous communities like
Representative Garcia, for
example.
And uh representative Armstrong,
she's got a Navajo community.
They did not get any credit for
that and that.
Uh publication. I'm not asking
for a credit, but I think credit
should be given where credit is
earned and where it is due. So,
um, please tell me that I don't
have to go through the Navajo
Nation Council resolution to get
any jobs started anymore.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Sure,
um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, absolutely, there, there
was, um, I did attend a council
delegate meeting with them and
there was a number of issues
discussed 64 included obviously
from the state line to the
interchange and
In hiprock and then a separate
discussion on the bridge
thereafter, but um, we didn't
request that the resolution. I
haven't, I haven't seen it. I
think what it does is present a
sense of urgency for the Navajo
Nation, um, to us that they
would like that corridor worked
on, as we've shared with you,
and as we've seen firsthand, I
know I have that's a priority
area in particular, um,
the portion we have now, the
portion in front of the school
district, absolutely and and
into the interchange. So we
haven't seen
resolution, it's, it's not
paramount for us to identify
priorities.
OK, thank you for that, Madam
Chair, and also one more
request, Mr. Secretary, can I
get a published report like this
on my district.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Madam Chair, representative, uh,
perfect. I, I believe District 5
report will be at the next
tier's meeting and uh you'll
have an opportunity to hear from
our new district engineer Rona
Lopez, and she'll present a very
similar report.
OK, thank you for that. Uh, the
reason why I'm asking for it is
I've got 3 short months to uh
tell my constituents this is
what we got started. Thank you
very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
A man with the plan
representative.
I love it. Uh, next we have
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you to the panel. I'm
gonna go back to the equipment
list, the things you say you
need, uh, so kind of like around
3 or 4 I lost count. Uh, Madam
Chair, um, you need about, um,
for district for about $100
million. How likely are you to
receive that?
Since this is a needs list, is
there a point at which someone
decides, oh, you don't really
need that, we're gonna only give
you $10 but not the full $100
million madam chair.
Sure, madam, Madam Chair
Representative, thanks for
asking the question,
um, first of all, I imagine that
this is District 4's priority
list and that it's comprehensive
list is likely larger than
$10,000. We've been fortunate
enough in the past to receive um
some one time appropriations,
um, to the tune of about $200
million for statewide and so
that provides each district with
something like 30 and uh give or
take. And so we chip away at the
list a little at a time, and
then on the back end of it are
older vehicles.
Our strategy, um, again for the
2nd time in a row has been to
leverage capital outlay for for
equipment.
And so historically when I came
to the Department of
Transportation and, and started
getting emails about, you know,
ISIP reminders and capital
outlay requests deadlines asked
the group, well, what, what are
we gonna submit and, and, and
the group at DOT said, hey, we
don't ever get capital outlay
and I thought, why? I mean,
it's, it's ridiculous, you know,
and it had just become kind of a
practice.
Among the uh um the groups who
make recommendations that well
anything that the DOT needs they
can take out of the state road
fund, right? That's what the
state road fund is, is, you
know, uh, uh, a real
discretionary kind of budget.
And so last year we asked and
this year we're asking again for
uh over $30 million and it
includes equipment and it
includes what we need to
maintain our patrol facilities
across the state, um, and I
think I may have mentioned this
before, and I'm, and I'm on a
soapbox.
Now representative, um, we have
the 2nd largest footprint of any
state agency in New Mexico
government, second only to
corrections department.
1.4 million square feet, which
represents we represent about
40% of all the square feet that
GSD oversees. And so when we go
after Capital Lotley for our
patrols, right? We're
essentially looking at deferred
maintenance going back years and
years and years, and so we're
getting to the point now when we
present this year at the Capital
Outlay Committee we're going to
bring patrol supervisors um with
us to talk about the conditions
of, you know, the patrols, but
what we're trying to do much.
Like most things is this is
reestablished the practice, and
we're hoping that between what
we need for our facilities, we
can also equipment we can start
to get capital outlay flowing to
us again.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Mr.
Secretary, I that's kind of
where my thoughts are leading,
maybe a special appropriation, I
mean, a generous, special
appropriation to cover the
equipment needs of all 6
transportation districts and
whether it's 300 million or
maybe even more than that. We're
gonna have apparently, Madam
Chair
Um, more than $3 billion of
extra revenue again, when we
convene in January and it
wouldn't be a big slice out of
that to fund this appropriately,
so that would be my sentiment,
Madam Cher I just have a couple
other quick questions. If uh
District 4 has a broken piece of
equipment, it can't fix it in
time. Do you borrow from another
district perhaps, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Brown, that's correct. So
basically what we'll do, for
example, we did it last winter,
um, Klein's Corners is a good
example. We had 210 yard snow
trucks that had gone down. We're
expecting snow on the upcoming
week, probably the next 3 days.
So what I did is I went to
District 2, who doesn't always
see a whole lot of snow and I
took 2 or 3 snow trucks from
them and I brought them up to
District 2, or excuse me,
District 5 area, that's District
5 declines corners to help us
through that storm. Currently
Klein's Corner still has those
310 yard.
Trucks, um, because I just can't
get seem to get them enough,
enough equipment for them to
give them back. So yes, we'll,
we'll get equipment wherever we
need it from in the state,
whether it's uh snow trucks,
excavators, specialized, uh,
other specialized equipment that
another district may have, but
if a district needs a piece of
equipment, I'll get it for him
one way or another. Thank you
for that, Madam Chair, and to
whoever wants to answer this. Is
there, uh, when you decide to
retire a piece of equipment, is
there an aftermarket you go to
auction with it? Is that how you
dispose of it?
Those things, and, Madam Chair
Representative Brown, that's
exactly what happened. So we
have 3 auctions every summer.
The first auction is called a
hardship auction, and we provide
$50,000 to any hardship uh
entity that'll come in and
they're able to purchase um any
of our pieces of equipment with
a $50 or $50,000 little bonus
there. Um, the second auction is
the locals auction, so anybody
after the hardship, any other
local government, uh, tribal
government, school district
could come in and, and go after
the rest of the equipment.
And then lastly, which is gonna
happen this Saturday is the
public auction, and that's where
all the equipment that didn't
get sold to those two auctions I
mentioned will go to the public
on Saturday and we'll get rid of
the rest of them. This year we
had about 230 pieces of
equipment, including cars and
trucks, so that's a lot of
combustion engines we had at at
the back end as we kind of, like
you said, retired those pieces
of Madam,
final question, a short one. Do
you ever lease equipment or do
you want to own it? I'm sure,
Madam Chair Representative
Brown, we do lease equipment on
occasion that's usually.
The specialized stuff if we need
an excavator, for example, for 2
weeks that has a long reach or
something like that, um, we'll
lease it for, you know, 2 or 3
months till we can, you know,
finish the project and then we
will give it back. We usually
don't lease a whole lot of
equipment, um, because we do
have a lot, we do have a lot of
equipment statewide, so if I
need to move it from down south
up north we'll do that for the
summer, whatever, back and
forth, whatever the case may be,
so, you know, one way or another
we'll get it done.
OK, thank you very much, and
Madam Chair, I just would fully
support a nice.
Fat special appropriation for
equipment. Thank you.
Is there anybody else who would
like to ask any questions?
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
briefly, I know that we often
get.
You know, notice from our
constituents that there's a
particular stretch of road
highway that's maintained by the
state that is at issue in cases
of that nature, secretary, is it
best to email you and say, hey,
can you guys assess this and see
where it is, it is on your list
for maintenance or whatever.
Yeah, absolutely, um, Madam
Chair Representative, when in
doubt, it's probably Bernalio
County's fault just for, for the
record.
I shared that with Mr. Dias
Archuleta yesterday. Um, let me
share, we actually did have a
meeting yesterday, um, district,
um, district 3, myself, Mr.
Brasher met with Bernardo County
and City of Albuquerque. Um,
some months ago, uh, Mr.
Padilla,
and John Romero worked to create
a matrix for the city of Santa
Fe. As you're well aware, there
are a number of roads in the
city of Santa Fe that we own,
some that the city owns, and
then through different
maintenance and lighting
agreements we identify
responsibilities. And
So what we're going to do is
replicate that for the roads
within Bernalio County,
including City of Albuquerque.
And so going down the first row
on the Matrix will be the major
corridors and then going across
would be the major functions
from weeds from um litter
control from, you know, uh,
herbicide, all of those things,
and, and we'll, and what we'll
essentially do is we'll make it
public and so that as
constituents as um uh elected
officials, you all can go on
there and know who to call and
what we'll do beneath that
major.
is identify the point of contact
at each organization so you know
who to who to gripe to you.
Thank you, manager. That's super
helpful. Thank you so much for
that. I look forward to that.
Anyone else? And I went, see a
couple of new members who've
joined us.
All right, no.
Thank you very much, gentlemen,
Secretary Serna, Mr. Padilla,
Mr. Romero, great report. Um, at
this point, we actually do have
a quorum, so we're going to do a
quick motion for approval of the
minutes from last meeting. Do I
have a motion?
Some money. Do you have a
second?
All right, any opposition?
Minutes are approved. At this
point, uh, lunch is waiting for
us at the back of the room,
courtesy of the NMVC Action
Fund. Thank you so much. Let's
give members a few minutes to
grab lunch, uh, take a bathroom
break and we will be we will
begin back at 12:30. Thank you.
