I've got a pretty good movie
where they can.
OK, gentlemen, we're ready when
you are.
OK.
Oh.
OK.
Ready? OK. Can everybody hear
me?
Yep. All right.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
afternoon, everybody, and thank
you Madam Chair, for inviting us
to speak this afternoon.
OK.
All right, don't be shy.
Um, anyways, uh, my name is uh
Jim Hirsch. I am the NMDOT's
wildlife coordinator and
alongside of me is uh Trent
Bobkin. He's our natural
resources suction manager and uh
so if I say anything wrong, I, I
report directly to him. If I say
anything wrong, he'll kick me in
the shin and let me know about
it. I thought you were gonna say
if you said anything wrong, it
was his fault.
Oh
that works too.
Anyways, uh, this afternoon, uh,
we're gonna talk about uh the US
550 wildlife crossing project
and uh just uh I'm going to give
a brief overview of the project
and then talk about our efforts
to implement it.
So back in 2019, Senate Bill 228
was signed by our governor and
directed NMDOT and New Mexico
Game and Fish to develop a
statewide wildlife corridors
action plan. This plan was
finalized in 2022
and it had strong support from
the general public, uh, NGOs,
um, tribal governments and other
local, state and.
Federal agencies. This plan
focuses on deer, elk, bear, and
other large mammals, and the
reason for that is that these
animals, uh, cause severe, the
severity of crashes with these
animals is, uh, it can be quite
severe and they also the roads
can impact their natural
movements.
The plan prioritized 5 wildlife
vehicle collision hotspots, uh,
this talk is going to be focused
on US 550, just north of Cuba.
The US 550 wildlife crossing
project presents an
unprecedented opportunity to
drastically reduce wildlife
vehicle collisions and restore
wildlife connectivity in the
vicinity of the continental
divide near Cuba.
The slide shows a one-page
summary of the of the project
and that we hope is a useful
reference for you folks. The
wildlife corridor's action plan.
Designated this as the number
one priority project.
Phases 1 and 2 of the project
are currently in design and
would include two wildlife
underpasses and two wildlife
overpasses when these overpasses
are built, it'll be the first of
its kind in New Mexico.
The 16 mile long project area is
divided into 4 construction
phases which are displayed here
under different colored road
segments.
The squares with Us are
delineate wildlife underpasses
and the squares with os
represent wildlife overpass
locations.
These road segments are mostly
adjacent to land managed by the
US Forest Service Bureau of Land
Management in Hickory Apache
Nation.
This talk is going to focus
primarily on phases 1 and 2,
which are represented by the
orange and and dark blue road
segments.
There were a number of factors
that made the US 550 area
priority. The first factor can
you, can you, I'm sorry, there's
a little confusion on the
committee which handout are you
referring to right now?
Yes, it's this one,
I don't think I ever got a
spiral on my congrat, that's it.
OK. We are good. Thank you. OK,
thanks for interrupting.
I'm on
Good.
Everybody's good. OK, great. OK,
um, anyways, uh, there's a
number of factors that made this
area a priority. The first
factor is the sheer number of
wildlife vehicle collisions,
over 200 collisions were
reported by the police from 2009
to 2018. However, keep in mind
studies have demonstrated that
reported collisions represent
only only one-third of the
actual number.
of wildlife vehicle collisions.
So it's likely the actual number
of wildlife vehicle collisions
is closer to 600 crashes.
The cost of these collisions
within the overall 16 mile
corridor is estimated to be
between 6.8 and $10.3 million
over a seven-year period that
accounts for vehicle damage,
medical expenses, towing, that
sort of thing.
Another factor is the uh
wildlife vehicle collisions per
mile per year.
What it, it was the 2nd highest
in the state for this particular
area.
This crossing project would
provide safe passage for big
game, which would likely
increase the number of animals
available for hunter harvest and
wildlife viewing, but also
benefit other wildlife species
that are susceptible to roadway
mortality. Most of the priority
area is adjacent to public land
ownership with limited potential
for development, and this will
ensure the long term
effectiveness of constructed
wildlife crossings.
A number of existing drainage
structures as shown in the top
image do not allow for big gay
movement under the roadway,
which causes the occurrence of
wildlife vehicle collisions.
The bottom end of M is a
rendering of a precast concrete
underpass that would be 50 ft
wide and would provide safe
wildlife passage under the
roadway.
The NMDOT is currently nearing
completion of a dedicated
wildlife or underpass on I-25
near Row and even with ongoing
construction activities in that
area, it's already being used by
deer elf, bear, and other
wildlife.
In other locations for this
project, we plan to build
wildlife overpasses as shown in
the top image.
Overpass locations are ideally
planned where there are
escarpments on either side of
the roadway.
This limits the amount of fill
necessary to build these
structures and therefore reduces
costs.
The bottom image is a rendering
of one of the proposed
overpasses and when this is
built it be the first of its
kind in New Mexico.
Colorado, Arizona, Utah and
Nevada each have at least 5
wildlife overpasses already
constructed in this project
would elevate New Mexico into
the national movement to protect
driver safety and and provide
safe wildlife passage.
All construction phases will
involve 8 ft high woven wire
game fencing which would prevent
wildlife from entering the
roadway.
And direct them to safely
traverse at crossing structures.
An attempt is made to end game
fence runs at cliffs or bluffs
or areas that have little to no
reported wildlife vehicle
collisions with excellent sight
distances to minimize what we
call end run events.
To address a high ranking
wildlife vehicle collision
hotspot on I-25 near Walters.
Where a motorist fatality
occurred last year. Safety funds
were acquired and will be used
for the construction of game
fencing to root wildlife under
existing bridges in that
particular case.
Game guards also called double
cattle guards would be installed
at turnouts and driveways to
further prevent big game from
entering the roadway.
These are much more effective
than gates, since Gates, you
know, since these structures,
you don't have to worry about
keeping gates closed.
Because much of this project is
through Forest Service and BLM
Lands. It would also ensure the
public continues to have access
to these particular public
lands.
Madam Chair, my name is Trent
Botkin. I am the Natural
Resources section supervisor for
the NMDOT and I've been closely
involved with the wildlife
crossing program since its
inception, uh, about a decade
ago. I'm going to finish the
presentation by discussing the
funding for this project.
Since 2022, the legislature has
appropriated a total of $112
million for the planning and
design of wildlife crossing.
3.5 million of these funds are
currently being used for the
design of phase 1 and 2 of the
US 550 wildlife crossing
project.
The remaining balance of these
funds would be used as a state
match for the FHWA Wildlife
Crossings pilot program grant
application.
The NMDUT has applied for $26
million in construction funds
just a month ago, and we'll find
out the result of our efforts
this coming January. Last year,
a grant application received a
perfect rating score, but other
more shovel-ready projects were
prioritized. So now that we are
in design, we're very optimistic
about receiving the grant.
A legislative appropriation of
36.5 million towards the US 550
project would allow us to build
phases 1 and 2 at the same time.
A reminder that SB 72, which was
signed into law in 2023 and
established the wildlife
Quarters Fund, has never
received any appropriations.
Instead, the previous
legislation has placed wildlife
crossing dollars directly into
the NMDOT budget.
And finally, I'd like to let you
know a little bit about other
wildlife crossing projects that
are in development. We are
getting ready to develop a
scooping report for the I-25
Glorieta Wildlife Crossing
Project and the DOT is also
preparing a scoping report for
the US 70 Wildlife Crossing
project near Tillarosa.
Thank you for your time and
allowing me to speak with you
today.
Thank you very much. Uh, looks
like we are gonna go to the
question and answer portion. I'm
going to begin with uh
Representative Armstrong and
then followed by
um Senator Gonzalez and
represented de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
These are so interesting to me.
I, um, uh, represent part of
Catron County, majority of
Catron County, and I was.
Leaving an event in Glenwood,
New Mexico, headed to Magdalena,
which is about an hour and a
half, 2 hour drive.
I counted 127 elk.
On my way home, I went about 25
to 30 miles an hour. It took me
4 hours to get home. So I'm
wondering how do you choose
where these will be, uh, I mean,
I don't think it's feasible to
do it. Is it, is it per capita?
How, how are you choosing these
locations or who's choosing
these locations?
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
representative Armstrong, um,
we, it's a variety of factors,
uh, but the big factor is, is
the sheer number of wildlife
vehicle collisions and that
index, uh, of wildlife vehicle
collisions per mile per year is
also a factor that we look at,
um, and, and I know exactly what
you're talking about
area not too long ago, about a
month ago, I was going down to
reserve and the sun was in my
eyes and so after a thunderstorm
and elk were just all over the
place, um, so, uh, we really
look closely at crash data and
that's, that's a big factor. Uh,
some of the roads you have, you
do have crashes, but, but the
traffic volume is low enough
where you don't have quite the
numbers or concentration of
wildlife vehicle collisions.
Thank you for that. I, I kind of
assumed that, but I was just
curious, um.
Uh, I really have been checking
out the one, on 550, uh, just
when we go to Farmington area to
to look at that and so, um.
Have there been any instances of
any of the wildlife getting
caught in the cattle guards,
Madam Chair, representative
Armstrong, uh, not New Mexico,
but on on rare occasions in
other states, it's been
reported, but it's pretty rare.
Thank you for that, and, and
Madam Chair, would that be the
responsibility of DOT to clean
out the cattle guards, um, if
people aren't aware, you know,
sometimes a lot of people throw
trash in them, which is really
unfortunate, but they also
during flooding, you know, they
fill in with silt and dirt. Is
it the responsibility of DOT to
clean those cattle guards and
and maintain those.
Um, Madam Chair, representative
Armstrong, yeah, it generally is
NMDOT that's responsible for
cleaning those out, although for
the, for the most part, it's,
you know, they maintain
themselves.
For a long period of time.
Thank you for that. I'm, I was,
I was just had those few curious
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Nex
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
uh.
Thank you for the presentation
also as um.
Representative Armstrong its
own, um, very interesting, you
know, that, um, in working with
this, but um I have a few
questions. Uh, so is there
evidence of also um domestic
animals as cattle, horses that
you take advantage or use this.
Um, Adam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, uh, yes, in, indeed,
um, there are sometimes domestic
cattle and domestic other
domestic animals will use these
structures, um, most of our past
projects are what we call
retrofit where we.
Uh, construct game fencing
direct wildlife to existing
bridges and and concrete box
culverts and uh there's one area
that we get, we get heavy use of
deer, but we also get heavy use
of humans and their dogs and
horses and things like that and
domestic cattle,
thank you for that all.
Um,
I guess so for our state.
In one way or a form we've been
using this for a long time.
Because uh if you take a look at
um between I25 between
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
There's a few of them where you
have those wild horses that go
from one side to another.
And then uh on 64 going to the
Gorts Bridge. There's also a few
that are used by cattle. I don't
know about. Well, now you have
um a lot more on um your um uh
mountain sheep that are there in
that area. So, uh, in a way,
it's not really, uh, we have now
the new concept, you know, wider
and bigger and more protective
part, but
We've been for quite some time,
Um, then, um, the other part
that I was going to ask you is
um to what extent does uh game
and fish participate with the
planning and the process and
working with them.
Yeah, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Gonzalez, um, game and fish, um,
does participate with the design
of these uh projects and we
maintain a pretty good
communication with that agency
regarding all these projects.
And uh Madam Chair, do they
contribute with funding?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, um, at the, yeah, they
haven't yet, but they certainly
have expressed a desire to to
help out at times.
Oh.
I um.
You know, I, I probably maybe
somehow that we can work with
that.
Because so, Madam Chair, in a
report that we have on LFC, you
always see the very large cash
balances within game of fish
then the other part is we're
talking about wild life, you
know, which, um, you know, I
think they go hand in hand, but
um maybe if we have that we
might be able to uh,
instead of doing 10 projects,
maybe we can do 15 or 20. So, I
would, I would further um going
To follow up on that and um and
see what we can do, but um I, I
don't see how you can separate
one from the other.
Um,
the last part that I have, uh,
Madam Chair is, so every year we
receive the trip report.
And to tell us about all our
conditions of everything that we
have within our to and from
transportation. So do they do a
section on this, on the trip
report?
They have a secretary I think
the Secretary is going to help
you out.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator, typically the, the
answer is no. Typically the trip
report is talking about the the
needs for maintaining
maintenance of current
infrastructure, and so it
wouldn't include additional
capacity or additional
infrastructure. So for example,
a project like the widening of
I-40, I don't believe it's
included in the trip report
because it includes capacity or
new infrastructure.
Oh, Madams.
To my opinion, I think they're
behind the curve. I, I really
think that it should be part of
it because when you talk about
numbers of accidents and
prevention, but
they're very good at pointing
out all our other deficiencies.
And you know, so the more
information we have, you know,
maybe that would form a stronger
bond into uh being able to work
with um additional funding, you
know, from different agencies or
within us, you know, to put in
more into this, but I really see
also that um, you know, and if
no one has done it, maybe we can
be the first ones. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Senator, we can
share I can share that with
AC&M. They typically work with
the contractor for.
producing the trip report, but
we actually have the
comprehensive study on not just
the top 10 high crash rate
incidences, but there's an
additional 10, uh, an addition
additional 10, and they are high
high wildlife corridor, wildlife
migration corridors. And so if
I'm not mistaking the sticker
price on all of those is, is
about is over $1 billion.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you for the
response.
Thank you, Senator, excuse me,
next we have Representative
Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you. I, I just
I'm gonna ask some questions,
but really I'm trying to bring
to attention on this timeline
here, so we started in 2003 with
a house joint memorial and 2009
and 2011 and 2013. Uh, this was
all sharing information, working
within them, DOT pilot traffic
safety projects, workshopping.
Then 10 years later.
We get $200.
I'm not sure what that would do.
I, I, I see what our NMDOT
budgets are, I know what to
maybe, maybe uh we can get some
things on the vehicle.
Um, equipment list. But, um, OK,
$200 then in 23, 50 and 245
million, so, um, I know I
haven't asked a question here
yet.
Uh, I, I understand in your
presentation your priorities,
you just stated that you really
have $1 billion worth of
identified sites that could be
done.
So I'm guessing you don't have
12 million cause you've been
working on planning and design.
What is your timeline to break.
Uh, ground and what is your ask
for the 25 session to make some
progress on this project that
we've been working on. I
I think maybe 15 years.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
So this project, you know, as
you know, we presented on it for
a few years, the wildlife
Quarter Action Plan to find the
sites to be able to build these
types of structures, uh, that
are feasible and, and practical
and constructible. So this one
was identified as the number
one, we kind of picked it up two
years ago. Uh, we got a scoping
report going and then last year
we tried to get into design. It
took until this year, but now we
actually are in finals design.
So we're talking about actually
in construction in 2026.
And so the ask for this project,
uh, to build phase 1 and 2 is
36.5. That's also assuming that
we received the entire $26
million in federal grant, which
we may not, uh, they may give us
a partial grant. We do expect to
get a large portion of that.
Uh, as well, and currently we
have the funding that we have
and getting the federal grant,
it is feasible that we construct
only phase one, which has
independent utility, but it's
the most constructible and that
makes the most sense to do phase
1 and 2 at the same time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much for that, uh,
that was a great answer, and,
and I want to make sure that the
people watching understand, uh,
we're not just building bridges
over a freeway. This is a
complex, um, process and where
we want to make sure we're
investing in the right areas
and, and in doing more
efficiently as possible, but I,
I did have to bring up the the
timeline and the money, but
understand the complexity of it
and I do.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative. Next,
we're gonna go over to Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and um thank
you for your presentation and um
it, I think it's a speedy
project compared to what my
grandpa went through trying to
get 491 constructed, so um thank
you for the work you do. And I'm
more curious about this picture
you have, um, the this.
Is this in Mexico?
This particular.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
believe so. I can double check
with uh It's Madam Chair
Senator, it's, that was from the
New Mexico 152 bridge
replacement project, uh, in
between Hillsborough and
Kingston. Last year.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, because I, you
know, some of these, um, animals
on here, I don't think are
really endangered species.
That are being hit. But like you
said, there's probably some that
are not reported, um, that are,
um they suspect with some of the
fires we will see displacement.
But I'm, I think one of the
things too is
I get concerns uh more about the
elk population that it's more
overpopulated, um, but that's
not you guys, that's on Gaming
fish, so just more of a comment,
but thank you for the work you
do. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Next we're
going to go to Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'm glad
you guys brought up cattle
guards.
Yeah.
It's funny, one patrol will say,
yeah, we take care of cattle
garden maintenance and the next
patrol says no.
We all work under the same laws.
Same thing with fence
maintenance.
One patrol will keep fences up,
one patrol won't. I know that.
Like I say, we all work under
the same laws, but
It seems that there's some real
resistance on some of that. A
little help in that.
Area would help me a lot.
And I know that it's the exact
position of that cattle garden.
I know that it's got to be right
in that fence line.
I know there's, there's things
out there.
But
very few of those are
constructed, so they'll wash
theirselves out.
Most of them it just fills in.
And lots of reasons, but
Um,
That becomes quite a problem
when, when animals start walking
cattle guards.
I, my main question was on all
these wildlife crossings was
If, if
Of course, these are federal
lands that you're showing.
This on.
But how do you keep cattle from
crossing those if the same
permittee is not on the same
side.
And I'm, I'm assuming you have a
plan?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, so in
our feasibility study, scoping
report and design, we take that
into account. So we're going to
be looking, uh, we're working
with the Forest Service, the BOM
will know who has those grazing
allotments. Uh, we have had
projects before where cattle or
where uh.
Both livestock and wildlife are
using the same underpass, we can
still put up a cattle, a cattle
fence to keep them from using
that if the if it's a different
allotment from the other side.
And of course, the deer and the
elk have no trouble going over,
going over the cattle fence. So
they can be used in the same
project. OK.
I think that is something that
And I'm glad you said brought it
out in the open because that's
why the highway fences we have
today won't hold those off the
highway.
is because we're not using the
high fences right now. We are
using them places.
And I think it's very effective
in those places.
That to keep that wildlife off
those highways.
Um,
That, that's my main deal going,
and I, I understand that that
That I don't know all there is
to know about wildlife, for
sure. But uh,
Well, that's a lot of money.
That's a lot of money when, when
we're talking about, uh,
A highway going.
50 miles.
And then
A couple of these things cost as
much as that.
And
I know you're justifying it
saying that property damage and
Personal liability and animal
damage, but
We've got a lot of highways that
need to be three-laneed.
Also
Um, hopefully, oil and gas can
do it all, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much.
Next we have uh representative
De la Cruz. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I have two questions. Uh,
first question is.
Do animals prefer an underpass
versus an overpass, and is there
a cost difference,
Madam Chair, Representative de
la Cruz, um, it depends on the
species. Actually, the wildlife
overpasses, uh, are actually uh
more, I'll say more cost
effective or more likely to be
used heavily, um, species like
pronghorn antelope and elk.
Will readily use overpasses over
underpasses because they're, you
know, they're out in the wide
open country. I know are
enforced habitats as well, but
they, uh, research has shown
that they'll more readily use
overpasses, grizzly bears will
use overpasses, um, uh, big horn
sheep will use overpasses, so
overpasses in terms of wildlife
passage are actually more
effective, but.
They are more expensive to
build, not only in cost, but
then logistics in terms of
maintaining traffic control,
that sort of thing.
Underpasses are certainly
cheaper, uh, deer will readily
use underpasses, elk will also
use them, but reluctantly and
they're functional, uh, you
know, I've heard other
researchers refer to it to
functional passage for for
underpasses, yeah, E.
use them, but in terms of
functional passage, it may be
not quite optimal.
Thank you Madam. So, uh, next
question and maybe you know
maybe you don't
at an I40
in Terras Canyon.
There's an open space called
Tres Pistolas, which connects
itself to Cibola. Uh, is there a
crossing for animals at that
point somewhere.
Madam Chertz and Tijerass in
Carnel.
OK. Yeah, Madam, Madam Chair,
representative de la Cruz, um.
I think it could be part of the
Taharri wildlife.
Uh, crossing project that was
done in 2010 or 2012, but the
exact location that was more uh
the exact location. I'm not
clear on, um, but there's, there
was some game fence installed
along New Mexico 333 and I
believe a little bit on I-40
east of Carnell into the village
of Taharra and then that game
fencing, um.
Uh, basically directed wildlife
to cross uh underneath a couple
of bridges, but then on New
Mexico 333, there's what's
called a uh uh we'll call it a
wildlife crosswalk. It's
actually an Agrade crossing
where there's um.
Electrified barriers and animals
do cross.
On the road surface of New
Mexico 333, but there is like
some warning lights and signs at
that point I don't know if
you're referring to that.
So Madam Chair, I hadn't kept up
when I was director of Parks and
Recreation we purchased Tres
Pistolas and it was a concern
for residents that the animals
wouldn't have an access point
for crossing and so I just
didn't know if you knew.
Thank you, Ma.
Thank you, Representative next
week go to Representative
Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
sorry it was late today, but
better late than never, you
know, I'm gonna touch base on
what's in the Woods said a
little bit ago, the concerns of
the of the cost.
You know, I'm the vice chairman
of transportation for Santa Fe
for the state and you know, all
we hear all the time is how bad
our roads are on Interstate 40.
And Interstate 25, and the, the
secretaries right there and
they're not bad due to uh bad
workmanship by no means or what
they're trying to do, they're
just bad cause the sheer volume
of semis going through
Interstate 40 and to me it's a
big concern of spending that
kind of money on a wildlife
crossing, looking at what's
happening on our on our.
On our interstates and you
mentioned earlier about Madam
Chair, you know, somebody got
killed in an accident. How many
people die on Interstate 40
because the roads are bad, you
know.
That's what we need to look at.
And you know, another issue,
Madam Chair, that I'm going to
touch on is uh cattle guards.
Uh, representative, uh,
Ellison did a deal for cleaning
cattle guards in New Mexico.
Cause you know, in the, in the
backcountry like on 371 491,
these highways, these cattle
guards are all plugged up and
the highway department will not
clean them, but yet we're going
to clean these wildlife
corridors that we're gonna be in
these cattle guards. How about
the people in the cattle guards
cleaned.
Outside that corridor we need to
look at those
those are real issues that we
need to address and if you want
to touch base on that a little
bit, I'd be more welcome to hear
what you gotta say.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you. So what the DOT does
in looking at roadway user
safety is their understanding,
we're trying to understand all
of our vulnerabilities, right?
There's a whole separate issue
here that we haven't even talked
about that's perhaps even more
paramount, right? And in
understanding the number of
wildlife.
Animals that were hitting one
metric where we don't fare very
well. In fact, number one in the
nation is our tendency to hit
people in New Mexico. We're
number one in the nation for
pedestrian fatalities.
And so there are a number of
areas from roadway safety, where
we have a number of high traffic
accidents or traffic crashes. We
have pedestrian safety where we
know we need to do a lot of
infrastructure audits to
understand how at intersections
and and uh other access points
for pedestrians we can minimize
deaths there, and certainly when
we look at wildlife corridors,
how can we minimize crashes
associated with wildlife
crossing the roads.
And so I think we have a
responsibility given that
there's a number of funding
sources specific to each one of
those focus areas to have a
comprehensive plan on the shelf
that says if there is a federal
grant specifically aimed at
reducing much like the one we're
talking about up here for $26
million that New Mexico
Department of Transportation has
done its due diligence to say we
can tell you exactly where we're
going to put that money to get
most bang for our buck, and the
same would be true of crash
fatalities on an interstate and
the same would be true with
Pedestrian death rates. And so
what our teams do is essentially
say, here are our
vulnerabilities, we can rank
those by priority and if the
funding comes, we're gonna know
exactly where to put it and for
what reasons and so in the big
picture, to be sure, if it
doesn't rain money and we only
have a limited amount of it,
then DOT, of course, goes to
work with you all and other
funding organizations, agencies,
and entities to say if this time
it's going.
To be for reconstruction or
adding lanes and capacity or if
it's going to be a little bit of
both, perhaps we find a corridor
that needs maintenance,
rehabilitation, or full
construction, and it just so
happens to be on this list and,
and then we get really creative
about, you know, um, hitting two
projects at once and so
representative, I guess the long
winded answer is we're
identifying roadway user safety,
vulnerabilities across the
state, and we're trying to be
prepared to be able to answer
that question, because
oftentimes when we go out to
communities.
And you all know as lawmakers,
sometimes you'll ask a mayor or
a county manager. Tell me what
you need and they tell you and
you ask them how much do you
need and they, you know,
ballpark it while at DOT we'd
like to be able to say this is
how much we need and this is
where we would put it if we got
it.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Uh,
what are the possibilities of
not getting that grant money?
You know, that it's been going
on for 10 years now, and if you
don't get it, what happens what
you what you have invested
because by uh say goes another
year or two the prices of
everything are gonna go up
double of what you're talking
about now and where do we stand
at then?
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
this is only the 2nd year of the
federal grant where these funds
were available. And so like I
said last year, we, uh, received
a perfect score. I, I met with
the people who are in charge of
this, the national level of
FHWA. They commended us for our
project, and they said, apply
again for the same project next
year. They said there just
wasn't enough to go around, uh,
this year, so that's why we do
feel confident, but we'll
continue with the funding we
have.
Get through final design, we, we
would apply for that grant
again, uh, the following year.
But in the meantime, we're
continuing to do projects which
are much lower cost. Jim had
mentioned the one in Ware. You
know, the first thing we look
for is, is there an underpass or
a bridge or a drainage that we
can already, we can use that's
already there. And watch, we had
a fatality on the roadway,
multiple wrecks, and so we
immediately, we looked at that,
yes, there's two bridges. So the
design is right now for fencing
only to push to push those out.
To get to use the natural
drainage. So we're always
looking at
Cost effective measures for
independent projects and
integrating wildlife uh
crossings into other projects as
well as much as we can. This one
happens to be a project that
just doesn't have other
geographic opportunities to use,
and so is requiring this larger
ask for this expense. But most
of the projects were able to
address at a much lower cost
using highway safety improvement
program funds or, or other, uh,
district funds that are, uh,
much smaller expenditures.
If I can add, um, Madam Chair,
representative too, just kind of
as a a measure that gives us
more flexibility and
opportunities is, as you know,
the establishment of the fund
doesn't necessarily establish
that it has funds, right? And so
what we prefer is is working
with you all and making an
appropriation to the fund. And
that's paramount because we
believe that the fund doesn't
have a reversion clause clause.
And so what happens when we
receive special
Appropriations through um
Section 9 or section 11, then
they come with 3 year expiration
dates and so if you look at the
laws of 2022, that funding will
expire in 2025 and that's OK
because we anticipate spending
it on this 3.5 million, you
know, 550 phase one to design,
uh, but being able to move, move
the appropriation to the fund
gives us opportunities to, to,
to use that funding over a
longer period of time.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Secretary.
One last thing, uh, Madam Chair.
You know, we're going to
rectifying vehicles nowadays.
What is that gonna do to the
funding.
For everything in general, cause
uh like Senator Woods said, you
know, I hope oil pays for all of
it, but the way we're going now,
a lot of it going to electric
vehicles which pay no tax. How
is that gonna take an effect on,
on your projects as you turn to
work on?
Madam Chair Representative,
it's, it's a good question and
a, and a good conversation and
so earlier we shared um what
NMDOT is is doing presently,
which is evaluating a couple of
things. One is, um, what other
states are doing to essentially
sustain long term funding for
road construction and
maintenance so that we can make
recommendations inevitably those
recommendations will include how
those states, especially those
that are adopting at a higher
rate than us, how they're
essentially hap
They're essentially addressing
the fuel tax uh replacement
strategy for EVs. And so that's
one piece of what we're studying
now. The second piece of course
is looking at measures that have
already been introduced and how
those fare, um, because
oftentimes what will happen is
when legislation is introduced
to support roadway funding,
we'll get 24 hours to do an
analysis. What do you think
about this, you know, what are
the implications financial or
otherwise, and so we want to
spend.
A little bit more time on the
front and being able to, to
inform you all what, what the
good, bad and indifference are.
Uh, Madam Shut, I don't have any
other questions, uh, uh, Mr.
Secretary, both of you guys,
thanks for the presentation.
Thanks for the good work you do
for us here in Mexico. Thank you
Secretary.
Thank you, Representative. I
have a couple of questions for
you, gentlemen. Um, going back
to your page, what is this 5?
Um, the money page.
And there's been a long
discussion today about just how
costly, um, these crossings are,
and we're talking about a total
of 5 of them, um.
First and foremost, when you're
talking about the legislative
funding needed of the 10 million
for phase one based upon our
assumption that we will get this
$26 million grant. Is this $100
million slated to come from the
state match fund that we just
passed this past legislative
session for, uh, all.
Federal grant funding projects,
or is this going to be a
separate line item in the
budget.
Great question, Madam Chair. So
apologies, the $100 million on
the table will actually, um, uh,
we essentially utilize the
balance that we have now for
appropriation for for the match
necessary for that project. And
so, um, and it'll contribute to
the cost of phase one,
basically. So when you look at
the total cost for phase 1 and 2
of 45 million, the ask is the 45
million minus our match
obligation up at that 8.5
million.
To answer your question, um,
NMDOT, um, is, I, I don't
believe that at this point we
are accessing the state match
fund and that's probably not
probably because it's just our
general sense that we could eat
up that match fun very, very
quickly. And relative to what
local and tribal governments
need for match to start
leveraging federal grants. I
think it's, it's, it's probably
a good leadership decision to
say,
It's more proper that we allow
them to use it. Now if we get to
a point anywhere, for example,
in the fiscal year when we see
that although there are a high
number of funds encumbered and
ultimately awards aren't made
and you know, some of the match
fund becomes available, we
imagine we have on the parking
lot a project that we could get
off the ground to to get that
fund spent down.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and
that was actually gonna be my
next question is what happens to
these funds if we were not to
receive the grant. So, um,
I also remember last year, um, a
grant a free standing fund for
wildlife crossings that had
already been established the
year prior, I believe that had a
$500 appropriation deposited
into that. Is that still
correct? Is that how, where we
stand and is that where the 10
million would go?
Uh, Madam Chair, so the fund
that the wildlife Quarters Fund
was established by a Senate Bill
72, but the $5 million was not
put into the was not
appropriated into the fund. It
was, uh, earmarked within the
DOT budget.
And so I think it requires a
special appropriation for the
funds to actually end up in the
wildlife corridors fund. So thus
far the, to my knowledge, no
funds have been put into the
fund. They've just been, they've
been uh designated with within
the DOT budget.
OK, thank you very much. And and
so, um.
Mr. Secretary, is that
essentially the ask here today
is for the earmark of the 10
million and for that to be
specifically deposited into the
fund?
Madam Chair, yes, that would be
our preference, not, not that it
takes from DOT's bottom line
because these have been special
appropriations. That's the only
limitation is that like the
others, they come with a
reversion day or the need for
DOT to essentially reauthor them
as a special appropriation, so
keep putting them in the fund
gives them a longer lifeline.
OK, thank you very much that
cleared up my confusion quite a
bit. Uh, I understand that we do
have, uh, questions as well from
Representative Allison. My
apologies for missing you, my
friend. Thank you, Madam Chair,
on the comment that Secretary
made.
Uh, most highway projects are
based on the priority based on
statistics.
My pet peeve is with the uh
Rockfall at the Hogback.
We don't have any statistics on
the people that step out of
their vehicles to gather the
rocks off of the roadway.
And when I question if they
reported it, they said, no, I
don't have time to call the
NMDOT. Oh yes, I called uh New
Mexico DOT, but they did not
answer. There's a lot of times
that I've seen the people on the
roadway collecting rocks and
putting them over the berm. So
some projects do not have
statistics, but they still
should carry a priority because
human life is dependent on him.
I say human life depends on it
because there was one time where
she
Uh, actually drifted down and
landed on an SUV and it folded
it right in half. It separated
the driver and the passenger.
It was almost a Navajo taco.
But, uh, you know, not
everything carries a statistic.
That's why we push to get some
of those uh situation remedied,
and I still think that a 20 ft
retaining wall can solve the
issues at the Hogback Rock
Falls. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much. Any other
questions from the committee?
OK, at that point, that
concludes this presentation.
Thank you very much for speaking
to us on this topic. All right,
um, and I believe.
He's here.
Oh, Mr. Dax, do you want to do
your presentation now that
you're here.
All right. I mean, you're, I
mean, you
I don't have to,
there we go. Uh, my name is
Michael Dax. I'm the Western
program director for Wildlands
Network.
Um, sorry, I am late today. I
was coming down from Colorado
and the construction at 285 um
really got me today. So, um, I
would have been here a bit
earlier, but there are now two
pilot cars there, um, which uh
really slowed me down. Um, so
I'm gonna run through my
presentation, um, fairly quickly
and just kind of hit the
highlights since you guys, um,
you know, really kind of just
poured through this material,
but kind of hoping to address
some of the questions I heard,
um.
You know, really want to, you
know, stress the importance of
right now, um, crashes are
costing New Mexicans $200
million a year, and those are
old numbers from 2016 and um,
you know, like everything,
inflation has affected these
numbers as well. Um.
And uh.
So, you know, when we're talking
about solutions here, um, these
are solutions that do pay for
themselves, and I come from a
wildlife background where, you
know, if you're talking maybe
$100,000 or $50,000 that's some
money that could get you
somewhere and it's taken me a
while to get to the idea that,
you know, $20,000.50 million
dollars just kind of rolls off
the tongue. But as you all know,
being in this committee that
transportation projects are
inherently expensive, and
they've only gotten more
expensive over the past.
few years
Um, I think it's also important
to note that um these are
extremely effective. Um, it was
mentioned earlier, the high
number of pedestrians that are
hit in New Mexico. There is no
solution that DOT could
implement for pedestrian
collisions that would have a 90%
success rate. Wildlife
crossings.
are the most effective safety
solution that any DOT can
implement um that has a sort of
numbers. Um, so again, kind of
thinking about the fact that we
have um the number and the data
is that back up um the need and
the justification, um.
I have a a slide, um, uh, titled
Wildlife Crossings Legislation
and representative de la Cruz, I
just want to point out that the
two images there are from um
Taharris Canyon. Um, I was not,
I was trying to look on my phone
at a map to see where that open
space is relative to this
project and I couldn't quite
figure it out, um, but you can
see the map there of where um
deer are crossing at 333 at
grade going down um the the
creek there.
in the median and then crossing
south into the Monzanos. Um, so
just wanted to point that out
for you.
Um,
So a handful of you here had an
opportunity to vote on SB 228 in
2019. Um, that was the first
bill of its kind across the
country and now a number of
other states have followed suit,
um, but New Mexico really led
the way and the wildlife
corridors action plan that I
believe um Jim and Trent, um,
discussed that was produced in
2021, um, is, is really a pretty
incredible document for a number
of reasons, and as they kind of
hit on, um, and the secretary
include
And when we go to apply for
federal grants, the fact that we
went through the process that we
went through and produce that
document to say these are
priority locations. That's
really powerful because I can
say that for some other states
where I work, um, you know, they
kind of just like have a list
that they just kind of came up
with and not that it's a good
list, it's based on, you know,
knowledge of, you know, the
wildlife and DOT departments,
but it definitely was not
submitted through this kind of
rigorous process. Um, also the
fact that, um, wildlife
connectivity needs in addition
to just wildlife vehicle
collisions were factored into
that report. Um, it is really
powerful stuff, and I'll
actually just point to the fact
that um that 285 project between
like Trace Pedris and San
Antonio. That's one of the
priority projects, but um the,
the work that's going on right
now, all that got approved prior
um to the wildlife corridors
action plan. And so it had not
kind of gone through that
process to identify.
I like, oh, this is actually a
really important area where elk,
deer, and pronghorn are coming
down from the Kai country and
then wintering on the Taoist
plateau.
Um.
Just gonna keep moving here, um.
There are some questions um from
Representative Kate um about,
you know, what is $2000 do, um,
when you're talking about these
really large infrastructure
projects, um, long term
planning, doing the scoping
reports, design, and then
maintenance are all really
important things that you can,
um, do with smaller amounts of
money, not that we don't want
bigger amounts of money, um,
but, you know, the, the
feasibility study that um DOT
commissioned last year, I
believe costs like maybe
$300,000 400,000 dollars, and
that gave us a really strong
picture of what that project is
now being designed for. Um, also
just long term planning, you
know, like any um transportation
projects, um, these take years
to plan, execute, implement, um,
etc. and if you're kind of just
like, you know, here's funding
this year, now 3 years later,
there's another bit of funding
that you could work on that
makes it hard to engage in that,
the sort of planning that's
needed. Um, and then, of course,
Maintenance, um, they mentioned
the, the 8 ft tall directional
fencing, um, trees fall on it,
cars hit it, um, erosion occurs,
you know, all sorts of things
that can lead to animals getting
in the roadway, and so that
requires maintenance too, so not
having to pull from the um
regular uh district maintenance
budgets always being able to tap
into those funds um can be
really effective, um.
I have a um one of the final
slides about federal funding, I
imagine they touched on this um
pretty well, um, but, uh, this
wildlife crossings pilot program
is currently the only fund that
um is exclusively for wildlife
crossings, um, there are a
number of other federal grants
where it's eligible, but it's,
you know, kind of, you know,
highway safety improvement,
stuff like that where, you know,
it's competing against a lot of
other things, um, there is hope
and.
Work being done to permanently
authorize this pilot program,
um, the next federal um
transportation bill would be
reauthorized in 2026. So
hopefully we'll have a good,
good news and that we'll get
reauthorized at a higher amount,
um, and I'll also just say as
far as the, the chances of um
the the application um last
year, oh wait, I think I have
the number here. So this year,
there were 56 applications from
34 states requesting 5.
$50 million. There's $145
million available. Um, so that,
you know, it's a competitive
program right now. Um, but
talking with um F FHWA myself,
this project is definitely high
on their radar and hopefully
something um that will get
across the finish line this
year, um.
Finally, just want to kind of
touch on some of these other
projects that are kind of moving
forward. Um, I believe most of
them were mentioned. The one
that I will mention is um I-25
in US 550 just north of Bernalio
on uh Santa Ana, um puelo land,
um, so the Pueblo of Santa Ana
did tap into the state match
fund this year for their
application to the pilot program
that would be to um plan and
design those wildlife crossing
structures, um, and being here
in
Albuquerque, um, I'm, I'm sure
we can all appreciate that, you
know.
It used to be that this uh
Sandias and the Hamas functioned
as one ecosystem and landscape.
Um, it's really hard for animals
to to navigate I-25 and US 550.
US 550 does see wildlife vehicle
collisions, um, elk and mountain
lions, um, seem to be the most
common and so that project
moving forward, um, would be
really exciting. Um, so yeah,
I'll I'll stop there because I
think, you know, for the most
part, you heard it all, um, but,
uh.
We, we do hope to see an
appropriation into the crossings
fund this year, um, last year,
the governor's budget included
$30 million coming from um.
Um, uh, coming from the general
fund, the legislature's budget
included $500 million but it
came from the road fund, so it's
kind of just, you know, robbing
Peter to pay Paul, which is not
what we're hoping to do. And so,
um, we're once again hoping to
kind of be in that 30 to $50
billion dollar range, um, and,
uh, I do agree with Senator
Woods that I think oil and gas
could, you know, take care of
the whole thing, so hopefully,
um, uh, those surpluses continue
and we're able to make some
serious.
investments that'll make a
difference, um, on this issue.
So thank you so much for taking
some extra time to hear me.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
You're welcome. Uh, Senator
Pinto, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation and I
don't know, uh, do we know a
percentage of so.
$50 million
Project. How much of that
percentage actually is for like
wages to pay pay the employees
do you have an average or Madam,
I don't have um numbers like
that. I, I don't know if
Secretary Serra or Trent or Jim
might be able to answer, but
that's, that's beyond me.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Anybody else?
OK, Mr. Jack, thank you for
coming. Thanks for hurrying your
way over here.
All right, that concludes the
presentation segment of our
committee hearing. Now we're
going to go to public comment.
Uh, the first person we have
signed up is Charles Goodmacher.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
um,
couple of meetings ago I
presented about electric school
buses, uh, and a bill, uh, that
was introduced last year, gonna
move forward this year. Very few
of you were able to be there was
at the very tail end of the day,
um, so quick recap and then an
update to some information,
correct some of the information
I provided then. Um, so, um,
obviously, you know, I said the
title electric school buses.
Going to bring a bill to help
districts that want to choose to
use electric school buses for
some or all of their routes
depending on their choices, uh,
what they feel is appropriate.
Um, there are a couple of
matters, technical type matters
that need to be cleared up with
legislation, uh, one is around
the possibility of districts
selling back some of their
energy to their utility
provider. So school buses are
essentially or like school buses
are very.
Large batteries. Some places
around the country, um,
utilities have actually.
Integrated into their utility
plans to provide the service to
their all of their customers
downloading from school buses
during peak periods of time, um,
especially during the summer,
the buses aren't being used.
They can download very cheaply
at night or 2 or 3 in the
morning, upload during the peak
time and help with the peak uh
period of time. So there's just
a little bit of adjustment to
the statutes around to allow
that to happen, um, and the bill
doesn't get into particulars,
it's just.
To allow that to happen, um.
And then to, uh, of course, um,
you know, we want districts or
hope districts will move to
school buses for health matters,
um, particular matter,
particulate matter inside of
diesel buses is 4 times that of
the particular matter that we
breathe in, breathe, uh, driving
in a regular car, um, and that
has an impact on their health,
their physical health, and also
their mental acuity. So, um,
just to update you.
Um,
Let's see, front PD um.
I, I reported in the last time
that PED did not have sufficient
money to help districts make up
a gap in funding that, um, that
is for districts that applied
for federal federal funds for
school buses and left them with
a gap to actually purchase the,
the buses and the
infrastructure, the charging
infrastructure. So, um, I
reported in the past PD didn't
have any funds available to do
that. They do now and they have
been. I'm very glad to.
Report, um, because there was
some money available. Let's see,
as they put it, they allocated
10 electric buses with HB 505
funds, 6 to APS4 to Santa Fe.
This year they allocated funding
to APS to make up the gap of
funding for the 20 electric
buses that they received. So
that's very good news. Um, but
the, the problem is that the
capital outlay fund for school
buses would not have enough
funds should other districts
choose to continue down this
path. So there was enough
Excuse me, our funds in the, in
the capital outlay fund for some
buses to be funded,
but if more districts request.
So therefore, we're gonna
request some additional funding,
uh, going forward, um.
Let me see. Oh, also, uh,
reported there were 5 school
districts in New Mexico that do
currently have electrical buses
or they're, they're in process
of getting them. Um, one of
them, Dora schools, uh, declined
in the end to accept their
federal grant because of, of, of
difficulties implementing the
school buses there. Lake Arthur,
I'm very happy to tell you they
have two lecture school buses.
They have one of these programs
actually they're, they're,
they're design and engineering
work.
For the infrastructure that they
needed was provided gratis from
their utility provider. So, uh,
on one condition, uh, that is,
you know, if this is the fence
for the school bus yard and this
is the secure side of the yard.
This is the public side of the
fence. They charger is literally
built right into the fence so
that the school bus can charge
up from the secure side and the
public can pay a fee just like
in any other place where there
may be a charger.
In charge and then the district
gets a small trickle of funds,
if you will, from that. But that
concludes my update. I want to
thank you very much. I hope
you'll support the move by
districts to electric school
buses.
Don't go anywhere. I'm
Representative Garrett has a
question for you. Oh, OK, thank
you, Madam Chair. Charles, I
just came back from Las Cruces
and the regional transportation
authority there has purchased 5
electric school buses, so my
question is, are you talking to
the public that you just gave an
example of a public situation in
a school are you talking to
transportation districts to see
if they're adapting electric
buses for their public
transportation routes and if
there's any
way
They can collaborate
collaborate, um,
I have not been having those
types of discussions now. OK,
thank you.
Thank you, thanks for the
update, uh, next we have a a
commenter on Zoom, Jim Lissy,
can you hear me? Oh, Mr. Lucy is
actually here and then we have
our next commenter on Zoom. So
come on up, Mr. Lizzy.
Absolutely.
Good afternoon.
I'm Jim Lissey out of Fort
Sumner.
Madam Chairman and
representative senators,
committee members, and staff, we
do appreciate it. Thank you all
for serving number one for the
great state of New Mexico. I
know it takes a lot of time and
effort for y'all to, to be here
in in the different committees.
There's 2 items I'd like to talk
about, uh, one of them is the
6084 corridor, uh, that, uh,
Dairy, uh, we're doing in the
New Mexico DOTs done study. They
started it in 20202022.
And uh that corridor that goes
from Clovis to Fort Sumner is
pretty dangerous. I'm also a
volunteer fireman.
On that, and so I worked the
Rex. I worked one of the wrecks
that involved
Down in the Ter Creek down in
there that involved 5 vehicles.
Uh, thank the Lord that nobody
died, but there was some pretty
serious injury, 5 vehicles,
about 20 people that were in
that accident.
Um, that corridor has a, a
substantial amount of accidents.
Um, another thing that they do
have is, uh, it is one of the
highest rate death fatalities on
that uh that corridor that comes
through there, um,
I didn't know it was that bad. I
knew it was bad. It's a two-lane
with, with the shoulders. So the
passing on it is very
treacherous, treacherous with a
lot of curves down in the
creeks, curves in the creeks,
um, it's really, really
dangerous in fact, I drove it,
um, this past week, I'm sure a
couple of the, uh, our senator
and, and, uh, representative
from that district back over
there, they travel it quite a
bit. In fact, I talked to the
mayor of uh
Of Elia, and he said, I don't
even come that way when I come
to Albuquerque or Santa Fe,
because it's just too dangerous.
I go down to Roswell and then
come across on 285 up to Klein's
Corner.
And I said, I didn't know that.
He says, that roses is too
dangerous. There's too many
trucks. There's that corridor,
uh, brings the Walmart trucks
and that's just one of the
companies, gravel trucks, etc.
Walmart has a distribution plant
in Plainview that comes all the
way up over here to Albuquerque
in the vicinities in New Mexico,
so they're in that quite a bit.
Um,
A lot of the, the, the
construction trucks, you know,
running gravel back and forth,
uh, the, you know, trucks coming
from off the interstate when
it's bad weather, even it's not
a bad weather, so it's a lot, a
lot of traffic up on there.
The study right now is um that
they've done the New Mexico DOT
is either leave it like it is,
do a, uh, just a small passing
lane, a super 2 or a 4-lane
highway.
So the cost of a super 2 or just
A regular passing lanes would be
119 million.
To do a super 2 if you're
familiar with the super to
anybody on the committee, uh,
Madam, uh, Chairman, and, uh,
and, uh, representatives and
senators is, is another option
of 125 million.
And a four lane uh estimation
was at 352 million.
So that'd be nice to have a 4
lane and it opened up because
it's the corridor from, you
know, from eastern states,
Texas, all of those that come
through going to Santa Fe, going
to Albuquerque, doing up to
Angel Fire, etc. touts, or even
getting up on the interstate and
going, you know, going back to
the west.
So my plea and prayer today is
to make you all aware of, of, of
the area that we're in. So how
How bad of an area it is to go
to an accident and have to work
in an accident
about
It's not every month, it's about
every year of the month. We have
a really bad accident and
fatality is really bad. If
you've ever seen a bad accident,
I, I trust you don't have to.
I'm sure y'all have been on this
committee. It is not nice. Being
on an officer on the, uh, fire
department there in Fort Sumner.
I've seen a lot of stuff, and I,
I don't want to see more of it
that it's been happening. So my
plea prayers for y'all's
consideration on funding on
that. For federal side, uh, it
doesn't
According to the study, that it
doesn't qualify for any
federal funding. I have a
slideshow that Mexico DOT's got
and I didn't have time to give
it to Ms. Vasquez in the back,
but it'd been nice to look at it
and y'all could kind of see it,
but, uh, I'm gonna keep it
brief. So I'm, any questions on
that before I go to the next
item.
Madam Chairman and committee.
manager
Uh, representative Zamora, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
apologies for showing up late. A
lot going on today for me, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Lissey is
actually one of my constituents
in my district.
Uh, he lives there in Fort
Sumner. I've known him for
years.
Uh,
My concerns, uh, align well with
Jim's.
Uh,
As we've seen over the years,
uh, traffic.
Increasing.
Uh,
We see a need for the for this
road to be improved.
Uh, we've seen a new pilot truck
stop come into to to Clovis,
which routed a lot more trucks.
South of I-40.
Uh, we see Walmart trucks using
that road all the time. I myself
have seen uh some bad accidents
on that road.
I myself had a farm.
South
Of 6084 there where you go into
Clovis about.
5 miles west of the Cannon Air
Force Base.
And that transition.
For it goes from a four lane to
a 2 lane.
It is very dangerous. There's a
young lady.
That lives there in Melrose.
That actually had a head on with
the guy that took the wrong
lane. I have in my past years.
Uh, worked with.
Uh, sandbar in New Mexico DOT to
improve that transition there?
I myself have had cars come head
on to me and I've called the
state police on 3 different
occasions because of that
dangerous transition there at
Greer, which is just west of of
uh Canon about 10 miles.
Uh,
To me, if we build.
The Ford lane, if we go ahead
and spend the money on the 4
lane.
I believe that we will see.
Some
Relief on I-40.
Because we'll see all the, all
the businesses that require
trucking.
Like, uh, Walmart and I don't
know how much trucking Facebook
will require, but now we're
seeing other businesses go south
of Albuquerque, uh, in the Bele
Los Lunas area.
And as, as if we were to go
ahead and build a 4 lane
parallel with I-40, which would
be uh what we're talking about
now and then keep going west.
Uh, from Encino.
And, and build a good road from
Encino to Bernardo.
And a lot of that has been
improved, but there's a lot that
still needs improving, uh, the
road between Fort Sumner and
Vaughn is real narrow, doesn't
have big shoulders.
But I think if, if we build
This road up.
We will see some of the I-40
traffic.
Go a little further south and
stay out of the I-40 corridor.
So I just.
want to support Mr. Lissy in his
testimony and and ask the
committee to consider the monies
that we need for.
For the final plan, so then we
could go forward with it and and
budget for.
For either uh Super 2 or 4 lane,
whatever.
The state decides or can afford
to do on that.
Thank you for your testimony,
Mr. Lissy, and thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair,
representative, thank you very
much. May I elaborate, Madam,
in, uh, representatives and
senators?
I'm looking for it. Thank you.
One of the things has been
talked about, uh, former, uh,
New Mexico 0.2 that lives in,
used to be in, in 2 in the
department.
He suggested going all the way
to I-25 from the east to the
west side.
And I was like, that's a long,
that's a lot of money, but it
alleviates so much traffic on
that I-40. Well that day come, I
don't know. But doing a 4 lane
going to Fort Sumner will
alleviate a ton of traffic.
There's so busy up over there
now then you got to look at from
Santa Rosa from Fort Sumter to
Santa Rosa to tie in on that. So
there, it's, it's a kind of a
catch, but, uh, going on that,
it's, it is a very, very
dangerous corridor. Thank you,
madam, Chairman.
And committee members. Thank
you, Mr. Lucey.
Uh, next, uh, we have our last
one more item.
Uh, OK.
I didn't know we had an agenda.
No, ma'am. I, I, I said two
items, I'm sorry I'm sorry about
that.
And you wanted to talk about a
good comment on a whole new
item, but it's a whole new item,
yes ma'am. 2 items. Yes, ma'am.
I apologize. Thank you, Madam
Chairman and committee members.
Uh, the other item that I have
to talk to elaborate on is
Sumner Lake has a dam there, and
it has a lake there, of course.
The lake was probably one of the
first.
Concrete dams.
On the Pecos River, built in
1937.
She's 86 years old. The Bureau
of Reclamation is, is in charge
of that, that uh dam.
She's an old damn. She's got 3
radio gates that hold water in
there, but they don't hold water
in it anymore because there's,
there's scared, the BOR is of
the compromising of the dam.
So at this point, the BOR has
come out since, uh, they've been
studying about 2017, 2018, how
do
Fix this dam and how to get the
money to fix it. So they are,
they are uh seeking and sought
federal grant money to go ahead
and fix the dam.
But there's a bridge that goes
over on the crest of it a road
that New Mexico DOT maintains
and a bridge that goes over the
top of the bridge or the dam
itself, the bridge does.
But they're going to close this
down, supposedly for a two-year
project.
We have people that live on the
west side of the lake and
ranchers and community members
that live on the other side of
the lake.
In order to get to the dam, you
got to come from the east going
west.
So
We were just told from BOR, uh,
I haven't been told, but, uh,
another inside person I'm pretty
involved in both projects for
our communities that this
project is gonna cost about
$10,000 for intermediate
temporary bridge that'll go
below the dam to cross over so
you, you'll have to drive down
into the, to the river and then
cross over this Tipperary dam,
working with, uh, District 2
engineer Francisco Sanchez, they
have the bridge, the bridge has
been inspected, the temporary
bridge.
But now they went from a 50 to
100 million cost. So my plea and
prayer is this session, this
committee that's coming up on
legislative session that we
could obtain the $100 million to
get this bridge in for now. It's
not a permanent bridge. That is
the next phase that BOR is
seeking to get a permanent
bridge built just right below
the dam.
OK, so what we're looking at is
I they were talking about these
different crossings and
everything that's great for
wildlife.
I, I, I'm a beekeeper, and my
main job as an insurance agent
in agribusiness, but I'm a
beekeeper and I was working in
my, uh, there in downtown is
where I have my shop.
And I had a deer coming and
visit me, uh.
Yesterday morning when I was
working, working my bee stuff,
and I'm like, what are you doing
here, guy? He he was a big old
buck came through in and out. So
the wildlife is, is, is
everywhere in the state of New
Mexico. Thank God we have it.
And all of the Parks and
Wildlife representatives de la
Cruz was talking about. He
understands what I'm talking
about and, and the rest of y'all
do.
But
Some of this funding that we're
talking about.
We're talking about one of the,
the one item I'm talking about
for the corridor from 6084 to
Fort Sumner, uh, to Clovis, but
this, this Tipperary bridge is
where we're gonna need in order
to get people back and forth.
There's houses that people live
there's there's a fire
department there. There's an
ambulance services that that run
back and forth that is owned by
the county, but the road is
maintained and it's, and it's,
uh, uh, by the state of New
Mexico Department of
Transportation. I did get to
meet the secretary. I have not
met the.
Secretary, so him and I, uh,
will visit along with Francisco
Sanchez to to see about this $10
million of funding that we can
do.
So, Madam Secretary and
committee members, any
questions?
No questions from the committee,
uh, Mr. Lucy, but happy to
huddle with you and talk a
little more about the process of
requesting projects, um, so that
they do become a part of the,
you know, DOT ask essentially
before we get ready for the
session. So happy to speak with
you about that process and at
any time. Um, and I know that
you have a great advocate here
and Senator Woods, so happy to
help.
Thank you any questions, please
feel free to contact me.
I'm the only insurance guy in
Fort Sumner, so.
So anyway, thank you. Thank you
very much for coming all the way
out here.
OK
All right,
now,
Representative Zamora. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Mr. Lusy for your testimony, uh,
there is some, some, uh.
Controversy as to who owns.
The dam
With and and it's between uh
Carl's Bad irrigation District
and and BOR.
And I hope.
That we can
Come to an understanding on that
as we move forward.
Uh
I don't know that it concerns
the legislature that as to who
Who owns that and how that will
be settled.
But it might come, it might come
in front of us in some committee
or something, and I just like to
make the committee aware.
That uh.
BOR and, and Carlsbad Irrigation
District are kind of butting
heads and trying to figure out
who, who needs to put what kind
of money up for this project.
And, uh, it'll be interesting to
see as we go forward as to.
As to what becomes of this
issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. OK, uh, to our last
commenter of the day, we have a
Sid who is with us via Zoom.
Sid, are you, are you there?
Um,
Madam Chair, and uh,
Committee, thank you very much.
Um, Sid is actually called about
irrigation district. Uh, my name
is Coli Burgess. I'm the manager
for CID.
OK, I'm said his left us, uh, in
that case, that concludes our
meeting for the transportation
infrastructure revenue
Subcommittee. Thank you to every
single one of you for being here
with us today. Appreciate it
appreciate you members for being
here. Thank you and we'll see
you next month.
Uh, the next tier is going to be
October 25th and it will be in
Santa Fe at the Capitol. that
were adjourned.
Um
