Return. Yeah. No, no, no, no,
no, we can do it well. OK.
OK, well, again, um,
We have a
Honda Lopez, the district
engineer for.
District 5, and she's brought
along a couple of others with
her, so, uh.
You can kick it off. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate that, members, good
to see everybody this afternoon.
Mr. Chairman, we are here with
Districts 5 and 6 this
afternoon, the last two, to
present, uh, this summer for you
all, so that's good, um, the
next two district engineers, um,
are, are two female district
engineers in the state of New
Mexico. We are very proud of
that. They come to you with a
ton of experience, um, you know,
something that um I always look
towards in these ladies.
is their information, their
background, their experience,
their knowledge, so we've been
very lucky with these two.
we will start with District 5,
Ms. Rhonda Lopez, the district
engineer. We also have Mr.
Javier Martinez as the assistant
District engineer for
engineering support for the
district, we brought him along
as well to Beel answered
questions that you all may have.
So,
Without Mister Chair, I'll kick
it off.
Mr. Cha, you have District 6 up
there. District 6 up there.
There, there we go.
No. No, that's still 6.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Um,
chair, uh, representatives and
senators, um, I am Rhonda Lopez.
I am the new District 5
engineer, um, been in the
position for a couple of months
now, and um with that I'll get
started with the um
transportation infrastructure.
Um, District 5 encompasses San
Juan, Rio Reba, Chaos Sane
Torrent.
And Los Alamos counties, um,
District 5 is headquartered in
Santa Fe, um, District 5 is
responsible for maintaining
approximately 5,375 lane miles
of roadway.
And is comprised of 21
maintenance patrols, 5
construction offices and 7
special crews, the district also
works closely with 10 tribal
governments and 17 local
government entities to meet our
transportation goals throughout
the day.
FY 25 budget, the operating
budget is, um, a little over 20.
Uh, 28 million, 364,000. Um, we
have ongoing construction
contracts that are, um, well
over $300 million.
Our contract maintenance budget
is a little over 8.6 million.
supplies budget is a little over
6.5 million.
Signing and striping is a little
bit over 1.5 million.
Rest area improvements is it
91,600 and our rest area
maintenance budget is at
650,000.
Regarding our staffing and
employee breakdown, we've got a
total of 325 positions, um, 45
of those are support staff, and
we have 31 of those filled and
14 of them are vacant.
Our maintenance staff, we have
194 positions, 167 of those are
filled in 27 of them are vacant.
Construction, we have 66
positions, 53 are filled in 13
are vacant.
And then our engineering staff,
we have 20 positions, 11 of
those are filled and 9 of those.
Oh, and then our, um our
District 5 commissioner is uh
Mr. Tom Taylor.
Going on to the next page, um,
we have a breakdown of all of
the different, um, funding
sources that we have received um
through a lot of our, um, the
laws that you all have passed
and provided us the DOT funding
for which we greatly appreciate
and getting a lot of our needs
and projects met throughout the
district and the state. So
starting up at the top, um, the
laws of 2019, we have a listed
all of the project.
um, that funding is set to
expire, um, I think it was
supposed to expire in June of
2024, but it was extended to
June of 2025. All of the
projects that were um the
funding that was allocated to
District 5, all of those
projects have been completed.
Moving down to the laws of 2019
chapter 271, Section 9 item 2,
also that was extended to expire
in 2025, um, there, there's uh
two projects that received
funding, um, one of them is
completed and the other one is
in currently under construction
but is actually very close to
being completed, it should be
done prior to the June 2025
deadline.
Moving down to the next 1, HB2
laws of 2021, Section 9.
General fund appropriations, um,
all of this funding expires in
June of 2025.
Um, this project, uh or you can
see all of the projects listed
have been completed except for
the S10681 that has 16.5
million, um, the Saint Michael's
through Indian School from uh
Indian school in Saint Francis,
um.
That project is not currently
fully funded, we have, um, a
shortfall of about $24 million
for that.
And just kind of a little bit
more on that project, um, it is
currently under design, um, we
are working towards a letting
day in late 2025, um, that is
assuming that um we are able to
work with the Santa Fe Indian
School as well as bureau of
Indian Affairs, um, on, uh, the
items for right of way and stuff
for the schedule. Um,
Moving on to the next table, um,
house Bill two laws of 2022,
Section 9, general fund
appropriations, these also
expired June of 2025, all of the
funding that was allocated to
District 5 had all those
projects have been completed.
As well as the next one for
House Bill 2 Laws of 2023,
Section 9 item 6, that funding
was set to expire in June of
2026. We have um completed all
of those projects.
And now moving down to House
Bill 2 laws of 2024, Section 11,
item 3, that funding is set to
expire in June of 2027. Um, we,
this funding was received this
year. We are looking at the
table, we're able to complete 3
projects, um, over the summer
and early fall of this year, and
the remaining funding will be
expended on projects that are
either um set to start in the
spring of 20.
25 when temperatures increase,
um,
And uh the only other one to
kind of add a little bit of
information on is that one at
the top of the ranchos, the
house, um, that project is
currently starting design, I
think everything else is
actually for construction, um,
except for that top.
Uh
Moving to the page 4.
I spell two laws of 2024 Section
11, item 5.
This funding is set to expire
June of 2027, um, again, this
funding was received this year.
We were able to complete 8
projects, um, over the summer
and early fall, and the
remaining funding will be
expended throughout the rest of
the year when temperatures
increase or some of the items
are actually for like signing
and striping that will be
expended throughout. So that's
um pretty much everything for
all of the house bill too and um
the um
Other uh laws of uh.
legislative funding that we've
received, so now we'll move into
active construction projects.
Um, we have a list of all of the
active construction.
Projects on page 4 and onto page
5 that total 1 and
Almost $192 million. And then
after that we have a list of the
completed construction projects,
um, most of these were completed
in the fall of 2023 into the
spring and um summer of 2024,
all of these are um mostly
substantially complete and so
we're working on closing out all
of the final paperwork to get
them completely closed out, um.
And all of these projects are um
almost $110 million.
age 6.
We have listed the FY 24
completed contract maintenance
projects.
And those all total a little
over $12 million.
And then following that is um
our.
FY 2425 contract maintenance
projects and we have, um, just a
little over $33.3 million for 4
projects, 2 of them were in
progress, and one of them or
actually 3 of them are in
progress and another one is set
to start construction when
temperatures warm up in the
spring of.
Going on to page number 7, we
have listed our um step.
Um, I have it broken out into
our um fiscally constrained
years, so that would be FY 25
through FY 28, um, and this will
entail projects that we have um
set in the stiff that have
construction funding as well as
design funding that's allocated,
um.
And that will be shown over in
the column with the phase
whether it's design or
construction.
Um, as you can see in FY 25, we
have um 100 and a little over
$106 million of projects, um,
planned.
We've got an FY 26, a little
over 90.5 million.
FY 27, we have 70, a little over
76 million and in FY 28, we've
got um a little bit over 82.5
million.
So all those are fiscally
constrained for years is a total
is like $360 million.
Moving on to page 8 is our
planning years of the step, so
this is um encompasses the
projects that we have planned
that don't need to be physically
constrained that are out in
fiscal years 29 and 30.
Um, and again, we've got most of
those actually. I think there's
just one project that we have
listed with design, everything
else, at least is um shown with
construction funding that we
have planned for the outer years
or um a total of
$223 million that for some
reason. I think those to me.
You know what, I think that's a
total including the fis um it's
not separated. I think it
carries over from the fiscally
constrained years. Sorry about
that. I just kind of noticed,
um, but yeah, so those are our
planning your projects. Um,
moving on to page 9, we have our
transportation project funding
that we have allocated for um a
variety of our local governments
throughout District 5, which I
think is extremely helpful to
them. We've got, um, this year.
we allocated, um, uh, a little
over $9.7 million and as you're
aware, there's the 95% state
match and the entity has um a 5%
match, which I think is helpful,
and there's a map underneath
that kind of shows where those
locations are throughout
District 5.
Moving on to pages 10.
And 11 kind of carries over and
actually 12 with the map, but
the um this shows all of our
local government road fund.
Um, that were allocated to um
different funding types, the
county cooperative, the counting
arterial program, etc. that has
a 75% uh state uh and then a 25%
entity match and that uh totals
uh 2.4, almost 2. or I'm sorry,
5.4, almost 5.5 million. That
was allocated. And if you look
at the map on page 12, that show
all of the locations, um, as
well as the different breakouts
of the funding type from the
local.
throughout District 5, and
Page 13.
Is a table showing um the
equipment needs for District 5,
That's a little less than 11
million. I would just like to
kind of mention that this list
doesn't actually entail all of
the actual equipment needs of
the district, but we were just
trying to um keep it a
reasonable amount uh and
prioritize that. So that's what
this list encompasses, but the
actual equipment needs of the
district is right, and I guess
with that we stands for any
questions.
OK,
thank you for your uh
Report.
And uh
would turn to the uh
Members in the first.
A person up is uh Senator
Gonzalez followed by
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and uh.
Thank you very much for your.
Presentation.
Uh, first of all, I, uh,
Just want to say that with a
number of projects and
construction that's going on.
But uh the outstanding job that
you really do in keeping the
public informed.
If they don't attend, that's
because they don't want to
attend, but you definitely make
the avenue there for public
hearing for comments and working
with a business groups.
You know, uh, a very, very good,
very welcome.
Uh, the second part that I was
gonna ask you is on page.
8
And that, uh, New Mexico 4, is
that Los Alamo. Yes, sir. Yes.
And uh oops sorry
uh, chairman and uh senator,
yes, it is.
OK, and then, um.
Does that tie in also to um.
On page 5, you have another New
Mexico 4.
That's um East Hamer Road
intersection, does that also tie
in?
To that same project or the two
different ones.
So Mr., yes, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, uh, yes, that is also
um the the completed
construction project that is,
yes, also near Los Alamo. OK.
Very well. Uh, the last part
that I just want to bring up
this song.
On the
If you were to be asked.
Just a very fair question.
Uh, what would you feel here
anticipated or?
Meats are for equipment.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um.
Honestly, right now I'm gonna
say probably like pretty close
to like $30 million maybe even
more. I could get an exact list.
No, it's fine. OK. And uh one of
the things that I want to just
bring up to the committee is so.
Um, I have visited quite a few
of the yards.
And equipment is very.
I mean, it's well used, I mean,
and
It does need a
You know, there's some repairs,
but a lot of it needs
replacement.
And uh
Every time we go into funding.
And when we get any of the
allocations that we do get
legislative.
Priority always goes to the
roads or two intersections,
traffic lights.
And equipment's always last.
And uh in my part is.
You can't do a good job if you
know, and not also that, but
it's a safety thing too.
And it's just like asking one of
our persons to do.
Some work without any more of
the technology.
You know, that we have
available, you know, to, to do
something like that. So I really
want to take a strong
consideration this year to
really focus and maybe somehow,
you know, if we can get a
additional dollars to.
For the 6 districts under
equipment.
Because I can see it very well.
And uh
Uh
Employees themselves.
You know, and they're very good
about it, but they'll tell you,
you know, the the.
And uh the last part of Mr.
Chairman.
For uh District 5 is, uh, what
is your vacancy rate now?
See
They could calculate that
And that's fine.
20%.
I know that in the discussion.
I guess so, a lot of this is
because
In some areas, you know, it's
very hard to get.
Individuals to work where it's
very remote and very rural.
But um
Have we done anything different
to incentives or anything to.
to work with those areas that
are hard to feel. Mr. Chairman
and Senator, if I could please,
yes, we have, we've reached out,
um, many areas to help us try to
find good employees. One of them
is, is adding an incentive onto
when we hire him on for those
rural locations or those hard to
fill positions, we can add an
incentive to those as well. Um,
we're looking to, um, the um
Secondary education, um,
community colleges, things like
that to help us um fill in the
gaps when it comes to some of
our CDL drivers and and promote
programs um that would lead
ultimately to CDL drivers and,
and then a a pipeline between us
and them to try to get those
individuals into the Department
of Transportation. So we've done
a lot of work, um, trying to get
good qualified employees in.
It's very difficult, as you
mentioned, especially in rural
New Mexico, um, where, you know,
we have a hard time finding
employees and.
keeping them, right? It's, it's
difficult, uh, but we are doing
everything anywhere from, you
know, um,
Job fairs and you know, taking
our equipment out to the um the
local community colleges to try
to create some excitement, some
momentum there and try to
promote employees. So we do,
we're doing all we can, but it
has been very difficult.
Very well, thank you, thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Well thank you thank you,
Senator. Next up we have uh
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
My first question is on slide
number 2.
Uh, the district wide Rockfall
mitigation study.
Its listed as being complete.
Is there a way then I can get a
copy of that report so I can
share with my constituents as to
what went into the study and why
it took so long and things like
that, is it.
OK to get a report from you all.
That's my first question.
Oh
My second is
On that same page, there's also
saying US 64.
Um
There was some late some highway
work that was done with hot and
place.
Is that the new procedure of the
recycling, because it seems in
some areas they just put a
2-inch overlay over existing uh
pavement and it doesn't last
very long, and it seems that if
what I think is the recycle
where they heated up and lay it
back down. I think that seems to
be working better. I see that in
the Bloomfield area, so
I'm sorry and then um the
repavement that was done between
The reservation line and, and
the water flow fruitland area in
In my backyard.
None of those turning lanes was
ever repaved.
And I understand we ran out of
money to do that. Is there any
plans in the future to uh rework
the turning lanes. I think in
that.
3 miles stretch, there was
something like 37 turning lanes.
And a lot of them have big uh
potholes because there's always
farm equipment.
Uh, running on those lanes, so
they tear up the road pretty
good. And then my final question
is,
Is it proper for me to use some
of the data and the statistics
that are outlined in this book
to share with my constituents
because
I tell them that, for example,
Highway 64.
There's plans to
It is
by the end of 2029, and I get
that from uh what I see in your
publication. Is it proper or is
it OK for me to share some of
these statistics with my uh
constituents. The reason why I
ask is because
I've been telling them that, one
of my projects as a legislator
was to finish Highway 64.
Highway 64 and yet after 6
years, we just barely started on
a couple of projects.
And
Being human nature, a lot of
people will remember.
One bad thing out of the 50 good
things that you've done.
And if they see that the
rockfall has not been addressed
in any way, they're gonna
remember that.
And then they're going to say,
well, rep Allison didn't do
anything in his 6 years with us.
So, can I share some of the data
like we're gonna do this section
of 64 mileposts such and such to
this and this fiscal year, Malto
such and such to the end of this
year. Can I use some of your
data as public information.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, uh,
Representative, we're gonna try
to tackle all those questions
you have, but if I could first
start at least with your New
Mexico 64, you're hot and place
recycle project versus a 2-inch.
Mill and Phil, I understand.
So, that's correct. A hot and
place recycle is where we will
recycle up to 1.5, 2 inches of
the existing roadbed, we apply
rejuvenating, emulsified asphalt
to that, we lay it back down,
um, and then we'll come back and
either do a microcell or a thin
bonded overlay, whether it be a
Nova chip or even a a a chip
still if we could, um, just to
hold that in place. We have
really good luck with that
process or both those processes
around the state, um, we see
anywhere to 5 to 7 years of.
longevity on those processes now
that the 2-inch mill and inlay,
that's a little different
process. That's what we'll mail
out the existing road bed, we'll
haul that material off to a
specified stockpile location,
which is usually on the side of
the highway. I know you guys all
see our stockpiles, and then
we'll come back in with a virgin
um layer of 2 inch asphalt. Um,
I know you had mentioned that
you're not having or seen very
good luck with that, but um in
DOT we see that we have better
luck with virgin asphalt, then
we do a recycled pavement.
Um, anywhere from 5 to 10 years,
depending on how thick and how
many lifts we go, um, but we
really have good success with
both those processes. We do a
ton of it every year, um, and
it's really had been our go to
over the last 5 to 7 years. So
we have really good luck with
those processes. Um, as far as
information that you can share
with your constituents, anything
we share with you all here in
this, in these committees is
definitely um something you can
share with your constituents. We
spent a lot of time obviously
and and they were, you know,
pretty hard putting these
projects, these um these
presents.
ations together, so anything you
feel like you need to share with
your constituents, you're more
than welcome to. I'll have, um,
I think Javier's gonna talk a
little bit about Rockfall. I
know he's been handling that or
maybe Rhonda and we could turn
over to them. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Allison, um, yes, we can
definitely share the the the.
Rockfall mitigation study with
you. I would like to also add,
um, I think earlier today at the
uh presentation Jessica
Griffith.
Griffin, um, mentioned with the
resilience that District 5 did
apply and we received $2 million
of resilience funding
specifically for the Rockfall
mitigation at Hawkback.
So, um, once we, I, I, it's not
shown in here yet because we'd
uh received the, we haven't got
it entered into the step yet.
But we will, and I think it's in
program for 2020.
And it's for construction. OK,
thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Chair.
I had suggested maybe even look
into some concrete barriers to
address the rockfall.
Uh, there's a section of road
just south of Cuba, where
there's a hill, probably about
1/10 the size of the hogback
that's got a 12-foot retaining
wall. Why can't we do the same
thing with the hogback? Why
can't we just put up 20 ft?
Uh
concrete burial walls. I think
that would be the easy and quick
fix.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chairman, represented, I
don't know if you were asking a
question or just or just, uh,
you know, providing some
information.
Sometimes in certain
circumstances, we can use wall
beer to prevent rocks from from
getting onto the roadway. It's
not a foolproof deal. We do have
issues with them, um, especially
in rockfall areas where we see a
ton of rock coming down. So yes,
sometimes they work, um, but not
always, and the hogback is a
little unique.
And in our experience, it's
probably, it's probably not the
solution at this time. We have a
project that we're working on
design. We got construction
funds for, um, I think we're
gonna have to wait for that
project to come around because
I, we're gonna get it done with
that. OK, Mr. Tier, just one
more comment about a couple of
weeks ago, there was another
rock slide, and the hog bark
area, and this time it jumped
the, the first barrier and then
the median and the east and west
lanes, this is a four-lane. It
jumped a medium and
went into the eastbound lanes,
and it closed all four lanes at
2 o'clock in the morning.
You know, if uh, if we had a
concrete barrier, or if a
netting had been in place that
would have solved a lot of
problems.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else? Oh.
Representative Garrett has a
question or a comment.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is um
this might apply to District 5,
but it, it might be statewide.
What is our ability to hire
companies to do construction.
Do we have enough? Are we
getting the jobs done? Just can
you update us on that?
Sure, sure, I definitely uh,
last week at LFC I did talk
about this a little bit in
calendar year 23, we had about
9192 contractors in our
pre-qualification program or
contract to this that are
pre-qualified in calendar year
24, we have around 100, so we
gained about 10 contractors in
24. Um, those contractors of all
disciplines, not just heavy
highway pavement, um, we see uh
new contractors coming in for
the specialty kind of areas, um.
being guard rail, uh,
environmental, um, all, all
sorts of contractors. So we're
seeing, we're seeing an uptick
in in contractors interested in
working in New Mexico, which is
a good thing. Um, we haven't
seen any capacity issues as of
this time. I think the
contractors are hungry to get
started already now in spring
and are looking, you know, to us
to hopefully we can, you know,
see some, some funding out of
this year's session to be able
to have a good productive
construction season this coming
year. So things are looking
pretty good representative.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Anyone else uh with a question
or comment?
Um, hearing none, I have a
Question or comment about the
about a 15% vacancy rate just to
follow up on uh
Senator Gonzalez Cavas is that
uh
About what you've been
averaging? Is it better or worse
and if so,
Uh
How much of a hardship is it? So
it's a 22 point.
Question.
Uh, Mr. Chair, we, um, actually
are higher uh in in the district
with our vacancy rate, I think
then overall DOT probably by
about 5%. Um, and I think a lot
of it has to do with because
we're in Santa Fe, so, um, some,
sometimes.
We're competing against
ourselves in a sense, the
district's competing for
positions, sometimes even with
the general office, if that
makes sense. Um, so it's
sometimes there's a bit of a, a
struggle for the district.
So it's, it's higher percent
than other districts.
Yes.
Uh
And uh
Page 5.
I just
Curious, you have a 39 40
billion $40 million project.
To reconstruct 3.7 miles of
interstate.
25.
So it cost
Almost 10 billion $10 million
per mile.
To reconstruct 1 mile.
Mr. Chair, um, that project was
Lawa Java, um, so that, that
project um and if you want to
chime in Javier, um, from my
understanding, there were a lot
of subgrade issues with that
project, so that's why Oh, OK, I
didn't realize, OK, that makes
sense. It's not a
Traditional flat 4 miles.
Correct.
Yes.
Uh, page 13.
Uh
follow up on Senator Gonzalez's
question about
Equipment
So you said you really, you're
asking for 10, but you really
need 30 million.
Is that correct?
So, on page one of your budget,
you see you got, you got 300
million.
Ongoing construction contracts.
Is that all state money? any
federal money in there or?
Um, the majority of it is
actually federal.
So is that your total?
The grand total uh construction
and maintenance
that is grand total for
construction.
Oh, OK.
Well, the reason I ask is,
30 million for construction or
equipment would be 10%.
Of that of your construction
costs and
And uh 10 million is only 3.3%
of your total.
Construction contracts, so
If you, even if you took another
5 or 10 million.
Away from uh
Construction contracts, you'd
have more equipment. Does that
make sense or is the
construction costs so much more
important than the equipment. I,
I don't know. I
I'm not making a judgment, I'm
just asking,
um, the construction contracts,
the 300 million, that's a whole
different pot of money, the
majority of the funding that we
receive is actually federal
funds, which we would not be
able to utilize for equipment,
um, and, and most of the
equipment needs are actually,
um, I mean some of it does go to
construction, but as you know,
we mostly hire contractors to do
that work. A lot of our
equipment needs is more
on our maintenance side, um, for
snow removal and, um, you know,
all all of the other functions
that we do guardrail repair all
of that kind of stuff, so.
Just,
uh,
It's nice to see a woman in this
position. You must bring a
different and unique perspective
to the general. Well, thank all
three of you for being here.
That concludes this portion of
the agenda will move on to the
next, we have a last minute.
Comment or question from uh
Representative Allison. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just a
question.
On September 25th, we had a
presentation by a company by the
name of ECM square.
They dealt with the road
stabilization.
As New Mexico DOT ever thought
to uh do anything with that?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
yes, we have the EMC Square
actually and I-40 in District 6
in Lisa's area, and we have it,
I believe, in the West Valley
East Balmain, and uh so we do
have that material down in our
district. um, yes, we've used
it.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Oh, thank you, uh.
Representative Allison, do you
have a question?
Rib cake.
Mr. Chairman like to move that
we amend the agenda.
For those, everybody joining us
here and online, um, we have
some cake to commemorate our
wonderful tears chairman Bill
Thommen for all of his work with
this committee and all of his
work, the New Mexico legislature
over the last few years, he is a
treasure and we wanted to thank
him for everything he's done for
us, as well as representatives
Allison, who's been with us for
6 years. Thank you for your hard
work, representative. You, um,
are
An incredible advocate for your
community, and of course, uh
Representative Harry Garcia, who
has been a mover and a shaker in
the transportation area for the
entire time he's been here and
so please join us. We're going
to cut the cake. It's got the
bulldozers and the and the tow
truck on it right over there and
uh there's our equipment, right?
We already have it. Um, and
thanks also to Representative
Garrett for helping get all this
prepared. So, um, we will have
the next presentation, but we
will.
will also be getting cake, so
consider this a working meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Let's
Two other meetings, um.
Oh that's
I
OK.
We'll resume our meeting.
Um
Next item is uh
A report from uh DLT District 6.
And we have with us
Lisa Vega.
Who is the district engineer?
So thank you for being here and
uh
You can kick it off.
Thank you, Chairman.
Uh, good afternoon, Chairman,
members of the committee. My
name's Lisa Vega. I'm the
District 6 engineer. I'm pleased
to be here presenting in front
of you all, uh, District 6 is
located in western New Mexico
and encompasses Cibola,
McKinley, and a majority of
Catrin and Sandoval counties,
and portions of San Juan, Rio
Riva, Valencia, and Socorro.
We have a map here on the lower
left hand corner of page one,
our commissioner is Charles
Lundstrom.
So just to go over some of our
budget, we have an operating
budget of about 23 million
ongoing construction contracts
right now, um, equate to about
142 million our contract
maintenance is about 7 million
field supplies, about 6 million.
Striping and signing about 1
million Resteria maintenance and
improvements about 372,000, our
IT budget is 251,000.
So far our employee breakdown, I
have 43 positions in our support
staff, 144 in maintenance, 50
positions in construction, uh,
13 positions in engineering
support, we have right now 5
interns, so, um, a total of our
permanent employees is 252
employees. Uh, right now,
District 6's vacancy rate is at
9.3%.
So I'll start off with on page
2, housefield fun update and
just wanted to thank the
legislatures for this these
additional funds we wouldn't be
able to get all of these
projects done as quickly as we
have without, without all of the
support.
So laws of 2019, um, we have the
majority of those projects are
complete. We just have the
Ellison corridor in New Mexico
for bypass designs which are um
one is 90%, the other one is
60%.
Uh, Allison has had some
challenges, which has delayed
the design, um, New Mexico for
had a value engineering study
which affected some of the
design aspects, so that went
back to 60%.
Our laws of 2021.
We have, um,
in just for your reference, the
projects that are shaded have
been completed just for quick
reference there. Uh, we have two
of the projects on 547 that are
complete, as I said, the Allison
corridor, we were short, about
40.
A million dollars or so, so we
actually had real real real
Kelly, those funds into US 491.
Um, and in New Mexico 264, that
study corridor studies is
complete and that first uh
project is actually underway
right now.
Um, and for the laws of 2022,
all of these projects are
complete.
Laws of 2023, uh, the majority
of them are complete except for
the last one there, which is a
project for the city of Grants,
and they are currently designing
that project there.
The laws of 2024, uh, the ones
that are gray are complete. The
projects that are uh shaded in
the blue, blue gray, those
actually are in progress right
now, and then the the remaining
projects will be started and
completed in the spring.
Uh, lots of uh 2024 again on the
bottom of this page 3, we have
the New Mexico 117 and New
Mexico 371 projects that are
complete.
The I-4070.2 to 83 is under
construction right now, then the
I-40 Maples 34 to 37, we're
going to start that in the
spring.
On page 4, we have our ongoing
construction projects.
Um, and then also our completed
projects that were done in 2023
and 2024.
On page 5, I have our fiscal
year 24 contract maintenance
projects. These are our
maintenance funds for last
fiscal year.
Of 2025 contract maintenance
projects. This is for this
fiscal year.
And we have projects on US 550,
I-40, and New Mexico 4 that have
been completed.
And the remaining um in Mexico 6
in New Mexico 53 will be done in
the spring. Then, of course, the
items on the top there are
districtwide.
Uh, items that we need in order
to for our internal.
On
page number 6, we have our sip,
which is our fiscally
constrained ears.
Um, we have those listed here
and then the district 6 the
planning years, so these are
projects that are currently not
funded, but in our planning
years, so some of these are
actually in design right now.
And then on page 7, which is a
pretty important page. Uh, this
is our temp project scoring
sheet and this is scoring all of
the district's unfunded
projects.
So I, there were more projects,
but we only, I only went to a
priority 20 of what would fit on
this sheet, um, so our current
number one project that is uh
that comes highest in the
scoring for the temp is a
project on I-40 for Mount Post
8.7 to 9.7, which is a bridge
replacement project, and we were
just um awarded in an infra
grant for $30 million but we
still have
between the 30 million and the
50 million to uh.
That will probably come from our
targets or some other state
funding.
And then some of these projects
that don't have control numbers,
these are projects that are
needed on I-40. I requested some
information, um.
And based on the information
that I received, the rank pretty
high, and most of them are are
minor to major rehabilitation
projects, and these are projects
that I'm going to need to
program into our districts step.
Um, moving on to page 8. These
are our transportation project
fund projects.
And as R Rhonda stated, the fund
is very helpful to our local
entities and definitely happy to
collaborate with them to, to get
these projects completed. So the
projects that are shaded are
completed and the other ones are
still in progress.
And on page 9, these are, this
is just a map of.
Where the TPF projects are
located.
On page 10, these are our local
government road fund projects,
which are from the fiscal year
24 and 25.
Again, the, the one that shaded
is complete.
And on page 11.
Um, I'm
This, this is a list of our
District 6 equipment that
currently needs replacement
criteria, so this doesn't
include any of the specialty
equipment that we might request,
but this is just equipment that
meets replacement criteria,
which is age, miles or hours,
repairs or being obsolete. And
as you can see, this adds up to
about almost $25 million. So as
you can see from this list,
there's tractors with mowers,
and this year.
the district had a lot of
difficulty in keeping up with
our mowing due to our mowers
breaking down.
And same thing with our
patching, you know, on this is
listed as 4 to 6 ton steel
rollers with trailers, um,
that's used by our patrols for
pothole patching and they.
A lot of our patrols were having
to borrow from their neighboring
patrols in order to get a lot of
that patching completed due to
breakdowns.
And in addition to that, on the
bottom of this sheet is our
District 6 Capital Improvement
needs, uh, most of our patrol
buildings are old and outdated,
um, Gallup patrol is our newest
building, and it was actually
constructed in 1996 or 1997.
I'm, I'm not, I don't quite
remember, but that's been a long
time ago, and as you can see,
we're gonna.
This is just a snippet of the
needs that we have currently
right now.
And that uh concludes my
presentation. I'll stand for any
questions.
Thank you for your presentation.
And um
We'll take questions, uh, first
up is.
It's uh
Representative Nunstrom, who was
on, uh, on Zoom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh
thank the presenters at the
table. I do have a couple of
questions I'd like to ask. The
first is, is that um,
I've uh requested several times
that there be um some resolve
regarding lighting on 491. I
have two chapters in particular
that have been very concerned
about safety issues out there.
One of them is Rock Springs, and
the other is Mexican Springs.
You know, I make, I make these
requests and I never hear
anything back, Mr. Chairman, and
uh staff, I need to understand
what's happening there.
There's been several times that
these chapters have raised the
concern about the turnout in
from 491 into their chapter
roads and also concerns about
lighting. So is there any update
on that?
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Lindstrom, the, I believe there
were a few chapters that did a
road safety audit for US 491s on
some sections there. Um, there
was lighting that was um one of
the recommendations, um, we do
have to work with the Navajo
Nation in order to update the
global lighting agreement.
Um, which is the first step in
in being able to add any
lighting to the state's
facility. In addition to that,
they can utilize uh
transportation fund.
Project or transportation
project funds in order to pay
for the design, or even LGRF
funds would be available to do
that.
And then once that's completed,
they can move forward, but the
first step would be to update
the global lighting agreement.
OK, when was that last updated?
I believe the last update was to
add some lights on New Mexico
118.
Um, between
566 and Rehobeth.
Which is currently a project
that was just recently awarded,
so I believe that lighting
agreement was updated, uh, I
want to say a year ago, maybe
more.
So what we have to update it
again if it was just recently
done.
Every time the uh the update is
to add, um, lighting facilities
to that. OK, so it's to add an
area? Correct.
OK, well, I like to see that
happen.
Um, particularly to Rock
Springs.
Mr. Chairman, the second
question I had, and I, I
listened to the presentation
regarding minor and major rehab
projects along I-40.
Where do we stand on the 6th
landing of I-40. Where's that
study at? What's, where are we
at with that?
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Lindstrom, that study has been
completed, um, I see there is a
website that the study is
available on, and I can go ahead
and email you the the site so
that you can download the study,
there is going to be an update
meeting that's going to be
scheduled.
I believe it was going to be
scheduled this month and I, I
think it got postponed, and I'm
not sure when the new dates are,
if if they have been scheduled
yet.
But they do want to make sure
that our local legislatures are
included in that update.
Yeah, so what does it say? We're
not gonna up, we're not gonna do
the 6th lane. We're just gonna,
we're just gonna continue with
minor and major rehab projects.
Is that what it's gonna tell us?
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
the the study recommends an
enhanced two lane.
Which is 2 lanes plus 2 12 ft
shoulders. Um, there are, I
believe, 5 areas that they're
recommending the 3 lane portion
to be completed now.
The study also includes numerous
areas where upgrades are needed
to correct horizontal and
vertical curves.
Um, in addition to
Um, some locations where it,
it'll require reconstruction and
then some other areas where it
will only be um major or minor
rehabilitation.
I need you to make sure that I
know when that meeting is.
And, um,
I want, I want you to
specifically contact me when
that meeting is gonna happen.
I think it's super important. We
just had another one of those
delays on 40 recently, uh, where
people were out there for who
knows how long?
Um
Don't know exactly what was
going on at the time, but I
still think that that has, is
still a major problem and
concern for us.
Out in this part of the state
and, and I mean all the way to
Albuquerque.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, the other
question that I, I had is that
Are you working with McKinley
County on bridge replacements
inside of uh
County roads that serve as
chapters. Are you guys part of
that process or that
Collaborative.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
yes, we do, uh, a lot of those
funds are transportation project
funds, in addition to local
government road fund, so in
those cases, we aren't involved.
Mr. Chairman, I think it's
important to know I went to a
briefing recently by McKinley
County. They have 40 inadequate
bridges right now. He's there's
40 bridges that are not
Uh
I guess certified to carry
school buses.
And that's throughout McKinley
County that predominantly
services Navajo kids.
So, I want to make sure that
we're able to do something more
with these bridges, and I
imagine throughout all of rural
New Mexico, we have the same
problem. It's just that I'm
closest to what's happening out
here in in McKinley County.
Uh, the last time I looked at
the the list, they finally got
I think it was right away
clearance for 10 of them, but
now they don't have the money,
and it's just a, it's just a
ongoing shell game, you know,
for the people that live out
there, they really need those
bridges fixed, so I'm gonna ask
Mr. Chairman. I'm gonna ask our,
our engineer. Is there some kind
of working group where people
come together from the various
chapters in the county and, and
you guys, when we're looking at,
at bridge replacement.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
the best place would be through
the Northwest New Mexico RPO.
OK, so the,
the cough does that?
OK, so you guys have somebody on
there that is knowledgeable on
all this bridge stuff.
Um, anytime that we're gonna
talk about bridge items, we can
make sure that we have the the
correct people there.
OK.
Um
I'm glad, I'm glad to hear that
and um
I was wondering also, is there
any plans for repair of 371.
I've heard a lot also on that
road. I know that we tried to do
the best we could with it, but
is there going to be some effort
on 371.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, we
did.
Schedule some projects on New
Mexico 371, um, with our regular
contract maintenance funds, um,
but and also our internal um
cruise, so we will continue to
do what we can to
To make sure that the road is.
Appropriate or doesn't have a
lot of payment failures.
Yeah, I'm wondering.
Has there been a full assessment
of what it would cost to get
that one up to
Uh, much better condition.
Mr. Chair Representative, no, we
haven't done a study, but that's
definitely something that we can
add to our list of studies that
are needing to be done.
Yeah, I'm just curious about
that and um again, it gets out
into that rural area, very rural
part of McKinley County for 371
and major corridor though
between the San Juan Farmington,
Aztec, Bloomfield area south to
I-40.
And then uh I guess the last
question that I had, Mr.
Chairman, were you guys
involved?
I know you were at the
headquarter level and I want to
compliment all of you for the
train derailment that we had
last summer.
Is there any more on that? Is
there any more update on that
derailment?
Issue.
Mr. Chair Representative, no, we
haven't had any additional
information from BNSF on on the
actual derailment, what caused
it if there's gonna be future
things that they put in place to
make sure it doesn't happen
again. We haven't been part of
those conversations unless.
Rick, do you know?
Mr. Chair, Representative, no,
we, we have not been in contact,
we haven't seen a report or
anything to that nature.
Yeah, the reason I'm wondering
is I want to make sure that
they've paid for uh the state
services. I know that.
The county
Uh, emergency people were out
there. I, I know you guys were,
I was getting regular reports
from your cabinet secretary.
As well as the depart of state
police department.
Uh getting regular reports from
them, but I do, I do know that
they were to provide uh funding
to cover the costs for the state
staff.
Mr. Chair Representative, I know
they had sent over um.
It basically an agreement, we
had to agree to certain things
in order to receive that
funding, that agreement is in
the Office of General Counsel
right now because there were
some items that.
We couldn't agree to, so I'm not
sure that they've made any
payments to at least to the
NMDOT.
OK, well, that's disappointing.
I mean, I hate to see us.
Having to pay for those kind of
things when, you know, we
didn't, it wasn't our, it wasn't
our issue.
That's all I have. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Oh, thank you, Representative.
Uh, next up we have uh Senator
uh Gonzalez, followed by
Representative Herden.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I was gonna ask you on, um.
On that portion of Riariba.
Being in your
District 6.
Where about is that's a very
small a Chair.
Senator, that is a very small
area and um I I'm sorry, but I
won't be able to.
that it's just barely, it's a
tiny little portion there. Yes.
And um, I don't know just.
Seems like it would make more
sense to be on District 5.
With the rest, but I mean, I
don't know the history behind
it.
Um, and then, uh, uh, the only
reason I'm asking is because I
represent part of Rio Reba.
And do you happen to know who
the Senate district is on the.
I know, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
I know that we end at Lake
Valley on New Mexico.
Well, if you have a chance, and
if they're not,
I also on your vacancy rate,
that's really good, 9.3.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, the
information I just received from
District 5 is that the reason
why they that portion of, of um
be 71 and County belongs to
Lisa's areas because the
maintenance patrol and leases
areas a lot closer than the
patrol from Farmington, so we're
able to to uh mobilize to that
area more quickly in from Lisa's
district. That's fine, yeah.
I'm sure that there was probably
a history behind it, but all.
Uh, and then the last part is
um.
Last week I brought up this
question.
In reference to to and from
transportation with school
buses.
And uh Joey, do you remember
what that the answer was so
represented lungstrom just
mentioned that.
There's like 40 bridges and that
definitely was not the number
that was given to us.
Yeah, uh, so Mr. Chairman, um,
Last week at the CD there was a
question about
Yes,
uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
you're correct. Last week at LFC
there was a question about
school bus transportation, um,
and bridges that weren't
certified, um, it was brought up
at the time that some school
districts have found
alternatives by using suburbans
rather than full school buses,
so lighter vehicles essentially
that could get across those
bridges, but that doesn't
necessarily work in, in every
case. So I think it, it, it's
really dependent upon the uh on
the area.
I guess so, Mr. Chairman, the
only part is that um
We went through this whole thing
quite a few years back.
And uh the number wasn't even as
high as 40.
And at that time we will mention
that, you know, every effort
would be to see how we could
correct that.
You know, that's a high number
now, 40.
That's
I don't know I mean uh
transportation through
suburbans.
And also through uh Peter
rounds.
You know, that can get very
tricky, you know, and
Very easily end up with live.
Anyway, maybe at some time we
can look at where we are, what
we need to do.
Because, uh, maybe we can use
more of that funding that goes
to.
school bus route.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I know that
there has been a
A great increase in projects
that we were doing with McKinley
County, and they have been, they
made a great effort in in
bringing that number down. Um, I
can get some updated information
as to what we started with and
where we're at now.
And Mr. Chairman, especially
because we're under the
Martina Ziai lawsuit.
And uh part of the remedies is
again, you know, bringing that
up.
Equity into education, you know,
in all areas.
And uh definitely uh
transportation would be one of
them.
Right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Senator.
Um, anyone else? Oh,
And
Your favorite uh legislator,
yes,
to miss.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
presenters. I am looking at page
one of your report first, and
I'm looking at your employee
breakdown, and it's 252
positions. Does that include the
9% vacancy rate that you
currently have in place.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative,
yes. And thank you with respect
to that, and I'm looking at the
interns where it says 5
positions, like who are the
interns? Where do they come
from? Mr. Chair Representative,
these are, uh, they also, they
come from high school and
college interns, so we, during
the summer, we do have 2, high
school interns, and then we have
3 college interns.
And we were able to keep two of
our college interns on because
they're they're actually yearly
uh renewed every year. So as
they're attending college
online, they're still able to
work for the DOT.
So your intent to interns are
actually um located in District
6, that's where they're coming
from. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair Representative, yes.
So I'm just looking back at
District 5. Why don't they have
interns?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
we provide or we allow all the
districts to receive interns if
they, if they feel they need
them. I think District 5
actually did have, um, 2 or 3 of
them as well over the summer
break. Um, they just didn't
mention them in their, their
list of employees breakdown um
they are temporary employees, as
you know, so maybe that's why
they failed to do it, but
everybody around the stadium,
um, I think District one was
probably the leader. I think
they had 6 or 7 kids, and I
think that's a a result of being
in Las Cruces and New Mexico
State.
being so close, but all the
districts did have some interns,
including our general office in
Santa Fe, which we had about a
dozen at least.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. That
is really good news to hear that
all the districts have interns
and uh because that's a part of
Grow Our Own, and are these
students who are majoring
somehow in transportation, uh,
what are, tell me what a little
bit about their background, if
you don't mind, just briefly
Representative, we have um 2 of
these that recently graduated,
actually we have one person. His
name is Hector Largo, is a
Native American from to from I
believe um Theroux. He graduated
from Mexico State, but he did
intern with us. He just now
recently got hired on into our
EIT program, so future engineer
for the department, so
definitely this is working. We
have another young lady, um, who
worked at the Gallup project
offices from Gallup just is
going to graduate New Mexico
State now in December, her, um,
I believe she's also intending
on.
Coming to the NMDOT as well. So
another future engineer, um, we
have in the high school, we had
one that was we have.
Two high school interns that
were from Grants High School,
um, one of them actually became
permanent and has joined the
department in in our um service
um mechanic area. So you know,
these, these young people that
are coming to work, they're
they're actually being able to
see what we do and are excited
to actually start careers with
NMDOT and this is kind of what
we were wanting all along was to
just kind of give them that
little bit of a taste and
hopefully that they would.
find some interest in, in the
DOT. Mr. Chairman and
Representative in Santa Fe, our
interns this summer, we had a
total of 41 of them was an
engineer from Mexico Tech. We'd
love for him to stick around. He
still has a few more years.
We're hope to see him this
summer. The other one was a
business major who graduated
from Mexco State. We did take
her on board. She's now working
for our state maintenance bureau
out of Santa Fe, which she is a
tremendous employee. And then we
had 2 or 3 high schoolers that
came in and we just wanted to
expose them to all types of
things.
We sent them to maintenance and
the materials la into
construction, and we wanted them
to see exactly what we did
because, you know, we always
tell them the Department of
Transportation is like a school
bus. There's plenty of seats on
the, on, on board here. Maybe
this one's not for you, but
there's one. There's definitely
one for you, so we try to get
them a little taste of
everything, cause we want to
find that seat for them, so
hopefully it works.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair
presenters. That's quite
encouraging and it's right along
with what we should be doing in
New Mexico. Just looking at the
employee breakdown again very
briefly because we have talked
about the need for some work
that needs to be done, and if
you have a 9% vacancy, so that
looks like about 23 employees.
Like where is that vacancy and
why is it vacant? And are you
leaving them vacant on purpose
so that you can pay other
employees.
Ah, Mr. Chair Representative,
the majority of the vacancies
are in our maintenance section
just because we have the most
employees there. We do have um
some vacancies in our
construction section and of
course in our district, um,
complex. So in our admin
section, HR, um, I believe in
our, our audit section, um,
there aren't any positions that
were holding, um, if we're, if
they're not being advertised is
because they're we're doing.
things like reclassifying or
things like that, but we're not
holding any positions. We're
advertising them all.
Thank you very much. And if I,
if I go quickly to page 11 of
your document, and you are there
you list the number of
Types of equipment that need
replacement. Like how old is
this equipment?
Mr. Chair Representative, this
equipment that that ranges in
age and and what I think people
fail to understand is that
during the season when this
equipment is being used, it's
being used quite a bit. So even
for snow removal, those trucks
are being used basically 24
hours a day until they're done.
We don't have any of our those
trucks in this list because
we've been doing a lot of great
job of getting some additional
funds to get those types of
vehicles, but things like
tractors, mowers, rollers, those
are things.
that are used on a seasonal
basis, but they're used.
A lot, and so they range in age
and it's not just, you know.
One is it, it depends.
Mr. Chair Representative in the
heavy equipment, we usually
don't um.
We don't replace them when it
comes like a certain amount of
years, it's really by the hour.
So in our heavy equipment, um,
you know, we're probably at 2
3000 hours over what's, what's
normal for a heavy piece of
equipment, um.
We take extremely good care of
it. Uh, we do the best we can to
keep it together, but they are
aging. I mean, we use them hard,
they are hard hours, um, but we
do the best we can to keep them
on the road, um, but they are
aging and they are very old, and
we really use the heck out of
them. I can't stress it enough.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair and
presenter, so, uh, senator
Gonzalez raised the question
about funding for equipment, and
is this equipment amount in your
budget now?
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
no, it's not. So in our eCall
budget, our equipment budget, we
have about $10 million Mr.
Romero and I will kick in about
another 3 to 5 million. So total
statewide, that's about 1314, 15
million depending on the year.
Um, so per district, that's not
much. And if you look at some of
this equipment like for, for
example, a motor graders
$300,000 doesn't go that far, so
any, any amount of money we can
get to throw to equipment. It
was greatly appreciated. I know
the districts were saying like
30 million that magic number,
probably that.
to to replace everything, but
it's not always a good thing to
get 30 million per district and
try to order that type of
equipment, it's just, it's just
a lot of money to try to spend
in a 3 year time period. So we
found that like 30 million-ish
is a is a good number for us. We
could get that, uh, amount of
money out, we can get that
equipment ordered, um, but it's
really like, and I've told
Senator Gonzalez this many
times. It's like getting in
line, so when you order, for
example, a motor grader, um, you
get in line with, with everybody
else that's looking for a motor
grader. We're looking at
Anywhere from 1 to 2 years
before we see them. So it's,
it's about getting in line and
just waiting our turn before we
can actually see that equipment
on the ground. So it's very
difficult for us to spend huge
amounts of money and equipment,
but that $30 million seems just
right.
This Mr. Chair, just for
clarification, I was asking, as
you're putting forth the
Department of Transportation
budget this year where you
asking for this amount of money.
I apologize, Mr. Chairman
Representative, again, I
apologize for interrupting, but
um, no, the budget that we are
currently budgeting our
equipment out for around 12
million, so anything on top of
that, we'd add to their budget
and we'd start just seeking the
additional equipment as it comes
up.
So we're only budgeted for about
10 or 12 million.
OK, thank you. Uh, Mr. Chair,
one last question if I may. If I
go to page 6 of your
presentation.
And under your districts 6
step planning years you have
listed a number of things that
or letting. So I'm, I'm just
trying to make sure I understand
that and the committee
understands what you've done
here. These are the years in
which you plan to issue an RFP
to get these items done, is that
correct? Or what does that mean
when it says the leading year.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
that's when we intend to
advertise it, so within, so if
it says 2027, design takes about
18 months.
And then we would want to put it
out, hopefully if we get funded,
then we would want to put that
out for for advertisement for
construction in 2027.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, and to
follow up on that question. The
others say TBD to be announced
and why is it to be announced
and why isn't it planned
already.
Mr. Chair Representative, those
are items that
We did a study, because we were
getting flooding on the.
Near gallop and so some of those
projects haven't been um
designed yet.
And so, and then the.
Just to get him on the step and
to get us thinking about them,
we put them there, but we hadn't
decided on what year we would
let them yet.
So those will be to be
determined just because we
haven't actually
Decided on what year we're going
to try to get those projects
completed.
And in addition, some of these
other projects are projects that
are um.
Bridge rehabilitation, and we do
get.
Additional non-target funds or
bridge rehabilitation, and that
would come from the general
office and so we just don't know
when that money will be
available yet and so we haven't
had a chance to put that or
letting dates into those some of
those other projects.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
presenters Senator.
she had
Question of regarding one of
He's comments. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, just on the point of
um.
Of the equipment.
Yeah so
It's just recently, you know
that.
The request has been coming to
assist with forest fires.
On the equipment.
And that's very different kind
of uses, you know, from what the
Department does versus having
your equipment on.
Basically in the mountains.
You know, and that's gonna bring
even more wear and tear faster.
You know, or even more
breakdowns.
So, uh, you know, we definitely
don't wanna be saying no to a
forest fires.
We have to realize in
consideration that that really
takes a toll on equipment.
That's all, Mr. Turner, thank
you.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, I have a couple of
questions. They're both on page
11.
Seems to be a popular page.
So
The motor graters get 4 you have
8 or 14.
quarter of a million dollars for
one, you could, you could buy a
Ferrari for that.
So how many do you have, how
many graters do you have total,
and in your inventory right now.
Mr. Chairman, we probably have
around, I would say 650 to 700
currently on the ground
statewide.
Not just in this uh district.
Mr. Chair, I don't know how many
motor graders we have currently
on hand, but it's probably
pretty close to this 14, because
some, a lot of this, this is
just our equipment that meets
the current criteria for
replacement. So I would say it's
pretty close to 14, if not all
of them need replacement.
So,
you, you have a lot, uh can I
assume you use it mostly on dirt
roads?
No.
No, Mr. Chairman, we use motor
graders for many things. Dirt
roads is one of them, but one of
the things in America and then
DOT we don't have very many dirt
roads anymore, we do have some,
not a lot of them, but we use
them for um went to create
windrows when we have hot mix or
we're laying base sports or you
know we use them quite a bit
snow removal, we they're out. So
you use them in construction.
We're also so patching, we also
use the blade patching.
Mr. Chair, we also use them for
that.
So wouldn't the contractors
Provide the graders, or you work
in conjunction with contractors,
or are you actually do a lot of
road construction yourself.
Mr. Chairman, no, we don't. We
do lateral construction, but you
know what our in our
construction program that is a
contractor uh uh operation, they
provide all the equipment, labor
and material to complete a
construction project. The the
uses we use them for is either
maintenance, uh, you know,
construction that we, we
currently do internally, uh,
winter maintenance, those types
of things that our forces
actually do the work for. Oh,
well, thank you. I just showing
my ignorance. Thank you.
So, uh,
A uh patrol, I assume that's
like a substation.
Uh, Mr. Chair, in District 6, we
have 12 patrols, and so each
patrol is has a boundary or they
so within District 6, we break
up the district, and each patrol
is responsible for a section of
the district. So yes, you could
consider it like a substation.
$1.5 million for a pump
replacement. Is that
We had your building is flooded.
Mr. Chair, in in Gallup, the
interstate is actually about
25 to 30 ft higher than some of
the local streets and part of
the construction was they
actually built a pump station.
So there is another state road
that is a um parallel with the
interstate and if we, if that
pump goes out, then that road
gets completely flooded during
any type of rain event. the road
gets flooded at the building.
Yeah, I think this, this pump is
actually not at the building. It
is adjacent to
I-40 OK. So,
You got a total of half a
million dollars.
But this
Pump replacements.
1.5 million.
That doesn't total half a
million.
Yes, Mr. Chair, I, I do see
that, that math error now.
Well
I'm not gonna hold it against
you. I still think you're doing
a good job.
So I just, I did, well,
actually.
Well, anyway, thank you.
Um
And one last question. So you
have a
That the 24 million free
equipment is that a wish list or
is that must have?
Or somewhere in between.
Mr. Chair, that is just to
replace all of the equipment
that currently meets our
replacement criteria.
So these, it's a need.
So it's not, it's necessary. You
wouldn't ask for it unless you.
Really needed it.
Yes, Mr. Chair.
That's all I have anyone else
have any last minute comments or
questions?
Carrying on, this concludes this
portion. Thank you again for
You know, being here for your,
uh, excellent.
And comprehensive presentation
and answers. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Mr. Chair, and
happy Thanksgiving to everybody.
Next item on our agenda is uh
Entitled Dangers of Driverless
Vehicles and semi semi trucks
and necessary improvements to
the New Mexico law.
And we will hear from uh
2 attorneys and a business
agent.
Thank you.
So we have uh
Julie Coob in the audience is.
She's a lawyer. Are you part of
this uh discussion?
Mm.
Oh, thank you, thank you for
being here.
Pardon?
OK, well, welcome to the
committee and um
Who can uh
You can commence.
You have this mic on.
All right, my microphone was not
on. All right, I'll start over.
Uh.
Mr. Chairman, Senator Tollman,
and Mrs. Vice Chair, uh,
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
thank you for the opportunity to
speak before you all today. My
name is Andy Young, and I'm
speaking on impacts of semi
truck collisions, then I'm going
to pass the baton to Mr.
Seevers, and then we're gonna
pass it on down further, and
we're, I'm gonna first here to
talk to you about impacts of
semi trucks, a little bit about
me, I'm not just an attorney.
Actually, I have a class A
commercial driver's license, uh,
and I've testified before the US
Congress. You can read about me
uh in the presentation.
I think you all have handouts, I
believe, in front of you to have
you guys each have a copy of, of
the presentation. OK, perfect.
And I own a semi truck, which is
the next slide and trailer, it's
a 45 ft car hauler. I actually
drive it on the weekends, we
haul race cars, we go to the
next slide, uh, the race cars we
haul our open wheel modifies
just local tracks, but in
addition to being a truck
driver, I've served on the
Federal motor carrier Safety
Administration's advisory
Committee, the Motor Carrier
Safety Advisory Committee, and
we, and that is with
Stakeholders both in the
industry, labor, and with
enforcement and one of the
things we focus on, not only in
that committee, but I focused on
locally in the city of Cleveland
in Ohio, which Mr. Senator
Tollman, you mentioned you liked
our roads in Ohio earlier today.
I attended, uh, Amy, uh
Whitfield's, uh, presentation on
that earlier today and uh so
we've been working on Vision Zer
initiatives in Ohio, uh, for a
long time now, which is why the
striping is the way that the
striping is in Ohio, and there
are simple fixes. I'm excited to
hear.
about New Mexico's target zero,
was excited to hear Amy and also
the response of your committee
to Amy Whitfield and the work
that Target Zero is doing. So I
want to talk to you a little bit
about Target er and the
importance of what Vision Zero
means and target your means, it
means no margin of error. And
when you go to the next slide,
if you look at what torque
robotics is saying as recent as
November 11th in 2024, um, the
transport topics news, it's like
the Wall Street Journal of the
American Trucking Association.
That they're working towards
actually having driverless
vehicles on the roadways, uh, in
Texas by 2026 without somebody
behind the seat, which they're
planning on doing in 2025. They
are doing highway speeds on a
closed courses, but the edge
cases, which are very rare
circumstances trucks might
encounter on the road, they're
still working out the bugs, so
to speak, on the edge cases. So
when you talk about ed cases,
and you talk about semi trucks
versus cars, the edge cases mean
margin of error, and we can't
have.
the margin error when you're
dealing with trucks, because if
you could go to the next slide,
this is a slide you saw earlier
this morning, which is the safe
system approach. What we're
specifically talking about in
the safe system approach is the
safer vehicles component of it.
So I put a circle around the
truck, but I've also put a
circle around humans are
vulnerable. So when you're
dealing with truck versus car
crashes, the humans are
vulnerable for a number of
reasons, but let's hear from a
trooper and what a trooper has
said, this is a crash that I
investigated and we actually, I
handled the case and
went to trial, this trooper said
on his live dash cam video with
the audio played back.
There's nothing. I mean, what
can stand up to a semi besides
another semi or freaking train.
There's not much. It looks like
the family did all they could.
They had all their kids in
proper car seats, and they were
belted, the boy in the back was
on the opposite side of the
impact. This just is just how
severe some of these impacts
are. There's nothing we can do.
So when you're dealing with
truck versus car crashes, they
become so severe that I asked
this trooper what he meant about
what his statement was in his
dashcam video when he was
responding in two boys.
were killed in this crash, 9
year old and 19 month old, so I
asked, when you have a semi
truck versus car, what, why is
there a different dynamic in
there, and his response was,
well, commercial motor vehicles,
they're higher profile vehicles,
they don't necessarily match up
to the bumpers or the main
frames of passenger cars or
SUVs, so if they get hit, they
don't hit those main structures
that are meant to take an
impact, they go more into the
soft body of the vehicle. So the
purpose behind this is, OK, if
we're gonna do driverless
vehicles and get driverless semi
trucks on the roadway, we want
to do it right, make sure
there's no margin of error. Make
sure there's not a situation
where you have a truck versus
car crash that ends up in
catastrophic results, because
We have not perfected driverless
vehicles with cars. It would be
nice to see cars perfect that
because there's a concept called
vehicle crash compatibility and
vehicle crash compatibility is
basically the academic speak
that the bumpers match up. So
when you consider this 51 car
pileup where 6 people were
killed in this particular crash.
This happened in Ohio. When you
see the cars, the bumpers all
match up. You see the airbags,
the side curtain airbags, and
basically the passenger
compartments are intact, but
when you have a
truck, people think of the truck
weight and length of the truck.
They don't think about that
geometric mismatch with the
bumpers don't match up, where
the truck then travels into the
car as we saw with that one
trooper, so if we go to the next
slide, this is another crash
that I investigated, go back
one, please. Uh, the insurances
Highway Safety, which I've
worked with them and been on
crash tests and participating in
crash tests on their crash
testlo in Rucksville, Virginia.
This was a Jeep Grand Cherokee
2014, that was a top safety
pick, but in this crash.
in a, uh, shortly after the
Steve Grand Cherokee came out
and you see the crash where the
first point of impact with the
side of a trailer is literally
the windshield and then the
occupant inside the vehicle, so
if you go to the next slide and
pan out, the safety engineering
that has been put into this car,
the energy absorbing bumpers,
the crumple zones, none of those
matter when you hit a semi
truck, and if you go to the next
slide, you can see that same
jeep underneath the semi truck,
and then you go to the next
slide, you can see that jeep and
unfortunately the driver of this
particular.
Jeep was killed in this crash in
an underride where the truck
driver was over his hours doing
something unusual with a U-turn,
and you can go to the next slide
after they pull the jeep out
away from the truck, you can see
the catastrophe that's involved,
and then if you go to the next
slide,
And one more slide.
Here you can see that not only
did the energy absorbing bumpers
in the crumple zones don't work.
Neither do your seat belts,
neither do the airbags. If you
go to the next slide, you'll see
the airbag doesn't even go off
in this particular situation,
and quite frankly, if you go to
the next slide, you're safe for
hitting a brick wall in your
car, because all the crash
testing is into brick walls or
into other vehicles where the
vehicles bumpers all match up.
As soon as you have a vehicle to
semi truck crash, it's a very
different scenario. And so there
are some new tech that is coming
along that isn't very, that
isn't rocket science.
And those are side impact guards
that you can see on some
trailers. Now, the original
equipment manufacturers have not
mandated these yet, so I'm not
very convinced that the original
equipment manufacturers will
ethically do the right thing
when it comes to driverless
vehicles because there are these
side impact guards. There's even
front override protection, but
as you look further at the
Insurance Institute of Highways
testing, and I was at this
particular crash test in March
of 2017. Here we are in 2024,
still talking about it. This is
what it looks like without a
guard.
And these are pictures that I
took. If we go to the next
slide, this is what happens to
the person, you know, you see
the fuel efficiency skirts,
those are just like dog doors,
you can see the fuel efficiency
skirt just pushed up in the air
right there, you go to the next
slide. Again, pictures that I
took, and then we started
installing a couple on some
vehicles as well, uh, some
trailers, so, you know, the side
impact guards do make a
difference because if you go to
the next slide, I was at this
test too. This was a 40 mile per
hour test of a Chevy Malibu,
where if you go to the next,
David Zubi, who's the head of
the Insurance Institute of
Highway Safety Research
Division. He's holding up the
statistics from the crash test
dummy that this particular crash
test dummy survived, as you can
see in this picture, I had a lot
more dark hair, not gray hair,
so this is an older picture, and
this is stuff we're talking
about now in 2024 that shouldn't
be something we talked about,
and if you go to the next slide,
the edge cases margin of error,
vision 0 equals no acceptable
margin of error. We heard Ms.
Whitfield talk about that, and I
don't know that we should be
using New Mexico.
on pilot on a pilot program, uh,
Mr. Gonzalez said earlier, it is
not an entitlement to have a
license to drive. It's not an
entitlement to have a liquor
license.
Right now there is no
registration process for
driverless vehicles in New
Mexico. And so the concept is to
bring a registration process to
the, the vehicles here that are
attempting to drive from an
experimental standpoint, um, New
Mexico's roadways. So if you go
to the defensive driver
training, um, Tracy knows about
this and others who drive
trucks. The Smith system's been
around forever. The 15th to the
cynicism is make sure they see
you, seek eye contact, and I
think one of you talked about
eye contact.
Maybe you've been you, Mr.
Gonzalez earlier when you were
talking about pedestrians with
Miss Whitfield from and and Mt.
Not sure how a driverless
vehicle makes sure that the
other motor sees you or sees
whether or not you're on the
cell phone or something of that
scenario or case, and then even
with some of the crash avoidance
technologies here you still have
automatic emergency braking, but
if a car goes in front of the
truck and this truck then speed
dropped to 30, 5 MPH, and if you
go to the next slide, this was a
situation where you can see that
car.
Turning when they thought the
light was red, yet the semi
truck driver goes through what
was a stale green light with a
short yellow, and then the red
that happened thereafter or
arguably a short yellow, I don't
think that it was a short
yellow, but anyway, that's what
the argument is, uh, will this
crash avoidance technology, make
sure that that person sees you
or be able to see that
particular uh vehicle is before
it turns. And so if you go to
the next slide, Detroit
Assurance is one of freight
liner's tech suite of safety
systems for crash avoidance
technologies.
And this is, these are old
slides if you go to the next one
that they said it's standard
equipment. So here's why I don't
know that the original equipment
manufacturers have the ethics to
do it the right way. They've
been aware of automatic
emergency brake and making its
standard equipment, yet they
have a delete credit option. So
if I'm a truck driver or truck
company or a dealer buying the
truck, I can delete out the
safety uh systems that actually
help protect on the highways and
the safety systems arguably
aren't where they need to be yet
either, and if you go to the
next slide.
The wildest part about this is
in Europe, all the Daimler
Chrysler, Packar, uh, Volvo,
they all have their European
divisions. Europe is regulated
and mandated automatic emergency
braking since 2012, yet we
haven't mandated here in 2024,
and why do we need to have a
regulatory mandate to do the
right thing and have it
automatically put on, and then
in addition to that, front
override, the lower front bumper
on trucks has been required on
trucks in Europe to match the
bumpers on cars since 2003.
side underride now with a
caveat, this is more for
vulnerable road users. We heard
that phrase earlier today. Those
are the bicyclists, they've had
that since 1989, yet we don't
see side guards on trucks and
trailers to this date, so if you
go to the next page, so why does
this matter? It matters because
even at 2025 freightliner, where
the truck driver does everything
right, and is able to break for
5 seconds and slows his truck to
8 MPH, go to the next slide, a
fatality still results when a
car is only at 21.74 miles an
hour.
When you think about 8 MPH.
In 24.74, that should be a
survivable crash. But when you,
in a car versus car crash, it's
a survivable crash, but in a
truck versus car crash, it's
not. So arguably, trucks versus
cars are more dangerous than
cars versus pedestrians, because
when you look at the next slide
at 20 MPH, a car hitting a
pedestrian, the pedestrian
survives 9 out of 10 times. When
you have a car hitting a
pedestrian at 30 MPH, the
pedestrian only survives 5 out
of 10 times, and at 40.
MPH, uh, survives only one out
of those 10 times. So I showed
you an example of a truck in a
car, cars going 21 miles an
hour, trucks going 8 MPH, where
there's a fatality. And if we're
gonna allow driverless vehicles
on the roadway, we better do it
right. And like I told you, so
this is a picture I took in
Europe in 2016. I was at a
commercial vehicle show in
Birmingham. They've had these
side guards to protect from
bicyclists going under the back
axles of trucks in Europe since
1989, I met Tanya Robinson, who
was with the Transport.
Laboratory of Research
Laboratory of England, where she
was able to show that there was
a 61% decrease in bicycle
fatalities involving commercial
vehicles in that 30-year time
frame. Yeah, here we are in
2024, and we don't see side
guards or side rails on any of
these things, so I ask you, does
twerk robotics do the right
thing, will it do the right
thing when it's owned by
Freightliner and Daimler
Chrysler in bringing the right
ethics. So there needs to be
redundancy, as you can see here
in the city of Cleveland.
put side guards on as a pilot
program in garbage trucks in the
city of Cleveland. There's me
and my bicycle helmet. We, that
was a a rite of silence actually
for a bicyclist who was killed
in uh the family was thrilled
that ultimately the city of
Cleveland's stepping up to the
plate. New Mexico can do the
same with its own trucks and its
own fleet of vehicles, and if
you go to the next slide, the
whole goal is to try, try to
create that safe system
approach, have safe vehicles
because humans are vulnerable,
redundancy is crucial and to
have a registration process.
process that allows the
redundancy to be crucial
ultimately lead to the last
slide, which is what the
ultimate goal is that we heard
about today, which is target er,
Vision 0 here in New Mexico, and
I thank you all for your time.
I'm gonna pass the baton.
All right.
Thank you, Andy, um, Mr. Chair.
Members of the committee. My
name is Mike Steers. I'm a
partner in the Albuquerque law
firm of McGinn Montoya love
Korean Sebers and uh presenting
with me is Tracy McCarty, who
represents uh the Teamsters
Local 492.
Um, and we're going to talk
about the dangers of
driverless vehicle testing and
um so I'm I'm gonna talk
specifically about the safety
issues.
And why we need more oversight
of driverless vehicle testing
and Mr. McCarty will talk about
the impacts of driverless
vehicles on our workforce,
especially as a driverless
vehicles start to become used in
the commercial setting.
And then we'll talk about the
legislative solutions. You could
go to the next slide.
Uh, one back.
Uh, there's some information
about both of us, and you can
look at that as a part of your
materials.
Um
So I want you to think back uh
to the time that you were first
learning how to ride a bike or
the time that you were teaching
your kids how to ride a bike.
Um, he wouldn't buy a 5 year old
a bicycle and just say,
Just go ride wherever you want.
Go down to the store and get
yourself a candy bar, right? I
mean, you, you'd buy, you'd buy
your kid a bike and, and put
your hands on the handlebars,
put your hand on the seat.
And uh go along with the child
until the child learns how to
ride properly until you know the
child's going to be safe.
And then you would say, even
then, one of the, when the child
is learning how to ride and, and
has sort of has it down. They're
not gonna, you know, I'm just
gonna say, go do, go do whatever
you want. You're gonna sit there
and watch and make sure your
kids are gonna be safe as they
learn how to ride a bike.
And as we can see, um,
driverless vehicles are still in
their childhood.
Um, these are just some
headlines that I've collected
from
These are all relatively recent,
the semi truck crash that you
see there or the semi driverless
semi truck crashed into a home
in Kansas, that was just a
couple of weeks ago.
Um
We just haven't reached the
point yet where driverless
vehicles where anyone can really
say confidently that they are
safer than human-driven
vehicles.
Um, when the federal government
measures or analyzes vehicle
safety, they look at
the number of fatalities per 100
million.
uh vehicle miles traveled.
That's how they analyze safety.
Um, so we know that crashes
involving human driven vehicles
killed 1.33 people per 100
million.
vehicle miles traveled in 2022.
That's according to the IIHS.
The Insurance Institute for
Highway Safety. Um, we don't
have comparable data for
driverless vehicles.
Um
They just don't have that level
of experience on the road yet.
Um, so no one can tell you.
That
No one can give you data to say
that um the number of people
killed in crashes involving
driverless vehicles is less than
1.33 people for for 100 million,
uh, vehicle miles traveled.
Well, what we do know is that
they are not fail-safe
driverless vehicles are not
fail-safe.
Um, according to the data that
has been submitted to the
federal government.
Um, driverless vehicles were
involved in 130 crashes during
just an 11 month period in 2021
through 2022.
And among those have been, uh,
that were there have been
crashes, there have been tragic
cases of people being run over
by a driverless vehicles. One of
those was in San Francisco, uh,
you may have read about it in
the news, um, it was a
driverless cruise taxi. Cruise
is the name of the driverless
vehicle developer and that's a
subsidiary of General Motors.
The
There was a woman who was
crossing the street at a
crosswalk.
And she was first hit by uh
somebody who's driving a human,
a human who is driving a car.
That impact through the
pedestrian into the path of a
driverless of the driverless
crews.
The machine mind of the
driverless cruise taxi didn't
recognize that there was a
person trapped underneath this
car.
And so the driverless car
initially stopped, but then um
it was programmed when there was
some kind of impact to pull off
to the side of the road, so
that's what it did, and it drove
with this person underneath the
taxi for 20 ft up to about 8
MPH.
And so when the EMTs got there,
they had to lift the cruise taxi
off of this woman.
And she somehow survives, but uh
she filed a lawsuit against
Cruz, and there's this, this big
investigation and um the state
of California ultimately revoked
the license of crudes to, to um
have their driverless taxis in
the state.
And they recently actually
admitted that they covered up
that incident, uh, when they
were interacting with the
federal government.
Another example is in Tempe,
Arizona, um,
Where there's a driverless Uber,
the driverless Uber was driving
in a
Uh, on an established test route
that had been on before. It was
a clear day, there was nothing,
no, no adverse conditions at
all.
There is a person crossing the
street, and the, the driverless
Uber.
thought that there was somebody
crossing the street. I mean,
from over a football field away.
Recognize that there is
something there, but it got
confused. The system went back
and forth between, is this a
person? Is this something else?
And even though it had
recognized that there is
somebody crossing the street
from over a football field away,
it's still plowed into this
person.
And, and it killed her.
And uh
So those are just two examples
in Tesla, Tesla has this system
called autopilot that's not
fully self-driving, I think it's
a level 3 technology. There's
different levels of self-driving
technology.
But they are under a federal
defect investigation because
they've had multiple crashes
that including some fatalities.
Then you see, you know,
driverless semi trucks have also
been involved in incidents, um,
Involving crafts they've been
involved in crashes.
And um, you know, the driver was
semi trucks carry the same
dangers as driverless cars in
terms of the technology,
they're, they're untested
nature.
But they're so much bigger and
heavier, and, you know, that's
what Andy talked about uh how
they can cause so much more
damage.
So, um, that's why we need more
oversight.
Of the testing that's happening
in this in this state. Um,
If you go to the next slide.
The federal government has
chosen not to regulate
self-driving vehicles yet. Um,
the federal agencies that would
regulate them are still
collecting data and thinking
about how they're going to
approach that, and they're going
to regulate the actual, the
technology, and they recognize
that states have a, a critical
role and a valid role in the
process of regulating driverless
vehicles, especially when it
comes to public safety and
licensing and
Insurance.
So these are, this, these are
just a sampling of states that
have some type of
Permitting
Process for driverless vehicles.
So they have, they
Required the driverless vehicle
companies to apply for a permit.
And it is in the essence is they
have a way for the companies to
demonstrate that they're
driverless vehicles are safe
enough and they're safe enough
to be on the road next to
humans.
We're driving their cars.
You go to the next slide. Our
legislature, as you know, uh,
passed a law regarding
driverless vehicles in 2021, and
that has enabled the testing of
driverless vehicles on our roads
and so some of you may have seen
the torque robotics trucks that
go up and down I-25, um, they go
up and down I-40.
And that's just one of the one
of several companies that are
that have um indicated that they
are doing testing in New Mexico
on our public highways.
And the statute has some very
minimal requirements. Uh, the
company is basically just have
to tell NMDOT.
5 days beforehand that they're
gonna be testing. They have to
say we're gonna
We're gonna be testing with
these vehicles on these roads,
and that's it. They don't have
to get permission to do it.
The vehicle, the driverless
vehicles have to meet federal
safety standards. That's what's
in the leg in the, in the
statute. But there are no
federal safety standards for
driverless vehicles. So it
really means nothing at this
point.
And the and the the act says
that the vehicle must be capable
of complying with New Mexico
law, um, not that they have to
comply, they're capable.
And it prohibits local
governments from um doing
anything really to uh restrict
or limit the ability of these
driverless vehicle companies to
test in the local communities.
And so contrary to the
recommendations by um federal,
the federal government, the
agencies that would regulate
driverless vehicles, and I'll
talk about those a little bit in
a minute. Uh, but our statute
does not prohibit the use of
driverless vehicles for purposes
other than testing, although I
think that was probably what was
meant to be implied.
Uh, it does not require a human
to be on board. I, I know that
torque robotics.
Actually, as part of their
system, they have two humans on
board. Uh, they call them safety
drivers. That's their practice,
and that's great. Um.
But
We don't know about these other
companies if they're coming in
and um planning on doing this
testing with nobody on board.
Um
And the, the act does not
require any companies to to uh
submit any kind of safety data
to our state. So we just have to
kind of take their word about uh
the safety performance of their
driverless vehicle. Um, and then
If you go to the next slide,
there's the NMDOT has made some
regulations that sort of expand
on the statue a little bit. Um,
they expressly allow the use of
driverless vehicles without a
human on board, and they allow.
driverless vehicles to operate
anywhere and under any
conditions.
So, um, I want to pass it off to
Mr. McCarty for uh him to talk
about the effects of driverless
vehicles on the New Mexico
workforce.
Good afternoon, Chairman.
Oh,
my name is Tracy McCarty. I'm
business agent with Tes Local
492 here in New Mexico.
Um, if you'd go to the next
slide, please.
The impact of heavy vehicles in
the workforce according to the
uh US.
They were statistics they're
about 2.4 million truck drivers
nationwide.
State of New Mexico as a
teamster, we take and represent
UPS and ABF drivers, and you can
see in the in the statistics
below. Currently, my drivers
make about $30 an hour, UPS
driver was around $45 an hour.
These jobs are paying 132,000 to
$145,000 a year to these
individuals.
These are high paying jobs, the
technical jobs and they're jobs
that we picked. I've been a
truck driver for 32 years. I
started out long before most
technologies in this business.
I've gone through self-adjusting
brakes, which we didn't have in
the past.
I've seen the how originally
they didn't work very well. I've
gotten tickets for having breaks
that were out of adjustment on a
truck that was supposed to have
a self-adjusting brake.
I had to get out and manually
self-adjust.
They started this technology a
number of years ago. I had it in
some of our trucks at ABF. I can
tell you one incident in this
particular, and there's a bridge
in Amarillo, Texas. I'm driving
along, the technology picked up.
The roadway goes underneath a
bridge. The traffic is going in
front of me as a driver, I can
see this. I know that there's no
danger.
The Self-adjusted, the self uh
uh braking system in that truck
didn't recognize that.
Locked up my trainers and
started sliding my trailer
sideway down the highway.
I've overrode the system quickly
before there was an accident.
But it's those situations in
this country that self-driving
trucks and autonomous vehicles
do not take into account.
The fact that I, as a driver was
trained to watch stoplights from
a long distance away where their
cameras are focused on the
nearest thing to them, not the
the stop light that they can see
a half mile down the road to
know how long that stoplight has
been green. Is there a chance
it's gonna turn orange before I
get there? Do I start breaking
out and slowing down, or do I
continue at highway speeds up to
that.
Technology isn't there.
The job impact for this state,
which is a poor state, and these
are high paying jobs.
These are jobs that cover
families with insurances and
just a uh a standard of living
that a lot of people in the
state don't have pensions for
life.
For some of these families.
These are things that the state
can't afford to lose.
It's not safe out there right
now for it, and I don't think
the state of New Mexico should
be using our highways as a test
track for this type of thing.
Thank you.
So the, the federal government
has issued some guidance to the
states for state legislatures.
Um, and the essence, the most
recent guidance indicates that
they don't want states to
directly regulate the
technology.
But they do recognize that
states have a valid role in um
regulating certain aspects of
the use of driverless vehicles
like registration, licensing,
um, you know, permitting the
testing to happen in the first
place, and they've encouraged
state legislatures to do that.
The National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration has issued
a number of documents that have
those recommendations and I've
That are summarized their
recommendations here. Um, the
first of them being that they
don't recommend
That states permit the operation
of self-driving vehicles for
purposes other than testing at
this point.
Uh, and they have not revised
that statement.
Since they issued that in 2013.
Uh, they recommend minimizing
the risks to the public by
requiring companies to do
initial testing, somewhere other
than public roads.
submitting testing data to the
state.
And having a plan that they can
give to the state to uh show how
they're going to minimize risks
to people who are traveling on
the roads next to these
driverless vehicles.
And they recommend having a
properly licensed driver in the
vehicle during the testing, who
knows how to operate. So if it's
a commercial vehicle, there
should be a driver with a with a
CDL.
And uh they recommend limiting
the conditions where the vehicle
can be used in driverless mode.
And so
Uh vice chair Hochman Be Hill is
um
Been working on a bill. I, I
don't think it's been finalized
by the bill drafter yet, but
there's a, a concept, um, or
legislative solution.
They would fill in the gaps, uh,
fill in some of the gaps at
least to make this testing
process safer for New Mexicans
and more transparent.
And allow us ultimately to make
more informed decisions as a
state about um
About whether, what we're going
to do with this driverless
technology moving forward.
So the key points of the
legislation would be to only
allow uh testing for the time
being, not, not allowing
driverless vehicles to just be
used for any purpose whatsoever.
Um
Company is allowed to
demonstrate their testing won't
present unreasonable risk of
harm to the public.
And that's throughout, through
an application to the NMDOT, the
NMDOT would issue a statement of
approval upon review of that.
Um, a human with a proper
license needs to be in the
vehicle during testing.
And that's consistent with what
Torque is already doing, what
more responsible companies are
already doing.
driverless vehicles have to
comply with.
Traffic safety laws.
Not just be capable of it, but
actually comply with them. Uh,
and then they have to submit
data to the state. So if there's
some kind of incident where the
driverless system fails,
including if the
If the system prompts the human
safety driver to take over.
That's reported to the state,
and if there's a crash, if
there's any kind of hard break
event, things like that.
Will be submitted to the state
so to our DOT, our legislature
can review the data and make
more informed decisions.
Um
And then it would include uh
insurance requirements to
protect, protect the public in
the event of a crash.
Um, and those limits, uh, the
increased limits are already
consistent with what these
companies are already doing
under the regulations of the DOT
made, but they would codify
those.
So those are the safety
improvements, and then I'll let
Mr. McCarty talk about the rest,
but I'd like to thank um
Representative and Vice Chair
Hochman V Hill for working with
the, the Teamsters and the trial
orders to draft a bill that will
uh
Include safety improvements for
Members of the public and um
Part of the safety aspects,
excuse me.
part of the uh safety aspects,
and I do have people that I know
that work at Tor as drivers.
Some of the data that they're
going to present to any
committee is, in my opinion,
skewed to the fact that they're
not testing it in these real
world situations.
Those trucks are brought in
after every trip. They're gone
over, tires are replaced.
Everything has gone over with a
fine tooth comb so that they can
do it. It's not a real world
situation.
I'm not saying that trucks
aren't safe. I've driven trucks
for 32 years. We do the best we
can out there every day of our
lives, nobody wants to go home,
uh.
And be unsafe at the end of the
day. Nobody wants to kill the
family. Nobody wants to hurt
anybody.
They want to make a living and
be good at what they're doing.
I don't think that some of the
data that these companies are
going to present is necessarily
accurate to the fact that of the
real world situation.
They test these on sunny days.
They don't test them during
snowstorms, they don't test him
during rainstorms, they don't
test them at, at times when
traffic is not optimal to their
situation.
Drivers are trained and put the
time in. We know how the truck
reacts, and we know how they're
gonna act.
And the human person in those
safeties is there for a reason,
so.
um
ripple.
Yeah, very briefly too. One
thing that a truck driver does
when it start, when that truck
driver starts their day as they
do a free trip inspection of the
truck and the equipment, and
they want to make sure that the
equipment, the tires and
everything are good. Who's doing
that in a driverless truck
situation. In addition to that,
we've all purchased a
refrigerator, a microwave, a
toaster or some device, car,
that breaks at some point in
time when it breaks, what are,
what's gonna happen is my
understanding is that it will
pull itself over the side, but a
truck.
The driver immediately pulls out
it's, it's it's orange triangles
that are DOT mandated and they
walk behind the truck to put
those DOT triangles behind the
truck. How was the driverless
truck going to put DOT mandated
triangles out when it's broken
down and is a sitting duck on
the shoulder of a highway, uh,
which is a hazard to all
motorists. So these are valid
considerations that should be
part of of the overall aspect of
the legislation and while the
testing is going on, keep
drivers in that truck so that
the driver can do.
those things we just talked
about.
So I think we'll take any
questions, but uh just again,
thanks to Representative Ackman
B Hill for agreeing to, you
know, put these safety.
Oversight of.
Aspects into the bill and um you
know, requiring job replacement
strategies which we've talked
about a 10 year um sunset
provision or something like
that. Um,
At, at which point the
requirement with sunset where,
you know, the having a human in
the vehicle, um,
With sunset and we can
re-evaluate that based on the
data that we collect over the
years um through this, this
improved.
Um, system where the companies
are required to submit that data
to the state, which is really,
really crucial.
Oh, thank you.
OK. Thank you for your
presentation.
And now we'll accept questions
from the uh
Members of the committee, uh
first.
Person up is uh representative
Nystrom, who is on Zoom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you very much. Just a
couple of comments. Sounds like
the panel doesn't like my FY21
bill.
It uh is a bill that I carried.
When all of this, uh, business
was starting to cook,
particularly when uh the testing
had already been going on in the
state of New Mexico by by Tork
and others.
My question to the gentleman at
the table, the sunset bill
passed,
How many accidents have we
actually had?
They are tied to autonomous or
not our driverless trucks.
Um, I don't think we have that
data, uh, representative
Bostrom, um, yeah, I'm just
curious because I'd be, be real
surprised that I haven't heard
of any, but that doesn't mean
there hasn't been. I just
haven't heard of anybody. I have
not, I have not heard of, uh,
I'm sorry, um, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, I have not heard
of any crashes involving a
torque truck.
What I do know about is the
incidents that I referenced in
uh in other states, um, which
include the semi truck crash in
uh Kansas and I, I don't believe
that was a torque truck, but um
that's just
You know, part of the, the point
is that they just haven't been
tested to the same extent as
other vehicles, and so we don't
have the the
Um, the number of vehicle miles
traveled to be able to really
make a comparison to say that
they're safer than human
drivers.
Toman and one of the sources uh
for that bill was, is the New
Mexico Intelligent
Transportation Systems.
Um, I've gone to a couple of
those conferences and had a very
close working relationship with
the DOT staff on that issue, and
um
It is something that's hard to
get your arms around because
every state's got different set
of rules and regulations and the
technology is driving what's
happening.
Uh
It's moving much quicker and
Maybe it is time to take a peek
at that and see if we can't
strengthen it. But I do have a
question, uh,
What would we be cap capping
penalties out.
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative, I'm
not sure what you're talking
about in terms of, I mean, if
we're going, if we're gonna get
into the situation where these,
these uh companies can be sued.
Maybe I didn't hear it correctly
and I apologize. I'm on Zoom and
we don't pick up everything, but
is there going to be some kind
of capping of penalties for this
if there are accidents or
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, I
think uh there would be no caps
built into the statute, what,
what, what I referenced I think
was, and I think what you're
referring to is the insurance
limits.
To the for driverless vehicles,
there would be an, an insurance
limit of $150,000 for
driverless cars.
And $5 million for driverless
semi trucks, which is already
consistent with
Uh, NMDOT regulations and what
torque and other companies
already have.
Um, and as far as apportioning
liability, I think that's a,
that's a
New question that really hasn't
been
Sorted out in the courts or
anywhere else, um, whether it's,
is it the vehicle manufacturer
or the um or the driverless
vehicle, uh,
Developer or the person who's
using the technology, uh, who's
at fault? I think that's, that's
kind of an open question.
Yeah, I'd be curious who gets
sued at the end of the day if
there's an accident.
Senator Chairman Tollman and
Representative Lindstrom, I
think that the visual equipment
manufacturers on a product
liability basis would probably
be the ones that have to answer
for it, but it does raise a good
point because a lot of times our
civil juries do what's called
the comparative fault analysis
where there are multiple parties
at fault, and how does that
happen when you're dealing with
a driverless vehicle type
situation and to your other
question about have there been
crashes? Well,
The curiosity is have any
crashes been reported and have
the OEMs that are testing the
original equipment
manufacturers, testing this
technology, reporting back how
many miles they're testing, the
data that they're testing, are
they giving any data back to
allow for any faults or any
difficulties or anything like
that, and the idea behind the
bill is so that there is
redundancy and that data is
being shared, not in a doctored
way, but in a real way. So the
fact that nobody knows if
there's been any crashes
involving these particular
autonomous vehicles.
If one has occurred, is there a
requirement to report it?
Well, you're gonna have to
report a crash regardless of
whether it's autonomous or not.
If there, if there's a crash,
uh, that's gonna be recorded,
uh, and I believe the testing is
only on I-40 or is it other
places? if it's a crash
involving a fixed object, let's
say it's in the last mile or 1
mile, there wouldn't necessarily
be a police report or reporting.
Really?
If, if, if a vehicle that is
On private property unbanned
driver vehicle, and it is, and
there's a crash on I-40, which
is a state roadway at uh
Actually federal roadway, it
doesn't have to be reported. I
said last mile, first mile,
which isn't necessarily on the
highway, and if it's a fixed
object, let's say it's a fixed
object in that last mile, first
mile, that would be, it does and
it's on private property, it
doesn't necessarily have to be
reported. So the question is,
are we rehearing the reports of
those edge cases. Are we hearing
reports of the fault or the
things where the driver actually
has to, because it's my
understanding they're not
driverless, but at the time the
driver takes the
wheel are we learning when the
driver's taking the wheel each
time that the driver's taking
the wheel. I don't know that we
are.
I don't know either. I'm not
sure. I'm not sure. I haven't
asked the DOT yet if they've
been collecting that kind of
information. I don't know if the
uh intelligent transportation,
uh, division there is, is
collecting that. I have, I don't
know. I haven't asked him.
But uh it'll be interesting to
see what the draft looks like
and I, I sure appreciate you uh
bringing this forward, but uh
there would be some questions
around insurance limits and
penalties and those kinds of
things. So this will be um
outside of the kinds of
committees that I serve on, but
I'll sure be paying close
attention to it. Thank you. And
uh Mr. Chair, representative,
just to answer your question,
uh, they are testing, uh,
driverless semi trucks on I-25.
That's, uh, I, and I-40, and
there's also a different company
that has told NMDOT that they
are testing driverless semi
trucks on I-10.
So, all the way across 10, so
all the way from Arizona to
Texas.
Along that that entire corridor,
um.
Oh, you're talking about I 10,
Mr. Chairman, you're talking
about I-10?
I attend, he asked the nurse 10.
OK, I was gonna say cause that
is not happening on I-40, like,
uh, out in my neck of the woods
because there's too much
congestion. uh, there's too many
backups. It's not reliable
because we've got all kinds of
issues out here in this part of
I-40. I doubt you could test
very much out here, but I do
know that from Albuquerque East,
there is testing on I-40.
So, thank, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On that
point.
My understanding is that there
is no semis being self-dri.
They are being self-driven.
The talk is doing testing. I've,
I've written with them, and they
had 2 people up front, but in
fact, as a matter of fact, is
there any
There's no semis being
Driven driverless, right? In New
Mexico. Mr. Chair, they are
being driven with the driverless
technology. There but there's
there's somebody in the truck so
there's,
so how can you report an
accident with a driverless truck
in it.
Oh, well, I think, you know, the
reporting, Mr. Chair, would be,
um,
Whenever there's a, whenever the
driverless technology is being
used, regardless of whether
there's somebody in the vehicle,
if they're not
Operating the vehicle, if
they're not.
You know, performing the actual
driving, and it's the driverless
technology that's, that's being
used to to operate, and there's
a crash, um, or whatever event.
Would require reporting, then it
would be reported. So.
You'll see how you could have an
accident.
If there's no, there, there's no
driverless trucks on the road.
Mr. Chair will they the
driverless trucks, but there's
somebody in the truck.
Mr. Chair, that's correct, there
would be somebody in the in the
truck and they are monitoring in
in case the driverless system
passes off the responsibility to
them to take over. So if there's
a, a failure of the driverless
system, it would, it would
Notify somehow the, the driver
is your turn to take over.
Well, I have a Tesla that's
As driverless capabilities, but
They warn you to be attentive.
So I have more questions, but
later, but uh,
Next up is uh Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
have a couple of things, um.
So, um,
For example, say that this was
to happen.
With the legislation.
And uh you and Miles offers a
CDL.
Classes and training.
Uh, why would they have to do?
Uh, I'm not Mr. Chairman Senator
Gonzalez, could you clarify your
question? Are you asking if
there's no driver compared to
what they do today, yeah, or
CDM, would they have to do
something else. Yes, so today
there's a new entry level driver
training that includes, uh, and
I, I teach at a truck driving
school, taught over 440 students
and the, there's, there's a
written book portion that they
have to pass a written test, uh,
that is pretty comprehensive and
then in addition to that, there.
They coarser the driver test,
which is the backing and
maneuverability and the road
test, and they have to be signed
off on that aspect of it by
somebody who's registered with
the Department of
Transportation.
So one of the curiosities is,
are the driverless truck
programmers, are they trained
truck drivers? Do they have
experience in truck driving, are
the folks that they're putting
behind the driverless truck as
the driver safety backup, are
they trained and have CDLs, I
believe they do, and the
question's going to be going
forward, uh, where that happens
and to also respond to, uh, Mr.
Chairman's question before as
well.
It's, it's a matter of trust but
verify, right? So trust but
verify, how do we verify? How
often is the person or the human
having to grab the wheel of that
truck. And is that data being
reported, how often is there a
fault or a scenario or situation
where the human has to grab it,
just as like, uh, the senator's
car says, well, you have to
remain attentive. Are we
receiving the reporting and the
data in the transparency to
build that trust from these
original equipment manufacturers
to allow us to feel comfortable.
on our roadways that we're not
just simply guinea pigs. And to
answer your question, who is the
one that's actually behind it?
Are they a train driver? Do they
have a CDL? Are the driver
programs CDL drivers themselves.
Probably not.
If I, if I may send her Gonzalez
also, you know, and currently we
have autopilots and airplanes. I
watched a program on the high
speed streets in Japan. All of
those still maintain operators
in those positions. This bill
isn't to stop automation, it's
to maintain drivers in those
vehicles while they're being
automated. There's no doubt that
that technology will advance
someday, but as of right now,
nobody on this panel believes
that that technology is to a
point that is safe for New
Mexico highways. We're trying
keep drivers in the trucks.
I understand right now that
there's not and, and uh the
chair Tollman's questions.
There probably isn't any uh
reports of an autonomous vehicle
accident, because right now
they're currently are no
autonomous vehicles on the road.
That not because we don't
believe that technology is
there.
Um, Mr. Chairman, let me just
add a little bit more. So,
Um,
Who would come to you and him to
teach him the new things that
need to be done, or their
students, Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator
Gonzalez, are you talking about
like a new CDL program
specifically for the human
operators of driverless semi
trucks. Mr. Chairman, that is
correct.
Um
Mr. Mr. Chair, Senator Gonzalez,
I believe under the current
draft of the bill, uh, we
wouldn't, it wouldn't require
like a special endorsement or
Uh, for
Human operators of driverless
semi trucks, but it would
require a certification.
By the
the company that's testing the
vehicle that the person who is
operating the vehicle as a
backup driver has been trained
in the operation of that
specific um driverless vehicle
system in that vehicle.
Oh, Mr. Chairman, I guess where
I'm going also is we don't want
to create another unfunded
mandate.
You know, so if we are doing it,
you know, that's.
Do what it takes.
You know, provide that. So the
next question, because we have
so many.
is, uh, will this affect any
school buses.
Uh, Mr. Cha, Senator Gonzalez, I
don't know if it would affect
school buses. I haven't heard of
any school buses that have been
um used with driverless
technology, but I'm sure that
that's um something that's being
contemplated in the future.
And as far as unfired mandates,
that's, I think that's the
balance that we ultimately
struck, um, when we're looking
at this, uh, this potential bill
is, you know, if, uh, that, uh
If it were to create a new
endorsement that would sort of
be an unfunded mandate where
you're telling DOT that they
have to administer this, uh.
This new program, this new
endorsement for, for these human
backup drivers, whereas with uh
with this alternative, it's the,
the companies that are
certifying that this driver has
been trained, and I think they
really probably are in the best
position to be able to train
those human backup drivers in
their own systems anyway.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, uh, the last
part is um.
It probably doesn't cross the
mind because uh.
Right now we have such a
shortage.
You know, with um to and from
school if something like this
comes up, you know, it might be
explored and I don't know where
it would go, but I'm just
bringing it out.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you.
Oh, thank, thank you, Senator.
Next up is uh Representative uh
Burden.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, and
thank you, panelists. You
mentioned that the when you were
asked about the insurance on
these vehicles. It says 150,000
if an accident occurred for
involving an automobile, and I
think you said $5 million for a
truck. So that seems very no,
but who's offering that type of
insurance.
Uh, Mr. Chair.
Representative, I don't know the
specific uh insurance carrier.
Is that what you're asking? I
was asking that question, and
then who's, and then uh who was
setting the value of the rates
to determine that that's what it
should be when it's out on the
road.
Well, the, the $5 million rate
is, it seems like it's sort of
industry standard from what I've
seen, I think that most of the
other states that have an
insurance minimum for driverless
semi trucks have the $5 million.
Minimum.
Um, and it looks like, uh, the,
the companies that I've seen
that have submitted their
certificates of insurance to the
NMDOT um have shown that they do
have that 5 million. I, I don't
remember who the insurers were.
The clarification, you said
minimum.
Or is that the maximum? That
would be the minimum under the
statute.
So, um, they could carry more,
you know, they could have an
excess insurance policy, but
they would be required to have a
minimum of $5 million in
liability coverage for a semi
truck.
And just, and thank you Mr.
Chair and one other quick
question, how does the
driverless truck know what the
speed limit is.
What is it that's helping them
to know that.
Senator Tollman and
Representative Herndon, there,
there is technology that's
fairly well advanced. The
cameras do pick up the speed and
ultimately report this speed
back, even your modern vehicles
do that too, to some degree.
However, it's not foolproof or
always right, uh, but for the
most part, that tech is already
in existence. And one thing to
make clear is none of us are
against the the driverless tech.
We just want to make sure it's
done right. We ultimately want
to see.
New Mexico reached target zero
by 2050, uh, but the question
is, how about we see driverless
vehicles.
Cars themselves in the tech
perfected there before we jump
straight to semi trucks because
of significant impact the some
of the trucks have when they are
involved in crashes.
So, uh,
Senator Tom, uh, representative
Hendry.
Um, even in my own.
Personal vehicle, there's a, a
registers on, you know, this is
a 75 mile an hour zone. This is
65 mile an hour zone. But once
again, through the, the
technology, I drive through
Albuquerque every day, we all
know there's a huge instruction
zone right there. It goes down
to 55, but on my pickup, it
still registers 75 mile an hour
speed zone.
So even the technology that's
through an uple through a
satellite system, which I'm
assuming still doesn't pick up
on some of those things. We've
had uh situations with my
drivers at ABF and and other
companies where they'll enter a
town and the speed limit will
drop.
But it doesn't register to the
truck as that as that, and it
will, it will still show 65. My
drivers will get warning letters
for violating the law, but once
we should look at the cameras,
we realized that they weren't in
that speed zone as of yet, so
that technology is out there
right now, but even that is not
affected the the ability to.
And, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um,
The research has the has shown
that uh driverless vehicles are
more likely to be involved in an
accident in a construction zone
or um other uh some other types
of specific situations and for
that reason, one of the things
that that would be in this bill
would be that the human driver
who is on board would have to
take over and drive in a
construction zone and in other
situations, um, that are high
risk like involved like
situation.
areas where there are a lot of
pedestrians like school zones
and things like that, um, while
this testing.
Uh, phases, is in effect.
I see, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Oh, thank you, Representative.
Any, uh, anyone else have any
questions?
Harry and I have a couple of
uh switch the gears that we
talked about, uh, side and rear
protection on trailers.
I noticed in Europe, they have
much
More sophisticated and
substantial protection.
On the front or on the side and
the back and in America, I read
an article recently about
But they have uh
And what do you call them some
kind of
still
Has down from the
trailer
re back it's.
According to this article, it
wasn't strong enough to, as
strong as it should be, because
it doesn't prevent.
Someone's running under that, if
it's a heavy enough vehicle, and
that
Yeah
Congress has tried to pass a law
to require more substantial rear
bumper.
Uh, that they won't because of
The uh
Showing favoritism to the uh
Corporations you ask the uh
Mr. Young asked earlier. He
said, Well, why, why don't we
have the protection here in
America.
Well, that's because the
corporations are running
America, not Congress. There's a
lot of truth to that.
So, I, I was impressed with uh.
Well
Europe's a whole different
culture.
And they do have much better
protection.
On their trailers.
That we could have that we
don't.
So
Uh
So, the self-driving trucks,
it's not, I'll be the first to
admit, Mr. Young, that we need
to perfect it on cars before we
Introduce it in
Trucks, heavy trucks.
So, but I, I think it's just a
matter, it's a question of
Not a question of if, it's a
question of when, when obviously
the technology is not.
Advancing enough, but eventually
it will be. If you took a 100.
to random and picked 100 cards
with him and 100 cars without
driverless.
you would find that 100 cars
with the
Technology
It's, it's perfected.
would have less accidents
because humans are more prone to
make mistakes.
Yeah, the technology when it's
perfected.
Would you agree with that?
Senator, uh, Tom and I would
agree with that. Ultimately, we
would like to see the carver car
to car driver.
Car to car driverless technology
perfected first, because if
there is a mistake, the system
is set up to forgive that
mistake because of the safety
engineering of the car, the
energy absorbing bumpers,
crumple zones, seat belts,
airbags, and then you have that
vehicle to vehicle crash
compatibility, and then
ultimately if we are proving
that vehicle to vehicle
driverless vehicles and
passenger cars are working, then
ultimately I think you're going
to see them in commercial
vehicles work as well. And then
hopefully they can then interact
with one another, and I, I do
anticipate, like you do that
will ultimately get there. I've
been to 3 commercial vehicle
shows in Europe, I go, uh,
frequently because it's like
getting in a DeLorean and
driving into the future, and
they are so much more advanced
over in Europe. And you're
absolutely right. The rear
impact guards are required on
the back of trailers, which is
102.37 inches, but there's
nothing required in the open
gaps, the 267 inches on each
side of the truck, which other
than the fuel efficiency skirts.
So if we're gonna hang something
from the trailer to save fuel,
why don't we hang something?
something more robust to save
lives too. I'd love to see the
bill include something, OK, if
we're gonna do driverless test
vehicles on the trucks, why
don't we create vehicle to
vehicle crash compatibility by
mandating side guards or in
Europe, the front override the
front bumpers fron underrun,
they call it there.
The bumpers are 18 inches from
the ground, the front bumpers.
They match up with cars, so if a
truck hits the back of a car in
Europe, that truck doesn't climb
into the backseat killing people
in the back of that car and then
the safety engineer of that car
works really effectively. So I
think that those are all things
that that are are to be
considered, but the rear impact
guard's first regulation was
1953. It was approved then in
1998, and then again, improved
in 2022, but just for trailers,
semi trucks and trailers, the 53
is the one for single unit
trucks still to this day, in its
Federal motor vehicle safety
Standard 223 and 224, the rear
impact guards. There's nothing
for sides right now, so.
We're protecting the back, but
not the sides. It's just it's a
head scratcher.
Well, thank you for that. he
showed us some pictures of your,
uh,
semi.
It's pretty impressive looking
vehicle. Thank you. It's an
older classic Peter's kind of
mean looking.
Well, I, I hope it's not me
looking. We can pull it up
again. It's the second picture.
Or the 3rd, it's it's good
looking and, and, and me
looking. Yeah, it's an old
classic Peterbilt,
uh, it's you don't need side
rails on it because it sits so
low, right, right, so, so that's
what's interesting too. So
there's an issue, well, the side
rails caused clearance issues.
Well, you have household goods
trailers, which are known in
this industry as bed buggers.
You've got car chassis, you've
got uh step decks, you got
reversible gooseneck trailers,
you got uh low boy trailers, you
got
all kinds of different trailers
that are already on the roadway
that have very low clearance,
this is a car hauler since it
hauls race cars, it can fit 3
race cars in it.
So it's not two levels.
Well, there's a, there's a lift
inside. So if we go to the very
next slide, you can see above me
it's the lift in the hydraulics
for the lift, so you can
actually put a put car and sit
underneath the car
it's impressive. So you must
charge a lot of money cause
that's an expensive vehicle. No,
so the truck in the I I drive a
gratis. I'm just part of the
team, and that's my support for
this team, and we've done really
well. Our, our team actually won
5 features this year. It's all
amateur though, I'll be honest
with you. So, but we're, we're
talking about going to Daytona.
For Race Week, not in 2025 or
2026 to see how our driver will
do you
race cars. Well, there's a team
of us, yeah, OK,
so I'm getting a little off the
topic that's OK. We can pull
down the slide,
but so anyone else have any
questions or comments?
Uh.
What, when we start talking
about uh uh convoys and, and 3
trucks going and 3 drivers and
only one of them controlling the
other two. Why wouldn't we just
pull a triple, so Mister uh
Senator Chairman, uh, and
Senator Woods, uh,
They, they have tested that.
It's called platooning, where
the truck in the front has the
potential driver, then they all
hook up and there's in between,
but for some reason, I don't
know the answer to this, the
platooning, you don't hear about
it the same way. There are
triple trailers, I think Senator
Tollman, Chair Tomman talked
about it in New York seeing the
253 ft trailers there are
triples in Ohio and in various
roadways, but it depends, like,
just there's limited roadways
that have it in. I know
Representative Jones was
concerned about the over.
sized vehicles. I'm sure there's
an oversized weight permit, uh,
she mentioned it earlier this
morning, but, uh, you're
absolutely right. The problem
with the triples is what Senator
Thomlin talked about this
morning, the back trailer starts
wiggling considerably. So it's
called a whiplash effect, or
they call them wiggle wagons
too, whereas if you take the
driver's steering wheel and just
move it an inch, your truck and
that trailer will only move an
inch, but the second trailer
moved more like a foot in the
3rd trailer moves like 2 ft, it
gets to be, there's a precision
component of it that gets to be
pretty uh difficult but um Tracy
McCarty, is that right? Did I
say your last name right? If, if
I may, uh, Jan and
representative or Senator Woods,
um, triples that you're talking
about the tuning, you're talking
about 353 footers. Part of the
problem is the weight and the
amount of power that one truck
can generate to pull that much
weight. It's against the law,
it's against the weight
restrictions and bridge limits
in most states. They're doing
that in in uh Nevada, I believe
has platooning that they have,
have tested, but part of that
is, uh,
the deal, the triple that he was
discussing were usually 3
triples is 3 28 ft trailers
instead of 353-foot trailers.
You still have a weight limit of
110,000 pounds that you have to
stay under.
So that's why the platoonings
for, for the generation of power
to, to maintain them, and for
the weight limit restrictions
for each.
OK.
They question, Chairman.
You
Um
This uh concludes this item on
the um
Agenda, and I guess we don't
have,
we have no uh no public comment
and uh we also don't have any uh
legislation to consider. So this
uh concludes the
The 6th and last meeting of this
particular committee. Thank you
all for your participation and
happy Thanksgiving.
Mr. Chairman,
thank you Mr. Chairman, there's,
there's one.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to take this
opportunity to thank you for
this interim.
It's been a pleasure serving
with you with uh transportation
and all that we deal with in
this arena.
You've been a pleasure. You've
been a gentleman throughout the
whole process. One of the most
even keel people I've ever met,
and I just wanna thank you from
the bottom of my heart for being
such a great chairman for this
interim.
Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, I was going to
say the same thing, but the
Thunder got stole. That's all
right, Patty, we're OK.
So she said it was.
Even tempered.
killed.
She was.
Thank you for your time.
No, thank you, thank you. Thank
you for being here. Thanks for
your presentation.
completely.
The meaning is adjourned.
Oh
