Oversight review committee and
uh I think we have a four agenda
here today with a number of
interesting things for us to uh
look forward with we certainly
yeah there has been bumps in the
road in the past there's no
question that I think we have an
opportunity now particularly
with legislation in the next
session to really make some more
impact cell we're going to be
hearing that pretty much kind of
the theme for today but we also
want to be sure as budgets have
been moved around that
those who were
be previously in our budget
getting the funding uh in the as
a move it around the accounting
sheet so
we welcomed university of new
mexico particularly in in that
regard but before we begin i'd
like to have the committee
introduced themselves I martin
hickey I am senator district
twenty here and albert currently
and chair of the committee
thank you mister chair and i'm a
representative joanne ferrari
we have to remember to turn them
off
um and i'm from last crucial
stonian accounty and love uh
grew up since I was twelve in
albuquerque so I love coming
here for a meetings as specially
for project echo which were so
proud of um
so with that
representative
thank you mister chair and madam
vice chair and representative
liz thompson house district
twenty four which is the
northeast types of albuquerque
and i'm proud graduate of the
union pt school.
Thank you in good morning i'm
linda lopez state senator
district eleven which is the
southwest quieter into bernalio
county and glad to be here.
Great thank you are colleagues
and without further or do we do
have some business to attend to
but we'll make sense and when we
get caps so.
Today I have some extra time but
will start with the agenda
hearing from the university of
new mexico
first as a welcome to us and
then as we talked about in our
previous meetings being sure as
we reviewed the budget and the
projections for this year and
the
movement is I understand the
funds into a kind of a
comprehensive budget for the
university of the categories
that we were previously funding
or moving out and but we want to
be sure that the very valuable
activities included in that
funding are going to be going
forward and that that we we
don't let anything slept through
the cracks so with that all
turned it over to rebecca nap
year that chief financial
officer and you land the sanchez
the director of the cancer
center thank you
good morning mr chair and
members of the committee i'm
yoly senses their c on director
of the union comprehensive
cancer center and i'm delighted
to welcome you today to this
meeting on behalf of doctor
donald listed on its the ebp of
your mam hutson sciences and the
ceo of unam health he regrets
that he's unable to be here to
welcome it today but he is at
the union border regions meeting
in valencia and it was difficult
for him to transport himself
between the list of
places so we are so grateful for
your support in are so happy to
host this meeting today if you
could look at slight number
three on your hand out I want to
pre iterate what it means to
have and then see I doesn't have
a council center in our state we
are one of fifty seven n c I
designated comprehensive council
centers and seventy two one of
seventy two n c a designated
cancer centers which means that
we are in the top three percent
of cancer centers in the nation.
In thirty six states we are
charged with the the core of the
n c i'm extra mural research
mission about eighty five
percent of the extra mirror
budget.
We are charged for the discovery
signs engine for translation to
clinical trials and
interventions we are charged
with deploy engaging our
communities and build community
networks and train the next
generation of work force and
beaters
thank you committee for the
funds provided to the cancer
center the money that we used to
pay for the programs that I will
be talking about in the next few
slides but before I say that we
always like to send ourselves
around our mission and so are
mission is to reduce the cancer
burden in overcome that in
tremendous cancer health
disparities in new mexico in the
nation and we do this for ground
breaking transition research
translation of those discoveries
into interventions and
prevention impact full and
respectful and culturally
sensitive engagement of our
communities education and
training of a more diverse
workforce and leadership and
delivering exceptional patient
centered care
your support app has meant that
we are able to address health
issues related to tobacco use
throughout the state
with a program said i'm going to
show you through the next few
slides
I would like to give you our
cancer center by the numbers we
are the only nci designated
cancer center within a five
hundred mile radius and we serve
all new mexicans with the
largest on college of position
team and new mexico the tweet
our patients we provide our
patience actually can see by the
numbers you know about fifty
thousand patients a hundred and
four thousand ambulatory clinics
and twenty twenty four eighteen
thousand three to confusions and
twelve thousand almost thirty
thousand radiation treatments
provided by a hundred and thirty
six port certified phone
colleges the number that I want
you to also look at is a bottom
right of that slide in twenty
twenty fourth we provided
eighteen point three million
dollars and on compensated care
this went up from fifteen
million dollars in the previous
year.
So I guess if we serve all new
mexicans and we provide our
patience think of the art care
by expert multi disciplinary
planning teams novel access to
access to number clinical trials
and personalized treatment
irrespective of ability to pay
and that's our mission at its
core
how we use that tobacco
settlement from that funds and
i'm also adding the cigarette
tax month funds because I was
asked that question at our last
meeting that we hold it at the
cancer center is we use a arts
are devastated with us to
advance cancer research and
cancel research is necessary not
only to find the need that
latest
approach is to prevention
diagnostics and care of cancer
but it also enhances the
economic development throughout
science and discovery efforts in
our state.
We use up a cigarette tax on the
next line which is like number
seven on
it for state of the art clinical
cancer care to drive aren't cl-
clinical trials cancer engine
that allows patients to access
cutting it access to clinical
trials at our cancer center
and the next slide which is
slight number eight
are approaches to overcoming the
cancer health disparities in new
mexico through it by directional
community engagement and this
includes that only outreach
those communities but education
access to prevention and
screening programs and I will
specifically focus on up one a
couple of them on my last line
on the next line I want to bring
your attention to our
expansion that would not have
been possible without
partnership with let it just
leave let pledge these are an
executive committee and without
access to
the funds from a cigarette tax
the funds from the cigarette tax
up paid both bonds to build the
original building that you see
their but also for the latest
fifty thousand square foot
expansion in that expansion is
gonna allow us to bring
diagnostics and there are put
external mexicans that are not
available anywhere else in the
state which includes image
guided radiation it's a morris
linked to an at linear
accelerator that can point the
radiation beam straight to the
tumor cells and spare the
surrounding normal tissue in
real time the patient can be
imaged and treated at the same
time so for the patient breeds
the beam moves so it's not too
effective organs we're also
going to bring state of the art
there I mean a therapies and
sobics that are pure these are
the latest in there peace or a
patient cells or a donor cells.
Immediate cells are engineered
to attack the tour and they can
then if the two more comes back
they can replicate and attack
the tomorrow again these
approach to savings are
decurative in payment with
article a blood basement
lingencies and the whole promise
for other two or types as well
and the last thing that we're
bringing is there not sticks
were remarried image and nuclear
medicine so that we can direct
particles that narrow
radioactive to the tumor cells
exclusively and then they gobble
them up and they die again
sparing the surrounding tissue
all of these new technologies
all this expansion could not be
possible without collaboration
with you and through access to
cigarette tax my last lied
addresses directly what we are
doing for one of the deadliest
cancers that is known to be
the increased breast and due to
tobacco use and that is long
cancer so we started a long
cancer screening program in
october of last year and that is
and corporation with probability
and critical care and we also
started it tobacco sessation
program
with through support from the
department of health so thank
you very much I hope that I
answered some of your questions
from last year and something you
may have this year
welcome thank you
rebecca
good morning mr chairman and an
esteemed members of the
committee i've had the pleasure
now to meet you all but as a
reminder I am we're back in
appear i'm the vice president
for finance and administration
at u and m health and health
sciences.
I first want to start off this
morning by thinking the
committee for its continued
support the university is
grateful for the funds that have
been allocated toward
institution at the baquest of
this committee.
Uhm if you'll move to slide to
you can see as chairman hickey
spoke so well about just a
moment ago of insuring that the
funds that have been allocated
from the tobacco settlements
that have moved into ing have
been preserved appropriately
maintaining the intent of what
those funds were to be used for
I just want to reassure you that
although the method for
allocation has changed from
prior here the fiscal twenty
five dollar amounts for each
program that they receive
represents the exact same level
of finding allocated in twenty
four these funds of nearly three
million dollars of support
really are the critical for
these important programs and
projects in the subsequent sides
you're going to see me briefly
share with you the use of these
fines
so moving to the next slide are
generics by a computing
environmental health and
research to back of fines are
used for the pilot finding and
support of our core facilities
i'm sure many of you all are
already aware by pilot awards
support that preliminary work
far principle and get
investigators research ideas
that really can lead to highly
impocked for results.
Um these types of awards are
often referred to a seed finding
and they're a central for us to
be able to achieve much more
substantial grants accordingly
these funds are typically
earmarked for our early career
investigators.
I'm as a brief acknowledgment of
our cores the tobacco funds
support the course that our
house in the health sciences
clinical and translational
center as well as in the
comprehensive cancer center you
heard doctor sanchez briefly
speak of.
These cores are centralized
resources that provide our
researchers with access to
advance equipment technologies
and services there are vital
part of our research enterprise
and they also help us recruit
new faculty.
Moving on you have on the next
slide information regarding the
poison and drug information
center tobacco finds these funds
allow us to provide twenty four
hour assistance across the state
of new mexico and is the only
point in center for our state in
addition to improving the health
of all new mexicans by reducing
illness and death associated
with poisoning and improper
medication use this program also
works very diligently to reduce
the burden on a providers and
hospitals by being able to treat
less severe exposures at home
with center guidance.
If you'll move to the next slide
you will see the information
regarding the health sciences
tobacco fines um this
predominantly supports faculty
retention and compensation
equity for our faculty.
Moving quickly on to pediatrical
in college and again you heard
from doctor sanchez the amazing
work of ariand ca designated
comprehensive cancer center the
tobacco funds irremarked for
pediatric oncology provide just
incredibly essential support to
notice their pediatric patients
up but their families through
counseling additionally these
funds are also help provides
some support to our faculty
salaries
so not last but certainly not
least i'd like to move to the
next slide and share information
on the use of tobacco funds
first with specially education
programs in trauma and
pediatrics these funds support
the trading programs that
provide trauma care to patience
across the state of new mexico
similar the tobacco funds for
periodic education is to insure
physicians across the state of
new mexico or also well equipped
to manage pediatric population.
So the I realize this is been a
very brief and high level
overview of the use of tobacco
funds and I am certainly happy
to stand for any questions that
you may have but I first went to
thank mr chairman and the
members of the committee for
your time today and again the
continued support of our
programs
thank you very much
very such answers to the
questions that we had but i'm
sure it's stimulated questions
among members of the committee
the first at a asked
representative of chasing to
introduce yourself
thank you mr chairman and sorry
to be later had a physical
european appointment this
morning
and this is actually in my
district so welcome to my stiff
and notice to see you again
thank you
yes
representative
thank you mister chair thank you
before we echo everyone out of
the room rate
oh that's right
it definitely wasn't
let's see
I was looking at the building
for the future that you were
mentioning
and
the mirror the bo mirror stem
cell uh transplant.
Transportation
I worked on a bill that would
ask doctors to
screen people to see if they
were under the certain age I
think it's forty or forty five
to be accounted at and um
we got pushed back the doctors
don't want to be told what to do
they have so many other things
to do but we thought that would
be important to get people to
volunteer especially since
people need to be educated it's
not as intrusive and paying fall
as it used to be um have you
found with
this program that it's difficult
to find people who will be
donors.
Thank you for that question and
we have come a long way not only
in the
ease of providing an alternate
transplant which is from a donor
not from the patient that
themselves but also in a it's
okay the community on up with a
program called be the match
where it added large venues
be the match program set up
booths and try to ask screen
people to for for donors so it
has gotten easier it's not
perfect yet but I think through
education and
and out reach we can we can get
there
thank you do you think mister
chair
and missile under is do you
think it's going to be where
doctors might start helping to
do that on their own or do you
think we need to do something to
to get this build through to ask
them mr chair and representative
ferrari thank you and buster
ferrari thank you for that
question I think we could always
use help
that that would be my answer
thank you thank you we'll try
and work on that some more and
i'll so then.
The.
Miss net pure I was wondering as
we have you know transitioned
over to the ing
and the support for all these
great programs are used seeing
any difficulties with having the
programs and funding for them to
be increased.
Night at this current time one
of the things that I think we
have to be really careful of is
when you roll any sort of funds
into ing is that you have a
clear deleting action of their
part their source and use you
know we have to remember where
they came from and we have to
remember the intent in which
they are to spend I will say
over time in my and i'm
embarrassed to say almost thirty
years and health care I can't be
that old
about it my almost thirty years
in health care I can say that as
things and needs change and we
make these adjustments I think
it will be critical that we
continue to be accountable back
to this committee
to ensure that as we pivot those
changes that they still like
with the intent and purpose and
the blassing and so that's where
you know I think having these
annual meetings and providing
this feedback and oversight are
really foundational in ensuring
that happens because you know
who's to say the way technology
will go in the future and I
can't imagine a world where we
wouldn't need a poison and drug
information center or genetic
saying
you know abile computing but as
technology evolves as the world
changes who knows but we
shouldn't lose sight of the fact
of what the intent of these
funds were for and white the
account of building in who the
accountability is to so I
appreciate your question and
agree with you completely that
you know making sure that we
have this preservation of
acknowledgment of the the use of
these fines but we also have
this annual accounting to you
know even though they're in
embedded in the ing we still
should have this recognition
each year secondarily the peace
that you asked around increasing
funds I am optimistic that as p.
Heart of the ing when ing
finding receives its email
increase that ideally these
funds would also be eligible to
increase as well which I think
was your alls intent when you
had this transition and so I
think we just need to be mindful
that keep our eye on that.
Great thank you very much that's
all mister.
Representative thompson thank
you mister chair and think you
ladies this isn't really a
question it's just a moment of
celebration that we finally
finally got the tobacco
settlement money to be a
permanent phone like it was
intended to be all those years
ago and so when we get low on
cash in the state they'd always
come to our funding and take it
out and so after many
at least a decade on my part and
before that i'm sure on some of
them
more senior
folks are just I just want the
the world to know that finally
we've got it as a permanent fund
and
i'm excited about it thank you
mister chair mr chair and and
represent our tops and we really
do appreciate that and thank you
for for that
thank you for that observation
and thank you all for the work
that you did all those years
before I was here to get that to
happen
other
senator.
Lopez any question I do mister
chair and I think it just goes
back to I know that over time
the poison and drug center has
run short
and
there's always I think an
opportunity for expansion just
because of all the different
concerns that have been brought
to our attention.
Is there a need for additional
monies is the center adequately
funded.
And and item because I think at
one point mr chair there is a
concerns that it was not um
staffed appropriately especially
if it's operating twenty four
hours.
And some of the concerns it
advance I just wanted just to
see mr chair
how is.
The drugs the was official new
mexico poison and drug
information center how is it.
Operate.
Mr chairman senator lopez uh
chairman lopez
you know I I recognize the fact
that in our state we have you
know a significant challenge
ahead us ahead of us as it
released to substance use and
often some of this work lines
back on two our poison and
dragonformation center
I recognize that we also have
you know i'm all too fast that
it approach to how we deal with
this to speak specifically to
the fines as a relates to the
poison and drug information
center I think it would be best
for me to go back and work with
the individuals and speak to
them about any particular
deficiencies or short files that
may be appropriate to bring to
this committee and to your also
attention if you would so allow.
And I appreciate that mr chair
because I know the different
health plans have nurse advice
lines or whatever they're called
but.
Again I think unamazed central
for many places around the state
is critical and so many
different ways it's worth never
one I said the only entity of
the state of the mexico who
provides what I call the
emergency care.
Um so I I would appreciate the
information cause it's it's just
a concern if you pick up the
phone and if there's nobody
there or whatever the cases I
think it's just false a finances
are state to make sure that
there's access thank you mr
chair and senator lopez I could
not agree more and I think we
also have to recognize we do
have a portion of our state that
is uninsured and so I recognize
that although we may have nursed
navigators and other care
providers that are available to
our insured population but you
know making sure that we also
care for those that aren't
insured is important as well so
thank you for that recognition.
Thank you senator lopez just of
a comment on that
the the
allocation of the funding in the
accounting procedures did come
from the lfc per se I just
wonder be clear about that but I
would also ask in lou of the
observation by the sanitar that
you send our latter eric if you
could make a record of that so
that we know again
by history we are the oversight
committee in many ways of these
activities even though they
change the accounting procedures
and if there's advertising that
it is an accountability I feel
that we have as a committee so
if you could let us know if
you're
what kind of funding increase
that center because it is the
only separate in the state and
secondly then we will certainly
advocate for that to the lfc and
the finance committees as a put
the budget together for the ing
thank you mister chairman we
will do that thank you.
Representative chasing a
question.
Okay again a little bit of time
left and I I do have some
questions on that some of the.
Are there things that we were
looking at here and it they
primarily center around
the ability of the cancer center
to
attract and retain the faculty
that has made it so great and I
know that a goal of the
university here at least one
that i've had and certainly no
one's countered it but I think
that doctors don't as if you
would hear which agree
but not speaking him for set per
se but I see and and uh
rebecca your comments you're you
said twenty fifth percent tile
faculty
of I believe that's a mc I think
I recall
doctor sanchez that you
indicated that the fact of the
researchers in the cancer center
being compensated as you
compared to other cancer centers
around the country at the
fiftieth percent how is is that
correct.
Thank you mister chair for that
question in for remembering our
conversation for so many months
ago yes indeed our goal is to
to compensate our our clinicians
and clinician scientists at the
at least at the twenty fifth
percent apple are our goal is
the fifteenth percent I don't
and we have a cheap for most of
them the fiftieth percent I mean
thank you for that the um I I
would advocate that as you are
look at putting together the ing
budget you put in the needs
where you have those deficits
the
I can launch into that the
university of new mexico when I
look back thirty years ago
supplied so many of the
the
physicians in in new mexico in
albuquerque and that's not
happening anymore and
being able to have the
university be able to attract
the best in the brightest of the
residents want to come here want
to stay here as residents often
do when they go into practice
and in the norm is about sixty
to seventy percent of residents
going to practice where they
were in residency and and that
i'm i'm trying to get an
accurate figure but that's
really slipped here in new
mexico but one of the reasons
they do that is when if they
start a family they know the
community but the other piece is
when you're new.
You always want to be able to
have someone over your shoulder
that you can cars because you're
going to run into things you
just the yeah I remember and and
you call the faculty who taught
you you built us relationships
and self being able to sustain
the retention of those faculty
so that the residents now
doctors in the community have
that back up that so critical
forum is something that we we
really need to strive for and
and this is an asset not just
for advocates an asset for the
entire state and so I believe
it's one of the critical.
Goals this year that we not
incriminally but that with the
crisis we have of two few
physicians and so forth in the
state that we jump and this to
get the fact that the fiftieth
percent higher so that the
residents have more comfort in
in being able to stay and so
again this other figure
the five hundred and eighty one
thousand five hundred thousand
five hundred going to the health
science as ing I believe is a a
critical component and if you
need more there we would like to
know that not of the several
million it will cost to get us
to the fiftieth percent I know
it's a pretty big figure
but we we we we have to
recognize worry we're in a
crisis in the state of people
not getting access to health
care as i'm running again
virtually every household says
can you get me an appointment
somewhere because I can't find
when anywhere and and I think
that support the compensation so
for the just critical fact or so
does that's an observation and
but as as people ask me of
question uhm back i'd like a
just a point of clarification
make sure i'm getting this right
it's my understanding and I
think you would know this from
the amc
that
state based.
Medical centers at medical
schools training programs at a
state based that as they have
their refunded in some ways by
the stayed
and
usually have a for pondering
itself of medical students from
the state the normal support for
a faculty at the fiftieth
percentile and average across
the board.
The normal funding is the
percentage that the state
supplies for that because the
vast majority comes from
clinical work I understand that
but the norm is eighteen percent
and if I am correct new mexico
only has six percent support
from the state for faculty
salaries and it have a mess add
up in somewhere can you correct
me thank you mr chairman no we
we certainly appreciate the
level of support that you have
given the universe sitting in
your concerns around the
adequate compensation um some of
the questions that have been
raised over the past twelve
months have really necessitated
us taking a deeper diet into
this and you know we're working
with some industry experts to
actually take a a very lazer
focus view on the current
compensation of our faculty what
the funds flow arrangements are
how this compares to other
likewise state institutions both
our period institutions as well
as across the board as a whole
and we should be able before the
end of the fall have some really
clear data to be able to share
with you all that will give a
better holistic view of where we
are with compensation and more
importantly how it impacts work
force expansion as a whole
because I think you know some
chairman hickey you are very
aware of the fact that the
charge that we have been given
and i'm sure many of the
committee members about all of
you all are of you know
increasing the number of health
care providers that were
producing for the state we take
this very seriously so we're not
going at this and a half baked
way and we are making sure that
we do a comprehensive business
plan that we look at the
programming and what the
essential needs are for the
school as well as the state.
What will be able to provide
within the criteria being able
to meet still some of our
crediting bodies expectations
cause you as you all know we
have to adhere to lcme and other
standards so we can't just
decide today who were going to
do this we've got to have the
funding mechanisms we've got to
have the bodies we've got to
have the clinical sites we've
got to do all these pieces and
put them together in a great big
package as it impacts work force
in compensation is a piece of
that and so and I look forward
for there to be a substantial
amount of more information as we
progress into the fall
thank you for that observation
and I want to make clear this
isn't just about physicians I
mean I when i'm out there and my
car it says i'm a position
that's where they say all can
you get me an appointment and
like this this applies to the
nursing
farmers sea physical therapy
every other training component
of the institution we have to
assure that we are at least
meeting the the national average
so thank you for that answer and
I think this person it will be a
focus of mind should I be
honored to be reelected to
bring as much as I can to the
attention of my colleagues that
we can't look at incremental
anymore we have to do this and
do it now for incremental we're
going to get incremental results
and were in a crisis stage
and I I heard the other day that
again
and and
there's in the nursing school
that
in this goes beyond the fiftieth
percent hile
in in the nursing score and and
with again a crisis of shortage
there that the trainers the
educators in the school and this
may be well above the fift.
Have to be able to have as
income in that role what they
are sacrificing by nat working
in azers and I mean but that I
mean it's just just simple
market economics and so we've
got to that that's another area
to support so again then be
finished with this garage
started to go over a very think
this is self fundamental for the
health of new mexico and it
starts here in the the training
program that you are now in
since we funded it gives me the
spring board to
uh
about this issue in this forum
the end and i'm sure that we'll
get great help with the faping
reduction out of the really good
faculty etc etc and they and
those who stay in new mexico
because we're supporting them
but I was at a meeting
it's a economic form of few
weeks ago and and
one of the members the forum
just happened it come up in the
discussion and she came to set
our you know can you do
something my son went to you are
now
by son medical school my son did
his residency at you and my son
joined the faculty at your now
one of the younger faculty but
obviously my with my next apps
of patient one of the very good
factory he just moved to the
university of arizona with a
sixty percent increase in
compensation
and because they have so many in
that special the area being able
to get home to see his family at
night whereas here because
people are leaving it's it were
burning them out and so there
there are more exceptible to
offers.
From other states and so i'll
just leave that story as we
often tell stories to illustrate
this this is what we're facing
and we have got to start that
exodus from the university and
and overall on the state by
being sure that we are
competitive
in the medical center and with
not just a surrounding states
this is a national shortage
that's going out we have to
compete against the rest of the
country and weekend
hopefully we will see that so I
thank you for the indulgence of
my colleagues in the audience
I bring this up because it is
such a critical issue in the
future and it will obviously be
coming up in other forums as
well but I want to thank you for
your presentations are very
informative and we look forward
to the information and we we
look forward to the expansion
and it's just one less question
is the expansion in a capital
proposal somewhere at this point
it was funded by fight capital
we just were the lost approval
is for fifteen million dollars
print yes yeah I remember it
because of time it was twenty
five and utter and it and now
you refresh my memory we did
find that so congratulations and
look forward to the people who
are going to benefit from the
therapies you can be able to do
who you can't get out of state
don't have a ppor you know
medicare for anywhere in the
country program so thank you
very much very grateful thank
you.
Thank you thank you mister
chairman committee we really
appreciate your support.
The.
And now we're moving on to the u
in them to back of prevention
and sensation
information in the program
randall sterling and rynica
martinez.
Push the button it looks like a
person talking and it alternate
better
committee well thank you very
much for having a certain day
this my first time
this kind of opportunity uh so
greatly appreciated my name is
rental starling uh I am with uh
the unam campus office of
substance and alcohol prevention
coasap for short because it's a
now full uh we fall under carsa
which is a central alcohol of
substance use it addictions
to another malful that's a
category free research center
here UNM folks on alcohol and
other substances
and so we we are on campus
ourselves cause that that is
tell you a little bit about a
system research but that's who I
am
and i'm a doctor on a camartine
as I practice family medicine in
sports medicine where you are
now been here since two thousand
nine i'm the medical director
currently at unam student health
and counseling and we have of
course the general medicine
connect with the sports medicine
and then we also have counseling
under our building as well with
a little and slowly services
bonus in what that so we're well
staffed or well
whilst after a students we have
pharmacy xdashray lab and
physical there be
a acquis puncture a general
medicine allergy musician and
travel clinic um.
On the medical side and then on
the council inside we have
numerous counselors and we just
started the uh the collegiate
recovery center we took that
over from the colleges at the
psychology right and um and
that's under a counseling
division as well that's that's
what introduction there thank
you.
So we have the hand out here and
think you're working for
pronouncing that especially of
color it's it's so much easier
for for me to read so in terms
like items for presentation you
know to take a little bit about
who because i've been in course
present some data um you know
both color student lifestyle
survey and i'll take some more
about that following up with
what's being done regarding
prevention and sensation
activities on campus so I guess
on the
call that slight three coast
after sample of what we do so we
work with members of the campus
community we work with both will
student organizations as well as
departments and others this
thing anything from hseed main
campus to south campus which is
athletics we're also associated
but that is a certified through
department of health harm
reduction related to
find out testing strip star can
a delivery and stuff in such on
campus
we also ensure united compliance
with the drug free workplace
acts and title four
which is under federal mandate
for providing alcohol education
for all new and incoming
students for a degree granting
universities and colleges and we
also conduct research we do
surveys every year we do
we write a lot of grants
folks in the various things
including anything related to
risky drinking um
to actually even hbax and up
take some cases doesn't mean we
always get him but the system we
apply for a variety of things so
that's a little bit about costs
so on slide i'm not sure which
one that is we have in terms of
some of the data uh.
I'm gonna take a little bit
about what we some of the data
we collected recently so
we do every year a survey called
the student lifestyle survey I
will probably refer to it as the
slash for short because I like
the acronyms so this is
something we do every year and
basically these two lifestyle
survey is geared towards a
forces for students all you
don't students to obtain data on
actually use of substances
alcoholic substances including
their car team
in this also some associated
behaviors believes attitudes
opinions associated with so on
this particular case obviously
we're kind of just focusing on
the
nictene related course you have
questions all answer what I can
you know other services so when
you looking at the sly this is
18-22 year olds you and am
student tobacco and dickon
teenes versus national data so
this is something I like to use
is called the monitoring the
future and you'll see the
reference at the bottom of that
slight word in the future is a
large national survey conducted
and only by the university of
michigan and
ah
what they do in this they were
they're looking at to the head
once you know for basic first
grade through twelve grade in
the no deliver for adults and
they split the adults for ages
nineteen sixty and to like not
college in college so we're able
to get a critical clip was going
on
in a course for the look at
college you're looking at it
it's just eighteen to twenty two
that's why i'm saying he's
eighteen twenty two this one so
we kind of get closer apples to
apple's type of comparison so to
back when they continue you can
see in past thirty days and this
is when the survey was taken we
do this endeavor about every
every fall so it was last
october past thirty day use
among universe students is about
twenty one percent and can print
that to the mark to the future
it's at nineteen percent so it's
act specifically as twenty point
eight
union but you know that point
two.
Uh so it's very close one wide
argue and significant but it's
very close national data past
twelve month us as you can see
union is a twenty seven percent
in among
march of the future the national
data is twenty six percent now
one of the reasons at the top of
that slide that I have an astric
is because the way the question
disaster this work is a little
bit fuzzy because i'm not
adopting
the the item directly from
watching the future survey but
they they will ask uh so like in
the past three days have you
engaged in faith you know our
question is have you engaged in
tobacco faping nicotine so it's
ours is a lot more
inclusive in terms of it
captures all of it
monitor the future is a little
bit more specific so for example
when they ask also if they ask
about thieving but they'll ask
also about cigarettes well
nationally it's about
this age group about twelve
percent of fourteen percent in
that area unanimous like nine
percent to ten percent so but we
don't ask that specifically as
an a separate item whereas they
do so it's kind of that's where
it's but this kind of does get
an indication of where we had in
general in terms of actual
smoking behavior i'm saying
smoking in general like tobacco
could be chew it could be very
so that but this gives an idea
where wreck compared to
nationals
by the on the next one the union
nickel team to back to use by
age group
so this where we get into the
fund stuff with a student
lifestyle service so so we're
not you know we can see the
address twenty one we can see
eighteen twenty two eighteen to
twenty six we do have students
older than a twenty six of
course but I wanted to kind of
keep this within a
young adult you know by typical
and ish definitions what is
consistent young doll which is
typical ages eighteen to twenty
six some might say eighteen to
twenty nine I kind of work with
the more useful definition so
that's why I cut it off at that
sixt.
Kind of see this data where
we're at so course also
considering that state laws
regarding attaining smoking uh
perfect nearly a or certainly
cigarettes and others know they
just twenty one you can see some
of the difference there where we
where we are by each group and
it does the older you get you
know in terms of it's as intent
to trend up a little bit so that
is kind of interesting
this is again going to be the
UNM data so this is this is us
this is university in the mexico
uh southern counterbreaks down a
little bit
and I should say for this most
recent student lifestyle survey
are average age was about is a
high end of age twenty two so we
have significant number of
graduate professional students
you know seniors who also take
this survey so this particular
case it was it was about twenty
two point eight with the average
age so the you know making the
influence eighteen to twenty six
as is mostly free for a
representative there's fear out
liars obviously so this kind of
gives again an idea and it does
increase I have various three's
why
the increases of the page as
we've seen some of the i'll see
certainly within faping and
again this is going to be you
know with a lot of people in
baby favoring
we have seen a trend you know
over time with this it's we had
a high like about four or five
years goes like really is
amazing and that's a little bit
crippled out a little bit since
then but you start some people
who may be for example still
well faithing or smoking as a
continue because well this one
things I can quit any time of
what i'm sure is a doctor you've
heard that
so not unusual to charge same
thing i'm sure you've heard that
your practice so you know that's
not usually see that uh and
again you know roughly about
eighty percent of those students
who are vaping for example
you know they could come out of
campus already having started
facing his lack with a high
school is not unusual
so we're going to the next one
uh what fords to back of
nicotine every use in the past
twelve months never direct
question.
That we have students as part of
student was still survey there
you'll see there in the far
right hand side that slides as
nine and this because that's
that uh uh roughly about
seventy two something that do
not use it about seventy two
percent that said no well past
twelve months nothing so that's
what that means but the other
twenty eight percent that we saw
that previous live said yeah
past twelve month use this is
how they kind of break down in
terms of what they use so that's
a little bit under temperatures
like nine point something
percent for cigarette use
and I come from the southeast
part of the state originally so
that was a lot bigger factor
where I grew up
everybody well
you're saying about lost
crucials for example yes it was
not unusual growing up you had
like the morale candidate back
to the pocket you see the
improve you know I don't know if
that's around today but I still
remember that
you know the chew a cigar the
esignate which is kind of
faithing obviously it's a bigger
one
used to be a lot bigger thing
about ten years ago not so much
today and other uh which other
different types of you know
spoken may be done so this is
how it breaks down this the past
four months again according to
our union student last time
survey ages eighteen to twenty
six
so we ask those who have been I
know that and so this is going
to be an online survey right so
we can make it the skip if you
said yes you answered I have
been engaged in spoken the past
four months you will get this
next one you know what has your
been your change in use and so
not used have quit decreased
about the same increased in this
is a you know this is how if
they may have changed the game
like they being you know you top
and they continue in cigarettes
to anything like that
I think going forward because
when I was putting this together
I looked at like not used and I
think one of things could this
come and odd option to have
there.
This is just me
it was to the odd option to have
you said you have used and yari
saying you didn't use I think
that's because somebody may have
used it all I did a couple times
they see the social i've done in
a couple of times the parties
aren't really used that's kind
of how that's met but i'm gonna
be removing that going forward
so either you're you have quite
you've decreased about the same
or increased
and of course always walking the
committee that put first effort
in on this but so this shows a
little bit many and so they have
decreased most of the about the
same
we've had some that have
increased in this kind of issue
thing as well is good to see
that there was in about eleven
twelve percent of the they have
quite and that's impressive as
well
so this kind of gives it you
know
again idea where what's going on
to cancel someone was for
students
one of the things the next slide
is how do you think you're
closest friends with fill
this is what we refer to
injunctive norms and so this
will be
especially monitor each group
this young adults are very
concerned how they're peers
perceived particular actions and
actions at the engagement right
so this is going to be you know
an injunctive dorm how would you
how would your closest friends
feel if you smoked and are used
to back a rated and most would
actually say they disapprove.
And I mean that's stronger
disapproved disproved make of
the majority of this summer
neutral and you know sort of
maybe they don't know their
friends that well but that's a
whole other study there are a
certain a little bit approved to
strongly approve you know if
they don't know that's a that's
valid they're not really sure
branching in a lot of maybe if
their new students transferred
to incoming students they don't
know you know
people there are new friends
they meant I know them that well
it's a potential so I get my
break but strongly disapproved
to disapprove does make a most
so it's actually not a socially
acceptable action in this tends
to
have an impact on students than
smoking you know they less
likely certainly smoke around
the friends but they see it as a
behavior if not just for health
reasons but also that they
should not be engaging it
because our friends their peers
are not approved the faction was
interesting to me is about the
approved and the reason why is
that when we look at about five
six percent that say that their
friends would be okay with this
when we ask a separate question
about what about faping what
your friends approve a faping it
increased a couple of points
like to seven and a half percent
you know something on those
lines why that's funny to me is
is well and it is kind of funny
I think there many times that
i've seen this and this is a
i'll go into a separate study in
just a moment
as that there is probably
something where you might have
smokers at least vaping let's
say specifically
could do netricks and this is
something that we've seen in the
past
with some of the various types
of devices I would almost put it
back is like if anybody who was
ever played in bands you know
whether it is from like high
school went through college you
know if you new drummers are
fewer drummer they had something
they would call drummers hanging
that they would approve of each
other's loud noises nobody else
would just them is the same kind
of concept but among those who
engage in favoring uh so because
you have these different types
you can blow a huge clouds of
smoke you can't do a cigarette
cigars you could do that so I
say need tricks of stuff geared
toward smokers.
You may have some they actually
kind of approved doing that you
know so this is why I think that
approval was a little bit higher
but also could be
uh the approval could be higher
because it didn't spell its bad
cigarettes for example there's
another potential as well uh
when talking with some of the
our undergraduate students so
just it just needle thing is
does the tiscal significant but
I thought it was very
interesting that maybe it's a
little bit more proved and
cigarette or other types of
smoking.
The next wide is a referred to
like a previous study we did we
had had
from funding through cast that
we had had a small study about
vapping now this has started in
twenty nineteen and we're just
went through
you know whatever we went
through institutional review
board which is to get approval
that's the u approval process
that you can do any kind of
research uh we'd started us in
twenty nineteen then there was a
pandemic and a closure so it
think it started to like twenty
twenty one but just in short
this is about just for those
were the trigger for that was
because about right before the
pandemic for closure I should
say was a
there been several smoking or
faping related illnesses and I
think he was some deaths that
been reported at the news and
that's like okay this is a big
deal so that's why we started
this just looking at and so we
we went ahead went through a guy
like about that case about two
hundred eighty or so a vapors
union students and again about
averages and breathley twenty
two that did this as an online
survey
so they they talked about we
asked for questions about their
attitudes attentions believes
related to favoring and reasons
why they started in that's where
I talked about like the tricks
that came up quite a bit in the
data you know many said oh I was
trying to stop smoking
cigarettes so it went to facing
instead
of my friends are doing it you
know they were doing cool stuff.
In else things like that as they
talked about these different
types of activities they could
do and so in the mission this
like well okay this this is a
big social thing that's why I
mentioned that about the
approval stuff earlier
but in terms of his vaping
harmful I mean we've seen you
still see data today that it has
a lower perceived risk than
compared to other spoken
specifically cigarettes we'll
say uh is still like a lower
perceived risk it's only see
this data even those again like
from twenty twenty one
is still is fairly close pretty
close to what we see a national
data uh someone saying maybe
elements are not sure they're
just not sure for various
reasons and there's
maybe because they don't see the
same things warning labels for
example you might see one
serious you know you don't see
we walk into seven eleven you
have the thing the sort of
digital says in the right their
friend you don't see that for
anything they've been just or
they believe because it's
organic I don't know but this is
can give an idea that you know
most think the year probably is
a hardful if we ask to follow up
which we did not but if we did
you know compared to cigarettes
which is worse than I have an
idea where I might go I just
don't have data to back up
and in terms of belief that they
can quit any time for those who
are in the medical profession
mostly agree and I know docking
might say this is i'm sure
you've heard this a few times
from some some of your clients
but you know the property I can
it's not that easy as that is
you know we know that but to
mostly they can and
some that are disagree they may
be now you know it's like I
tried and it's not as easy to
create as I was thought you know
a lot of course are not sure the
fact some of the time not sure
agree
without lawyers a strongly agree
and strongly disagreed but you
know mister this might get might
be something you see them on the
social clients I I quit whenever
I want you know so
that's the belief there and I
think that with favorite again
kind of received as less hard
for.
And or less light on the data is
intention you know how they
thought about putting and you
see about sixty five sixty seven
percent a cities have thought
about it
in a course you can have a
significantly now thirty two
almost a third set now they have
not thought about it and yet you
know there's our problem sort of
correlations that can be run
with this data but it get it
gets a snapshot of um kind of
what's going on in terms of
those who may quit thinking
about quitting this for a data
from a couple of our studies
that we recent conducted again
that we did instruments to watch
all survey every year
so the follow up in terms of
what's being done prevention
assessation efforts
so if the prevention efforts me
one things we have funding from
two pack from twenty sixteen to
twenty twenty it was geared
towards creating transitioning
union to a smoke free campus
and so we did then not so your
policy here in a moment
so that was being a fun we had
we we had read applied in twenty
twenty we can get that funding
unfortunately
uh but we did use that too
creature smoke free yes and so
something we do every year's
part of our drug free campus
activities and again in our
total for
uh we do send it out the policy
statement so this policy is
signed by present stocks we've
been sending accordance with a
uh federal direction it goes at
everybody and that's a so
faculty staff students and it
shows in a clues like it
smoking as prohibited to the
campus and essential submission
in their specifically so we do
we cover all
control of that we also in terms
of so this is an annual thing
every year goes at everybody we
also have as you can see on the
right hand side of what's being
done we have the facts on
tobacco use we do put that
around campus we send that out
to let people know this here's
kind of again the dangers but
it's prohibited on campus.
And of course we have right
there in the middle of the page
we have the cup of union is
proud to be tobacco freedom I
had this is one of the last two
so if any of the committee would
like it
so i'm just saying but we we
have the south of students uh we
had that available both within
the building but also during
what's called student
orientation so this just ended
last week
this the first week is goal so
for about eight or nine weeks
during the summer you know we
have orientation account on the
union where you have about three
hundred fifty students each week
come through these are new
incoming students we do was
called discover events so we
provide this to them so again
they know this is a
reinforcement type of thing yes
it's in the send the this policy
statement to figure to get we
had this hour we also had the
flyers around we also had this
in this student hamburg that
this is a smoke for a campus and
so
this is something they have to
read uhm.
You know this is they have to
click off yes I have read this
so it's it's it's within the
policy for students to go
through for the even ever come
on to campus as a new student
sees a various on the various
events that we do
along the way with it and I
think that um
you know as we do with the
prevention you've got next slide
to see the policy and there's a
policy statement.
So it's una policy a up twenty
two fifty and so you will see
there's a
you know one of the things that
there's like okay this is a
ninety nine point nine percent
spoke for campus whatever the
contract was done with you and
am I think there's like a little
spoken area by pope joy that was
part of the contract for
shows that are done a potential
like so many times mini rodies
might smoke and so this is
collect this they have they have
their spoken area that shows
that come through otherwise it's
not allowed anywhere we again we
have the policy within the
residential life a policies
student handbook
and we hand off his policy every
year not special reforms met
through you know various things
and flyers that we put up there
is in terms of a you know we're
look at
stick and cared approach they
cared approaches of course you
know peer approval and health
the stip would be well there is
a hundred dollars fine that
could be levied if you're how
smoking on campus and so I don't
know that data you know that
actually done often I don't know
you know how many
it's hard to cash somebody in
the act right I mean especially
raping it you know I didn't do
anything I mean I what do you do
so I mean we're and we're not of
course enforcement so this is
something can be done by you and
mp we don't have that data that
how often citations are let me
down but this against this is
our policy statement we do with
two pack funding back twenty
sixteen to twenty twenty we're
very proud of that
and I think we're the first
cances do that so if then mexico
so that's a little bit about you
know we terms of our policy are
reinforcement uh activities we
do it's not really
that we talk about harm
reduction as well prevention
against hard to prevent some
difference where he began so
it's not really a hard reduction
case eu you are spoken where
you're not type of things we
like to be able to say hey you
need to go ahead and go into
session which goes to our next
the last slight so it goes up we
have on the website that's a
snap shot here some various.
Resources that we provide to
students that is a these are
lengths you know is what they
get so we have a link of course
to shack student health and
counseling we have to the quite
line uh various other forms of
of of quitting you know that go
to dot com type of sites in of
course the newer one that live
fate free we have on there as
well sees a research for
students to go to er and
whatever we do our student
lifestyle survey and again being
online um
that they students can uh there
to be resources the end of that
they also show the numbers you
know phone numbers as well as
like that they can go to
and of course never brings us to
doctor martinez so this will be
short suite
shack that's a student health
and california etc
we don't offer anything
specifically for tobacco
securities we don't have the
capacity we don't have the
resources for it
it is addressed by all medical
medical providers when when
students come in for care.
As such other risky behaviors
health behavior so that is
discussed you have to get its
it's funny because students
don't allow the students don't
think that beeping is in the
same categories smoking so you
have we do a lot of education on
that we assess where they are in
their
wanting to quit
and then if we feel that they
are in that.
In that frame of mine where they
do you want to try something for
quitting lee referred then we
have cards in each round out to
the quit now new mexico we
handles out and fortunately
that's all we can do but now we
have this this college resource
center which is for addiction
it it is
primarily for alcohol at this
point but we are looking at
we're still this is so new to us
just opened last week um we are
looking at various other kinds
of addiction to
gaming to
other drugs smoking issues not
there yet so
that's all we have offered
any questions for me.
Thank you for the
can I just ask what you just
said I missed when you said
college at resource it's the the
college recovery etc
crc crc yeah to see acrony just
the acronym okay thank you thank
you mister
thank you I will proceed with
questions and will start at the
send to the table and move on
down.
Thank you mister representative
and thank you for your
presentation so in in terms of
this service that you do
are you going deeper about like
maybe
an in what situations might you
be you know at a party situation
or when you're and then
the reasons and that the age
that they started at some kind
of some of the the factors going
leading into a lifetime use of
tobacco products excellent
question representative thompson
on our annual survey we don't
and I think there's a great
suggestion I mean you know this
is
so when I go back to the vaping
survey that was again if years
ago we did ask those questions
because it was dedicated only to
write smoking faping type of
behavior we were able to go into
that and we saw that most people
started a eighteen fifteen
eighteen was big and I know that
kind of it escalated as you said
you get all see the parts or so
I didn't include it but yeah in
the inch in situations
one thing is that came up
representative which is
interesting to me was mental
health
and anxiety you know yes the
friends are doing it but why
were you know I did this and we
have several serving stress
there in society are switching
off from the tobacco which I or
smoking cigarettes which I
started as from anxiety so there
was a level of mental health it
went into that and we certainly
seen.
Data similar to that regarding
you know why are you going into
alcohol is because you know peer
pressure level right but also
you have anxiety you reach for
the drugs that are available
hence so they did that so with
that said I would love to be
able to replicate this the study
I because I think it's very
important it's it's something I
think is you know as other
things have kind of come down
the pipeline where the resin
fitness various things are like
in the mexico the rule of
alcohol and deaths and stuff you
know this kind of it's
unfortunately swept away and
it's still huge and still a very
big problem so i'd like to be
able to say we would be able to
dedicate a another survey to
that I think it'd be fantastic
to do then I see something just
about what we're seeing that the
student helped and the younger
population here on campus.
Is marijuana there's a lot of
marijuana use in its very
the thinking behind it is it's
not harmful because it's legal
because it's natural and we are
seen a lot of taxicity coming in
were having to treat we are now
treating it because before we
were having to send it out to
the emergency room to get it and
we are trying to keep them out
of the emergency room so now
we're doing a lot more a lot
more treatment for it.
But then if it's what we can do
we can only do so much and if we
need to go they need to go with
the emergency room but I think
that's the bigger problem in
this and this young colleague
each as well over over just
regretting I think more honest
problem
thank you for that and just
calling back to our legislative
health and human services
committee a couple weeks ago we
had the social workers in front
of us and the
stated in national study that
said behavioral health needs in
new mexico are met nineteen
point one percent of the time so
we're kind of.
Setting ourselves up for that
not that we're not trying and
then on your on your page with
this charter there the one
number I want the most is
unreadable
the tobacco used cost at least
for the two of us is that a one
point six or
yes okay okay and is there any
way we could get I mean I would
love to have this just this in a
in a readable form to
hand out to folks and to to use
as a reference so if you could
get that to
erica in in a way that we could
we could print it just that
section of it so that it's
readable yes all right
representative and old eyes you
know all that stuff.
Representative.
Thank you mister chair I have
some a lot of questions so you
can keep unreally brief if you
want to but I appreciated seeing
the graphs for
you know what was happening but
in the different age groups and
then compared to national data
is there a way that you can give
us
the trends over the past ten or
twenty years in all of these
different things that a
different time.
I don't think you know i've i'm
sorry representative of a I
think I can certainly give you
some I can put some together for
union and I I don't know if
you've done twenty years of
survey I could probably do for
but every year's you've been
closing the data it'd be nice to
be able to see how the trends
are you know changing better
worse what you're scott better
how we could correlate that with
something that's happened like
cobid to go up
so I would appreciate that and
also on the alcohol reduction
that you mentioned
are you making available and I
was surprised with the shack
that you don't actually
supply you know sessation you
know
you know materials like the
patches and different things we
need to get you funding to be
able to expand to do that
yes and we need the access to be
there for students right where
they are not just referring them
to all these other programs that
aren't really doing their job
either and I mean not that
you're not doing your job but
you know not able to get that.
And but for alcohol
do you
know if they are able to
recommend or prescribed her or
have available the lock zone for
students who might want to
reduce their drinking or quitted
at all it is provider dependent
to provide me locks on for
people what we do we do offer we
have a policy on as we can if
someone is coming through
alcohol having alcohol
withdrawal in
mild or they don't need
hospitalization we can do that.
Um and we probably will expand
using this new collegiate
recovery center but this is so
new we haven't our medical
department and counseling
haven't really kind of work that
out but in medical we can treat
without analog zone we we we use
the backs on treatment it was
certain providers so
we do do some addiction things
were not seen that as much.
As we have in the past honestly
but maybe we're not maybe we
you do a better job and try to
screen for that I think that
would help specially for.
Age group that is on campus um.
To reduce excess of drinking and
especially bens drinking and
that's where a lot of our you
know injuries and fatalities
happen absolutely an and also
help with
not so much prevention but
reduction thank you for
considering this and look
forward to hearing more about
your college at resource
recovery um
center
and then also funding from from
new pack you said that mister
chair um.
And randol or mister sterling
that new pack did not
fund you in twenty twenty two is
that correct.
A yes representative and mr
chair the weird head funny from
twenty sixteen to twenty twenty
that we replied for a new grand
starting and twenty twenty we
did not were not successful have
you
restored that funding now
unfortunately since twenty
twenty ok so sure.
Just a clarifying point you said
grant yes grant makes me think
you applied to some federal
agency or state agency stay.
And or was it a request that it
be in the budget
somehow somewhere came from
this fund
well so with two things mister
chair of that one I would be so
when this was this before I came
in to cost up in twenty sixteen
hours not I didn't arrive for
another few years into this
current position so that that
was that line was already in
there but I believe my
understanding was that was a
grant from I think what was
called two pack so it's
something that was applied to
you know busy as a.
External funding source
to was a grant
so
if it just if I could clear five
of them so
did
new pack and that we need to
follow up this afternoon on this
did
new pack put money out there for
colleges
institutions to apply for I
believe sorry is it just
something you ask the department
of health you had a four year
budget for it and said can you
continue it but it didn't get
put into the budget so if I
think that's a great question
mister chair that I my
understanding was that one was a
I think we call press for a
proposal rfp that was put out by
two back new pack regarding
policy to be able to change
policy like within the
university of settings so this
is something you have applied
for the one that they now
specify those and twenty twenty
with something to actually
increase to the statewide so
there could be.
That could include technical
colleges as well as you know
other two year organizations
like saying mexican junior
college or done yet county
community calls like that for
policies that when that's the
one we applied for and twenty
twenty but do not take
thank you
if I could ask another question
just could you get a lot
could you get a little more
history on that and send us a
memo or whatever it's just so
that we have a little better
understanding as we approach
trying to what i'm hearing how
do we have how do we build up
what the services you're
providing and it helps us to
know what source it did come
through or what source we might
try to take it to thank you and
thank you represent a friend for
letting me have taken
any time mr chair
I think it's really important
that we recognize how the
programs have not continued
from two pack into
new pack.
Administration and um
i.
Wish that it you know could be
restored and have the kind of.
Support and leadership that we
need and have more collaboration
with such as your great programs
also
when you were talking about
enforcement
and mister chair and.
I keep forgetting mr starling
and um.
Can the faculty when students
are beeping in the classroom.
Cana and do they have
enforcement to ask a student to
leave because they are you know
jeopardizing the health of other
students you know from second
hand smoke from the beat
mister chair and representative
from that's that's interesting
because I mean i've never heard
of it but I that's that's
scenario occurring as you
described however
faculty would have that ability
because that is something that
is and someone is being
disruptive and certainly
violating a campus policy they
have the right to go ahead and
ask a student to remove
themselves from
their classroom as they do they
would have their right to do
that's my understanding how
often that might happen I don't
know
that it's
in question to put among the
faculty and maybe even factor to
sit at one have an answer about
that that I could clarify for
you
cause it mister mr starling it
is in campus policy not to be on
campus even if you're outside uh
so many feet from a door like
the cleaning of indoor area yes
representative that's that is
correct and we do have the no
smoking stickers if we may have
some right here as well but to
certainly feel like visiting
main campus will see a lot going
into this up another places
that's have been there for a
while and so this is that is on
there yes it is a there not
supposed to be smoking not like
not too fee for a door like not
at all on campus
thank you mister
leader chased you have questions
yes thank you very much mister
chair and appreciate your
presentation and you did just
find it first
don't worry about it
what.
I was wondering is an are trying
to support students in quitting
how
how often do you.
Do those same students use the
quick line for example.
I don't have that data miss
wondering it seems to me that
that's a fairly comprehensive
approach and
wondering if you refer them to
that is that one of your
strategies
um
rather than
duplicate that service it seems
that.
Maybe just monitoring their
their
their access of that in their
compliance or
how
perhaps assessing how successful
the view that strategy might be
helpful do you.
Thank you leader cheesy I I
think going back a few years and
this is probably priority I know
there was resources at you and
i've do the woman's resource
center that did due to backups
and station and they did supply
nickel team pouches and my night
I don't know what became without
funding but that is when i'm
shot kind of stopped referring
there and saying he here's a
card and we don't have the data
we tried to pull some beater to
see about that we just don't
have that data that is
interesting that would be
something to try to it just
seems not i'm turning our excuse
me mister german I was looking
down there and
represent thompson once show
this committee.
One of my family members step
son who's just.
Last friday his sister came to
town to go to an orthopedic
appointment where they when they
told them if we're not doing
surgery unless she creates
market
and so she sat down with him
ended the quid line and I didn't
it took them a long time and
they talked to someone and it
was very supportive and it
occurred to me that.
Maybe just supporting others who
are accessing the quick line and
saying how are you doing on that
would aviate the need to
actually do the same thing is is
recommending so it it I was
impressed with
the.
Actually the extent of the.
Suggestions and then there
willingness to.
Monitor and support
his progress.
So
you know it
I so much agreed by the story of
a.
Dr chairman
son going to the university of
arizona where I did my
undergraduate.
Work I mean two sons are nice
place but.
Daying how can he forward for
sixty percent
martin
that
if you know we have for your
resources who only use them
wisely
that so that I I think
it would be.
Enter a interest to me
to know what quidline
strategies.
You're using and so forth and.
I wondered.
I guess I was kind of surprised
by the question about the use of
the the they being in the
classroom I i've been to agent
before but it's been decades
I can amount of somebody lining
up in class of course at that
time we did even have the de
johnson indoor erac but nobody
was smoking and side it was the
old oldest classroom building on
campus and
and
I just can't imagine you know
any I think I know too much from
having been on this committees
for
since it was formed I think in
nineteen ninety nine and.
III do think it would be
really disrespectful to the
the.
The other students in the
classroom but
I I was wondering about ventinal
because that is we hear a lot
about it and I know i've had
clients who have had that issue
and i'm wondering if you're in
ca- if the storms that you and
are reporting that you are
what.
If anything you're doing to.
Assist in that area
well thank you leader chasing
with mister cherry permission
to to follow up with that and so
will since know we do
i'd think belts student
lifestyle survey can and and we
do ask some questions about
prescription painkillers i'm
trying to recall if we are
specifically about fits now.
So what we do is at least within
coca
we do provide fence no testing
strips that are given to us as
part of the DOH her reduction
provider program so we offer the
students we do this through uh
tabling events of course we get
circle that come up we do offer
as well to
any factory staff we've actually
done some stuff of course off
campus as well like with the ps
during a paradight for example
and so we do offer fintennal
testing strips to those
registered and we provide as
well since
information with the way the
process worked in shabe a little
bit off a table it you know and
and into a hopefully sterile
environment at a few drops water
see if other stick turns if it
turns pause for not so we then
provide those little your call
cookers uh if they wish to use
those as well as ills yes
determine are you saying that
this they couldn't charge a city
of what they would like to
interest house but
a
so we hit reprovide that I I we
may have data about I had to go
back to look at the apologist
it's not knowing this off talk
my hand ahead whether.
These you know students seeking
out fence and a lot of I had to
see if we have that if that data
we and I can I can check it
fairly easily but we do provide
prevention of her reductions if
you're going to engage and you
know some recreational drug use
such make sure doesn't always
have that and so we provide the
test trips along with the narkin
as well
and I knew and we've had as a
xylar scene testing strips we
obtained that we can also
provide students which is a new
kind of early warning
drug on the streets if you well.
The college at recovery center
the mister chairman that you
mentioned
that is an impatient.
It's strictly strictly out
patient and it's run by a
graduate student and help with
our accounts those as well so
it's strictly out patient and
this determine is the graduate
student from the medical school
or from another program like
psychology or something like
that.
Mr chairman literature it's
there from another program there
are graduates to and I believe
in psychiate psychology
thank you very much mister
chairman.
Thank you
and sen
I think you mister chair and nap
so much of questions but just to
come out of you know I I have a
middle school aged child
and what she has reported back
to me of what's happening in
middle school were beeping.
Is of concern
and to look at the numbers that
are being reported course itself
report
you can see I mean I can see
should I say that
it goes further back right then
just when the students are at
the university level and even at
high school.
So.
Mr chair I just think that this
committee working with our
partners right who were here and
other places around the state
that we still need to.
They're still so much more work
to do
cause the ads are there and you
see anyway we see it I watch one
when she's done not on just the
television because that's like
old school but when they're on
these little
computers that they walk around
with it just explained.
And the outcome we have a family
member who.
Smoke from many years and his
house is just it is very bad is
quality of life is
not good
and to see the outcome about of
course that was an older
generation i'm he's earning his
seventies.
But still.
There's just so much work to do.
Um and and for what you've just
reported back here is still
concerned because you also do
mention you the access to other
drugs it it's.
The warrant drugs didn't work it
is just a different way mr chair
that we still have to retool
ourselves and figure out
how we can discourage our young
people from even starting so
i've just a comment mr chair
just frustrating because I know
many of you doing the work our
cancer centers do the wonderful
work of trying to heal people
but what do we do to start
before so it's still look an
eternal question by just had to
voice up thank you mister chair
thank you center grade
observation and as we helped us
hearing last year at you and
then we were introduced to the
phrase
vaping is the gateway to
addiction and that was the
medical center of leader doctor
to the donus who is an
addictional just so
great I mean it it is about
prevention.
For sure we're running quite a
bit of around time so i'm going
to ask hopefully to some very
quick questions and very short
answers and some of this will be
getting as information
does do you share your program
with any other institutes of
higher learning in the state is
there any cross fertilization or
coordinated effort and just need
a brief answer pretty much yes
or not so no I well with that
sir
we do do some clab there's no
funding associated with it but
we will work with the other
basic degree granting
institutions on administering
the student lifestyle survey.
So we do work with them they can
so it's just a survey but it's
it's not the education center
thank you
I I just for the record I have
had a
secretary of higher education to
be here or a designate of that
individual
unfortunately I got an answer
back or we just oversee funds
that
yeah although I know that they
oversee policy in a lot of
barriers and and have input
there are the executive does
obviously through that
department
I wish that they were here this
to me is a fundamental
obligation.
Of that department to work with
you to take what you're doing
here and find out what's going
on in others and be sure that
there is a way that it is spread
to the twenty nine institutions
of hired learning
so i've again my significant
disappointment that they're not
here we will work on that this
next year and we will look to
you for leadership and that
effort thank you
the
obviously.
There are smoke shops near here.
If we were to put a mile
restriction radious restriction
of of every campus
and again this gets into local
or whatever but if we were
putting a restriction.
For a mile of.
Cigarette shops where the vaping
materials can be obtained just a
quick yesterday would that be
highly effective and reducing.
The.
You don't think so there would
have to be research I mean it
will follow with what doctor
team said that I know there is
some stuff regarding marijuana
shops regretional candidates
within like a nearby I don't
know if that curious over this
you know alex decided nearby
campus grades fall I don't know
if the same as with smoke shops
though so I I don't know
okay thank you I I know they did
that in new york city with high
schools and showed it dramatic
decrease in smoking site this
back in spoken there wasn't
faping at that time but a hard
a prohibition was highly
effective and reducing so
there's something to think about
up finally at we've covered this
the would really love to know
what
what you need in terms of
resources to expand the program
have the crisis center fully
operate I mean to be able to
deal with you i'm net in in the
crisis and the number of things
you've mentioned
it would be wonderful and I know
you always have to check with
higher ups around this
and so miss napier looking at
your iphone here I want you to
hear this one of just so you
know it was me not them
pushing for more resources and
other words what would you what
what would be an ideal program
for education and to some degree
session
and we'd like to see that and so
i'm asking you and again you
will have to check with higher
ups but they don't know this was
requested by the committee what
you would need to have a fault
fledged training program and
again we'll use that information
to go to the higher education
department and say
you need to or we will work to
get you so you can put this type
of program in place of the
twenty nine institutions and
also probably be.
Very helpful for high schools in
middle schools for well but but
what what would be the idea
program don't tell us now
we're gonna hear from ncsl in a
little bit but just making that
request that you deliver that so
that we can understand that to
advocate for you as a committee
and I without I will thank you
very much for an excellent
presentation and the the surveys
are doing it's great again we
need to do more of this and I
will end with doctors and
bonuses are observation vaping
is the gateway to addiction and
that's why we're so far to stand
this thank you so much and we
will adjourn for I know we want
a line that I am sorry
you
know no no no right
now you're aligning iran and I
think you for being here and
you know it takes a time that
you need to
go through but if there are
things that you can kind of say
where you can look at this on
your own together that would be
great
yeah great thank you very much
hello
okay mister chair members of the
committee i'm a lot of dances on
the cheap medical officer of
medicaid i'm going to be talking
today about the interventions
that we have done and medicaid
over the last year and last few
years for tobacco and nicotine
section I did bring some people
with me I have a cabby leaver
whose are quality bureau chief
and I have keen in who is our
new pharmacist so yeah so I
think for you a brought up
I also there are two cheap
medical officers in the room
from two of the plans at the dr
brand mark has and doctor
napolion cause we've been doing
quite a bit of claboration uh
since turkey's care has been
getting off the ground so i.
Ask them to come
before remove one could each of
those individuals stand up in
identify themselves.
The.
After a friend market metal
companies.
We also have doctor ethridge
great doctor a three
thousand good to see you again
great that presses bomb and I
would love to over lunch which
will becoming
after this presentation there
are couple other things that
effect to touch base with ya
focusing on pbm's thank you
this is your your new friend
skinning he's our new pharmacist
oh he's okay i'm sorry that that
so
we we always start with our land
acknowledgment on behalf of all
colleagues at the healthcare
authority we humbly acknowledge
we are on the unseated assessor
lands of the original people of
the public hatchy and denay pass
present in future with gratitude
we pay our respects to the land
of the people and the
communities that contribute to
what today is known as the state
of new mexico
I will glide right over the
mission statement slide for the
health care authority and move
right on to the agenda
so
the things i'm gonna be talking
about today very briefly talking
about just the state of tobacco
and continues in medicaid are
slide about the appropriation
there is some updated best
practices as far as medicaid
program so i'm going to review
those and then talk a little bit
about how we're trying to align
with those best practices.
So the next slide this is page
five showing but broken down by
age the number of people who
have claim that in our system
are tobacco users
so you know claims data is
limited they have to disclose
that somebody has to put it in
their chart by what we're seeing
is a pretty flat slightly less
over the last few years and
adults about a ten thousand
people less than if you compare
it to two thousand and nineteen
13 is also slightly down and
then up in younger children
which is kind of what we've been
talking about over the last few
years it does is reflect it in
our data as well
went the next two slides or
showing is a kind of a sly down
and how much we pay for
to back or related illnesses
that there's it's less than it
used to be it's not it's more
than it should be but it is less
than it used to be so these are
am when we pull claims we paul
people who have a history or
current use of tobacco with
disease processes that we know
that tobacco contributes to the
the disease process so little
bit of a
decline
and then there's next like as a
page seven is showing that help
the amount spent on the season
products per year uhm so up from
twenty twenty two down from two
thousand nineteen and two
thousand twenty which is when we
removed all the barriers to
smoking session in the medicare
program so that's why there is a
big jump and now it's come down
some
i'm heads nine for showing the
appropriation which is broken
down going to the medicaid
program for both cessition and
then treatment of smoking
related diseases and then also
the breast and service cancer
category of eligibility is paid
out of this fund.
So a little bit more than
fourteen million dollars
going to pete eleven
third this is kind of the meat
of the presentation there are
two guidelines for best
practices for medicaid programs
the cdc one is from the early
two thousand and this cms one
came out within the last year.
Pretty much everything from the
cdc one is also in the c m s one
which is no cost counseling
quitlines group and individual
no cost for any smoking session
medications and no barriers to
treat that uh so.
No barriers to treatment means
no copies no prior
authorizations no limits on the
treatment duration so you can be
on the treatment for six months
or eight months or a year if you
need to know yearly or a
lifetime limits we know that it
takes many tries to quit and no
step there if you so you can't
require that someone starts with
nicotine and then does and help
you properly on leader
c m as these are some new
recommendations from the cms
bulletin this year they
recommend that uh medicaid
programs leverage the fifty
percent administrative match for
quite lines be recommended back
assessation in the twelve month
post pardon our post part of his
format are keyed so that's not a
problem they want over the
counter products to be covered
like nicotine replacement they
recommend utilising pharmacists
to further work on smoking
sociation and to utilise the
mcore contracts so this slight
and twelve is just showing the
things that we we've been doing
for year is that there are a
line with that and then i'll get
into the newer things we
regularly monitor the mcos with
a quarterly reported on their
tobacco section
we have had barrier free access
to backlast sectation sense at
two thousand and eighteen we
have individual and group group
counseling with no cost and we
cover all pharmacological
treatments brand engineer so
this is just showing it as
estimated number is just cause
of claims lag of the
prescriptions last year for a
formal pharmacology for tobacco
section verena cleaners is
chancex but chantics came off
the market so it's just the
generic name and the appropriate
as well beautren nicotine we put
all of the different products
together
wasn't just you know patches
sometimes you use for renewal
and some of those other products
at the same time so there might
be some overlap with that
population.
And then the next slide for
thirteen is just showing the
utilization of the quite line
individual councilling and group
counseling so you see group
cancelling is not very popular
individual cancelling is the
most popular app me as a
clinician that's if there was an
extra code if you have spend
time talking about tobacco
section you you you use that
code so I think that's probably
easy to access as far as data as
well and then i'm some use of
the quite line not enough and we
have an intervention related to
that coming up.
So last year a little bit more
than a year ago we started a
program for centennial rewards
for beeping we were asked here
at this committee to do better
for prevention and for a beeping
a teens so this program means
that teens can watch a video
that recommends and you know is
is evidence based on help with
prevention of beeping and
teenagers and then they get
points and they can use it in a
catalog for in a rewards and
then the slide on thirteen
fifteen shows the utilization
over the last year so between
a hundred fifty and four hundred
members access that particular
part of sent any overwords the
the fee being videos
this as slide on sixteen this is
not new but I put it here
because it was recommended in
the last year it was something
we were already doing which is
utilizing pharmacists for
tobacco session we
have so honest slide it showing
that we're in the blue we have
more than five protocols in the
state for pharmacists meaning
that within certain protocols
they can prescribe medications
it's not you know incident to
billing it's not under someone's
license they follow their
protocols they can prescribe
about and one of those protocols
is for tobacco section so that's
been true and all pharmacists
that you and am
their program with that
credential and we also have a
counseling code that allows them
to be build for their time with
at counseling in the pharmacy we
do we are planning to expand
that rate now it's peed through
the kind of the farmer see
billing process and what we're
hoping to do over the next year
is really allowed pharmacists to
to have medical claims and.
Do that kind of work and the and
that we we anticipate that will
expand on their utilization of
um
that service
so and then we also have one of
our delivery service improvement
performance targets which is
that acronym is decept this is a
way this is one of the things
that we direct mcos to work on
and there is a capitation you
know at at a penalty if not if
not done and one of those is to
improve in increase pharmacy
councilling so they have to
increase it just by one percent
cause we think they're close to
zero percent right now so if the
everything improved by one
percent next year more pharmacy
counseling so that will hope
fully incentivised far from
assists to spend more time here
turkeyways care next steps this
is slight seventeen these are
things coming with turkey's care
which started july first
so this is the big intervention
is that the mco's have been
wanting to collaborate to do a a
joint quite line cause they
think that having four five
dollars and four mco quid lines
that means there's five numbers
and so I am I cautioned they
said that's a great idea but we
need to make sure that the quick
line is reimbursed and supported
so they have been working
together we've all been really
working together that she's
medical officers in it in a new
way and and they have been
working with department of
health as well the plan is that
were that they will department
of helpful invoice the mcos to
use one quite line so that will
allow us to draw down that fifty
percent federal match for the
members who call deoeach quite
line and then they will the mcos
will reimburse deal each quite
line so that is the plan we're
kind of at the final staff final
stages of that.
And the other thing coming into
her quotes care is that we added
tobacco section to be one of the
tracking measures there is there
is about eight I think there's
aq performance measures and
about ten tracking measures so
we added it so we'll be watching
it a lot more closely in the
next contract.
Uh this last slide and knowing
that we would want to talk about
primary prevention
this is on uh slide eighteen I
ask the mco's to tell us what
what they're doing and just kind
of with a cabby other two mcos
or legacy and to our brand new
so these are some of the things
that they said they have been
working on with
being prevention especially and
children so one of the mcos is
that during that visits
pediatricians can ask about
weeping and should be asking
about being being so one of the
mceos is doing an education comp
campaign recommending the pd
attressions make further asking
about beeping in their visits
we're doing a lot more data
collection cause if you were
called last year we really did
not have good data of who was
beeping uh it's just people have
to ask the question it has to be
in a clean so that mco's are
going to be creating a system to
collect that either
the so that was kind of early
screening provider education at
one of the mcos is going to be
doing a continuing education for
pediatricians and they're
working with the pediatric
council to rule that out for
peditritions and then they
they're they are already
collaborating so they're they're
collaborating with department of
health for their beep free
program they're collaborating on
the quitline and there are or
reaching out to school based
health centers and then each one
has different materials but it
has share their materials about
videos website materials and
then apps some of the different
mcos have apps to work on
beeping section or beeping
prevention so so those are some
of the kind of a smattering of
the things that they sent us
and I talked fast and all done
thank you very much very
informative and i'll have some
comments at the end appreciate.
Yeah you're being here and and
telling us what the progress is
again we'll start with
representative of thompson and
work our way down the day below
them i'll find a shop thank you
thank you mister chair thank you
so much for your presentation so
my first question which you
answered at the end was do you
do the do all the him owes have
well functioning quite lines
because four years we heard they
didn't and they were kind of
pushing that cost back onto the
state so i'm glad to hear that
you're talking about one quit
line and i'm really glad to hear
that you're going to monitor it
closely because as I said those
of us have been on the committee
for a long time know that that
was a real issue for us for a
long time and then on your slide
seven I just like to see
an oversight that i'm asking for
my in the quite lying things but
I would like to see on this
broken down by mcos
of like I see ones i'm not you
know i'm not sure how how the
new ones if you have enough data
but how each how much money is
mco with spending and then break
it down kind of per member per
month so we're not put
pevalising people for having a
smaller population
so if you could get that data to
us that would be great
and then I was recently at a
national conference of state
legislators health policy
workshop and the last speaker
and I should have looked up his
name at his he's one of the most
quoted physicians are on
everything
and he said to us that the
pharmacists are the best area
for national national growth in
terms of health care so just
another plug that we need to
give our apartment as much
freedom as we can possibly give
them as many responsibilities
as.
As much support so that they can
help us do this important work
so thank you for your
presentation thank you mister
chair thank you representative
for our.
Thank you mr chair and thank you
i'm sorry to miss your
presentation but I was wondering
for
the nicker team patches that the
health care providers are you
know when someone signs up
um how
many weeks are they distributing
to people
of the pouches do you know.
Mr chair representative I don't
know that off the table of my
head
I can
whatever would be kind of
clinically appropriate there
wouldn't be any medicate
barriers as far as how much was
distributed.
Buy I have no prescribed that in
a long time so I don't remember
off the top of my head I think
the general
is
practices for six weeks which
sounds like it's really not
enough time for someone to you
know get that kind of you know
support from breaking that
terrible habit
but i've heard that it might be
just two weeks that are being
prescribed so I was wondering if
you could check on that and make
sure that that's not what's
happening because yeah we're
paying the
providers to implement this
program and provide you know
whatever the person needs if
they're not getting yet for at
least a minimum I think the six
weeks um and if there is a way
to increase that to a higher
number
of you know to make sure that
they're really not having to
quit go back because they didn't
get enough the first time and
then have to start all over
again
I think that's really important
but you know for them to collect
on providing that and then you
know cutting back
to make more money.
Is a breaches so I hope that's
not true
mr chair representative ferrari
I will look into it end I will
follow back up
with erica you could will then
get the information excellent.
Anything else.
Represented a little chassis
saturday
and mrperiod chaired thank you
for the information and just
again looking at the numbers for
the young people self report
how would I say
self report is always horrible
especially for young people
and for adults too as far as
that goes but again mr chair I
think this is that a picture of
those that we can share data of
and with
because the state pays for rate
for the medicare members because
I think that mr cherry this who
were reporting on right here is
that correct yes so those who
are in private
insurance mister chair
curiosity right this is just a
small snippet of what is going
on so I think you could multiply
this possibly by how many
and I just really think it shows
the extent of a health problems
to come that's going to cost us
a lot of money down the road so
just just comments today that's
not mister chair thank you
thank you
number comments now again
we
yes no movie good given the time
constraints essentially
to set
for by next question what is the
percent of the new mexico
population receiving help
benefits through medicaid
because I I know that with the
termination of the
cover to program it so forth it
went from the high forties but
where is do you know where that
with that number is now mister
chair that is it is certainly a
moving target at I think it is
forty three percent right now.
Okay
that helps me with the next
question you you've talked about
of fifty percent administrative
match can you explain is that
something you have to apply for
or is that something you get
mister chair so for program
benefits when you're reimbursing
for a
you know a doctor of specific we
have from most patients for most
members we have a seventy eight
percent match but for any
administrative types type
funding in other administrative
funding that we give to the
mcose and any funding for us for
our program that is a fifty
percent atch
does that then lead to because
there is not in the budgetary
process are we getting
insufficient funding for
administrative activities
because we only get a fifty
percent match
I mean because that means the
states paying more
and so I I
knowing the lfc have every year
saying oh my god medicaid is
going through the rough um and
there might be a tendency to cut
back in that area yet well done
does administrative activities
can have a huge impact on costs
particularly down the line mr
chair that that is the the hope
is that we
right now if somebody calls the
state way quitline and they
happen to have medicare there
you know they're not going to
turn them away and there is no
funding for them so the only way
they would we are really paying
for it without federal funding
as if they happen to call their
mco so if we have one line with
this invoicing process then
we're able to leverage that
federal funding
okay
maybe that's something we can
talk about offline in terms of
irms of ours legislators
advocacy.
For you are in the budgetary
process and the budget that gets
put together
before medicaid going in the
future.
Um
third I am I can't tell you how
three am to hear about the
collaboration with the
pharmacies
they put on a two three day
program this summer with money
that that we got to think
college of pharmacy here to talk
about
privileges act behave to turn
scope of practice it's really
scope of capabilities and
capacities and hopefully we'll
rethink our way around that and
particularly for the pharmacists
in the rural areas
and you indicated that you are
if they do that counseling that
they get some type of they now
get a reimbursement that did I
hear that correctly yes mister
chair and
have you checked with them to
see and trade off basis
if
it take it it's it's not worth
their time to take the time out
for counseling versus the number
of I mean all the other things
they have to do and so when i'm
wondering is if under the
authority of the pharmacists a
pharmacy technician could do
that counseling is I mean I
think that that's you know as
long as the pharmacist make sure
that they've got a downstreet in
our and then
you know maybe if you add all
that up in it would be great to
to go in with a school of
pharmacy here let's make that a
project to see if there might be
enough counseling activities
particularly for this but maybe
some others that we could expand
the the
coverage of areas that
pharmacist could do with people
but it would be really
interesting and
if the college of pharmacy is
listening.
Could you work with the
department to come up with a
proposal to show that it's cost
effective and through the
reimbursement medicaid in some
other areas to bring in
technicians in a number of these
activities that said the
understand where i'm going I do
mister chair we can we can look
into pharmacy technicians and
how to expand what they're able
to do that there isn't something
that's been on our radar up till
this point some other things
that you mentioned that I want
to comment on the council in
code is it's a we've heard from
pharmacists at cumbersome
process and we're changing how
we do it we're doing it this way
in in their point of cell system
we're switching it's a medical
claims like cause it's just they
say it's hard it's not highly
utilited so that's kind of the
goal of the next year.
Um we also what I would say as
far as is it worth their time we
certainly hear that it is worth
their time from community
pharmacies this is a viable way
to improve their business which
we know that they struggle and
we we have several things we
tried to implement over the last
year to to help community
pharmacy is this is one of them
and then a third thing just to
kind of uh you know shout out to
my team so keen and came from
unam and he's been a big
advocate for the expansion of
the pharmacy practice and just
that's that's been a big part of
his role beforehand so I think
that we have somebody who I mean
he's really ready to get to work
and tell me how to make this
work for pharmaceutics
that's that's fantastic I would
the the increase in the payments
for providers across the board
with a hundred and twenty
percent for primary care
going to be in january but a
hundred percent for all others
in entmr
I would urge you to look this is
such a valuable activity that to
me you know that's that's worth
a higher percentage payment but
you know we tend because
in a lot of people don't know
what public health is and how
impact it can be so he tended
disregard it paid very little
for it
anywhere the number of other
things that have happened there
can it dismiss and don't ensure
a lack of understanding of it's
importance but this this
counseling
when you look at it and an hour
or I basis is huge and it's kind
of like the basac words payments
we do for primary care
versus specialty procedure
oriented it's a accident of
history starting in the thirties
and yet the most value we get is
to keep people from the
exacerbation of crime disease
which is primary care.
And the pay back to society and
unfortunately helping someone to
cause it safe people change but
really it's only about fifteen
percent a year
you know there there is a huge
pay back factor so what i'm
saying here is you know we and
and you will be hearing from me
and i'm sure many others one
fifty no we got to go to two
hundred I mean the mathematics
is turning out two hundred with
raising commercial the two
hundred because of the medicaid
formula work the maximum payment
for you and medicaid you've got
to have commercial up at a
certain point as well because it
really impacts it so to get to
be to a competitor to vary we've
got to raise the stuff up but I
would love to hear if someone
could get back at again getting
keen in with the college of
pharmacy how can we this this
incredibly valuable activity
when you look at the barbility
costs and over time is high and
I would really like to see this
reward well
you know not just an e n m
hundred percent
but more like at a hundred and
fifty percent that activity and
because it's a far missus
overseeing it they can put their
signature on it but again the
technician can do it and that
will help make a cost effective
for the pharmacist to hire those
technicians to do that
counseling because as you noted
pharmacists are our primary care
clinicians in the rural areas
and dark king will talk about
pbm's and
how they are driving private
pharmacies out in what we can do
to stop that
so but that's offline
just the last thing yeah I I see
and I and i've heard this in in
a number of areas of out how the
new contracts for the mco's
you know gonna be a point of
leverage.
Theoretically some of it network
adequacy is virtually in
possibility and we've got to
work on that that's why we've
got to raise the compensation
because they can't they they
can't make a cost effective to
just do it on their own so we've
got to support them and there
but I also
you know we as a committee with
often fine we we we hear good
things there are things are
being done our money gets
appropriate and then later we
find out it doesn't get spanned
it doesn't get done so I would
like to see a report next year
and how you were able to
persuade
drive compliance and force
that the mcos are meeting their
obligations under the contract
and parts and if it's only
partial then it requirement that
it goes up and again the
contracts of the contracts but
the enforcement penalty is being
significant if they don't up
that's why it gets people's
attention that's where finding
out metal health parity elini
levy define against the blues
there are for an incident
blocking access to
behavioral health and find of
five hundred thousand dollars
for instance that cut the blues
attached and I haven't lived on
that side of the world I know it
gets attention so just these are
the things that it's great to
talk about it but if there isn't
a compliance mechanism so
hopefully you have an individual
who is keeping the score and
rigorously and and rigorously
account of reporting and and
then I want to thank the two
mcos that are here today for
coming that you are
demonstrating that you take this
very seriously and we greatly
appreciate that but I hope you
know we will take seriously our
role as oversight.
In this area to be sure that the
contracts are being complied
with so I just
and and and and that has
stimulated some other thoughts
from my colleagues and I am
going to turn over to them but I
again I want to thank you a lot
of for being here today and I
want to apologize to you again
for my behavior last year when
you were brand new and you had
no idea what I was talking about
and I was losing my composure
again I apologize for that but
it said it was it was two years
ago senator was i've recovered
okay actually I did call you
afterwards but I but I just I I
want to say thank you for
listening and for really
producing some but appear to be
major steps forward so thank you
so much and again thank you have
plans for taking this seriously
and now I would like to
recognize uh representative
thompson thank you mister chair
this is kind of a shameless plug
so I got it a text from
the letter allow cone who runs
the
county and tribal health council
programs and she said
please know that health councils
lead prevention and intervention
efforts in relation to tobacco
or point that nor can a bus etc
and its intersection with mental
in behavioral health forms of
violence they were side
homelessness etc and so I just
want to say if you aren't a big
supporter of county and tribal
health councils we've been
trying to get money for them for
several years it without much
success so i'm I am
hoping that my colleagues and
anyone listening will join it on
the fight to get more money for
county and travel health
counsels thank you mister chair.
Mrperiod chair yep I just wanted
to correct I said normally it
was a the nicketing replacement
programs were six weeks but it's
eight weeks so i'm not sure that
everyone gets what they need cdc
like you pointed out recommends
you know they get it for as long
as they need it so maybe we
should look at you know not
having
yeah third only the eight weeks
but
from what we hear it might only
be two weeks right now so that's
what we'd like to check thank
you
mr chair at representative
ferrari so the the contract
requires that there is no leaf
there's no limits on length of
treatment so their effect we can
look into if there's any
contract compliance issues and
if you have any details or
specifics i'm happy to look into
that but we do have contract
enforcement of the situation
that you're discussing.
With that again thank you for
the presentation and thank you
for making it focused in time
sensitive and impact
we will break for lunch we will
reconvene it one fifteen UNM has
kindly provided lunch for the
members of the committee and the
staff
so members of the community
stamp please go up and grab
whatever you want and then
anyone else who wants to partake
I I think there will definitely
be left overs please do self and
