OK, if members can please return
to your seats, I think we're
ready to proceed.
Um In the meantime, Secretary
Cerna
If you're ready, take it away.
All right. Good afternoon. Chair
members. I'm uh I hope you can
see and hear me. OK, I'm turning
on my camera now trying to
preserve some Internet.
Madam chair. Can you hear me?
All right.
Yes, Mr Secretary come in loud
and clear.
Right?
I'm going
To, uh, share my presentation.
Although I understand that you
have copies, and so I'll just go
through this. Um and you can
follow along as you wish.
Let me just since I'm doing this
Stop my video to make sure I
don't
walk up here. All right? Well,
good afternoon, everyone. I
apology. I apologize that I
can't be there with you in
person. I'm uh, coming to you
live from Farmington, New
Mexico. I'm joining. Um so
leaders from, uh, tribes and
pueblos in the nation, uh, in
the state of New Mexico through
the, uh uh, G to G Education
Summit And now the tribal
summit, Uh, today so
Um It's a pleasure, though, that
you accommodate me this way. I
want to start today's discussion
off with kind of a A timeline.
Recap. Uh, if you will, um, for
lack of a better term, it's kind
of the PTSD side of the 2024
legislative session and and I
and, and I think this is a
really good discussion.
Springboard for you know how we
hope to be, you know, super
productive over the interim,
especially with this committee
so that as we move
The end of the year and the
beginning of the session in
2025, we can kind of reflect on
on how this past session went
and and identify where maybe we
can sidestep some pain points.
But as you all know much like
we're doing today, over the
course of the interim, we
present at, um every single
tiers committee gathering there
were six last year. Um, and as,
uh, customary we move through
each transportation district's
priorities to, you know, help
convey how our district
engineers and support
Therefore identifying, you know,
critical priorities and how, um
funding throughout the course of
the session can address those
priorities, both construction
and maintenance.
Um, at the end of the year, we,
um we closed out 2023 with our
presentation to LFC on December
11th. And that essentially was,
um, our district priorities
along with, um You know our
commitment to continue to work
with the executive on ensuring
0.1 time funding would be
present in the executive budget
wreck that executive budget rack
was issued on January 4th. And
And then the day after the FC
budget
Was, um was issued in the next
slide will show you the side by
side of how that shook out.
Um, we started the consensus,
uh, meeting process. Uh, which
is a collaborative discussion
between LFC analysts D FA,
analysts and Department of
Transportation staff and again
later on in the in the slide
deck all kind of walk through.
what that cons. Consensus
process looks like more
specifically in how it yields.
how Spill three for House
Transportation Committee. We had
a second meeting on January,
17th. And then on January, 23rd
we
Um, um, present on house
transportation to the House
Transportation Committee, The
House Bill three Language, which
essentially was the consensus
figures for revenue and budget.
um, among galaxy, DF and NMBOT a
couple of days later on January,
25th
NM DOT had a Senate Finance
Committee budget presentation.
It was during this presentation
that the discussion about 1
billion in bonding
authorization, uh, be considered
and then on the same day, um,
leadership from House
Transportation presented House
Bill three to House
Appropriations Finance
Committee. For those of you that
present recall there was a lot
of discussion about funding at
that time and our request was
for a budget hearing.
Front of House Appropriations
Committee on January 26th DOT
presented a follow up, uh,
presented to Center Finance
Committee as a follow up to the
bonding discussion. Um, at that
time it was shared that C
Finance Committee staff was
working on, uh, on legislation
that would essentially authorize
the commission to bond upwards
of a billion dollars. Um,
shortly after that, on February
3rd NM DOT myself and others did
have a discussion with Senator
Muno.
About the possibility of, you
know, weaving together non
recurring general fund and and
severance tax bonds, Um, for the
purposes of funding
infrastructure, um, in the 2024
legislative session a couple
days later, and the Finance
Committee D FA determined to
just wasn't any capacity where,
uh, given where we were at that
time during the budget
development process for non
recurring revenue on February 6
Senate Finance Committee asked
on the Senate floor Senate
members to identify project
For House bill to funding and
then the very next day sent a
bill through 100 with which
authorized bonds for major
construction Pass Center Finance
Committee and then February 8th
Senate Bill 300 passed the
Senate floor and and that's as
far as that got, and then it was
essentially the final week of
the session in February on
February 12 and UTO funding on
or around February, 12. Our
funding material lies between
capital outlay, severance tax
bonds and House Bill two section
11 funds. Uh
Call it kind of the 11th hour
because the session did end on
February 15. So as you can see,
you know, there was not only
were we working collaboratively
to to identify the resources
that the Legislature could
invest in transportation. But
beginning from beginning, you
know, with the sort of the
session we were also in a lot of
discussions about how and what
color that funding was going to
be. As you know, we went through
the course of the budget
development process.
As I mentioned earlier, I want
to walk you all through the
house. Bill. Three development.
uh, process. It's it's really
the mechanism through which an
MDT funding and our performance
measures are ultimately
considered and rolled into House
Bill two. And so the the revenue
in that house bill three. Gen.
Uh, essentially stem from
federal apportionment, which is
our federal funds that come from
Federal Highway Administration,
the several tax distributions
that make up the State road fund
and then roll over
As agreed upon by DTLC and D FA.
So, of course DOT doesn't res
Re. Um DOT doesn't receive any,
um, General fund, at least not
recurring. And so, um, we're
we're not subject to a lot of
any reversion language and so
that materializes as Rollo for
one year, one year to the next
So, essentially, the the The
bill is a four major sections
from project design and
construction, along with their
performance measures, how we
operations, performance measures
program support and then modal
division and it's pro program
measures, including, uh, ports
of entry, and so we moved
through that process of building
out what the budget is gonna be
for these four major programs
and then essentially, it starts
moving through the legislative
process, Um, again, going back.
To NM DOT developing and
proposing and sending ahead of
these discussions to D, FA and
LFC. It's preference for the
those budget category, Um,
allocations.
Uh, we can, uh, the consensus
process as I mentioned earlier
than occurs. We bring that
budget, then to House
transportation during the start
of its session, there's debate
and action.
Ultimately this, UH, House
Appropriations Committee
presents. Um, um and and, uh,
sends that to send it, Uh, House
appropriations for consideration
before it's rolled up into House
Bill two. Then once House Bill
two moves over to the Senate and
then Senate Finance Committee
also reviews it and then
ultimately, it's incorporated
into House Bill two
And so at the end of the day,
DOT is very unique in how we we
essentially establish our annual
budget.
And then on top of establishing
our annual budget, there's the
ongoing rep parallel discussions
about how that budget is going
to be supported with
non-recurring appropriations,
which has materialized as a
Section nine and then more
recently in, uh, this last
legislative session section 11
So when the session started, Um
you know, we had a kind of a
night and day alcoholic. Uh,
side by side between the
executive recommendation in the
all
and you'll see as we had
committed to over the course of
last interim. We worked with the
executive to carve out a healthy
Section nine base for
construction projects we had
identified over the course of
the Interupt six Priorities, one
for each of the transportation
districts. And so, uh, the
executive proposed 200 million.
Um, uh, for
Construction projects. It also
included 10 Million for Roadway
Beautification, 30 Million for,
uh well, I
and 60 million for electric
vehicle infrastructure. Um, the
development that was 30 million
from ARPA and 30 million from
capital.
And so if you look over the
LFCR, um it did include 40
million for
Um, construction projects across
the state. It did also include
10 Million in Capital Outlay.
but what it did do was, um fund
wildlife corridors with
essentially a rollover earmark,
Essentially saying, you know,
we're gonna take, uh, your roll
over from next year, and we're
gonna dedicate it to wildlife
corridors. Um, so we we felt, of
course, that the recommendation
was at best kind of, uh, uh, Net
game for the Department of
Transportation. Aside from
Capital Outlay recommendation.
It was really, um you know, and,
uh, a loss for the department
between, uh, absorbing its 50
million in rollover. And and
then, of course, an infusion
free for construction projects.
So at the end of the day after
that long timeline that I showed
you in the first slide, the
session yielded a 555 million in
infrastructure support, and you
see how this shakes out. There
were, um $320 million in S TB
sponge bonds for major
construction projects, Uh,
approved along with that 320
million appropriation. There
were nine projects totaling 547
Million and so the language, of
course, uh, requires that the S
TB.
Must be issued by June 2025. And
so we're working with D FA on
two bond sales one in December.
1 in June. There's 5 Million for
wildlife corridors, 10 million
for beautification, 100 and 20
Million for road maintenance.
Um the road, uh, Air service or
raise program receive 15
million. Um, as I mentioned in
that timeline, the Senate
Finance Committee request to
send members for the
identification of projects
identify, uh materialized. 40
projects, um, and $70 million of
funding for those 40 projects.
Um
And then, of course, an
additional $15 million for
electric vehicle charging
infrastructure.
Um, calling out these three
funding sources, which is the 3
20 million and and Spongebobs.
the 70 million for identified
Senate projects and 120 million
for maintenance. We, um we, of
course, wanted to be very
transparent about these projects
for a couple of reasons. One is
the 320 million for the nine
projects, um, presents the
Department of Transportation
with a funding gap, right? Uh,
we're short. Um
Short a couple $100 million to
get all nine of those projects
done, at least as our district
engineers are proposing, Uh,
those Termini today and so, uh,
one of the things that we want
to be clear about is that if we
do, um, if if we are successful
in identifying from where the
gap in those projects will come,
we want everyone to be able to
see you know how, um you know
we're gonna pull from other
priorities to get those
Projects done, and I think
that's important because we're
all very clear that if we get a
project done today, it's gonna
be somewhere in the area. 5%
cheaper if we do it a year from
today, But what? What we
continue to ask for your support
with is, um is essentially as
projects become identified that
the funding aligned with the
cost to get those projects done.
Um, for the second group of of
appropriations that 70 million
for 40 projects If you do
straight math, right, you know
that, you know, 40 projects and
2 million would be $80 million,
so each of these projects would
be funded at less than $2
million. And so what we had to
do is get that list and and
essentially kind of, uh,
untangle it right And and look
to see what areas um, were
identified. What areas are
already gonna be, uh, worked on
at some point in the near
future.
Um what the cost of of working
on those projects would look
like if you know it were raining
money and because it isn't
raining money, what alternative
treatments or maintenance? Could
we do on those projects so that
you know again, we could try and
and impact as many of them as
possible. And then the 120
maintenance projects is becoming
like an annual process. So we
are working on a public facing
dashboard, and I pulled a snip
of that dashboard here for you
to see. And so I believe we're
ready to go live and so I'll
start sharing
With members the link to the
dashboard but we're essentially
presenting to you is three
different. Um
Project funding sources and
those are those three resources.
The bonds the Senate, uh, floor,
uh, projects and then the 120
maintenance so that members and
the general public could go in
there and say, All right, let's
see how DOT is gonna spend this
sum of money that the
Legislature Um uh uh, allocated
to them and then the you'll see
here like on this table for
those severance tax bonds
projects. We're showing a a
distribution of those funds
because some projects are
becoming our our. Our
Expensive that we're gonna use
multiple sources to get them
done. And in this graph in
particular that purple piece of
the of the pie chart represents
a funding gap. So from where are
we gonna fill that purple? Uh,
slice is gonna be an ongoing
discussion.
Um, one of the big priorities
for us, um, coming out of the
last legislative session was a
memorial to really understand
what the agency can do to
impact safety on our roadways.
If you were watching the news
this morning or the morning
before you saw that again, we're
at the bottom of the pack on on
road safety metrics nationally.
Uh, we're at the top of the pack
when it comes to, um, highest
rate per capita of pedestrian
fatalities. And so your
Um, in this committee chair, V
Hill and, of course,
representative R de la Cruz
pulled together a memorial that
that is really tasking NM DOT
with being intentional about how
we're going to reduce
fatalities, and so over the
course of the year we're gonna
really work on some activities
that we hope will help identify
how much, Uh, how many, Uh, how
much resources we're gonna need
personnel, financial and
otherwise to really address high
incident rate locations across
The state. So some of the
activities we're gonna be
looking at is, um,
understanding. Uh, how
comprehensive Our data is on
crashes. Um, understanding where
the hotspots are both on stadium
owned infrastructure on our
local owned infrastructure
conducting road safety audits so
that we can understand root
issues and then understanding
how we can fund solutions to
those root issues is really
going to be something that we
hope to get to you all. Um, you
know, over the course of the
next several months, but I think
it's important to also note that
a lot of
Solutions are not going to be
driven by engineered solutions,
and some of them may not be
directly tied to infrastructure
development role. They're gonna
be issues related to substance
abuse, homelessness, transient
communities, you know, access to
housing. Um all of these other
social issues that we know we've
got to work with local
governments to address it. We're
going to continue to improve on
roadway safety. So this is gonna
be a measure that has never
really had a number attached to
it in terms of legislative
appropriations, and we're hoping
to do
That over the course of the next
few months.
We're also working very hard on
workforce development of the
Department of Transportation.
Um, you know, Uh, Just a year
ago, we reported a, um, a
vacancy rate that was just under
20%. And that was alarming to
anybody who understood how much
Um you know, revenue we were
receiving to get projects done,
including an over a billion
dollars of legislative
investments for one time,
appropriations. And so we've
done a lot of things over the
last couple of years to address
our vacancy rate, which is now
at 15.2%. So we've been able to
drop it by almost 4.5 points
over the course of
Year, but we are still
struggling in a number of areas
and those areas are concerning
because they are highly
technical areas, including our
engineers, specialized engineers
and engineered techs and
inspectors and project managers
Construction project managers,
things like that. So we've, you
know, deployed a number of
programs, um and and
compensation compensation
strategies to ramp up you know,
our overall recruitment and
retention how effective we are
being a recruitment and
retention and so from employee
engagement
The compensation. Um,
implementing, uh, pay schedules
that really, you know, address,
um
Tenure or appropriate placement
with employees who have high
number of user relevant
experience to, um, longevity Pay
referral programs really
changing how we do things from
an HR perspective to expedite
action so that we don't lose
qualified candidates. All of
these things have really been
laser focused on, uh,
recruitment retention, but about
a couple of months ago we worked
with Department of Workforce
Solutions and the higher
education to department to issue
a call.
Partners among our post
secondary institutions in the
state to essentially start
developing career pathways in a
real intentional way, and that's
going to be done through a
combination of paid internships
and the development of
customized training programs.
We've worked to identify these
critical roles where we either
need to have a better
partnerships for, uh for
graduates or, um, partnerships
to create programs that would
yield program computers that we
Then essentially in before the
Department of Transportation, So
we're committed to dedicating
the funding for program
development for credentialing
programs. And for the tuition,
um, to get, you know, either
existing deal T workers into
those programs or, um, creating
a pipeline of workers that are
not yet at DOT. And then we're
also looking at, um work based
learning opportunities, which is
essentially a way of saying we
need, um individuals with this
degree.
They're already seeking that
degree, but when they graduate,
they may not have the relevant
years of experience. And so
we're gonna start hiring them
while they're while they're
completing their degree, so that
when they graduate their degree,
combined with that work based
learning experience is going to
qualify them to just come in as
workers and then Lastly, we just
need to be, um, uh, more
intentional about secondary
recruitment. We have a number of
entry level positions that
essentially lend themselves well
to employing individuals
directly.
Out of secondary programs. High
schools are alternative high
school programs. So we're
working on being able to get out
to high schools. Um, engage, you
know students at a high degree
so that they know the pathway
that's awaiting them and
determine transportation and get
to a place where we can
interview and hire them on the
spot. So, um, we're we're
meeting with several
institutions on the 20th of, uh,
on the 20th of this month. I
believe so that we can start.
Um, uh, essentially aligning.
In demand occupations with
training providers.
Over the course of the interim.
We also wanna look at how we can
create long term. Uh, revenue.
uh, stabilization for TOT, and
that's essentially understanding
that looking ahead. We may not
have the the one time surge of
revenue that's really been
funding a lot of projects at DOT
over the last few years since
2019 to be exact, so we're
exploring a number of things,
some of which you all are
familiar with, like the motor
excise tax.
Distributions, which would yield
about 100 and 60 million of new,
uh, revenue. Recurring new re
revenue to both the State Road
Fund and the Transportation
Project Fund.
We're also looking at changes to
vehicle registration fees. Um,
which to our understanding, um,
haven't been changed since 2003
and in 2003. They were lowered
and so right now, um, we're
looking to see, um
Uh what, uh 25% 30% 35% increase
or registration fees would yield
in terms of of a revenue to the
State road fund. Um, included in
that is the consideration of a
strategy for recouping. Um, you
know some fees for loss of fuel
tax for electric vehicles, But,
uh, what? We're what we're
looking at the distributions. Uh
for, um, registration fees.
We're also looking at how we can
essentially assign.
The revenue for for those
distributions, for example, if
we increase registration fees
and get more revenue, could we
be a new distributed to help
with beautification and litter
prevention activities across the
state so that we can actually in
the future? Say, you know, a
portion of this has to go here,
uh, so that we can sustain
activities that we know are
gonna come with, you know, um,
support to local governments,
Uh, funding grants to local
governments, et cetera.
We're also looking to, um
understand what present
increases to the fuel tax would
look like to new for New
Mexicans. If you look to the
right of this slide, we have our
economists do some numbers that
were scary to look at, which is
essentially go back to 1995.
when fuel tax was last changed
and help us understand Ideally,
what fuel tax would look like
given the cost of inflation
doing business, um in in the
road industry, right and you'll
see here the gas ray
Would need to be 32.5 cents a
gallon, which would essentially
help keep up with general
inflation right but to keep up
with street highway inflation
from that 95 to 2006 period, it
would be closer to um 59 cents
per gallon, right And we know
that that's not realistic for
new Mexicans, and we're not
proposing that we take that kind
of swing, but by amplifying
where we should be if we were
kind of just tracking with with
what we're doing here, um as a
state generally and what we're
doing as an industry with
highway construction, we know we
To look at How, uh, you know, we
use road fees like fuel packs to
help support the cost, uh, of of
maintaining our roads and on the
map. You can see, of course that
you know relative to our
neighbors, but across the
country were pretty low. In
fact, we're the fourth lowest
gas tax rate in the nation. Um
and so, uh, we we've got to look
at some of these mechanisms that
are already in place to
determine how we keep up with
the cost of doing business.
One of the other priorities that
we've, uh, we've started
exploring. In the last couple of
years. Um, has been the support
that we that we need for our
building and facilities,
maintenance and repairs. DOT S,
the second largest footprint,
Um, second to the New Mexico
Corrections Department. We have
82 patrols. We have project
offices. Our six district
offices, our labs across the
States Humongous organization
and what we're trying to do
essentially is, you know really
swing the door.
Open and how we can help the men
and women who are servicing our
roads on a regular basis report
to a patrol that has functional
systems from
The septic systems lighting
heating back the electrical
power source to you know,
support the work that they do,
and we we estimate the need for
millions and millions of
dollars, But we'll be submitting
an I. I
Above $30 million to support
improvements at our districts
and at our patrol yards and what
we're gonna do to amplify the
necessity of doing this at a
larger scale is we'll have our
patrol supervisors and some of
the, uh, this the employees from
our patrols, actually presenting
to Capital Outlay Committee
about some of the the conditions
that you know they face with
their patrol facilities. Um and
and how we We need to help them
because otherwise, um, we pulled
the the support for
Facilities directly out of state
Road fund and so just to kind of
recap, you know, and and and we
we sometimes sound like a broken
record. II. I know that, but
what we're doing is we're
tapping the road fund. As you
know, uh, a blank check for a
number of
And and those things are pay
increases as as appreciative as
we are for pay increases
authorized by the Legislature
every year that they're awarded
100% of the cost of pay
increases comes from state road
funds. So last year there was a
3% pay increase that amounts to
over $6 million for DOT, or
about $28 million over the last
four years for pay increases
when we need to fix our
buildings and our patrols State
Road Fund the transfer of the PR
C, um, division to DOT.
State Road Fund and so the State
Road fund, which is now at about
half a billion dollars, is
essentially becoming that
replacement for any sort of
recurring general fund. Revenue
for DOT. And as you see, with
some of those distributions from
fuel tax to registration fees to
excise tax our revenue sources
continue to stay flat and over
time as we see better fuel
efficiency and increase to
electric vehicles. You can start
to see
You know, Um you know those
valleys kind of, um, um, start
to trend downward, So we We have
a lot of work to do to identify
strategies that are
comprehensive and, you know, not
short sighted, but certainly
we're hopeful that what we do
here in the interim, you know,
is materializing. Um, during the
session, right? And we don't
spend the session rehashing
these discussions and instead of
looking for the resources that
we need to fill or backfill the
strategies, you know, we don't
spend that
Um, you know, discussions about
how we wanna fund those
strategies. So, um, that's
that's an overview. Madam chair.
I'm hopeful that I captured. You
know what it was you wanted us
to do, But, uh, I'll stop there
and and sit for any questions.
Thank you very much. Secretary.
Sn We really appreciate that in
depth. Uh, presentations were
informative as we begin our work
here in the interim. Um, I know
that we have some member of
questions first. We're going to
go to Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair Vice
chair and thank you, Secretary
and the staff of
Uh, on page 12.
You know, uh, right at the
beginning to the right side
where we have a
New Mexico tax rate hasn't been
adjusted since 1985 1995.
I. I feel that it's very
important.
That we need to show that we had
1/6 sense repeal.
That year.
And we have never recovered from
it.
So you know, but I think it
needs to be also shown as a
historical part, you know of, uh
You know, the
The need for that.
Uh, the other part that, uh
Madam chair and, uh, members,
uh,
Uh, we keep getting further and
further behind.
And, uh, I don't have a problem
is as a committee if we can come
up with the
Different scenarios for an
increase.
And also working with staff and
the secretary.
And somehow
Eventually we need to. This is
the only revenue that, uh,
really stabilizes to the
Part of our needs.
And and our needs get greater
and greater.
And also with inflation and also
seeing the cost of, um
What it is to operate.
Um I don't see how we can
survive. You know if we
And I'm for one more.
Then I would like to see you
know, different scenario
supporting something like this.
Thank you, Senator. Next we go
to our representative Montoya.
They can. Madam Chair Secretary
Cerna.
Um
I just, uh
Have. I'm having a little bit of
trouble getting my mind around a
a fuel tax increase.
Considering that in the last six
years, we've more than doubled
our budget.
While simultaneously decreasing.
Or at least not increasing
several years.
Uh, the
Transportation budget.
And investing in infrastructure.
We've invested in all kinds of
things.
In the last six years.
Except for infrastructure.
With this unprecedented surplus
that we had last year.
I I'm having a and and with
simultaneously ridiculous, um
Inflation that our citizens
Are facing
I'm just having a real hard
time.
Getting my mind around.
Even considering a tax increase.
When we're sitting on a budget
surplus.
That we
Spend on everything but
infrastructure.
So, um, For me, it's it's gonna
be a real hard sell.
Um
I believe me. Nobody fought
harder for transportation to get
a bigger
Piece of the pie last year than
I did.
Um And I think that
Uh,
The the real problem with us not
investing in infrastructure as
most of what we invest in in
infrastructure. There is a
federal match.
We're investing in all kinds of
things that just are cost.
To our bottom line if we spend
money on on
Uh, roads. Most of that comes
with some sort of a federal
match.
So I'm
I have a hard time.
Under the current circumstances,
considering a tax increase.
Um
On top of that, I if I'm
I was
Uh,
Fading in and out there a little
bit. It's been a long couple of
days for me. But I, I think I
heard you say something about
DOT is now going to be
Looking into the connection
between homelessness and roads.
Is that? Is that what I heard?
Mr Secretary.
Sure. So, Um, Madam Chair
representative. The the metric
for, uh, rudely Safety falls on
the Department of
Transportation.
And so, uh, what we do
essentially is collect the data
that helps us identify where the
high incident rate areas are
pedestrians, cyclists, um, and
those in motor vehicles, of
course.
And so if we wanna move the
needle and remove ourselves from
the state with the highest, you
know, pedestrian fatality rate
in the nation, but we've got to
do is understand. You know,
where our pedestrians most
likely to be hit, and that's two
kind of buckets. One is physical
location in the state, meaning
you know that it's happened
already or two is based on what
we know about where pedestrians
are getting hit, where they're
likely to be hit, um with
similar types of circumstances.
But what we're also mindful of
is as we look at clusters of
incidences across the state is
that the root issue may not be
infrastructure. It may not be
engineered an engineered
solution. We may need to work
with communities to say, Hey,
listen, you know, the Department
of Transportation is working to
reduce pedestrian cyclist,
fatalities or or or automobile
fatalities in the state.
And we've identified this
corridor as being, you know, a
high incident rate area and
after doing a, uh, an audit a
roadway audit, we believe that
the issues are XY and Z and XY
and Z could be, um,
homelessness. It could be
panhandling. It could be
substance abuse it It could be a
number of things that wouldn't
necessarily, uh, result in
updates or upgrades to
infrastructure. So what we've
got to do is identify how we
Help those communities get the
resources they need to, um,
address the root issues.
I. I appreciate that we we do
have a
Very high pedestrian death rate.
But most of that
Is observable I. I don't know
that we need to do a study.
To realize that we have a lot of
panhandlers and a lot of people.
Getting into the streets, I. I
don't know that we need to spend
money.
On a study.
I mean, we haven't done the
first things first, which is
address the issue.
Um
I mean,
If we're going to continue to
allow panhandlers to
To do that.
Maybe we need just need to
create toll booths for them so
they can
Be safe and stand in a
In a little
Boxed like a security guard
shack.
I mean, I. I don't know how we
can address this with
infrastructure. The reality is
Other departments.
And other departments in the
governor's administration.
They're not addressing this
issue.
And pass this on to a study.
From the Department of
Transportation.
Is
Frankly, I think it's asinine if
we're gonna if we're gonna dress
root issues. We need to do that
in the right department.
Taking taking your eye off the
goal, which is to
To build infrastructure.
Where we need it, I. I just I
just
I'm having a hard time with
that. And Mr Secretary, I can.
I'm not imagine that this
originated.
In your office. Um, I'll be
looking for that Sounds like
this is something that's coming
down from a from a little higher
and it just makes zero sense. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Next. We have representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh and
Mr Secretary. I am just looking
at page five of your handout and
the last, uh, sentence there you
talk about a 15 million for
electric vehicle charging
infrastructure. I'm asking this
question for clarification. So
is this 15 million different
from the money that is going to
our cities and counties now for
infrastructure, or will yours,
coordinate and align with that
money?
Yeah. Great question. Uh, Madam
Chair Representative. So the, uh
the 15 million is good. Go well,
right now we're doling out a few
different buckets. One of them,
of course, is, um, already done,
And that's the initial surge of
12 million in capital outlay. We
are also already awarded have
already awarded our nevve
funding. So that's making its
way to, um, communities along
the interstate corridors and the
15 million will look a lot like
that which is
Calls for proposals, um for for
communities, or, uh, private
partners who partner with local
entities place a more TR
stations and then a portion of
the 15 million also will likely
utilize to help build out a
state agency infrastructure. So
it it's all making its way out
to partners. DOT is not spending
a lot of its resources, um,
overseeing and managing the
construction of of the projects
were essentially issuing
contracts to
Uh, get those EB charge stations
OK, thank you very much for
that, Uh, clarification and Mr
Um Madam Chair and Mr Secretary,
I just want to commend you for
your vision on workforce
development. I think it's highly
important for us to be able to
develop the workforce that will
be building these EV stations
and other infrastructure. And so
with that, I just wanna
OK, thank you very much for
that, Uh, clarification and Mr
Um Madam chair and Mr Secretary.
I just want to commend you for
your vision on workforce
development. I think it's highly
important for us to be able to
develop the workforce that will
be building these EV stations
and other infrastructure. And so
with that, I just want
clarification on the, uh, custom
customized training programs
that will be
Presented. I know you're talking
about curriculum. You will be
talking to post secondary
institutions, for example, to
divide to design these training
programs, but I'm also looking
at the last item where it says
funding. Uh, New Mexico. DOT
will provide funding for
curricular development and
course tuition, So people who
want to go to these training
courses. Am I to understand that
you will be able to provide them
with a course tuition and, uh,
if there's an RFP
Yet for, uh, curriculum
development. Thank you. I'll
I'll look for your answer.
Sure, man. Sure, representative.
So, um, the partnership with
higher ed and and workforce
solutions is really aimed at
kind of identifying what
existing resources already
support this initiative, so at
Workforce solutions, it could be
we all a funding for workforce
development at the higher
Education Department. It's um
you know how institutions are
funded short of providing
certificates, associates degrees
and and so on. And so, um, or
again with Workforce solutions
is a pre apprenticeship funding.
Um, learning opportunities. So,
uh, the partnership with higher
Ed and Workforce solutions is
aimed at us Not being
duplicative, right? We don't
want DOT to make investments in
workforce development that are
duplicate of what higher ed and
and, uh, workforce solutions is
already has available when we
encounter you know the
development of a program or the
offering of a program that
doesn't align with the existing
or perhaps we have a
participant that is intelligible
for Rio a funding then
He needs to make the investment
in saying we have a program for
project managers or for engineer
techs, and we need 15 engineer
techs and and you know, eight of
them are eligible for this
funding, but the remainder of
them are not. Can we enroll them
and support them through DOT
resources? Uh, we we need to
make those investments. Um, the
same if we have an existing
employee that wants to move
along a pipe a pathway and we
need them to become a
In specifics
in the in a certain pathway,
Then we give we have to invest
in our workforce to get them
where we need them to be.
And one last question, Madam
Chair and Mr Secretary is, um I.
I don't know if you know about
the program at CNM on women in
the trades and one of the big
focus, uh, through that, uh,
school and that that workforce
development is the fact that
there are 51% women comprising
the population of the state of
New Mexico and to make sure that
we utilize that trade. Uh,
possibility in developing them
and thank you for looking into
that.
Thank you.
Next we go to Senator Woods.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Good afternoon, Miss Secretary.
How are you today?
Good afternoon. Fine. Center.
How are you?
I miss wondering how far
thanking
How far ahead do you think?
And you're work plan.
How many years ahead. Do you
plan projects?
Sure. So, Um, Madam Chair,
Senator. The Our large
construction program is managed
by the step and so six years
ahead. We can start looking at
where projects are in the step.
and then we start moving them up
as we get projects completed on
the step, and so, um, when, when
we sit down to plan a project
getting into the step is is one
of the main priorities so that
we can understand.
It's gonna sit in the queue of
projects and BA based on where
it is in the queue. It's
assigned resources initially for
planning and design and then
ultimately for construction. And
then at that point, we call the
project fiscally constrained.
So, um, there's a lot of
foresight before a project moves
into
Something that point on it can
take, you know, 12, or maybe
even three years before it's
ready for construction. At which
point we've got to find the
funding to fiscally constrain in
order to break ground on it.
And and why I ask this question,
sir. Uh, madam Chair.
Mr Chair.
Why I ask this question.
Is, uh, as you know, I asked
earlier last week.
About
Have we got a plan to
reconstruct? I 40
And I know that's that's
Kind of talking state to state
wall to wall.
Have
It's fallen away from us.
I asked you that question. And
you said that
You know you're you when? When
you talk about the skip and the
different ways
I'm talking about a long stretch
of highway here.
Is there a plan in place that we
can do? A long stretch of
highway maybe even make some
more lanes.
Exterior lanes, dude, A, uh, a
side road, A frontage road. Uh,
I know Highway design is always
changing multiple times.
But I guess the question is
Or the request for me.
Is that we do a long run plan on
how we're going to maintain
these federal roads and if it is
get more federal money, then
maybe we need to start lobbying.
The federals to get that money.
But
I know you and I are on the same
page with this. Uh, you don't
have to answer that question,
but I just wanna brought it out
to the committee.
That we need some very long
range plans on some very big
highway projects.
Uh, the the small plans that we
have today of of taking care of
15 Miles.
Is a small range plan when
something runs from state to
state.
Wow.
I talked to you over and and
Causes bad about an interactive
map.
You said that interactive map
was being put into place.
And that is a map. From what? I
understood that would allow a
Individual driving down the
road.
To actually notify
DOT
That there's a problem in that
road. There's a place that needs
to be repaired. There's a, uh
you have many more eyes and you
and you told me that was in
process. Uh, have you got any
idea of when that might be?
Term key so that we could use it
like Absolutely, Madam Chair,
Senator. Our our coms director
is reporting that by July 1,
we'll have that ability to allow
the general public to report
major, Um, road issues by
notifying us on a map where
those issues are and then we
eventually want to evolve it to
allow them to report the need
for, uh, picking up of roadway
debris picking up litter on the
roadside and then ultimately
also for, um, area
In need of snow removal. And so
that's how we will evolve from
this July, Um, over the course
of the next several months.
One more question, Mr Chair.
The secretary.
Is there any states in the
nation?
That use a reverse bid reverse
auction process to bid contracts
that you know of.
Oh, Madam Chair, Center I. I
don't know. I know my, uh,
trusted colleagues are in the
room and and I can defer to
them, Um and and there are
experience on whether or not
there are states that that do
that.
Madam Chair. Uh, Senator Woods.
as far as I know that that is
not a AAA procurement tool that
other states use. Um some, uh,
some of the procurement tools
they use as progressive design,
build CMGC, which you all
approved for us a few years back
Design build, Um and, uh,
indefinite quantity, Indefinite
cost type of procurements, but
nothing reverse audit like you
had mentioned, so that's as far
as I know, so we'll look into it
further and see if there is
something out there. I would
appreciate if you would look
That And maybe, uh,
C could possibly look into that
also
Um, I
On workforce solutions on your
On your hands. Your your your
people you're trying to get, uh
I'm assuming nearly every one of
your employees have to have a CD
L.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator. A
great deal of those working out
of our patrols. Need to have a
CD L? Yes.
And a CD L If you've ever had AD
W, I you can't get a CD L.
Is that true?
Uh, Madam Sheriff Center. That's
a major impediment. Yes.
Also, if if you
How long is it?
A drug test. How long do you
have to have a negative dub test
before they can go to work for
you?
And and what I'm getting at, and
you don't have to give me the
specific What happened was I had
a conversation with several
Uh,
Police chiefs.
Uh, recently, men were talking
special session. Uh,
And they told me one of their
Problems.
With hiring people.
Into their
Police force.
Is if someone is ever
Had a drug.
Uh uh, Arrest Or, uh, you know,
Tested positive for drugs. It
was five years before they could
harm
It was, uh and I don't know
whether that was a particular
City policy. I don't know
whether that's a state policy.
Uh, do you happen to know if
there's a policy in place?
On something like that. DOT.
Sure, Madam chair, Senator. So,
um, we we obviously will
identify what are called, uh,
safety sensitive positions, or
CD, L drivers and others who may
be, uh uh, providing a service
that, uh, meets the requirements
identified by the state
personnel rule for for, um,
safety sensitive positions, and
so for CD L, it'll be, uh, drug
testing. And then, of course,
their CD L is incumbent upon
their ability to have a a
driver's license.
Which is hinged on uh any
convictions related to DW I or
other types of arrests. So the
one that we engage in less than
the drug testing is the
background check. And so, um,
certainly. You know, DOT wants
to be an employer that gives
Um individuals from all walks of
life and opportunity to be
successful, And so it's mostly
the ability to obtain a CD L and
the drug testing that we're
concerned with, because we know
it's paramount to the immediate
safety of our employees and the
general public.
The sick day. I want to thank
you for the information today
and thank you, Madam Chair, Mr
Chair.
Thank you, senator and members.
Um just to, uh, scheduling issue
here. We are supposed to be out
of here by 330. We, of course,
had the technology issues and I
still have several members with
questions. So, uh, if if we can
all agree now, we were just
gonna go over the draft agenda.
Uh, that agenda has been sent to
everybody via email. If you see
anything that is missing or
something, a topic you would
like to add to the agenda. Just
email it to us, and we can take
the rest of the time for
questions with everybody is
comfortable with that approach.
Right, going once going twice.
Uh, next. We have representative
Garrett.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Secretary. Cerna. Um I have
two questions which may be
followed up later. Uh, in
interest of time. My first one
is regarding EV charging
stations. So last week going to
Carl's bed, we went all the way
to Texas San Juan Santa Rosa V
all over the place going to
charging stations, including
District two's, uh, DOT on 3 80
70, which for the best, So How
does the
Revenue work. Does the state get
any revenue?
From the charging stations. Uh,
we had Francis Network charge
point and several different
companies where we charge
Sure. So for the for the term,
madam Chair, Uh, representative.
so for the electric vehicle
charging stations that DOT is
essentially funding we allow for
the owner and operator to recoup
any match investment that
they've made into the charging
stations, plus operations and
maintenance and the cost of
electricity and so you it. It
looks a lot like a public
private partnership where the
public funding is supporting a
portion of the charge station,
the private entity or
The public entity, whichever is
supporting a portion of the
total cost, and then they
operating and maintaining the
charging stations. And so what
they're covering in the cost is
the ability to recoup their
investment to recoup the cost of
electricity and to operate and
maintain the charging station.
So, Madam Chair and Mr
Secretary, so actually unlike a
guest tax on on gas, there's not
a tax on the EV, the private EV
charging stations that goes into
the state coffers. Is that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, representative.
I'm gonna I wanna say no
immediately, but I'm even gonna
pull up my receipt from when I
charged last to make sure I'm
not wrong. Um Or I could just
defer to Mister Valdez. I know
he's in the room. Uh, Mr Valdez.
The question is of the tax
associated with charging
I chair? Uh, Representative
Garrett? Uh, no. So the the
taxes do not. I mean there.
There's not a tax on the EV
charging, uh and in some cases,
a secretary mentioned, um
there's a five year performance
period that any any entity that
engages in the use of public
funds. It must agree to that
during that five year
performance period that they
cannot recoup any of the costs.
Uh, beyond just operation and
maintenance and
Initial investments that they
made from the match. B. That was
initially, uh, provided for 8020
match. Um, they can recoup some
of those costs. Uh, there are
some issues that we're working
with, Uh, currently, uh, in
regards to rural electric
cooperative's and demand rates,
and so, um, right now we're
looking at solutions to how we
can offset some of the demand
rates that are, uh, actually
hindering the abilities of some
of our partners to recoup some
of those
That were initially made based
on the extreme amount of demand
rates that are being charged at
those charging stations. And I
think that's a topic that will
be coming up in the interim that
we could explore further in, uh,
take off line as well.
Thank you very much. And Madam
chair. My other question, which,
uh,
We don't have to go into now. As
as the 2024 legislative funding
dashboard and then we have the
step, which is the statewide
transportation improvement
program websites down the road.
If you can show us how things
interact, and will that 2024
dashboard be updated with past
years and future years, just a
basic answer, but more in depth
later down the road for sure,
Madam Chair representative, Uh
right now it'll have
2024 I expenditures? Um, we we
could do just as the same in
future legislative years, but
aligning it with the, uh, with
the ST uh, The best bet would be
to be using the federal
dashboard that's available on D
FA S website. Uh, DOT has
already reporting all of its
projects that have a federal
cent on them, and that would be
the best alignment between
what's funded in the step now
and what's um, what's um,
getting done?
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Next we have,
uh, representative Kate.
Thank you Chair and and thank
you, secretary. For this time,
I'll try to make it short if you
could make your answer to it as
well, I appreciate that, Um, I
see in your request for the 15
million for the EV Chargers. How
much has uh DOT invested in
these chargers until this
request?
Sure. So the the request. I'm
sorry I'm a Madam Chair
representative. So the request
was actually, uh, for 30
million, and that's what the 50
million is what we received. So
we, uh, we received initially
$12 million from capital and
that has gone out the door. Our
ne program is, uh, just over 37
million and and that's over the
course of a few years, so we're
rolling out the first couple of
years of that funding, and, uh,
we did receive some CF I grants,
but
Went directly to communities.
And so now we'll get this 15
million out the door. So just
some quick math.
Um, all in over the next four
years. What we have on hand will
be 12 Plus 15. Plus, 37
is what? Uh, we expect to expand
over the next couple of years.
OK, then, I. I did math
different than you did. So.
Thank you. Thank you, Secretary.
Let me just make sure you have
you've done 12 million so far.
You're working on 37 million and
you requested 15 million is the
15 million part of the 37
Million, Or is it on top of the
37 million
Sure. So we've spent 12. We're
working on spending the 37
million from NVI we received in
2024 15.
Additional and that 15 were
working on getting it out the
door.
Like we did the 1st 12 men and
chair secretary. Uh, resident
Ks, uh, all together guaranteed
funding for electric vehicle
charging infrastructure from
legislative. Federal, um in
discretionary grants will total
$132 million part of the reason
why, with the $38 million from
NVI is it's a It's over the
course of five years. Uh so
that, uh, appropriation is
spread over five years. $12
million of that has already been
awarded. Contractors are already
putting
In the ground are Nipah. Uh um
and our environmental processes
have already been completed on,
uh half of those projects, and
the other half should be
completed in the next coming
weeks. Uh, the $15 million that
you're pointing out was
appropriated to the 2024
legislative session, which will
be available to us Come July 1,
and it's exciting to talk about
how we can use that $15 million
to make sure that we're
spreading and filling the gaps
in rural communities and
communities across New Mexico
that were not eligible.
Nev. Funding which really focus
on our alternative field
corridors, and that $38 million,
so as what my math is $64
Million investment so far. $64
million. Madam Chair secretary
represent Kates plus an
additional $63.8 million that
was awarded to us to a
discretionary grant award from
our federal partners that will
consist of two heavy vehicles
charging infrastructure
locations across I 10 to help
with supply chain issues and
heavy freight.
Going across that that section
of New Mexico Thank you so much.
I'm just trying to expedite my
questions. Um, I do appreciate
your, uh, feedback and and
concern about, uh, pedestrian
fatalities and looking on that I
would say that having a section
in this with on all of, uh, your
findings for safety and my last
your last. Uh uh, presentation
to this committee showed that
the lack of seatbelt use was an
outrageous
Um, a percentage of a vehicle
that so knowing what are How are
we addressing that that would I
just That's just some feedback
and then quickly to be able to,
um, do a slightly deeper dive in
my colleague, Uh, to the left of
me, Um
Is Workforce Solutions does not
provide an apprenticeship
program for dot
A skilled labor correct.
Manager representative. That's
correct. OK, so when you were
talking about workforce
solutions, and I really applaud
a filling some of that gap in
your vacancy rate that's a real
reflection of management style
and changes, and I very much
appreciate that. But I you said
yourself that you're looking for
that higher skilled labor and I
have yet to get real data and
detail on what is the
apprenticeship program that DOT
Since they are not participating
in the states.
Apprenticeship program because
they have their own is what I've
been told. I would like to have
detail in the next presentation
of how it is put together. And
what is the data? How are we
beefing up that apprenticeship
program Because you yourself
have said that you are lacking
that skilled labor
And thank you very much ma'am
Chair.
Yeah.
Thank you, representative. Now
we go to, uh, representative
Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, Mr
Secretary. My first question has
to do with the bonding, The bond
sales. It's my understanding
that, uh, this will not occur
until June of 2025. I was hoping
for June of 2024. I imagine it's
somewhat, um, complicated to to
do a bond sale. Uh, is there any
chance it could be moved up to
December of 2024?
Mr Secretary, Madam Chair.
Yeah. Great question. Uh, Madam
Chair representative. There'll
be two and so the first one will
occur in December of 2024 and
the second one will, uh, will
occur in June of 2025. So we're
working with D FA. It'll
essentially be the board of
finance that manages the sale
And so between now and then What
we're working on is, um, getting
the projects ready because the
timing of the bond sale needs to
coincide with the timing of the
letting. And so, uh, we expect
that
By June of
Madam Chair, representative, Val
Jump since, uh, he he throws out
Um So, as you said, we have two
bond sales. Um, but specifically
31 1 28 is gonna be in the June
bond sale. And those, um bond
sales are tied to the
development timelines that we
have on those on those projects.
Um, so we're anticipating it to
let, um next well after the June
bond sale
In January of 25.
OK, thank you. And then my last
Question is regarding, um,
highway is or its route, I
guess. 380 Roswell to the Texas
New Mexico State line. So, um
Roswell will be having, um, the
national air championship air
races. What is the first year in
which that will occur, Madam
Chair, Mr Secretary, or or Mr
Of furniture representative. I
don't recall what the first year
is, Um, I can I can check and
get back to you shortly. I know
The Mark Roper from Economic
Development Department is here
and he probably has that dated
In mind.
Madam chair. The reason I raise
it is and we know that there's a
lead time involved in doing road
projects. Um, And so the
question is, is 380 in the stick
currently
Madam Chair, Mr Secretary.
Well, Madam Chair. Uh,
Representative. Yes, it is. It
is currently in the step. Um and
we will have the first phase
ready to go out to let, um, this
coming February.
OK and then kind of the lead up.
Um, a follow up question.
Actually, madam chair.
So it has been projected that
the air races may be as um,
popular as the balloon fiesta,
which would mean a lot of
traffic.
So knowing that the air races
will be in Roswell. Is there
something about the plan for
that?
That route that needs to change
to accommodate higher traffic
volumes and and along the lines
of that, are we talking roadway
rehabilitation? New
construction? What might have to
change? Um, in addition to what
you first anticipated, Madam
Chair, Madam Chair represent a
good question. Um, um I'm gonna
take a stab at this race is
we've been planning. We have
been planning to be moved to
Roswell for a while, so I would
anticipate that that additional
traffic was taken into account
when the development of the
project
The study was done to determine
what the typical section should
be. Because right now we're
doing passing lanes every mile,
um, to allow, uh, for that
traffic to pass each other. I
don't think that those future
volumes would like would
necessitate a four lane
facility. Um, but I'll double
check that make sure but I'm I'm
99% sure those traffic
projections were taken into
account.
OK, Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr Secretary.
Thank you, mister and Madam
Chair representative in
September. 2025 is the
anticipated date for the events
to begin.
Thank you, Mr Secretary, and I
have a few questions before we
finish with the chair's
question, so I wanna go back to
your portion of the presentation
where you did gave the detail on
the $70 million in member $70
million in member projects that
were added to the budget last
year. Um, Mr Secretary, and so
the first question I have is
Of all the member projects
received requests you received
is $70 million enough to
complete those projects.
So, madam chair, um to do some
form of maintenance on most of
the projects, not all of them.
There are several projects that,
um, won't be worked on for a
couple of reasons, primarily
because there are plans to do
more in depth work on those, uh,
projects in the near future, and
Zach because our understanding
of the legislative intent of
those projects is that they all
must be on state owned assets,
and there are some that are
local owned assets, so we
essentially have
Taking a stab at all this, uh, a
form of maintenance preservation
that touches several of the
projects, But, um, no, not all
of them will be worked on.
Thank you, Mr Secretary, and
that's a good segue into my next
question, Which is do these
member projects kind of in a way
out? Prioritize those projects
that are already on the step.
How are you going to how are you
going to divide DOT S finite
resources between those projects
included on the step and those
member included projects.
You know, Uh, Madam Chair. Good
question. I mean, I ideally what
we could do is you know I
ideally the 70 million would be
applied to support the gap in
the S TB projects. Right? So
there we're taking from others
projects to fund the S TB
projects for sure. And so we,
uh, you know, as we mentioned at
F CAA week or a couple weeks
ago, this is where you know,
identifying the priority
projects and fully funding
Priority projects is paramount
because the the addition of
other projects does two things.
One is It's certainly um it it
it pushes our priority projects
down the list. But secondly, if
those identified projects are
not fully funded, then we also
have to, um, pull from funded
projects. Um at the Department
of transformation, or we make a
decision to not fund a project.
That's you know, legislatively
listed or listed in.
Legislative language, and so we
have all of those options
because the language is flexible
enough to give the OT some
discretion and the dashboard is
intended to show legislators and
the general public. This is how
DOT is piecing together. You
know these legislative
appropriations
OK, Thank you, Mr Secretary
Secretary, And so is there like
An internal prioritization
process for these projects. How
are you? How are we knowing what
is being done when
Sure so the dashboard will show
you what is being done. And when
we expect that the bulk of these
projects will be done before the
end of this calendar year
because they'll be predominantly
maintenance projects. And so
when we share the link
Based on those
In general, how much each will
We're losing you, Mr Secretary.
Madam chair. I can jump in a
little bit, probably with, um,
Miss Pal's assistance.
I I'm not sure. Maybe, um are
you there, Mr Secretary?
OK, so as far as um what, how we
would prioritize our project,
especially in the step we use.
We use our car form that each
district uh, utilizes to kind of
rank their priorities. Um as
well as our asset management.
Um, data that we get so we wanna
keep our pavement and bridges
and fair condition or good
condition. State of good repair,
So really, we're prioritizing.
um, our projects to ensure that
we are keeping our
infrastructure in a state of
good repair Anything.
That then will come in with, um
you know, what are the economic
development? The considerations
that are there? What are the
safety considerations that that
are are being taken into
account? Um, but specifically
with the 70 million. Those are
prioritized towards kind of
funding maintenance projects
through the districts
themselves and not really
developing those projects within
the step and or through my in or
through my division.
Thank you, Mr Quintana. That's
that's extremely helpful
information. That's what I was
kind of looking for. Um so
This member priority system. I
know that we have utilized it in
the in the past for some time,
but I mean, is this I? I'm not
to put you on the spot, but is
this model more or less
difficult for DOT to
accommodate?
Um Madam Cherry.
I would say. In the past we've
been able to be flexible with
the with the language enough
that allowed DOT to still
prioritize What projects we need
to get out. Um, while still
accommodating legislative, uh,
requests and funding and for
their projects as well. We just
kind of wanna balance and make
sure that, um
What is proposed for a
legislative priority. We can get
there with the funding or if
not, we can phase it out in a
way where we can get ultimately
to what was, um
Identified as as the scope for
the project. If you will.
And I think, Thank you, Uh, Mr
Quintana and
yeah, Go ahead, Mr Secretary.
Yeah, David, that's that's
really the the right On
response, Madam chair, I think,
um, you know if if projects are
to be listed, and they're fully
funded, then I think that's
great. But working
collaboratively for members to
allow DOT to identify a specific
corridor in that prioritization
process, I think is key, too, so
that we can all come to center
that how do OT vets and
prioritizes projects is really
addressing the most? Uh, you
know, highly need areas, and so
it's a partnership.
Of funding those priorities,
helping members identify where
their corridors fit into the
scheme of things and then
getting them funded, uh
properly.
Thank you much, Mr Secretary.
And, um I think that's a perfect
segue. You know, we're gonna
talk a lot about budgeting for
transportation infrastructure
this year and this committee and
it's my hope to do just that,
which is develop a a helpful and
collaborative process to ensure
that the Legislature works with
DOT to make sure those priority
projects are identified and
fully funded in a timely way.
So, um, thank you for answering
my questions. And I'm going to
defer Actually, no, I think we
we have, uh
Senator Gallegos cited a couple
more questions and then we'll
finish with the chair.
Quickly. Senator Vice chair and
Mich Quintana No, don't know if
Miss Secretary could answer
this, uh but on page 10 and 11,
you have the increase in motor
excise tax and then you go and
consider changes in vehicle
registration fee being that
we're talking about millions of
dollars on the electrical
vehicle charging stations
statewide. Do we have a number?
I guess I would have read this,
I would have inserted this in
here where you have, uh, from 21
per year to $56 per year.
For passenger vehicles, then
later, it talks about considered
surcharge for EB registrations.
Why do we not have or do you
have a number of what it costs
now for an electric vehicle and
what you would project in the
consideration of surcharge?
A registrations.
Sure I, uh, Madam Chair? Uh,
Representative, I can respond to
that. So, Yeah, we We've done
the math. Um, the numbers that
were proposed last year, I
believe were 100 and 20 for a
full electric and $80 for a
hybrid plug in electric and we
were backing into those numbers
Representative Using average,
you know, Miles traveled average
cost per gas times. Um, you know
17 cents per gallon, So we've
done the you know the estimate
so that
Your your average user is
contributing about 100 and $20 a
year? Uh, per, uh, in gas tax.
And so that we we are squaring
the circle with the math there.
So, miss.
And turn in Miss secretary then
I guess I would consider if
that's enough. If on a regular
vehicle you have motor exercise
tax already, and the
registration. Would you not want
that to be a higher number than
the 120 in the full view
vehicle? Uh, you're trying to in
a regular gas vehicle. You have
the two sections in the
electric. You only have one,
which is the
Registration fee, I would have
thought that would need to be
higher in order to offset both
sides.
Her road use.
Right. So Madam Chair
representative. The EB vehicle
processors are also subject to
motor excise tax. And so
I'm sorry, Senator. I apologize
there their subject to motor
excise tax as well and so when
they purchase their vehicle, I
believe the state of New Mexico.
Great is 4% so they'll pay the
excise tax at time of purchase.
Just like a vehicle. Uh,
purchase, uh, would occur so
they'll they'll be paying that
as well.
I appreciate that Madam chair
and and secretary so they do pay
the excise, but they don't pay
the, uh, gas tax and is where
the deficiency is. Is that
correct?
Madam Madam Chair, Senator.
That's that's exactly it. OK, so
the same consideration would be
if they're not paying a fuel
tax. Would that 120 on
registration be enough or
sufficient?
Offset the repairs needed on the
roads as they use them.
Madam Chair, Senator, There's
there's definitely meaningful
debate about the weight of the
vehicles, rather gasoline
vehicles and whether or not
that's added, you know, stress
to the roots. And so the 120 is
more calculation of the lost.
Um, but we have not and and a
number of states have yet to
calculate what the increased
weight of EVS is doing to roads
to recoup them, so there are
different models. Um, that range
from
Instead of a surcharge. Uh, you
know, a use fee tracking miles
driven. Um, you know, with a
with a ceiling on what they
would pay a year, so there's
some models we can look at, but
none of those specifically hone
into it. The increased weight is
is doing to added maintenance
costs.
Well, thank you for that. I just
curious because it looks like,
uh there's gonna be a lot of
charging stations should be the
need for the vehicle.
Road use also. So, Madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, chair
Tollman.
Oh, no, thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Secretary.
Soon enough for being here and
for bringing your, uh, staff.
And giving us comprehensive
answers. So
I have two questions. What? Uh,
The involve EVS and I'll check
with Jerry after offline.
So on Page five.
You have, uh,
S. A. Yeah, it's
320 million in ST BS.
And if you add up all those
figures you do get 555 million.
In the
Which is mentioned in the first
sentence. So what's the
difference between the 320
Million for ST, BS and
Nine projects totaling 547
Million. That's a $227 million
difference. Maybe you
Touched on that, but I missed
it.
So if you added that
To throw seven. Now you're
talking, uh,
You know, almost 800 million
So
What's the difference? Like? Uh,
I'm sorry, Senator de
So in in, um in the
appropriating language, the
language specifically
appropriating 320 million for
construction projects that that
legislation lists nine projects.
The sum.
Um, of all nine projects.
Is the larger number. So if we
were to have received funding to
do all nine projects we would
have received in that
legislation. 547 Million
So except that didn't occur, so
it lists nine projects that cost
547 but only appropriated 320.
So when you go to the dashboard,
we divide how that difference
the 227 million as a gap and so
All nine of those projects are
fully funded.
OK, Thank you. Thank you, sir
Terry for that, uh,
Explanation and I have a quick
comment follow up to Senator
Gage comment about
No.
Fee for electric vehicles and
my, uh 2023 bill. It did include
tax credit bill for EVS that did
include
A fee for
And fee for EVS, in addition to
the registration fee that bill
got through the House and the
Senate, and then it was vetoed
by the governor, then the next
year this year, the governor had
her own bill that did not
include
Extraordinary fee for electric
vehicles.
Which which is not the best way
of doing it. A lot of states.
Some states have already
developed a plan where you have
a device on your car that keeps
track of how many miles you're
driving and you pay so much per
mile, which is obviously fairer
than paying a flat rate.
Although that's the most
simplest and most
straightforward method, But then
a lot of people get a lot of
pushback because people don't
wanna know the government to
know how many miles you're
driving. Well, personally, I
don't care if the whole world
knows how I'm gonna drive them.
But anyway, that's some states
have already adopted that, and
that's the fairest
And most straightforward way of
Of assessing a
An extraordinary fee for EEV.
Vehicles. So you're absolutely
right. We should We should have
something like that.
That's all I
Yeah, and I'm sure
Thank you, Uh, chair, Tom. And
thank you very much. Uh,
Secretary C, and we really
appreciate you joining us today.
Um, And in our few minutes left
members Thank you, Everybody.
Hi, Mr Secretary.
That was it. Just thank you.
Thank you. So in a few minutes
left members, um, let's turn to
the draft agenda.
And, um, we had separated it
into
Essentially subjects.
And Group of sub subjects under
those subject headings.
And, um, rather than go through
all of them. I'm gonna ask
members if you have anything
that you specifically want to
add to that agenda.
That you don't see.
Representative Brown.
Uh, yes. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I have an addition I'd like
to propose for, um section C.
And that's regarding electric
vehicles in the future of
transportation. Um so, um,
number one. There is a
presentation on impending
advances and benefits in the
field of transportation
infrastructure.
Um, I. I just like to propose I
I've looked at all the numbers
here under this heading, and I
think
Uh, what would help the
committee is to have a
presentation by someone who, um,
sells EVS. And I'm looking at
I've been to two presentations
now by auto dealers and getting
their view of S and customer
trends with those, And so I
would like, and probably the
most insightful person. Um, I
had a chance to visit with is
Mister Travis Hicks.
Of Richland Motors.
Um he had a very, very
interesting perspective that, um
I would like us to hear and I
can give you his phone number.
Um, after the meeting today,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative. We will get
that information from you
before I turn off my mic.
There are barriers to people
buying EVS. And that's part of
what this discussion would be.
Thank you.
Thank you. We'll add that to the
discussion as well.
Anyone else?
Senator Gallegos and then
Senator Gonzalez.
Madam chair. Thank you. Uh, I
was wanting to see if we could,
uh, add in the D. Um, a
discussion over lighting of
dangerous intersections. So I
gave money to District two for
lighting intersections or we're
at, um a lot of the traffic
issues that we have with the
larger trucks.
On 128 is if they're missing a
turn off.
And they break
People behind them aren't
prepared for that. And if we had
a lightning that those
intersections are just the
street lights, then, uh, it
would give people notification
that there's an actual turn
there. Uh, but the other thing
is that typically what they do
in district two is the district
will put the lights up and turn
it over to the county.
But in Lee County
Our county doesn't want to
accept that cost.
And there's gotta be a way and I
don't know how we would enforce
it on them. But there's got to
be a way that we can make get to
a partnership, even if it's
partial state Partial county,
But those intersection had
become very dangerous because
there's no indicator in the
middle of the night until after
you have the accident. So just a
thought and item. Thank you,
Senator. We will add that as
well under the safety portion,
Um Senator Gonzalez, Thank you,
Mr Chair.
Under item, A
Oh, I really would like to
consider, um, also this, uh
Alternative is to get some
information of what I trust.
Would bring US revenue.
Thank you, Senator. I too would
love to see that information as
well. And I'm sure
representative Brown would too.
Representative Herndon.
Madam T. I'd look dislike a
clarification under item D on
number four. It talks about an
update of councils of government
and local government
transportation infrastructure
needs one of the things that
I've been speaking with the
Department of Transportation
about is an update on intrastate
airlines and bringing those back
in what they fall under Item
four. Or would I need to have
another item?
Um, thank you, representative. I
mean, these are all just the
information as presented. So I.
I either either or you can put a
new item number or we can just
include it. Either way, the
information will get heard. So
thank you, Madam Chair. You
don't have to make a separate
number.
Sure, Tom. And did you have
something?
Someone flagging me down.
OK?
Uh, we need to approve that. I
just before we get to that.
Thank you, Senator. Um, does
anybody want any clarification
on any of these items happy to
provide it?
If not, then we can make a
motion.
I'm sure I, uh, make a motion
that we approve the work plan.
As presented to us
Thank you have a second.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia. Um and you want to post
All right. Thank you. Members.
Thank you for your productive
