all meanings program so first
off our payment management
system that's how we collect
data to monitor our roads and so
this frustrate explains how it's
collected we manage thirteen
thousand center line miles of
road which sequence to about
twenty thousand lean miles
through nine percent
maintaining miles around the
national hoee system including
four thousand one hundred and
eighty two of interstate.
We use what we call and
automatic ruled analysis and
iran laser truck which drives
the roadways scans appearant
moving at the at the posted
speed and it measures our
payment our payment condition
we only do the right lane of the
road for efficiency purposes
that does give us a good sample
size of what we have around the
state a below is
a road reclassifications how
many center line miles and
emails uh that breaks it down
between interstate nine
interstate none highway system
none nine.
I was system and then nine
ninety h s
so the next page is a picture
of.
Our iran that is the vehicle
that will be driving around the
road collecting this data
so how often do we do it we go
out to p for this service that
the contract lasts four years so
we use each vendor that selected
for a four year period of time
we collect or any nhs routes
every year and are not in each s
route every other year so below
just basically shows exactly how
it's done will do the first half
of the year although nhs the
second half the second the first
half of the ninety s and so on
through four year period of time
so through that for your period
contract we have four data
points for any chis routes for
for consecutive years and then
to data points for a nine in
each route which are collected
every other year
so what is a measure.
We again collect payment
condition data
eh it includes our international
rep- our international roughness
index basically how smooth are
not smooth the road we
measures cracking reading
faulting and other payment
distress data and these are all
indicators of not only the
condition of the **** fault but
it's life span will be and what
what type of payment
preservation treatments we were
looked to do that to remedy
those conditions.
The.
The distress
that is collected every one
tenth of a mile.
We
the import then important to pms
to collect the integrated
payment condition reading which
all go over in the next slide.
Below is just some examples of
uh distressed measures that are
for flexible payment that's
black aspect and for rigid
payment which is which is
concrete people such as what we
have in this area
so these are our payment
condition reading categories
are pcr it's from zero to a
hundred zero failing
excellent so again it goes from
very port are very good with
intermittent levels.
With those intermittent levels
we have suggested treatment so
for instance if it's embarrassed
condition we may just need to do
a fog sill which i'll explain in
a little bit when it's very poor
for reconstruction we got a good
it all out and put in brand new
infrastructure.
The table below the first table
gives.
The fish will be a guy lines
that helps determine payment
condition.
The.
And so on this next slide.
The.
There were going those are a
current payment conditions
around the state so our
interstates we have fifty six
percent of them in good
condition forty percent in fair
and two point a little bit under
three percent in poor nine
interstate nhs we have thirty
five percent good about sixty
percent fair and just over four
percent poor in the non any chs
fourteen point six percent
seventy seven point six percent
fair and seven point seven
percent poor and those are the
respectively miles of each of
those facilities
so.
Before I get into this slate
this information isn't as it
comes out raw from
detection band isn't available
to the public but it is
incorporated into our asean
management planner or tamp and
that is the document that.
That consolidates it and reduces
it to a level that's not only
beneficial for people to
understand where we're at but it
puts it in data that we can use
for planning for design and for
meeting so that's where you'll
see that's where a lot of the
statute comes from is that
payment management system and
those efforts we do incorporate
local knowledge so we don't just
go off the numbers again this is
just a a piece of equipment that
does some initial measuring our
local knowledge comes not only
from our cruise but from local
areas.
So along with her pms that local
knowledge is in is incorporated
to decide what payment
preservation treatments were
going to use for what road we
were looking at
it's also used.
Uh in our design efforts so in
prioritizing our step and also
developing design for some of
our roads in deciding what we're
going to do what we're going to
do for that recommendation are
we gonna do a full
reconstruction we're gonna do a
million overly and i'll og over
similar treatments and with
those mean here in a bit.
So i'm gonna get into payment
preservation.
So basically this is what we're
trying to prevent and this is
what happens to our roads the
sake skin just gets dehydrated
and it starts doing raveling
cracking part willing are that
type of stuff so it's all a
result of accident now we are
vehicles honor rudes compounds
the issues but the roo because
of human deterioration is
occurred and this is what we're
trying to prevent with our
payment preservation program.
The.
Okay so this next slide it's
it's a graphic to show reactive
vs proactive so reactive is I
mean proactive excuse me is our
payment preservation program
we're trying to maintain our
pavements over the course of
time so we don't let him get to
a point of disrepair where we
have to do full construction the
blue line is that proactive so
as you can see with our payment
condition reading we can keep it
over a fifty fifty for payment
condition reading which is.
Fair keep it in fair condition
the whole time the beauty of
that is the traveling public is
always traveling on fair
condition ruled ways.
It's also a heck of a lot
cheaper to keep it on that blue
line than the red lane which is
reactive we just build it wait
till falls apart rebuild it we
took as a part so that's not
only expensive but as you can
see over time half the time the
road is in less than fifty
percent in poor conditions so
payment preservation you know
those are the two things it does
it saves money in the long run
through preventative maintenance
and it keeps our roadways in
good condition for long periods
of time
so payment treatments so these
are the different degrees of
payment treatment treatments
depending on the condition of
the road and what we're looking
to do to repair it minor
preservation
is around six thousand somewhere
in the seven thousand dollar
range and it'll get us three to
five years ago that's if this is
the appropriate measure for the
roadway major preservation
between seventy thousand and
hundred twenty thousand will
give us five to seven years.
Minor meet so that the first two
is our payment preservation
program now when we get into a a
more deteriorate deteriorate
rated roadway that's over under
fifty percent of a payment
condition that's when we have to
start getting into
rehabilitation and these are our
reconstruction projects.
The minor rehabilitations are
anywhere from one hundred and
twenty one thousand two twenty
five give us over seven years
major rehab around one and half
million per lene mile ten years
and then reconstruction are
reconstruction these days is
running two and a half to three
million dollars per lane mile so
you can see here when we keep it
in preservation our ranges
between seven million two
hundred and seven thousand two
hundred and twenty thousand
dollars per nine mile if we get
it let it get to the
reconstruction portion or
spending multiple millions of
dollars per day miles so it is a
fraction of the cost.
So our minor preservation these
are the of the first bullet from
the initials the previous light
minor preservation there are
several treatments foxill it's
just where we sprain a more
suffered oil onto the road
lotion on the skin just keeps
him waste keeps it for home from
cracking and just keeps the oil
content in the rejuvenators so
it maintains that that flexible
property that flexible payment
has crack silly and is just that
when we have cracks we wrote
amount we put in cracks soon
importance of that and I should
mention this in a previous light
one the main thing that
deteriorates a road is water and
choosing into the subject and
that's what we're trying to keep
out trying to keep all that out
of there and keep it off the
surface and running off once it
gets into our subject there's a
whole ten of things that happens
that causes all those people to
stresses that I went over
chips hill this is where we put
a layer of agreed get initially
spain emotion and put a layer of
aggregate over that this is huge
in our state we do all this in
house or the vast majority of it
and we can do this anywhere in
the state rural areas at if this
is especially beneficial on a
not only in our rule areas but
on some of our minor streets.
A wearing course is chipsill is
a wearing course but we also
have other wearing courses small
people overlease then wearing
binding courses things like that
and these are just thin layers
microsoft assing that basically
have added a friction courts but
also provide a soolin to prevent
that water penetration into our
subject.
So major preservation.
Made representatives and still
within the preservation are
small million overlease anything
around two inches and and less
two and a half fenches or less
so those type of million
overlays are considered
preservation it is what it what
it says we might all ask what we
bring in to ask fault.
These next two recycle a lot of
outsput we tried to implement
this as much as possible and we
do quite a bit of the first one
is that hot and please recycle
this is basically where a
machine goes over the house for
grains it up puts in some
rejuvenator and lisa back down.
Now that in of itself isn't
strong enough to hold our our
road so we have to on top of
that put some form of wearing
course it could be a chipsill it
could be a thin bonnet overly it
could be a microsurface or you
could even be virgin aspel on
top of it.
The and so that is recycling in
place with the machine that
recycles recycles it in place I
called minutes recycled as far
as millions overly it uses
existing stock powers of
millions that we have so we do
as recrushed to spec we had
similar most into it and we lay
it down the cast for again that
that
does need a wearing course to to
prevent moisture and to keep it
silled so we do put a cap on it
similar to what we do and and
hard in place recycles.
Those two of the helpless
because a reconstruction not
only is a costly nettle and not
only as a using as for resources
we start generating a lot of
millions that you see peppered
all over the state so we're
trying everything we can do to
limit the generation of those
but also to use what we have of
those
we're doing over the budget
prices before I go into that
before III move into that so
that the payment preservation
what we do now rick mentioned in
a bit earlier we we are even our
payment preservations because of
the conditions of our road road
is a bit in a bit of a reactive
state so sometimes we're using
payment preservation treatments
just to keep get to years on a
road until we have a major
reconstruction which has its
benefit assuming about roads
were completely rebuilt as of
tomorrow and we are to keep up a
healthy payment preservation
program on top of that we're
looking at around two hundred
and fifty million dollars a year
to keep adequate payment
preservation throughou.
Right now that would be
actually less just because we
need a lot of reconstruction to
happen but two hundred and fifty
million dollars is roughly what
are annual ukraine budget would
be to to maintain a healthy
payment preservation program
mr chair with that i'll turn it
over back to rec to talk about
budget thank you john so mister
chairman talk a little bit about
budget some of the money that
we've been receiving whether it
was one time a little bit about
re occurring and then how are
federal funds can help so as you
all know and I spoke early on
about the sixty five million
dollars we received from your
last year that was a one time
appropriation in the language
you all developed it was to be
divided amongst the six
districts which is great we love
equity the districts and how the
discretion tell key functions
specific projects based on
knowledge of priorities peeve in
management system and entering
touch again the data data some
of our m s is out there think
they're just as good as the p m
s system they think they're just
a smart and we like to test him
and they they are pretty darn
good so that local knowledge is
is really what helps us those
guys they live there they live
in the in the in the area is
very rural to mexico and they
know their roads which is great
and we love that the other one
is reoccurring you know we are a
formula based operation in the
formula is based on population
and the size of the
transportation network and that
steve funds for the from the
stay ruled fund that happens
every year the districts then
also have the discretion
delicate funds to specific
programs based on knowledge of
priorities and engineering
judgment.
And lastly we have federal funds
normally we don't normally spend
a lot of money and maintenance
up with federal phones there is
some opportunity out there but
it's really not conducive to
payment preservation we feel
like utilizing mean it's fun I
mean utilizing federal funds in
maintenance it's more like
replacing gardener signs or
striping things that those of
like that just because of the
oversight that's required on a
federal job basically on a
maintenance job they last two to
three days maybe a week duration
it's very difficult for us to
get our construction guys
although it oversee those short
duration projects they're
usually on major construction
projects like for you mister
chairman of gumree command she
as you know we have a full staff
twenty four hours a day out
there and has slipped in a mean
as project on them that's gonna
last two three days maybe a week
is really just not conducive to
that operation
like I said it involves more
project oversight
we would probably have to
introduce a bureau to manage
that federal maintenance money
and we just don't really have
the capacity right now.
So mr chairman if you want to
switch
to the FY twenty six minutes
program for it and dealt with
our payment preservation program
this is the money that we
program program with your sixty
five million dollars
district one their need was
obviously just one route on the
risk of twenty six
and doing out of county that
road it's a lot of work and they
are going to use their entire
ten million on new mexico twenty
six district two mister
francisco sanchez area they
provide its not only a few
router seven US twenty five last
year we had that I storm out
there and it tore that payment
apart in between von in ross
will that stretch between their
took a nice hit last year that I
storm love the moisture but it
is tough on the payments and
then we are also flexible and
being able to use the funds you
gave us for things like cracks
so in fox sool and striping some
bridge work things like that so
you'll see and district two
there is a various programs
cracks hill fox district three
again a lot interstate work
there utilizing with that money
and that a lot of them also
you're utilizing for filter
flight filled supplies for
patrol materials winter
maintenance materials base
course things like that district
four has really good program a
lot of hot and place recycle we
love to recycle in again you'll
see some filter plays there.
And then if you move on to
districts five and six I am
again you'll see how they broke
out their ten million and then
we kept the five million of the
sixty five million there at the
general office that are
discretion again I mention the
two eighty five route that's
that section sought the von that
was here with that I storm this
last year when do some reality
and then we're gonna we're going
hold back about three million
and fill supplies we're just
waiting for the winter months to
come we like to have a little
reserve to make sure that we get
through winter maintenance we
budget about ten million
annually in winter maintenance
per district then i'll get us
about thirty five percent of the
mater on the ground before the
winner hits and then as the
winner goes on will probably
throw one another ten million
maybe that's about average so we
want to make sure that we have
enough money to get us through
in our maintenance.
Yeah.
And without mr chairman we will
stand for questions
thank you a representative
how can we help.
Thank you mr chair thanks right
good is your ready
just a couple of quick questions
for you so when we're talking
about the.
The pavement assets how are you
guys I mean it does the math
consider a changes and vehicle
usage like electric vehicles
have your vehicles that are
going to be tearing up those
roads a little more as we go on
in the future mr chairman
madame leader they do not so
mainus will just basically look
at the existing payments
for what they are right we don't
really take into account
additional way on sometimes
we'll look at that but the all
that really does to mean as
program is just requires to add
more hot mix so we'll have to
figure out what we do there so
not a lot of times
maintenance is what it is we
really look at those types of
things in the construction
program because that's what
we're redesigning the entire um
structure of the payments
section meaning will probably if
we know that there's going to be
heavy truck traffic or electric
vehicles things of that nature
will look at it look at that and
design it will create a payment
structure that can waste down
that kind of wait but then once
it's bill after that thing we
could do we just keep it said a
good repair i'm not really
looking at the weight that's
applied to the facility itself.
Okay think so is there any sort
of indicator that you're looking
for when you should start doing
that.
Absolutely mr chairman madame
leader there is so if you look
at a payment what once it's bill
you look at a brand new payment
within three to five years we're
looking out of fox hill
depending on where you're out of
the state then after that we're
going to track still five to
seven years and then seven to
ten years will do a thin bonded
overly whether it's a micro or a
chip sill things like that then
twelve to fifteen years or do
two three inch million in lay
and then out to your fifteen to
seventeen that twenty ish year
range or doing a deeper million
in the usually six five to six
inches deep and that'll get us
to twenty year design life
hopefully hopefully not always
but hopefully.
Thank you
are you guys looking at any sort
of changes and more in the
multiplier like chemical make up
so because I know there's been
some.
Technology of answers on that
absolutely mr chairman about a
leader absolutely we're always
looking at uh innovation and and
things that we can do to improve
not only maintenance but
construction as well and one of
those things is asked for so we
have our state materials
engineer or asked fault engineer
or payment design engineer and
the attendees conferences as I
know conversation every year
with other states federal admit
highway administration and we're
always looking into a new
payments new **** faults new
binders new emotions and there
are some out there and we do
have em on our approved products
list and we are evaluating some
currently.
But yes there are advances we
are looking into them
and then once we find out that
they work for dot then will put
them in to are what is color
coupons list and then we'll
create either a price agreement
or some of their mechanism for
us to purchase those moving
forward in our maintenance
program.
Thanks and then my last question
so and your budget documentation
thank you it's very helpful
do you consider any changes to
federal funding mechanisms and
if so what do you expect those
changes to be mister chairman
and madame leader that's a great
question I think it's been a bar
since twenty twenty one when the
federal holding mistreasure came
out what was called idiq and
definite delivery and definite
quantity
approach basically what it does
is it allows us to develop a
contract within a definite with
a definite quantity and we'll
put it out to bed allows
contractors to bid on those
types of contracts whether it be
payment preservation striping
garden like I think we mentioned
that we feel I was like
conducive to that type of
program.
But nonetheless it is it we did
entertain it we looked into that
we feel like maybe it's a little
to reach right now because we
just don't have the man power to
get it done
and what happens is if we
utilize federal phones that's a
good point on all has federal
funds on maintenance all the
doors is take away from the
districts target for
construction so all will be
doing is eating into that so
that would be less construction
we do so you really have to
think that went through a little
bit and see if it's if it's
really what we want to do for
example if there is a
construction crop project coming
in three to five years and we
don't have the budget to get it
to get us there I think federal
funds could be used in that
sounds.
It's just very difficult for us
right now of where we're out not
only budget wise but with
staffing wise if we're really
there yet that's the question
and I think we could get there
but it's gonna take man power
money.
Thank you i'm a great answer to
my question and just to follow
up on that so.
I know that there are specific
line item federal funding that
the department was dependent
upon our or it was expecting to
receive what the electric
vehicle ground being one of them
what is the status of that
lawsuit and
are there any other like federal
funds that you were not
expecting to get the other eyes
would yeah that's a great
question misreturn in and and
madame leader I don't know if
i'm the right want to answer
this question secretary is your
awesome alternative over to him.
Thanks rich miss chairman and
leader we actually we heard
about three weeks ago that the
lawsuit
that we joined with several
states
worked out in our favor they had
provided the federal government
until july second to file an
appeal to that lawsuit which
they didn't do so we received a
letter from federal highway uh
late last week letting us know
that we can move forward to
obligating our never funding
right now we have some other
programs I think one is
protection one is cmac if i'm
not mistaken a can verify that
you know where we're showing
funding is available for
obligation we'd been told you
know that that funding is not
available for obligation but
we're kind of pushing the
envelope we're going to we're
going to move to obligated and
kind of challenge federal
highway we seeing it's not
available officially so that we
can we can pursue similar then
use for getting it budgeted and
out on projects.
Thank you very much mister
secretary thank you
john everybody and I appreciate
the free promotion but i'm
actually at the whip I know it
sounds funny but
but you please call me web not
leader even though I appreciate
the promotion thanks
rep johns
thank you mister chair thank you
rear can john appreciate this a
lot of detail here
you know see the ten million
whole ten millions going to
highway twenty six which I know
really needs to be done can you
tell me which area of the road
were going to be working on.
Mr chair representative johns
yeah we're gonna be spending the
ten million from malmarker zero
tomorrow more market fifteen so
from damning going east.
The.
People won't be asking so
appreciate knowing that my other
concern is of course highway
nine that runs along the border
here um.
I
was really glad to see the
process of grading or reading
the roads can you tell me
do we have a rating for highway
nine on the other side of
columbus toward animals.
We do have a rating but I don't
have it with me.
Well just based on you know I
travel that road I have videos
of the stopped to take videos
because they're actually areas
of the road that the edges are
crumbling there no their no
shoulders the edges are crumbled
away they're where there's no
white line anymore.
And the reason that concerns me
so much is for many reasons
first of all
you know today's helicopter ride
show me right where those those
wind herbin blades come from
they come from right here so
there's an economic concern
they're using this road their
heavy loads
it's a two lane road with in
areas the edges crumbled.
And
this road is used by school
burses and in a local folks and
ranchers and so forth i've had a
lot of people I probably have
more people call me about
transportation issues than any
not that you guys are doing your
job is just a thing out
especially on rural new mexico.
It's always a concern but.
But it's been an ongoing concern
for me because the safety but
today more so I see
the bigger picture and that.
How much that road needs to
attention because of you know
economic concerns as well so
I guess my question would be
okay you have a reading my
rating according to your list
here was zero to twenty five
at what point do you think we
can um pay attention to the
highway nine
mister chair representative
jones so right now we are chip
ceiling new mexico nine we
started on the website so we
will be doing the edge repairs
and coming through all the way
probably to the loan done yeah
county line with the chipsia so
you will see repairs on new
mexico nine under a repairs and
you'll see a better surface once
we chips all.
That is such good news I cannot
tell you how much I appreciate
that thank you so much thank you
mister chair.
Representative garage
thanks for mister chair thanks
for the presentations and all
the work everybody does.
My first question is on the auto
road analyzers the around vans
are those all done by private
vendors does do t have any
themselves
mr cherry represented gerry no
we do not have any and it is it
is all contracted up to private
vendors
about how many are working to
cover the year the annual and
the buy annual about how many
bands are vendors do we use mr
cherry representative I do not
have that information but I can
get it to soon after this
meeting.
Thank you the most second
question is it's.
So we mean dot is responsible
for maintaining four thousand
one hundred and eighty two
interstate lane miles and but we
don't use federal funding really
for maintenance do we get any
special funding
I mean that's something that
goes beyond our state are there
is there any special revenue
source that's proportionally
given by the federal government.
For that
mr chairman representative
garrett other than the funds
that we receive for
reconstruction the various
colours are money
no we do not there is some
opportunity out there for some
grants and some other things
that we can we can apply for and
we do
but a bucket of money out there
there is not.
And it sounds mister chair like
it'll decrease well who knows we
don't really know and that my
last question is just on
recycling when you when you
recycle the old removed as fault
are you able to reuse all of it
or is some unable to be used
mister chairman representative
that's a great question so we
generate a ton of millions at
one point probably five years
ago we had about a million cubic
cars on the ground state wide
right now to do with donations
to local governments tribes and
other folks
recycling projects and even in
our chips or program district
one is famous for this they will
crush our millions into a chip
size aggregate abuse in our
chips or program reducing our
cost per lane while down to like
nine thousand elaine mile which
is unbelievable if you think
about it and gives a seven to
ten years old we do a lot of
donations to local governments
tribes and and and schools and
universities to the tune of
about three hundred thousand
cubic yards so tremendous amount
of donation if we if we utilize
them in a millions of really
project after we cross show me
get like seventy thirty of waste
if we use them for chip sills we
get about almost fifty fifty
aggregate to waste but then what
you talk about waste I mean I I
see we still start really
there's israel still some
residual aspect in the waste and
we've used it for edge break
offs of we try to put in a
motion in the user for pardon
patching and we've donated it to
the fires and floods and they
made sound bags out of it on the
mid great suffer but there is
some ways but we try to use as
much as we can.
Thank you that's really
inspiring actually and then my
last question mister chair is
there's a lot of discussion
about windblades the turbites
because
people are trying to find ways
to recycle that has that been
anything related to dot or is
that just nights of thing that
you've been involved with it on
mr chairman representative.
I'm looking at the desire the
cameras secretary I I don't I
don't think so not right now
they see a lot of nose I see a
lot of okay thank you mister
chair.
Thank you representative.
Thank you mister chair
thank you to all of you guys
are secretary and reckon john
and ladies
you guys all do such a great job
with drmm one of the questions
that I have is regarding
poorest pavement whether you use
permeable payments
and cause I I know the
traditional way is impervious
but I just wonder if we are
thinking out of the balks a
little bit and I know it's hard
probably because it probably
cracks sooner or and it breaks
sooner and so on but
environmentally I think it's a
it's a good way to allow our
storm water to seep into the
ground and you know into our
soil so I just wonder if that's
something that you guys do or
not
mr chair representative whatever
we do not do it there so you you
bring up all the good benefits
of it but some of the drawbacks
and that is one of the main
drawbacks as I explain in in the
presentation we're trying to
prevent moisture from saturday
enough so greed and with premium
will payments do is it
immediately introduces that
moisture into this upgrade so in
new mexico are free stars.
That becomes an issue that
there's pumpino fines where it
kind of the water pulls out the
fines and compromises the
subject.
The other thing about poorest
payment is an order to maintain
its paracity that's a worried
could you say that again
that sounds a little more
technical
so you you need a special piece
of equipment to basically vacuum
out all the fines because over
time finds get into the poors
and start blocking that water
penetration so you need
basically a big back computer
that goes along and vacuums all
that stuff up which we don't
actually that's the point right
is that you catch the pollutants
in the surface and it doesn't
seem into the ground so I just
wondered if you guys use that at
all mr chairman of the regulator
I don't want to could you but we
we do have it district three has
three locations where we have it
um it hasn't been operationally
been working well it has plugged
up the friendshine system every
single case and we've been
flooding out homes and property
so it's very there's another
word on enough exists
maintenancy and if we don't stay
on top of it if we don't see on
top of it we will we will flood
fold
a definition
that's a deal with that we have
looked at it we do have it it's
been tough it's been tough thank
you mr chair you know I and I
know that you guys would
probably do it if you could but
I understand that you know it it
becomes more poorest in the more
poorest it is that harder it is
to compact it so but it's an
important thing to think about
is in
our web over here with the
little whip
she mentioned you know new
technology so i've hoping in the
future mister chair that
um are technology will be such
that it kind of has both
elements is the the poorest but
also.
Something that's compact and
stays together I agree
completely mister chairman but I
think that's a great point I
think if the technology could a
little better in that area I
think we would be I mean what is
was first built it worker but
just over time it's it with a
silt we have in the mexico it
just plug it up so fast and we
could never get it to work again
so if there's some technology
out there to help us improve
that or you know things that
that we could utilise to keep
that fringe drain clean we'd
certainly left entertainment but
it's just not there right now
then my second question mister
chair is with regard to course
and the sale of repairs
that area I know you guys just
finished doing for sale at from
eagle round to go of course
but that over pass I know when I
was on mr card
there was a discussion about
eventually re doing that hall
over a pass and i'm just
wondering if that's at all on
your radar.
Mr chairman representative we
don't have information on that
specifically right now but I can
get you something that would be
great thank you I have a few
other roads i'd love to talk to
somebody about
and
maybe i'll do that offline yes
the streaming reps that i'll
have I think.
Thank you mister chair a quick
go back to representative
regards question there's one
band that clicks all the status
so it's all then to just one
vehicle.
Represented a lot of thank you
mister chairman thank you german
for the presentation you know
III do have a question but I
first one of recognize erin and
his team they they do excellent
work they work really well with
us
I want to think guarantee all
the complaints so I get that I
passed on to him
but I would like to to mention
mr chair and and are not and I
had this discussion already but
i'll like still to like to talk
about it is hazardous cargo.
Just recently how to move a
couple months ago we had a truck
turn over on the next or twenty
eight it was claring to core
casted.
And and that's not good can just
that's just that good and so I
asked around and I and my
knowledge and maybe mister
second correctly if i'm wrong
you know there isn't any
agricultural use four hundred
car gaset so I I really don't
know why that that vehicle was
traveling to their
so that said I know based on my
conversations where they are as
there aren't new mexico doesn't
have decided.
Hazardous routes except for
radioactive materials and so i'm
wondering if there is any way or
any possibility that we can look
at that and keep materials such
as his heart correct asset from
using these highways.
Where there's agricultural
residential schools you know I
understand there's a need to
transport the material but if
there was a designated way for
them to I think they could be
able to do that
good sorry sorry mister chairman
vice charlata that's a great
question you know I know that
transportation commission has
the son exclusive authority to
allow or to provide four whip
routes I don't know if
if a chemical like hudger
correct us it is fits that bill
or not but I could definitely
look into that and if that's the
case we probably just done
combine it into our whip
designation
but there's some more talk about
that and I think it's a good
question and I can I can at
least pose the question let's
see where we go with it.
Thank you for that they can try
you know it's it's it's it's
concerning it is it is
concerning and and if this can
happen once i'm sure it can
happen again absolutely
interview to determine and if I
should not I think if you're
talking about for example whip
shipments I mean they have to
have a safety plan and and who
if something happens when you
call and what was what happened
and I don't believe that's the
case for this chemical so I
think it's a great question and
we can certainly
thank you for the appreciated
and one word thing mr
mister chair I was I was drawing
up to south afraid last week for
a couple weeks ago and.
I twenty five I know that has
been worked on and I spoken
terrain about this and I know
the interstate is a priority.
But is there do we have a
timeline is our timeline and
regards to the the sections of I
twenty five between hero sacro
there absolutely terrible.
Yeah.
Mister chairman at a great
question fact arm.
Ah district one has successfully
submitted projects to address
those areas by twenty five that
are going to go through what we
call our redistribution process
every year the in the fitted
federal fiscal year
fish way asked the others how
much money we can effectively
get out the door with projects
they're shovel ready so this
year we've identified about
ninety million dollars with the
projects that are shall already
they'll be able to go out for
redistribution that includes our
state match and arm three of
those projects are along that
stretch by twenty five that
you're speaking of so you'll be
seeing some construction they're
coming up next construction
season will let those projects
out over the first quarter of
the federal fiscal year october
november december time frame
potential in the january so
you'll see some action out there
next construction season
thank you for that thank you
mister because you know when
you're driving and I try up
there quite a bit and and I
think about the size of district
one
do my view point it's a large
district that say I know what's
not but you know it's just it's
it's the it's massive it's
massive I can only imagine the
amount of roads that did that
district one aaron and his team
have to maintain how to work on
how to make sure that things are
maintained that you know that
the guard rails are in place and
the potholes and everything else
and so once again you know III
i'm sure the errand and district
one are the only ones to do this
something all the all engineers
and all the districts have to do
this on a regular basis and I
really wanted to see mister
charles mister secretary thank
you for for being in supporting
the staff and the engineers that
the districts because you know
without them even though it may
not be perfect and we do have
and i've gotten complaints just
as representative johns about
the sides of the roads falling
apart but you know I I it's it's
a huge task is a huge task and
that said mr chair I would like
to ask you how is the the the
vacancy rate for dot you know is
do we do we need to hire more
folks to we need to.
I'll look at a priding out
through that to the budget
process you know funding for for
the agency to to to fill those
vacancies that there's if
there's a high percent of
vacancies.
Mister chair
mr representative thank you for
the question it's actually been
going very well about three
years ago we were sitting at a
vacancy rate of about twenty
three percent and we wouldn't
live down to fourteen percent
and in some districts I think
district when included it I
think
misvega here might have the the
best rated about six percent
six percent vacancy rate and so
given what we've been doing with
compensation for our employees
the legislative increases that
you've been doing out the
changes to health care coverage
from employees to
the agency were actually in a
position where we're going to
train hold at a ten percent
vacancy rate it's becoming the
reality of our of our budget
outlook for the next several
years
mister kintana will share also
as part of what we're doing to
assist keeping in mind that
the department of transportation
doesn't receive recurring
general funds and so typically
when the legislature generously
gives a an increase to other
agencies their budgets increase
by a percentage to offset that
pay increase dot doesn't we take
from the state road fund for all
those things right and so we're
probably spending about thirty
million more this fiscal year
than last fiscal year between
the pay increase the shift and
health care benefits and are
vacancy rate and that's thirty
million going back to the
figures that you know mr merrill
provided half a million for like
minor rehabilitation that sixty
miles of minor rehabilitation
that were using now to pay for
our employees and it's working
and that's the good news and so
we have capacity now with
personnel to be sure we need
some more in some areas but now
we the resources to get them
work working in moving is is
what we need to focus on thank
you very much for secretary in
this return that goes back to
the conversation that we had
during the session that we've
had for several years already is
the gas tax
oil and gas barrel how much the
homework is going for it you
know.
The
not necessarily because there
are more electric cars on the
road but the cars are more feel
efficient and they're using this
gasoline and so that I guess
taxes essential to the operation
and my opinion of dot and be
able to compensate and hire the
employees that we need to do
that when you tire and get
things fixed to what that need
to get fixed right there so that
said you know mister secretary
mr please you know you can
always come from my support on
that because I truly once again
appreciate the work that earned
in this team at district want to
think thank you mister
misses
said it I teed it up but
I don't know if I said about the
federal funds I didn't see that
so what I was going to share was
um mr cantona is actually
leading an effort at the agency
to start swapping over some of
our personal salaries those
individuals that are working
exclusively on federalized
projects so that we can shift
the payroll from state road fund
to federal resources and so
there again we're getting to a
place where we're tapping out
our state wrote fund we're going
to start tapping into our
federal funds and so the impact
goes from maintenance to
construction right cause the
federal funds pay for our
construction they give mister
stricker and mister trying
outside was done but you brought
something up very important mr
secretary so with our school
districts
school districts received before
funny and so they pay some
employees out of her funding and
so those employees are paying a
fellow funding if they were to
be switched or to operational
then you know it's a plan says
the plant you know you can
supplant it was once once the
come money comes back or
anything like that so the
supplement was displayed I can
say so would that be the same
case with the ut
security missure up said we
don't believe so right the
typically what happens is your
receiver a federal fonder of
federal grant that says you've
got to be providing increased
services rate our funding comes
by way of like our formulaic
funds and they just have a
louble in an allowable cost
thank you for that mister
secretary mister.
Senator in my stuff thank you
mister chairman thank you much
by the mister romero sector
couple quick questions
was still between center line
mile and lane mile
mister chair place chair that's
a great question so settling
mile is just a mile of a roadway
but if it's a multiple lane
roadway save it's forty nine you
want to play that way
for or a two in over two so
satellite mile over road a two
lane road
it's just the distance from
santa fe table cookie that's
center miles the total lane
miles a number of twelve foot
lanes it's involved in that is
the lane miles and so there's
more lane miles throughout the
state just incorporating
understand okay thank you thank
you
and then the road analyzer van
were fascinated with that as it
drive how many hours a day is it
driving around mr chair based
here that's another great
question I don't have that but I
can get it to you i'm sure it's
it's it's more than likely
driving all your round to
collect all the data that we're
looking to get we're also
looking to get it to start
collecting some striping data
for us about the shop in
condition so that'll prebate a
separate a piece of equipment
that i'll do that but for the
payment management one I would
assume it was the majority of
the time in our city three
hundred and sixty five days a
week a month a year this may be
a holidays in weekends that
happened thing but I can find on
an exact amount for you thank
you mister chairman so yeah I
find out
obviously maintenance whatever
two different drivers but
theoretically it could go
fifteen hours a day twenty hours
a day like three shifts in a
factory type stuff anyways as
curious if you could find that
out and then also the fascinated
by the payment conditions rating
and
and how uh
you know for years and years
we're just skimping skimping by
and doing the best we ca.
And now we can.
Spend money to make money or
spend money to save money we're
in a wearing a totally different
uh financial reality and so you
you mentioned to do the entire
state would cost approximately
two hundred two hundred fifteen
million.
Mister chairman
annually center so so hit
there's two things if you look
at the big gap you know if you
think about all our rules and
you want to say entire system up
to us to like a seventy five
percent payment condition
reading which is fair rating a
good fair road to get everything
in the state of mexico are
infrastructure up to like a
seventy five you're looking at a
probably three four billion
dollars.
That's just not doable so we
take a little gradually look at
it and start chunking some of
these things out things that we
can really realistically
accomplish we feel like two
hundred fifty million is that
sweet spa no
it's hard to guess because our
roads aren't a seventy five
oliver more but we feel like if
we were to receive two hundred
and fifty million over the next
ten years where you're probably
going to see that big dynamics
shift into wear you know to my
schools can be ranked up there
and probably around the top ten
in roads um this is all we're
all just you know spit balling
here but after that ten year
period two hundred and fifty
million dollars we're going to
we're going to start doing those
you know having a real
consistent maintenance program
where I meant mentioned to
representative day that you know
in three or five years we do
foxing on five or seven years
we're going to do cracks and
we're going to do it on every
road right and that's what we
think ten years at two hundred
fifty million dollars going to
get used to
like again it's a gestimates
today's dollar next year could
be tour seventy five million
annually but we think that two
hundred fifty millions probably
that sweet spot thank you mister
chairman and you're think two
hundred and two five zero two
one five two five zero two
hundred and five zero is
probably that sweet spot thank
you sir and then what we may
want to do and all circle back
with you and this chairman is.
Maybe get with the economies
department at unanimous
what would help us as policy
makers is and help us convince
our colleges if we had an
economic analysis of you know if
we did two hundred fifty min for
four years where would be in
four years and without billion
dollars in fact
a billion and one dollars you
mean in addition to showcasing
our state and and making people
you know.
Say when I was in a mexico drive
drove through the microscope
with loss of also we obviously
know there is on the last week
mister
in the um and they had repaved
the it was a
so if if there is one line going
on when one link going the other
do you call that a one lane road
to leave to line
mr chairman the laser could are
are really considered by the
direction right it's a four lane
highway we're we're assuming
that it's too late and each
direction
one lane road two lane road
they pave the roads.
But there was twelve eighteen
inches in the middle where they
did not pave and that's whether
where it was striped so it was
maybe one tenth of the road when
twelve of the road but if you
times that by a mile times about
hundred miles.
It saves a few bucks anywhere
just interesting so if we had
some statistical analysis of
stuff.
I've stuff like that as it
relates to this it would help us
convince comments or phone folks
on the appropriations committee
to to get closer that two
hundred fifty million thank you.
Thank you.
Rick you may have said it
earlier may put up on the board
and I missed it for some reason
if I did with jury iterate with
the total budget for him to your
tiers for this for school year.
Stover one point two billion
dollars and that's almost an
even split between our federal
apportionment of about five
hundred and sixty million and
our state tax distribution
budget up about
five hundred and seventy million
so those are two primary sources
of revenue i'm curious secretary
of you've ever
done a correlation analysis of
of of that budget versus your
miles are from maintain with
center line or otherwise have
you ever done done and curious
mister chairman what we've what
we've tried to do is actually do
a correlation between our dollar
per uh lane mile versus other
states and that's been a little
tricky to do so we we've been
trying to figure that so we can
say you're for every mile we
receive x amount of dollars of
funding and our border states
receive that but we haven't been
able to do that just yet keeping
in mind of course that not each
of not every single one of those
dollars goes to a direct road
maintenance or construction
project a lot of indirect in
there as well right but into its
it's for the same goal right
whether it's human resource or
otherwise that's a good say way
because
I heard reselling I don't know
how true is or not that some
states text has been one of them
that it's much they get much
more bang for the buck that they
are able to go further with with
the dollar for construction
reconstruction that we do any
mexical certainly true to that
mr chair
I I don't know our are we our
new deputy secretaries spend a
lot of time in textile and some
of the means there's fox in this
room that have spent time at
text
what we know is they have a
tremendous amount of resources
tremendous and that's in part
due to their share size the
review knew that they generate
from the same distributions that
we generate if you do kind of
that side by side comparison of
vehicle registration fees times
what are the twenty years twenty
times our size of the same with
gas tax other things like that
and so.
There's no question that when
you compare
the revenue per lane mile to
what we're generating per lane
miles some of the deficiencies
are were not pacing rate the
increases to those revenue
sources the way they are and so
where we have an increase going
to the representatives point
earlier or fuel tax or
registration fees things like
that other states are pacing
with how they need to increase
those fees road user fees i'm
relative to the cost of doing
business and and keeping in mind
that other states and believe
texas one the ability to to add
revenue sources like talts on
some of their roadways give them
you know additional
flexibilities are I wouldn't
courage that that you do that
analysis or a comparison because
it goes back to this practices
right want to make sure that we
have best practices that we are
indeed using the dollars
efficiently and effectively as
possible for taxpayer for us
rate so I really encruise that
that that occur on some level I
think would be good for this
committee I think a bigger for
legislature as a old no that and
and maybe we we are we're doing
great maybe we can say all no we
know we're able to get much more
lane mile per dollar than other
states are we're written in the
middle east I think it's
important information if I can
mister trimming is trying on
something we are doing that's
coming from a text up practice
is
again we're we're working with
federal highway administration
to
to roll out construction bit
constructibility reviews out and
this is
an idea that we believe is going
to help us not necessarily we're
not going to jump to assumptions
that it's going to save us a lot
of money but it's going to help
us identify costs evening
measures and so where we learned
it goes on in text ideas at each
of the design milestrones at
thirty sixty ninety the the
agency provides those plans to
their contractors and the
contractors provide feedback on
the designs up until that point
then the design team can
actually make adjustments to the
design of the road based on th.
Feedback and what we know it
from from tech studies in some
instances that identifies a more
cheaper efficient way to build
that project either from
availability material
specifications that aren't
necessary given the
circumstances you name it and so
what it'll help us do is a
couple of things one is identify
where our design practices are
pushing against cost efficiency
when our our contractors come
and tell us this is what we do
but we also believe it's going
to minimize our time delays that
we need to damages in some cases
and actually change orders when
we get into the construction
period and identify the need to
move in different directions and
so we're hopeful that that'll be
a a practice we're taking from
other states and and federal
highway after having talked with
texas is opening up to that idea
thank you.
Are you familiar with some state
immediately happening more but I
understood that it was happening
for for amount of time in some
states where they were using
crumb rubber and other words
recycling tires making crumb out
of it and then adding it to as
fault and that it was beneficial
to the roadway and it's lunch
video have you ever looked at
that as that still happening
mister yes we have a robbery to
rubber entire emotions
we are still available
benefited provides but we have
been using certain cases I was
returned if I could just touch
on there to remember that
stretch on twenty five from
santa fe north of the santa fe
opera on one of the complaints
that the santa fe opera was the
travel the traffic noise rate so
we were with our vendor and we
utilized an emotion with it was
called t r I forget what the the
number was but basically it's
tire rubber and what it did is a
basically added a real step I
mean extreme softness to a
payment and we pave that stretch
mister paul brassue is not here
he actually did the noise test
on the on that area I think we
saved above you know maybe we
softened it up maybe seven to
ten percent the noise I mean it
doesn't sound like a lot but I
think if you're the opera I mean
I think anything hopes rate so
we have looked at that we have
used it it's not cheap and it's
not easy to put down it was
almost like race crispy treats
when you first get him out of
the panic just that sticky it
was rough so any windy day we
had boy we had some claims right
because that string he stuff was
all over the place so it's not
easy to work with yes we'd
utilize out we also looked into
as what shingles we look into
some of that in our **** for new
mexico's not a big assault
single state so we would have to
not bring that in you know train
it and if we if we really got
you know really wanted to go
that way so we have looked into
those types of things they are
available to us
but we are exploring them
personally
thank you I appreciate that
that's happening and I will tell
you that.
Tires are a problem nationally
the disposal of tires are the
improper disposal of a problem
nationally and maybe you know
perhaps legislating that some
some percentage of criminal be
used might help kill two birds
of the one stone if you will
yeah mister chairman of I could
just touch on that again we also
utilize the tires for erosion
control measures and they built
they may like bails with them
and we used them as as rosing
control measures use them as
safety features on roadside it's
in the sixty eight counting up
to toss you'll see those that's
all tires so we do use them
we've have used them in the past
many different ways great and
while I have you guys here i'd
like to make a request
if you'll endows me committee
when you are in and i'm gonna
forget the number of the road
the one were signed on your
meets twenty five
three target as I say three or
three but I knew i'd be wrong
it is a problem when you're
trying to get onto twenty five
to head north because the way
it's turned you and there's a
yield signs or you have to yield
but you can look back you have
to like really create your neck
and it could be somewhat
dangerous
is if there's a way to explore
you know some kind of fixed to
that would be great just for
safety sake absolutely that
interchanges pretty old as you
can obviously travel that it's
pretty tough some of those
angles entered seeing and
leaving the I twenty five or
even three eighty or kind of
tough
it's on the step up apparently
it's coming around so we were
definitely looking at it but
you're right it is pretty tough
it is personal's angles or tough
and then the payment in the
transitions from the bridges to
the try twenty five is a little
rough so we got a lot of work to
do thank you so much thanks for
the presentation of want your
next thank you appreciate
so he.
Members can't can we entertain a
motion to approve the minutes
from last meeting so moved sim
we have a motion from center of
my estimate as a second body
representative lotter
of a takeable in favor say I
guess
any objections ever do first.
Oh right moving on to bridge
conditions.
No more you had that down all
the group
sir I downloaded it and that.
The.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is david
kington i'm I know most of you
chief engineer and i'm duilty
today's presentation is going to
be given by our new
but not so new bridge engineer
he's come back for his second
verse in second stand here at
the doctor happy to have himself
agreement to heal and are
designed manager on a ridge
group is been ahead of so
they're going to be giving the
presentation so just want to
give them a a little
introduction thank you.
Good morning good morning more
today we're going to talk about
the state of bridges in new
mexico and design section
manager my name is ben header
arm racher heal is our new on
state bridge engineer I think
ray was the state bridge
engineer for something like
around eleven years on he worked
with the consultant now he's
back after seven years
sorry
okay so this gives a overall
view of our bridge bureau so
again rate your heroes are
stability engineer we have a
broken down into three different
sections on bridge management
jeffee hill runs that section
unfortunately he is not able to
to be with us today um but he is
responsible for the database
collection from all the
districts as far as the
inspection data also there is
load rating as far as the way I
never you travel across the
bridge and you see a load
posting signed twenty tons ten
times that's what we're
referring to and then also he is
responsible for the oversights
of a week of the permits that
travel throughout her state so I
know when blades are brought up
earlier that's one example of
them on bridge design I am the
design design section manager so
our role in bridge design is
mainly internal design we have a
few design squads we also are in
charge of oversight of any
consultant
and then finally we have our
bridge construction group which
we're trying to get established
and it's in the preliminary
phases and i'm really their role
is to respond to any rfi's
request for information that
come up from the contractor if
there's a confusion on the plans
and also any on pre fabricated
elements so like bridge breams
and he still components those
are examples we have to approve
and then those are we would work
in coordination with our project
managers to make sure everything
it works
and so this is our bridge
eminatory soul.
On m d ot has responsible for
the inspection of all public
bridges in the state of new
mexico so we are responsible for
city and county also villages as
well but we are not involved
with four service any biable man
those are inspected by other
other entities
total number of bridges that we
have in our inventory this
includes city counties is just
short of three thousand seven
hundred and sixty bridges i'm
almost three thousand of those
are owned by m DO t and almost
eight hundred of them are owned
locally and
this is this table down at the
bottom shows our national
highway system in our non
national highway system so we
almost have an even split as far
as n m DO t armed and i'm
locally owned we definitely have
a lot more non nhs bridges and I
just wanted to connect talk
about this picture really quick
because i'm going to bring it up
in a later slide apologize it
doesn't look like that once
working okay by
we have our bridge snooper so
whenever we're doing bridge
inspections we should be with an
arms arms reach so sometimes
that will engage our snooper
vehicle so we park it on top of
the vehicle in the arm comes
below and so there inspecting
the the beam right there i'm
gonna talk about some terms on
deck so deck is just basically
the what we think of as a deck
and then when I mentioned and I
apologize the pointer doesn't
show up but i'm a say super
structure what I mean by
superstructure is that's really
the beams and substructure
that's the foundation so that's
the columns caps etc.
Sorry okay so are my national
bridge inspection standards nbis
requires that all bridges are
inspected on a twenty four month
intervals we do somewhat deviate
from this and this is depending
on the condition of the bridge
so are poor condition bridges we
may inspect them on a more um
frequent inspection frequency
the n b I s also establishes
some other requirements so that
kind of goes into what we
consider what are poor condition
bridges fair etc as far as our
bridge inspections we do have
our district bridge inspection
programs so all of our six
districts they may have a bridge
engineer district bridge
inspectors that'll perform these
inspections we actually work
with new mexico state university
they do approximately twenty two
percent of our bridge
inspections and them so what
that means is we have two
professional engineers hired by
any they work with four up to
four co op students so they are
take a break from their studies
and basically take a semester
off to perform these inspections
for us we also do consultant
inspections and so those are
more specialized inspections as
shown to the right there this is
the rio grand gorge bridge where
we have one of our consultants
doing of fracture critical or
non-redundant still tension
inspection on that and also that
it will include under water
inspections and some other more
technical inspections and then
finally bridge management
sections so actually our group
at a sanity we will assist with
some of these inspections and an
example of that was that snooper
vehicle that we looked at on the
previous slide
um joseph all days he works out
of our sanity office he is but
most competent on snooper
operator that we have for new
mexico on dot and he will assist
all the districts whenever we
were using these type of the
snooper for this type of
inspections.
Yeah.
So mbis are conditional readings
and our national bridge elements
so
t rates bridges using the n b I
s readings a zero to nine
so i'm a good condition is
anything from seven and nine
affair is five in six and
anything below that is
considered a poor condition
bridge mbe reading ratings are
national bridge element ratings
that refers to we can rate each
individual bridge element so we
have of course our deck are
beams etc but we can also do
bearings are joints etc so we
can track those elements in
especially those that are in a
poor condition on our bearing
pads on our deck joints are too
examples of how we allow our
bridge to expand as a result
they need to be properly
maintained and if they're not
they can leave to more more
damage to our bridges in the
future and then finally we can
create some agency to find
elements so what that refers to
is we have retaining walls but
we have a another type of wall
called mse and then we could
have like on cheek wall so it
could be just our office wants
to keep track of that data
and one thing that I forgot to
mention as far we have our deck
are super a substructure
coverage again super more refers
to the beams substructure refers
to the foundation on
the worst of the deck super or
the sub that is considered the
the condition of the bridge so
let's say that deck in the super
are seventh but our substructure
is a four that means we have a
poor bridge okay.
So this slide shows our current
bridge conditions over sixty
percent of our inventory is in a
fair condition so the table
there to the right is showing
our poor fair and good and m DO
t locally loaned and also
national average so as far as
our poor condition bridges we
are better than the national
average however are fair
condition we are above the
national average and are good we
are below the national average
a large portion of our bridges
is built in the nineteen fifties
to the nineteen seventies the
average age of our bridges is
actually over fifty years old I
don't know if you can see it too
on this slide but hopefully on
on the ones in front of you we
actually have two bridges that
were built in the nineteen
hundreds that are still under
inventory so um just one thing I
cannot keep in mind
also in terms of trying to get
our fair condition bridges into
a good condition all of them
it's going to take approximately
eight billion dollars to do that
if we want to improve our good
condition bridges and order to
meet the national average that
is going to take approximately
one point six billion dollars.
This is talking about our bridge
prioritization in our bridge
needs so our bureau will meet
with the districts on individual
bridge needs we will basically
kind of go through a ranking
system an example of that is
shone below so our bridges again
or divided by the national
highway system nine and nine
hundred nine highway system in
locally aren't we have
priorities our bridge work by
bridge condition data again
that's deck super sub cover and
whichever is the worst of those
are engineering judgment so
there could be some issues on
the bridge like maybe we are
seeing that a bridge is
deteriorating quicker ban on
what we would normally see that
might be a cost for our concern
critical findings those referred
to a safety concern that we have
on a bridge it could be
something as simple as a low
posting sign is not on a bridge
when it should be could be that
we have a deck blowout something
that that effect
our bridge load capacity again
that relates to our load rating
our safe load caring capacity if
we need to post a bridge traffic
capacity needs is another
concern so if we have a very
narrow bridge let's say we do
not have shoulders that could be
a cause for concern and then of
course this is all dependent on
our budget availability and how
we can prioritize these
projects.
So our bridge works costs they
have increased significantly
over the years on the average
cost to build a bridge in two
thousand twenty was
approximately four hundred
dollars a square foot we have
seen that grow to almost twelve
hundred dollars a square for in
twenty twenty five so the number
that we're kind of using right
now is about one thousand one
hundred and sixty six dollars a
square for a bridge deck area to
do a bridge replacement our
bridges require scheduled
maintenance to meet their design
service life and so example of
kind of some of the treatments
that will do on our bridges is
shown there prevent a
maintenance work is about ten
percent of our replacement costs
so it could be working on our
decks our joints are bearing
rehabilitation is a little bit
more intense of treatment we're
doing concrete pair me may be
replacing those bearings and
those joints are major we have
we may be replacing the deck we
may be replacing the the beams
then our cover replacement is
shown there so rehabilitation at
about fifty percent of our
replacement cost majority have
in cover replacement are about
seventy five percent of our
replacement cost
so our lifecycle maintenance are
bridges or built today and
they're designed for a seventy
five year design life scheduled
maintenance such as deck
patching which has shown to the
right there they're doing some
partial dick patching there they
go down to sound concrete
they'll go below the top matter
rebar and then also joint
replacement shown there and in
the bottom left is required in
order to meet these designs
design life failure to provide
proper maintenance mainly to
having a having to perform a
major we have or early
replacement so an example of
kind of some of these life cycle
maintenance that we could do is
then year one we may be doing a
deck overly year fifteen where
doing some minor repairs to our
our decks are joints are bearing
your thirty we may be replacing
our decks and doing some some
other work.
And then year forty five again
it's it's showing we may I can
be doing more like dec selling
expansion and bearing joint
work.
So in the late nineteen nineties
and and dot began tracking on
poor condition bridges and
notice noticed a limited service
life of our bridge tax and
around on twenty thirteen m DO t
decided to set a side
approximately fourteen million
dollars I apologize is not shown
here but it's fourteen million
dollars a year for
rehabilitation and preventing
prevent a maintenance work and
and mdot successively reduced
the number of state owned poor
bridges from two hundred and
eighty one down to ninety nine
and on the red line there is
showing in twenty thirteen we
are roughly at a hundred and
sixty three bridges that were in
in a poor condition.
One thing that we have been
using the past is in currently
is price agreements price
agreements we do not have to go
through our bidding process or
bidding process can kind of slow
down as far as like if we need
to do an emergency repair in
twenty seventeen federal
highways stopped allowing
federal funds to be used for
these price agreements and
twenty eighteen waste completely
switched over to using state
contract maintenance fund in
order to pay for these price
agreements
price agreements significantly
reduced time and process needed
for repairs to examples of where
we're going to be engaging chrys
agreements are the large birth
project the oversize the
overheight low that that struck
that bridge and another one
that's just south of roswell
where we had a large flood that
watched out.
Our bridge formula funds in
twenty twenty two we had a
transportation bill we were
given on forty five million
dollars a year for five
consecutive years to be used on
bridge replacements also in
years twenty two and twenty
three we were given an
additional eighty million
dollars a year and
am dot basically the federal
mandate was fifteen percent of
those funds had to be used on
non nhs bridges and i'm dot's
goal was to focus fifteen
percent on locally on bridges we
did have some struggles meeting
that but there were five bridges
that we are able to kind of work
on with that with those funds
and it was almost a total of
twenty million dollars
benefit
mr share a member of the
committee I wanting to consider
his prior to bil federal dollars
were not eligible for non in
hsbc really the locals had no
good funding source to address
their structures one thing and
bent program in touch on in a
few slides of the transportation
policy fund our project funded
done was passed in twenty
nineteen when a long way to help
us help locals address some of
their deficient structures as
well
also this is i'm showing our
transportation found our tpf
projects so are a local grand
program funded annually through
tax distributions these cannot
be mixed with any federal
funding and so it's a ninety
five percent and am dot funded
out five percent local match on
thirty two bridges were able to
be funded or designed with these
tpf funds and this amount to
almost thirty six point four
million dollars from enemy ot
sight for these bridges
and i'm finally I just wanted a
briefly talk about a couple of
programs that are bridge
management section users so we
have all bridge inspection data
its house in our asked aware
bridge management program or b r
m datab.
Our brm database they can also
do some analysis is trying to
predict on future projects so
that's a kind of slide that
shown here
this will help us collect that
data driven decisions as far as
which bridges we're going to
focus on in the future
and finally we have the overload
program so i'm a bridge
management section again they
performed capacity analysis for
all overweight permits issued in
the state they are section works
to ensure that oversize a weight
vehicles can safely travel
across the state and overload
program so i'm sorry a breath of
beam analysis program called
overload is used for these
overweight permits okay and I
believe that is the arseli.
Thank you everybody.
Representative jobs
thank you mr chair thank you all
for that presentation of a
couple of questions about the
lords broke bridge what is the
time frame that repair
thank you thank you mister chair
I believe and I don't know if
the room yeah doesn't look like
years
so we have pretty much designed
the replacement and so it's
gonna be replacing that spam and
so that has been gone through
its stages and now it is really
what the fabricator as far as
fabricating those beams and as
far as win construction is set
to begin I do not know what the
details on that and I don't know
if you know just a single.
So yeah that the fabricator is
in the process of fabricating
them
well I also am wondering you
just described the how we deal
with overweight and oversize
trucks loads how did this happen
what went wrong from my
knowledge again I wish jeffey
hill he is the one who's kind of
running that program but to my
understanding this was went
through our process they said
they were a certain height they
obviously weren't they are
probably closer to eighteen feet
high and so they are probably
going at seventy five plus miles
an hour crash throughout bridge
thank you was anybody injured I
don't remember not that I know
of mister thank you so much
thank you mister
mister chairman thing a little
allowed to that representatives
so the good news about that
bridge getting hit with you
believe it something else that
the bridge was actually it's
we're it's it's it was it's a
schedule to be fully replaced
i'm you're after next so it's so
it it had already lived it's
designed life
it was so it was it's not like
it it it could have been worse I
guess
silver lining.
Rep jose done
I am III guess I could have
added yet we look for the silver
line instantly thank you thank
you mister chair representative
thank you mister chair
kids you give me the status of
the ony to bridge in especially
I didn't see it anywhere and
here and I know that it's closed
thank you mister
as far as the status we are
still in analysis and we are
working to see if we can get
that bridge opened and so what
that'll until is our training
bureau they are actually working
with the consultant as far as
designing those medication so it
could be something as far as
like adding something into the
real grand in order for us to to
to open it but on the one thing
with this bridge is it is long
passed at service like so it's
approaching ninety years old so
it has definitely meant as
design life
okay mr chair and um
channelmen i'm just wondering
what is that mean exactly does
that mean that you're gonna
close it permanently or does
that mean that you're gonna
rehabilitate a historic bridge
because it's a historic bridge
and I don't think you close his
store which is necessarily rate.
Mister chair representative but
I got
the one attitude like it's been
at least moved to a consultant
is doing our mitigation work
we're looking to stabilise a
bread within the next month so
that we don't lose the bridge
and then we're going to come up
with a more permanent fix that
should go in within an
experiment to open the bridge so
right now we're focusing on
stabilising the road so we don't
lose it and and come up with
another design to open the
bridge so i'd say about in four
months four to five months it'll
be reopened so mr charges to
follow up on are you planning to
appropriate funding and
representative sanchez at asked
me to talk about this actually
so I wanted to know a little bit
more about are you looking at
appropriations to
rehabilitate the bridge or cause
I didn't see anything in here
about that bridge
thank you miss mister chair
representative just for
everybody's awareness it was
really helpful that i'm promised
been your that we had to close
that bridge
because we did have to go and
speak with the community and and
they're very concerned just to
share what what exactly is
happening right and so the the
footing of one of the bridge
pillars is beneath the rear
branded river
river better I believe
originally it set twenty two
feet beneath the
the
base of the river bedwhat's
happened over time is increased
waterflows and increased with of
the river channel itself it is
creating a concentrated high
river flow in that middle and so
the river bed is eroding and now
at our last inspection there was
only six feet left between the
footing and the river bed which
means that a really large rain
event could create enough slow
that we would lose the bottom of
the concrete footing and and
with no way it on it at all the
bridge could collapse and so I
meet the decision to.
To close it out and so what
we've got to go in there in due
is
my crazy said is deal with the
scour because again the fact
that it's closed does it
preserve it any longer and then
work to identify what we can do
to reopen it but to your
question about
our options we have a few
options going back to nineteen
eighty I believe when the senate
clerically was built the plan in
strategy was that it was built
with enough capacity to then
close down the on younger bridge
okay and that was never done for
obvious reasons because very
difficult to do that to a small
community right and so although
the bridge is exceeded it's life
spend other than the scouring
it's it's in good condition so
what we're well once we received
the final
strategy is determining the
final costs to your point and
doing a better if it cost
analysis to determine if that's
a sound investment understanding
that just in the corridor on
both sides of the bridge we have
millions of dollars of work that
we want to do on some of those
roads and intersections and so
when we were
at the community forum
represented a bit at all did
make commitments of course that
if we communicate with her very
early on that that strategy is
outside or or immediate scope
that she would champion along
with representative such as some
they save appropriations thank
you yeah and I I raise that
issue mr chair because there are
people here on this committee
that sit on appropriations and I
think it's an important
community issue
my family also lives there and
just last week I think I was
driving around that bridge and
it was like oh I can't go down
there and I know that it's an
important bridge to the
community so that's why I raise
that issue thank you.
Thank you
you know the work of inspection
bridges is a really big deal and
I imagine it comes with a lot of
liability
but i'm curious what how do you
get to be qualified is bridge
inspector
thank you miss chair as far as
qualifying for inspector it
really kind of depends starting
with your education so if you
have let's say your batteries
agree in civil engineering you
have to have just so much of
bridge inspection experience we
have to take a two week on n h I
bridge inspection class as far
as like doing those inspections
and then we have to have so much
experience and or to do that as
far as i'm if you don't if you
only have your high school
department you have to have
really a lot of like I want to
say it's something that on the
order of like six years of
bridge inspection experience
underneath someone who is a team
lead and then after that point
they can become a team lead so
yeah it part of start sparing
and by the education thank you I
think it's a helpful for all of
us to hear that because it's
pretty impressive these folks
have to look at a bridge
this thank you chairman thank
you german great presentation
enquiring minds on an old so
i'll ask i'll ask on behalf of
them but so this this graph
right here
your life spend is seventy five
years do you do you know of hand
that the
five bridges that were built at
the turn of the last century
there's two bridges that were
built in the nineteen zeros and
then three bridges they were
built in the nineteen tens so I
think you miss chair as far as
the oldest I believe it is north
of silver city and what it
actually was was a trust bridge
that was relocated to a county
bridge and so I believe that's
our oldest and I want to say
it's something around nineteen
or six nineteen oh weight.
And then also I believe we have
a bridge in las vegas and I
think is an arch and I believe
that's our second oldest
structure but both of those are
still in our inventory thank you
mister one in biggest up
there they built that adjacent
bridge but that took so that
bridge is not utilized but it
still exists that yes it's
really neat and then also if if
bridges last thirty five years
roughly i'm looking at all the
bridges they were built in the
nineteen sixties in the nineteen
seventy so so nineteen sixty
plus seventy five is two
thousand thirty five so in ten
years do you anticipate a budget
up do we need to worry about a
like a budgetary increase in
bridge
work
because I might overthink in it
thank you miss chair yes you
bring up a very good point one
thing that we've what we've seen
is for example interstate forty
interstate forty like I know
lisa district district six as
far as them entering our state
from on the on the west side of
the state we get heavy truck
traffic and so what we've kind
of seen is dollars bridges do
not last as long however then we
have some other bridges who have
like a hundred vehicles a day
and they can last ninety plus
years and one thing I I
apologize that I did not mention
as far as I seventy five year
design life raking kind of
correct me but I want to see
that's probably our policy maybe
for like the last twenty to
thirty years on prior to that it
was more like a fifty year
design life so as you said some
of these are well passed or each
thank you mister chairman
gentleman they are and then what
constitues are bridge for
example if there's a roadway
that goes over
a huge second and there's a pipe
but there's no space between the
payment and that and the dirt
and the pipe was that a bridge.
What what what bits into the
stats of a breach thank you
mister chair I apologize I had
was thinking about including
those end into this presentation
what it is is the bridge linked
has to be greater than twenty
feet in length so if we're using
a deck are beams are foundation
that deck has to be over twenty
feet as far as i'll coverts we
have on what's called like a
concrete box covered so I
literally looks like a a box
shape they are placed in a
series and as long as the first
barrel to the last birl if that
is greater than twenty feet that
is considered a bridge as far as
cover pipes if it is on the
space between them is less than
the radius and there is a series
of pipes where the first to the
last is greater than twenty feet
that is a bridge
and I apologize I I should have
brought that up it's much clear
if I show it in a picture no
understood no thank you for that
the
and then but then lastly what is
the highest bridge into mexico
as for apologies is it over on
the roadway to the bottom if you
were to
bung you just
rate the ranges answer my
question from it probably be the
real grand gorgeous sold france
in town yes our longest bridge
from our longest bridge I
believe is one of the rams at
the big eye and I believe it is
the southbound I twenty five to
the eastbound I forty that is
our longest segmental and I
think it's somewhere on the
order of like twenty eight
hundred feet
and i'll offline a lesson your
three favorite bridges in the
world
the one in florence takes the
cake thank you
thank you for your presentation.
So we are done with a regular
business there is a there is a
