Um
Well, let's go ahead with
introductions, uh.
Representative, thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm Representative Liz
Thompson, House District 24, um,
Northeast heights of
Albuquerque, and I want to thank
you and E and the Cancer Center
for hosting us again, um, lovely
place, Linnea, ya, um, this is a
great place to be, so thank you
all.
Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair.
Morning, Senator Martin Hickey.
I'm from the 20th District, the
eastern side of Albuquerque, uh,
glad to be back, uh, with this
committee and look forward to,
uh, our session and I'll have a
little more to say as we end.
Thank you very much.
I'm uh chair, uh.
Representative Joanne
Ferrari and I'm from Las Cruces,
House District 37 in Las Cruces
and um, welcome and thank you
again, Yim Cancer Research
Center for hosting us and um
let's see, we have first up.
Um
Uh, Miss Yolanda Sanchez, who is
the director and chief executive
for UNM Comprehensive Cancer
Center.
my sunglasses.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. Vice
Chair and members of the
committee, um, member Thompson,
um, it is my pleasure. It is our
pleasure uh to welcome you to,
uh, the UNM Comprehensive Cancer
Center, the only NCI designated
comprehensive Cancer Center in
the state of New Mexico and in
within a 500 mile radius, and I
will tell you what this means
for the state of New Mexico and
for the people of New Mexico,
but I want to say from the
outset that this cancer center.
This building, the expansion and
the work that we do at the
hospital is only possible
through a true partnership with
the legislative and executive
branches of the state, uh, it
has been a partnership for many,
many years, and you can see when
I tell you about the expansion,
what that means.
Next page
So the mission uh of our cancer
center.
And, uh, is to reduce the cancer
burden and overcome the cancer
health disparities in New Mexico
and the nation, uh, through the
pillars of our mission which are
groundbreaking transdisciplinary
research inclusive novel
clinical trials, translation of
our discoveries to community
prevention and clinical
interventions, impactful,
respectful, and culturally
appropriate bidirectional
engagement of our communities,
educating and training a more
diverse cancer workforce and
future leadership.
And all this while delivering
exceptional patient centered
care.
On the next page, you will see
this, uh, history of our cancer
center as far as, um, the
buildings that have been um
taking place to house not only
the research side but also the
clinical side. You can see that
the UNM Cancer Research facility
uh was built in 1998. Um, we, I
have been receiving state
support throughout our growth,
including uh 10.5 million um uh
uh.
Dollars in 2003. In 2005, we
received our first NCI
designation, uh, in 2015, we
received our comprehensive
status from the National Cancer
Institute. Um, we've had
expansion of our clinical
facility and and clinical
research facility, uh, leading
up to the expansion that you're
seeing, and this is the reason
why you're having problems
parking I apologize, but, uh, I
can tell you the exciting things
that are happening in the
expansion that are happening
only here for New.
Mexicans in all of our state and
it's just an exciting, uh, time,
uh, to be in, in this cancer
center. Um, I, uh, as of
yesterday.
It was my 2 year 5 month
anniversary as director and CEO,
so I'm very excited to be here.
Uh, next slide, uh, so as you
can see all these dots on the
map are the NCI designated
cancer centers. There are 74
cancer centers designated by the
NCI and 57 of which are uh also
designated with comprehensive
status and we are one of those
57 and you can see that lonely
dot in the middle of of our
state, uh.
And uh the only one within a 500
mile radius, what does it mean
to have NCI designation. It's a
big deal for us, but it's hard
to convey this to the public,
uh, what it means is that we're
the top in the top 3% of cancer
centers in the nation.
Uh, we are one of uh cancer
centers in 36 states. We are,
uh, received about all the
cancer centers receive 85% of
all the extramural budget of the
NNCI, uh, we are charged with
being the discovery science
engine and translations to
clinical trials and
interventions we are charged
with engaging our communities
and we're charged with training
the nation's cancer workforce.
Uh, I want to take a little, uh,
a few seconds to highlight on
this same slide on the next
page, uh, the star is, you know,
we are charged with being the
discovery science engine, uh,
for, uh, research is going to
impact the lives of all US
citizens, but especially of New
Mexicans and the tobacco
settlement funds has funded, uh,
in the past few years, genomic
research and genomic research is
the identification and the
changes in the blueprint of
ourselves.
that allow them to grow out of
control and become tumor cells
and with that information we can
now find targeted therapies that
will attack the vulnerabilities
of the cells that have that
change blueprint and so it is
instrumental that we continue
this genomic research, uh, and
right now with the federal
landscape, the way it's looking,
these funds become even more
essential and important for not
only our cancer center but the
people of New Mexico.
Um, and then on the next, um,
page slide, um, I'm showing you
the catchment area and um where
our patients come from, uh, in
all of
Uh, and, and, um, fiscal year
2024, we had uh 160,100, 501
patients, uh, all of, all of
which except for 322 we're from
the state of New Mexico, uh, in
about 50 and 5 from Bernalillo
County and outside. So what
makes us unique in the, in the
United States network of NCI
Cancer Centers is a unique
catchment area with multi-ethnic
populations that we engage
through uh respectful.
by directional engagement, uh,
we have, uh, one of, uh, the
unique networks in the United
States where we engage with
community providers who are our
competitors but ours also are
collaborators through the New
Mexico Cancer Research Alliance,
a 501c3 collaborative network
that allows us to open clinical
trials at other community
hospitals, um, based on the
science and the nation and the
science of the of the New
Mexico, the you know and then uh
comprehensive cancer center.
This is, this is a model that
has was highlighted nationwide
because it's unique in the way
that we collaborate with the
community partners including um
Loveless Presbyterian, um, and,
um, we're engaging in Santa Fe
and um Farmington as well. We
have a collaboration with Las
Cruces.
We're also partner with the
Loveless Biomedical Research
Institute, which brings
complimentary expertise in lung
cancer prevention, screening and
treatment, as well as tobacco
and e-cigarette research, uh,
and as you know, uh, we have, we
are, uh, leveraging the
expertise and the the richness
of Project Echo, a telementoring
platform that you are very
familiar with that was developed
at UNM and we use it to improve
cancer patient outcomes through
education, training and care
management, including a, um,
A
Um
Statewide triage conference for
hepatibiliary cancers to prevent
patients from traveling long
distances that they don't need
surgery and also to train
survivorship providers
throughout the state.
On the next slide, what makes uh
UNM comprehensive Cancer Center
unique. You can see that that
we're the official cancer center
of the state of New Mexico again
through the partnership with uh
you all the legislative and the
executive branches, we are, we
conduct cutting edge cancer
research and translate that to
discoveries and interventions in
our patients receive state of
the art care.
All in one place.
From multidisciplinary teams
that plan their treatment,
access to novel clinical trials
and personalized treatment
irrespective of what's in their
wallet.
That is our mission, and I found
out as director of this cancer
center with my colleagues in the
national network that this is
unique, uh, to our cancer
center, uh, a lot of cancer
centers, uh, are restrict the
patients they treat by the
insurance that they care, that
they're covered by, but we do
not. So I, again, we saw 16,500
patients in in fiscal year 24,
you can see that we, you know,
104,000 ambulatory clinic clinic
visits here in this space, um,
18,000.
therapeutic infusions and uh all
provided by 136 board certified
oncologists, um, we provide
access to clinical trials and
that.
That number on the bottom right
corner.
In FY 22, that number was
13 million.
In FY 24, I mean, I've talked to
3 and FY 24, it was 15 and FY 24
was $18 million in
noncompensated care. Uh, we
treat everyone with the same,
uh, compassion, same access to
care, same multidisciplinary
team irrespective of their
ability to pay.
Next slide, please. So now I'm
gonna tell you about why you
were having problems parking,
um, and the, um, the building uh
for the future, the expansion of
clinical research as an NCI
designated cancer center, we are
charged with providing the
latest technologies and
diagnostics treatment and
prevention to our the patients
that we serve, the people of New
Mexico.
And through a partnership with
the legislative and executive
branches we were able to break
ground in December 14th of 2023
on this 50,000 square foot
expansion, uh, that is on, um,
um, the, um, the north side of
the building, and you can see it
a representation there but I'm
gonna give you a lot of uh
different snapshots on the next
slide as well. And um this is
going to be an amazing, amazing
space. We toured it recently,
uh, it's going to house, um.
And I'm gonna go back to the
previous slide so I can just
summarize it. It's going to
house the latest in diagnostics
and treatments in radiation
oncology only available to New
Mexicans in uh in our cancer
center, um, cell-based therapies
and bone marrow transplant, the
only accredited program in the,
in the state of New Mexico and
I'll tell you about what it
means, and then Theranostics
program, we are the only one
high energy therannostics
program, and I'll, I'll show you
an example of what that means.
So, um, I wanna give, give you
the details, kind of the nitty
gritty, so you have them in
front of you that because of um
the increase in the price of
construction between when this
was planned in 2018, 2019, and
now we had to break, break it
down in segments. So the
original um but uh original
estimate was about 29 million
and we are over 60 million now,
but thanks to um uh your
support, we were able to to
raise about 44.5 million.
dollars of the $60 million from
the, um, from the uh state
support, including a bond that's
paid by cigarette tax and more
money that was uh awarded to us,
um, about $20 million shortly
after my arrival.
But that segment 2 will provide
is, um, and if you look at where
it says MRILINA, that's a vault
that's gonna house an image
guided radiation therapy
machine. It's an MRI linked to a
linear accelerator that allows
uh patients to be planned in
real time, the imaged in real
time and treat it in real time.
Uh, it's, it's the only one in
the state of New Mexico. It's
only also gonna have shielded
rooms for the gnostics, which is
an infusion.
of, of, uh, isotope, uh, of
radioactive, uh, medicine and
also we're just going to house
um we shell the uh cellba
facility for segment 3, and I
will show you what that means.
So just to give you an idea of
the type of technology, the type
of treatments that are available
to New Mexicans here this is an
example of what atherostic is. A
Theranostic is the is the the
basic science tells us, you
know, what.
is unique about the surface of a
cancer cell. what is sticking
out there that we can target and
so then scientists find a Velcro
molecule, which is that blue
molecule right there, um, um.
On, on the that colorful
molecule on the left that
actually will um attach to the
tumor cell and then if you find
that Volcker molecule, now you
have something you can send to
the tumor cells specifically, so
then you can put uh a uh a
radioliance, a radioactive
ligand on that Velcro molecule,
and it finds the tumor cells. So
if you use a low energy
molecule, you can image the
tumor.
If you use a high energy
molecule when that Velcro sticks
to the cell, the cell eats it
up, engulfs it and wants to get
rid of it, and then that isotope
goes inside the cell and kills
the cell. So it's highly precise
for the tumor cells, and it, it
spares the normal cells because
it's only finding the cells that
have that thing sticking out in
the air. So if you can look at
the next slide, this is an
image, um, uh, from a journal
what you're seeing on the left
is the PET scan of patients with
metastatic prostate cancer.
What you're seeing on the right
of each image is the um the
inability to detect the cancer
after treatment with the
theranostic PSMA, which targets
prostate cancer, which is, um,
we now have it here where um
expanding it, we're treating
patients with neuroendocrine
tumors, which is very, very
high, um, energy ligands, that's
why we need the shielded rooms.
They need their own bathrooms,
uh, as well.
So what is that uh going on in
that expansion as well. This is
the MRIINAC, which has that that
magnet that's available, uh.
It with the ability to image the
patient and the tumor and the
radiation uh machine that's part
of it that can target the tumor,
find.
If it moves, even when the
patient is breathing.
So it is the ability to target
the tumor, uh, in image and
treat at the same time. It is
amazing. It is, it is going to
be a game changer and it'll be
the only one here in New Mexico
and we, we will be able to carry
a clinical trials with this type
of technology including using
AI, artificial intelligence, to
better and more precisely treat
tumors. This is gonna be a game
changer for patients with
pancreatic cancer because the
tumors are deep and and close to
vital organs and it's gonna be a
game changer for patients with.
Early stage prostate cancer as
well.
So, um, and you probably heard
uh from my predecessors that we
um are um MRILINA, uh, reached
end of life, uh, and, um, we
have 3 machines and they were
reaching end of end of life at
the same time. That was the bad
news. The good news is that this
expansion will allow us to
renovate the room so we can have
these uh versa machines, the
same machine, and we're gonna
have 3 of them by end of 2026,
we can do a treatment plan on
one.
for one machine and we can tweet
on any of the three machines so
it's gonna increase capacity and
also what this does is latest
the the state of the art
technology allows us to very,
very, um, uh, with precise, uh,
precise uh uh treat tumors, even
metastatic tumors to the brain
with high precision in avoiding
the normal tissue.
So I told you that we act in in
in the segment two we, we had
um.
shelled segment 3 which was um
the plan for, um, the cell-based
therapy lab, and that's on 4th
floor, the 2nd floor on the
right, uh, we have a budget of
16.6 million 15 million from
state appropriation and 1.6%
match from us and the current
estimate is 18.4 million. So
again, we had to use value
engineering. We have an amazing
team at the cancer center to
bring the project within
available budget in
collaboration with the HSE
Capital projects.
as well. So I want to zoom in to
that part on the right, um,
because this is really exciting.
So, um, what we have is an
expansion of our clinical
research space which is the,
the, the, uh, lilac on the left,
the, the pink, and then in the
middle you're seeing two green
spaces surrounded by some yellow
spaces, so those are gonna be
the cell-based therapy labs. So
what is cell-based therapy?
it's, uh, the ability to collect
the patient's.
immune cells or donor's immune
cells and put a little um GPS
genetically engineered GPS so
that they can find the tumor
cells and so what happens is
that these patients' own immune
cells when they're infused back.
Find the tumor cells, attack
them and kill them, and because
they are immune cells like the
immune cells that clear viruses
and bacteria, if the tumor
recurs, they divide again and
they attack the tumor. So this
type of therapy has been shown
to be curative for hematological
malignancies and your
indications are coming on board
for solid tumors, uh, of course,
there are some side effects
because you, um, you, you have
your immune system that's
unleashed on your, on your tumor
cells and sometimes there's
collateral damage with normal
cell.
But we are learning of ways to
to diminish that side effect and
be able to amplify the curative.
fact. So those two green spaces
are going to have uh a um hoods
that are gonna be able to um and
engineer genetically these cells
that are going to be put back
into the patients beforehand we
used to send them out and we
used to uh also collect the uh
cells and send them out to be
for storage right now we have a
temporary space, but this is
where the cells from the
patients that are collected to
for the treatment are going to
be stored, uh, as well, so this
is gonna allow us to do clinical
research, um.
With this technology as well, we
have just started what's not on
this slide deck we just opened
our inpatient clinical trials
for the clinical trials that
require patients to be
hospitalized for a while as
well, uh, in, in this particular
space. So this is our bone
marrow transplant cell-based
therapy program, it's a
collaboration with the
Department of Pathology where
they collect the spheresis, um,
they're stored and there's, um,
um, commercial products that
we're using right now uh to
engineer those uh.
um GPS, uh, tracking mechanisms
into these cells and crown the
year 2024, we did 13 allogeneic
bone marrow transplants, that
means bone marrow from a donor
to a recipient in order to,
after we deplete their, um, bone
marrow and leukemic cells, and
then these are replaced and in
an attempt to cure them. Um, we
did 4A T. These are the
genetically engineered GPS and
we collected cells for 2 more.
We plan to grow this more than
double this program.
calendar year 25, uh, so we are
on track for that.
And uh we are the only place in
New Mexico where patients right
now patients leave the state for
this, um, treatment and we're
going to increase capacity so
they don't have to.
Um, I also wanted to update you
on um a project that we have on
the next slide to change the
face of cancer center leadership
nationwide here in New Mexico
and nationwide it's called the
emerging leaders Workshop where
leaders are nominated, um, by a
senior leader that if they were
hit by a bus, uh, they could um
be developed into their, into
their roles and so this was our
first cohort of emerging
leaders, 4 of them are already
transitioned into senior
leadership roles, uh, we, we
partner with the USC Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center in
providing them with the workshop
that provides executive coaching
and, um, decision making and all
the types of uh things that when
you're in your lab, you don't
realize you're gonna need as a
leader or when you're in your in
the clinic, so we've already
some of these are oncologists,
radiation oncologists as well as
basic scientists, um, recently,
we held our second cohort in
workshop that was hosted by USC,
and these are the three new
emerging leaders, Doctor Tawfik,
Doctor Samulia Reese.
Um, and Doctor Dolores guest.
And because you cannot start to
early on the next slide, um, we
are, uh, our training and
education program does outreach
into the state of New Mexico and
um these are middle schools kids
that were part of empowering
young minds. Uh, there were over
60 middle schoolers in Espaniola
they attended this workshop, uh,
yeah, and Senator Jaillo was
there uh talking about the
science of low riders, uh, and
attended all the, um, all the
uh, workshops as well and we
returned to Espanola, um, uh,
recently in, in December and we
had to cut off the registration
at 230 because that's how many
kids that wanted to attend, uh,
we have a scheduled visit to
Hobbs where um there's going to
be another empowering young
minds, uh, and we hope that all
these are um future cancer
workforce of um.
New Mexico. So with that, um,
we'll close and, um, entertain
questions. Thank you very much
for allowing me to give you an
update.
Thank you, um.
Question Senator Hickey.
Since, uh, thank you very much
for uh comprehensive,
comprehensive cancer center, uh,
overview, the, um,
Wait, we experienced uh July
4th, um, in positive ways, but
the negative way was the signing
of the big bad bill and
The impact of that, you kind of
alluded to, but are you losing
FTE because of that bill?
So the, the I know that's a
delicate political question that
you probably don't want to
answer politically, but I'm
just, uh, and you can answer it
obliquely.
Um, but we're gonna
In the legislature, we will be
looking at the impact of the
bill and where do we need to
fill cracks.
So thank you for that question.
So the um, the, the bill, um,
the reconciliation bill did not
touch the funding federal
funding for research, uh, that
is through an appropriations,
um process so we still yet to
know what the impact on the
research side of the house it's
going to be, uh, our payer mix
is um 43% Medicare, 13%
Medicaid, 6% indigent, and the
rest commercial, um.
And we are yet again to figure
out uh what the impact is going
to be. I can tell you, um,
That the the uncertainty.
is causing an impact in the
oncologists that want to stay in
academia.
And and in that your answer, my
answer to you is yes there.
And so we are working really
hard to recruit um
More oncologists, uh, because we
expect that we're going to see
an increase, uh, with the aging
population of patients with
cancer, so we are, we're working
really hard on that. Uh, we are
experiencing a, a, a short, um,
perfect storm with um
oncologists on family leave and
loss of oncologists, so we're
now, it's created an opportunity
to work with our community
partners in in handing off um
warm hand off to make sure that
our patients are being seen in a
timely manner.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you for that
answer. Um, I'm just wondering
how, how many community partners
do we have? Is it less than it
used to be?
Madam Chair, um, vice chair, uh,
Hickey, um, we don't have less
fewer community partners we, we
have the same number right now.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much. There's so much in
here.
So in terms of the empowering
young minds. I said, what a
great idea and I'm jealous that
Senator Harme was there, so, um,
as chair of the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee. I'm gonna ask if
you're doing any of these.
Please let me know so that I can
members around the state would
be able to, I mean, I want to
attend, but I would like, you
know, if you're doing one in
Hobbs, I would like for the
members in Hobbs to be able to.
To partake part of that if, if
need be. And your ear mix was
interesting to me. I mean, I
know that cancer is more and
prevalent as you age, but the,
the Medicaid, uh, percentage
seemed low to me. Um, is that,
has that been pretty much
steady, your, your pair mix is
that pretty, pretty typical?
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
Representative Thompson for that
question. Uh, our pair mix has
been changing a little bit since
my arrival, but it has not
changed dramatically. Thank you
for that question. I will, I do
have to, um, I'll be remiss not
to say that almost every
pediatric patient seen at UNM,
uh, oncology patient is a
Medicaid patient.
That's all I have. Thank you so
much. Thank you. Yes, would you
also introduce yourself,
Senator.
And good morning. I'm Linda
Lopez, state senator, District
11, the Southwest quadrant of
Bernalillo County.
Um, if I could ask, um, Madam
Chair, could you just, I was not
fast enough to write down the
mix of your um the payers, so
how much was it for Medicare,
etc.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Senator Lopez.
Yes, it's um.
43% Medicare.
13% Medicaid, 6, right now it's
7% indigent.
And then for private, I'm sorry.
Um,
the balance of that, sorry. OK,
and you said 43% Medicare?
Medicare, yes. OK. All right.
No, I appreciate that.
And Madam Chair, um.
I, I am
Happy to hear that the uh
Uh.
I, I won't go into politics
either, I guess, Senator. I'll.
Um, let's just say that the
resolution as you had mentioned,
didn't touch research at this
time.
Um, but
I think, madam, Madam Chair, and
Madam co-chair for
LHHS Health and Human Services.
We, uh,
This is still something that
we'll have to keep on.
Uh, our eyes on, especially
since I know that the new budget
bill is being crafted, so it'll
be interesting to see what comes
in that new budget bill, um,
that Congress is currently
working on um to keep our eyes
on.
And uh
I believe, um.
Madam Chair, is that as we look
at the big picture on, on
funding on what New Mexico is
going to have to come up with to
make sure that we can continue
healthcare.
Um, it's gonna have a a nice
price tag with it.
And um I know the governor did
mention that she's willing to
call us into special session if
and when we need to deal with
this issue. So, um, I am
hopeful.
Um, based with what you've
presented here, but also with,
you know, Doctor Richards and
others, especially from UNMH,
the system, um, that we make
sure that we keep
engaged, um, working with
yourself, doctor also and
others. Um, this is an important
Important resource, important,
um.
You know, provider of care for
people here in New Mexico. And I
know that a lot of persons may,
you know, that I've spoken to,
not a lot, but quite a few,
should I say, of people that
I've spoken to over the years,
um, uh, many don't know about
what we provide here at, at your
center.
And I know it depends, I think,
as to who your provider is and
to where some of that um
group of persons who need care
for their cancer are going.
So I, I just think more
regionally as to how we can
continue to support what UNM
Cancer Center is doing, I think
is so important that way people
don't have to travel.
and incur more expenses as they,
you know, and family support and
others, um, I think that's just
so important as to how we can
continue to support the work
that's done here. So I just
wanted just to make that.
Those comments, there's just so
much on the brain after July
4th, making sure that bill, the,
the resolution was signed into
law, but there's still more
coming, and we have to stay and
keep apprised of that, um, as we
move forward and it's just a
short window of time.
So I wanted to mention that,
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
May I, yes, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Senator Lopez
for your comments and your
question. Um, I did, um, we have
lost about in and this was
We get updated every week from
the vice presidents for
research, about $34 million in
funding, um, over 5 years. The
biggest hit has been to our
training programs, as you know,
because of the unique
populations that we serve our
training programs were meant to,
um um develop the next
generation of workforce, um, in
our population. So we are
awaiting.
Out to see whether those are
recovered, but uh these are
graduate students, um, postdocs
and uh undergraduate students
that were paid for by these
training grants. So we have, and
we are keeping an eye on the
potential impact both on the
cuts to Medicaid and on the cuts
to the NIH as well.
And Madam Chair, if I may, um,
at a recent hearing that was for
the federal funding, whatever,
I, I apologize. My brain is not
working, I haven't had enough
coffee, but it's the FFSS it's
the federal funding
subcommittee. We had a
presentation on it last week.
And the secretary or mijo from
um healthcare Authority did
mention that there's
anticipation of some of our
rural hospitals that will be
closing too, even though we've
tried to subsidize and help um
with regards to that. So, uh, I
mean, it's just this big mix of
what we're looking at and
The work that you're doing here,
um, over the years and how it's
continuing to be.
Oh.
The wonderful
Opportunities that are available
for persons who have cancer and
what has changed over the years
for us to be able to target the
different cells is phenomenal.
But
UNMH, the system itself, which
you are part of, is integral for
our healthcare in the state of
New Mexico and Madam Chair.
Um, it's just something that we
have to keep in mind of, and I
know we will, but I just wanted
to voice it to make sure that we
are.
Also making the outreach to our
diversity that we have here in
the state of New Mexico.
Um
They are our future and looking
as to what you've done with the
recruitment potentials for our
high school, middle school
students is what we need to
continue working on.
Um, especially for the state and
the mix that we have.
So, thank you.
Anything else, Doctor Sanchez?
Um, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Thompson. I
wanted to answer to you that uh
we do uh provide outreach to uh
our representatives in the area
when we are there, but I will
make sure to keep you in the
loop as well.
OK, great. I have just a few
questions, um.
Just you and him cancer help uh.
Veterans, if they've been denied
treatment through the veterans
program, can they come to you
and him?
Madam Chair, my, my tentative
answer is yes, but I will look
into that and get back to you
with a precise answer. OK, thank
you. And also, um, you mentioned
the 29 million for a lot of the
construction on different things
came to 60 million. How close
are we? I mean, I was trying to
follow all the different budget
things that, you know, the
community helped or even in a
match, um.
Is, is it close to that 60
million or how much more?
Do we need to support. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, we are
thinking of creative ways to um,
To continue with segment 3 and
segment 4 things that we shelled
because um we reached our budget
and even with our match, so we
are at um a little bit over 60
million now that we can
Um
Finish everything I showed you.
What I didn't show you was the
patient service area, which is
in the ground floor, and that
needs to be renovated to
increase capacity because we
have those new services with our
agnostics and and radiation
oncology, I think the latest
estimate I have for that is
about 4 million. So, um,
potentially that could be
another bond with cigar
cigarette tax money, um, that we
would come to you in the future.
To the committees in the future.
OK, thank you. And um when you
were talking about the BMT
program and how you're trying to
make it so people didn't have to
go out of state, um, are they
already trying to make it so
people come here instead of
going out of state or is that in
the future?
Thank you, Madam Chair, for that
question and um I have to give a
shout out to my colleague
Rayanne in the back, who has
been the biggest proponent to
have this, the news, uh, go out.
Statewide about what we have
here in our cancer center and um
it's going to involve not only a
marketing campaign, but also our
providers going to the
communities and, and, um,
shaking hands with the community
providers to make sure that they
know what's going on here. Right
now we see of about um
45 bone marrow transplants in
the, in the state, not, not
including pediatrics, we see
1/3. We're able to provide 1/3
of those a year. So we're hoping
that we can provide more of
them. I, I, um, not on my slide
deck because it's not final
because of everything that's
happening at the federal level,
but um we were able to uh get an
agreement to have a uh um 20 bed
hospital wing in the backfield
of the hospital for medical
oncology and the bone marrow
transplant cell-based therapy.
Uh, and that would comprise 6 of
the 20 rooms, uh, with their own
bathroom. So we are hoping that
um by the end of 2026, um, that
we would um have expanded the
program to
Provide at least um half.
Of the bone marrow transplant
and hopefully growing into the
future.
OK, great. Um, I don't have any
other questions. Thank you so
much and we really appreciate
your hosting us too, um.
And I'd like staff to please
introduce I failed to ask you to
introduce yourselves.
I, I am Sean Dolan, staff
attorney with Legislative
counsel Service.
And Andy Lazaro's over there.
She's with council service as
well.
Thank you. OK. Thank you and
welcome.
While we have a quorum, we're
gonna go ahead and approve the
minutes from our organizational
meeting, I believe, is that
right?
OK.
Are there any changes or uh
additions to the minutes.
Or do I hear a motion to move.
OK, thank you, a second. OK. All
right. Uh, are there any
objections to accepting the
minutes.
Seeing none, or minutes are
approved from our May 20th, 25.
media organizational meeting.
Thank you.
One of our next speakers has
stepped out, so we'll wait just
a minute.
We're a little bit ahead of
schedule.
You.
Thank you, um, for that brief,
um.
Interruption, we, um, are ready
with our new speakers, um, Linda
Seel and Mahesh, uh, Zita, would
you like to go ahead?
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Linda Siegel for the American
Cancer Society Cancer Action
Network.
Thanks for inviting us, though I
know we probably have nothing
new to say, particularly, but we
will, um, kind of update you if
there's anything um that you
might wanna know. I have, uh,
handed out something that I
thought was kind of interesting.
We didn't really prepare a
PowerPoint as we usually do, but
this is, um,
All about e-cigarettes and it
gives uh a little history, and
it's from the Truth initiative,
which is the nation's largest
non-profit health organization
dedicated to preventing youth
and young adult nicotine use. So
they've been around quite a
while and they work with all of
our national groups to campaign
for tobacco for kids, the Cancer
Society Heart Association, Lung
Association. I mean, we're all
Spending time and energy working
um to stop youth from smoking,
vaping, chewing, etc.
But as you know, we're up
against the tobacco industry and
their enormous marketing
campaign.
The, the tobacco companies
altogether spend about a million
dollars an hour.
In the United States marketing
their products. Now that's
everything, that's cigarettes,
that's e-cigarettes, that's all
the chewing tobacco, all the
different, the different
products.
In 2019 that amounted to about
$22.5 million a day for the
country spent on marketing. Will
you say that again? 22 $22.5
million a day spent on
advertising tobacco products by
the tobacco industry in this
country.
And in New Mexico, that is about
31.9 million per year.
In 2021, the e-cigarette
advertising and promotion
expenses for the United States.
To extracting them from the big,
the larger number was 860
million.
So in 2021, the industry spent
just on e-cigarettes and those
kinds of products, $860 million.
And we don't, I don't have the
breakdown for New Mexico.
So it's far from a level playing
field when we talk about the
expenditures that we make in New
Mexico and other states make to
try to prevent and educate young
people about the problems that
they'll experience with vaping
and nicotine consumption.
So in this um report from the
Truth Initiative, they, they
take us back to 2007 when the
e-cigarette was first introduced
by the industry.
And new products come out
constantly with higher levels of
nicotine, multiple kinds of
flavors that target just
children, marketing campaigns so
that in 2019, 27.5% of high
schoolers were using
e-cigarettes.
Now these have declined.
We think, um.
But according to the 2021 New
Mexico youth resiliency report,
34% of high schoolers were, um,
vaping.
Now, Mahesh is bought, you know,
he goes out and he buys all
these different products and he
comes and presents them and
Frequently there are things that
we have never seen that, that's
the new product that's that's
on, on the market.
The e-cigarette market is
rapidly evolving. The sales and
number of brands and types of
products increased 46% between
January 20th.
January 2020 and December 2022
and disposable e-cigarettes,
which aren't really as popular
now, tripled in nicotine
strength and quadrupled in the
e-liquid capacity.
And at that same time, they
started making the prices a
little lower, so that they
really were.
Targeting if we didn't know,
targeting the youth market.
There are, um, very few re
federal restrictions on
e-cigarette marketing. Where do
you see e-cigarette ads, TV,
streaming, social media, movies,
retail stores, internets and
magazines.
And obviously these are charged,
these are targeted towards the
youth e-cigarette use in 2021
for adults was 4.5%.
And it went up to 6% in 2022,
but
25% of that of those adults were
between the ages of 23 and 24,
so they probably started when
they were kids and, and then
continued. And as you've heard
us say before, the health
effects are dramatic for youth.
It's harmful in the development
of brains. It, it ultimately
with ongoing uses can cause all
of those chronic diseases which
we know that cigarettes cause
cancer and asthma and, um, all
kinds of things.
Regulation.
E-cigarettes have stayed on the
market.
For years without a full review
of their public health impact.
To date, the FDA has approved 34
e-cigarette products, but 86.3%
of all e-cigarette products on
the market are waiting FDA
approval.
And they're still being sold.
They're sold everywhere.
And of course, the tax in New
Mexico is not anywhere near
comparable to the tax on
cigarettes despite our efforts
over the years to, to change
that. We charge 12.5% of product
value on e-cigarettes.
And we have still in statute a
pretty narrow definition of
e-cigarettes and 50 cents for a
closed cartridge system. Well,
now there are all these other
products out there. I don't even
know what we're taxing them. If
we're taxing them because
they're not listed in our
statute.
And of course, there are no
federal excise tax on
e-cigarettes.
Um
So the truth campaign, the Truth
initiative, working with all the
other groups, um,
Do campaigns, do our own media
campaigns. Do you have our own
curriculums for the schools. We
know that we're not spending
very much on tobacco prevention
in New Mexico, um, compared
especially to what the tobacco
industry is spending on
advertising, so I think it's a
fairly grim outlook for us uh uh
uh currently on our
Success in trying to lower
e-cigarette use and all those
other tobacco products that
don't even fall under the
e-cigarette definition. All
those products, um.
Keeping them away, trying to
discourage our youth.
So I hope we can come up with
some brilliant strategies that
um can go beyond what we're
doing and we do spend our
prevention money pretty wisely
contracting. I'm sure we're
gonna hear that from um DOH
contracting with different
provider groups and having
education campaigns and having
the quit line, but it, it, it
cannot compare to what the
industry spends trying
to persuade people to,
especially young people, to use
e-cigarettes and these other
related products.
So that's
All I have to say.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Members Maheitta of the American
Heart Association, you know, you
just want to make what Linda
Mansion is, you know, the FDA is
not issued a complete ban on
flavored products, even though
they rejected.
A majority of the marketing
applications, uh, for the
flavored product, especially
those.
That appeal to youth, so we're
waiting for actions from FDA,
but the, but the good thing, you
know, uh,
Uh
Is, is the jewel settlement
money that was, you know, came
to.
You know, AG's office a couple
of years ago.
So last year, you know, there
was like $3.8 million.
Uh
Sitting in AG's office and then
we worked with Julie Meade, the
AG's office, and, uh, the
attorney general himself and to
get that money into
You know, DOH new PAC.
And so that that's a silver
lining here.
And so it's a $3.8 million that
put into new PAC funding and
thanks to Senator Campos, who
introduced that.
Language into hospital too to
get it in and we were able to do
that at the very last minute,
and you know, I, we already
distributed the settlement, uh,
Joe settlement, and if you look
at page 27 and 28.
Uh, so,
The, the total payment to, to
the state is $17 million over a
six-year period.
So, so far, you know.
It's $3.8 million that goes to
DOH in your back, and for the
next
You know, until 2030.
Uh, you know, it's actually it's
$2.1 million but after lawyers.
You know, fees and all that
like, you know, the state.
Gets $1.8 million.
So
The, the
It has to be appropriated by the
legislature to DOH to be used
this money for a very specific
purpose that's specified in this
agreement. I mean, if you look
at
Page 28, that specifies what
that money should be used for
and, you know, it's, it's the
responsibility of AG to ensure
that happens, so we, we have
that money coming in, uh, it's,
it's not a lot, but, you know,
it's, it's still something, uh,
so.
we would, you know, we will work
with you every year because this
money has to be appropriated, so
we, we ask one of you to
You know, carry that and put it
in hose 2.
Uh, you know, every year for the
Until 2030, so.
And
It's, it's in House Bill 2, the,
the, the money appropriated to
DOH.
It's, uh, you know, it's, it's a
big bill but it's if if you
wanna go and look at it, it's
page.
You know, 2 and 3.
Item 191 and it's, it's
specified in there, uh, so we,
we will continue to work with
the Attorney General's office.
Uh, and
You to, to, to make sure that
money is, you know, allocated
to.
Uh, in HB 2 and go specifically
to to new Pack to do prevention
and education, so.
But, but I think on.
On that, as you see in the, in
the settlement agreement, it is
narrowed to certain products
and, and, and youth, so we can't
just overall spend it on, on
prevention.
OK. Is that everything that
you'd like to present. Yeah,
ma'am. OK, thank you take any
questions.
Representative Thompson.
Uh
Thank you. Um, so it really
feels like.
David and Goliath, but even more
like the mouse and the.
I tsunami or something. I mean,
we're just, we're a little.
Um
Fighting the the giant. So just,
just on, on the e-cigarette, um,
the first page at the bottom
column, I mean, column on the
left, the bottom, the
e-cigarette use for adults went
from 4.5 to 6%. Yeah, that's a
small increase, but it's a, it's
a 1, it's a 33% increase. I
mean, in numbers, it's small,
but it's a, it's, you know, a,
a, a 1/3 increase, which, and
the fact that the majority of
That is 23 and 24 year olds. It
just tells us that we have a
We're gonna have
A mountain of folks just.
Continuing to and with cuts in
Medicaid and cuts in
Affordable Care Act, it's kind
of like a
A perfect storm, but imperfect
storm, so, um.
Just out of curiosity, I mean,
we have, I've been on this
committee since 2013 and you
know, same old, same old, we're
trying.
And of course, big tobacco's
always miles ahead of us, not
just steps ahead of us. By the
time we get a bill done with the
language, they've left that in
the dust, um, so are there any
states who have come up with
language to capture current and
future products.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Thompson, uh, I think they have,
I think California and some of
the states. I think we, we try
to do that in the last 2 years.
I mean, the, the new products in
the market are synthetic based.
So the tobacco industry is
arguing like, you know, since
it's not derived from the actual
tobacco.
So it can be taxed as tobacco.
But it's still nicotine doesn't
matter if it's synthetic or
natural.
So we tried to address that
issue, you know, the last two
sessions, like to, to amend the
tobacco Control Act.
To say, like, you know, a aspect
of where the nicotine is
derived, you know, it should be
taxed as, as is, uh.
But you know, other states have
done it, uh, and the, the new
product.
are like, you know, the chews
and like, you know, with high
content of nicotine and, you
know, very addictive, you know,
properties, so you know, we, we
try to do it. I mean, we can,
you know, that has been.
You know, Senator Hickey is,
we all have tried and.
Uh,
continue pushing for it.
So, Madam Chair, would you say
California, if, if we had a
model to follow.
Would California be our
Our best model or is it a
combination of.
A variety of states, I mean, and
again, it's, we've been trying
and trying at some point we have
to be successful, I.
Or else we quit, so we can't
quit. So is is there if you
know, we had a magic wand that
said, um, the bill is gonna pass
this year, um, what state would
we most want to look like.
Uh
Madam Chair and Madam Chair, uh,
I think that there are several.
You know, policy papers out
there, uh, and you know, the,
the first step would be like,
you know, amending the statute.
Uh, and, and taxing them as
such.
I, I think that would encompass
most of the new products.
Uh, that are coming in.
Uh, and, and have a standard
because right now our
e-cigarette taxing system is
like, you know, 12.5%.
Um, you know, product value.
And then 50 cents on disposables
and e-liquids are charged like 5
cents per milliliter. So it's,
it's, it's in terms of
administering the tax, it's,
it's more complex and
complicated. So we, we propose
like, you know, having a uniform
taxing system on all products,
you know, at, at the product, I
mean, and, you know, uh,
The product value or the
wholesale value.
You know, and, and, and taxing.
You know, comparable to imparity
with the cigarette tax.
And that will, you know, easy to
be administering in terms of tax
and revenue and.
Uh
I mean, that, that, that, that
would be an ideal thing and
there's several states have done
it and
it still.
Model languages we can, we can
easily adopt and
I'll be glad to send that
language to you. Thank you and
thank you, Madam Chair. So is I,
the model language and all that,
are there any states who have
been doing it long enough.
To show that it that.
That it's the right one, I mean,
is there enough data?
To show us the way of.
That would be the best.
Uh, manager, manager, I think
there is that we, we, we'll,
we'll get that for you because
there, there are like several
states have been doing this for
a long period, like, for
example, Massachusetts has
banned all the flavors.
You know, and
You know, and, and they.
You know, didn't affect their.
There are businesses, you know,
yeah, I mean, they, they go to
the neighboring.
States, but, you know, it hasn't
affected their
Bottom line in terms of
affecting the businesses or
retail stores and all that, so
we, we, we, we can get you, we
can get you that data.
OK, thank you. And then, Madam
Chair, we just have to, and I
know we've been trying to do
this for over a decade is to get
more of our colleagues to
understand.
But they don't even show up for
the meeting, so, so it's uh, so
thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
so much for both of you for all
the work that you always do.
Sendra Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for, uh, the
Um,
bringing us up to date, yes, not
much has changed. Um, but I
Again,
there, there is a new session
coming up. Uh, it is a call
session, so things may be more
difficult, but planning out for
the following session to
continue, so I um I have some
questions kind of around that
and also just something I, some
information I would like to,
that I just texted and got to
share with the committee.
The,
um, in the last session, uh, we
had a bill for a 40% tax. It
made it to the house floor and
uh after the Senate and, and the
House committee, um, and there
it died. There are two theories,
uh, I'll call them the cause I
don't have direct knowledge per
se or witnessing that uh they
didn't make it to a vote on the
floor.
Um
Potentially and, and again, this
is a question and.
Um
One that if you'd like to
surmise on, and if you don't,
that's fine, but, uh, one is
that the lobbyist uh for the
tobacco industry and the smoke
shops were successful, uh, in
lobbying the speaker to not get
hurt, uh, put out the agenda to
be heard on the floor.
Um, the other is the regressive
tax theory that the speaker has
espoused publicly of such a tax
on, uh, individuals and a
difference of opinion if, if
that is a better thing to do
than, uh, potentially save their
lives and families of of
thousands of people.
From, uh, uh, addiction as it's
a gateway drug, but what insight
can you offer as we look at
going forward in probably 2
years and, and, you know, we've
got a lot of time, so there's a
lot of work that can be done
with the speaker, um, there's uh
again entering into discussions
with these other folks to see if
there's some sort of compromise,
but again, as we laid out.
in the bill, the greatest
inhibitor to uptake in youth is
cost and cost raised by uh taxes
as has been demonstrated, uh,
particularly with cigarettes and
in other states and probably uh
I don't know that other states
have done taxing on nicotine as
we try to do in pro probably
there, but any insights you can
offer us in going forward, uh,
um, and getting ready for 26.
27, excuse me.
Madam Chair, um,
Vice Chair Hickey.
The regressive argument is, has
been the primary argument in the
house, in the House tax
committee. It's for alcohol,
it's for tobacco, it's for those
products that
do
cause harm, I mean, alcohol only
in the, um, excessive amounts,
but I, I don't know that we'll
ever get rid of that argument. I
mean, one of the things that my
clients as American Cancer
Society that we have to price
e-cigarettes.
So that they don't cost more.
than regular cigarettes because
we might discourage youth from
buying them, but then they will
go to cigarettes.
And so it's this balance that we
have to achieve that we don't
raise e-cigarettes too much.
So that they're still, we, we've
tried numerous times, several
years to make them comparable
and, and that would probably be
the best approach, but we're, it
is a regressive tax. There's no
question about it, alcohol
excise taxes regressive, tobacco
taxes regressive.
Food tax was regressive. The
regressive taxes, but the health
ramifications of, of them are so
severe, at least in the long
term, that we, you know, that's,
that's our argument, yes,
they're regressive attacks. We
need to stop saying no, they're
not regressive. Yes, they're
regressive, but so what?
When these other things happen
because of use, uh, targeted
attacks on young people from the
industry to buy this product.
Um, I think maybe that you know
we can't quite say it that way
for a certain of your
colleagues, but that we have to
persuade them that there is a
whole industry out there
spending $8.2 billion in the
country every year, uh, I
didn't, uh, on advertising of
tobacco products.
Thank you. Um,
Back in the day, I don't know if
there are any.
Uh
Sociologist in the room or
quality of life.
Researchers or uh outcome
effectiveness measured in
different ways, but there was a
quality of life measurement tool
called the SF 36 at one time and
maybe it's, it's esoteric, I
don't see it.
Much and in medical articles,
but, you know, is there
potentially and, and this is a
rhetorical question, um, for
anyone who's listening who might
be uh interested in following
this through, but where, where
do the two meet regressive and
and destruction of life and so
forth, and yes, there are
subjective components to the
assumptions that go into the
argument, but it does turn it
into a quantitative uh.
potential argument and so, um,
uh, quality of life years, uh,
lost, uh, quality of office.
There's an SF 12 very short
measurement, um, but the, the,
the quality of life probably has
a low in regression, and in
regressive tax and taxation and
the quality of life, probably
overall has a low overall number
compared to.
quality of life when you're an
addict when you're addicted and
the quality of life that is
impacted by all of those around
you and, and so there may be a a
numeric argument there that we
could put forth that that both
camps, if they agree, I mean,
would it does in the academic
literature, it, it, it does
touch. So, uh, again,
Maybe that's another avenue, um,
uh, another question for you as
you observe this and have
observed the state for years and
we used to have uh RDL, uh,
Testimony, a man chair and uh
panelists on uh the lack of
enforcement capabilities. It's
basically subbed out to the
police and they occasionally
find a young person to go in and
buy for him. Um,
And uh I have read some
literature saying that you
really have to have a robust
enforcement as well as the tax,
um, and so in the bill that was
put forward last year initially
there was 500,000 to go to RDL
but to uncomplicate the bill
that was taken out.
Thank you, RLD. Thank you. Um,
took that out, but, uh, and, and
again, maybe this is a fiscal
year, so maybe there is a chance
to put it there, and of course,
as we know, nothing happens
fiscally without doing work
literally the moment we're
speaking with the uh finance
chairs and, and vice chairs and
their respective chiefs of staff
and the uh legislative finance
Committee had and so on to to
actually get funding. I mean,
otherwise, if it's in a bill
with.
We get funded. Um, but do you
have any insight into how we
might create persuasive
arguments for that handful of
individuals who do control the
money in the state. And of
course, the executive has to
weigh in and, and um uh finance
and administration to some
degree, but that's where the
efforts ought to be put. So
under understanding that um you
have any uh suggestions how we
might get that up since we are
probably
won't get a tax passed again,
um, maybe we can take another
tack by uh really upping
enforcement.
Uh, any thoughts on that?
Well, I'll come then. So um
I don't know how we persuade an
increase in RLD's budget to do
enforcement. I think one of the
things that we, um, I'm hoping
that DOH will be able to talk
about this. I know that a lot of
the federal grants that have
been sent to the states to, to
doinar, the shop, you know, the
kids that go, the adults that
pretend to be kids that go
shopping to buy cigarettes, um,
those kind of programs are
probably on the chopping block
if they haven't been.
shocked already and so it would,
I think the burden will fall on
New Mexico to try to up our um
monitoring of uh RLD's ability
to
But when you look at the
priority list of everything
that's happening right now and
the cuts that we're gonna be
experiencing, I don't see
500,000 for RLD to focus on
tobacco purchases to be.
Up there at the top, so to
speak, so I think it's a really
hard lift.
Thank you.
Mash me.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, I
think.
The only argument at this point
is like, you know, there are
massive cuts to Medicaid.
Snap.
And that might affect, you know,
some of the cessation programs
the feds offer.
And, you know, in terms of like
revenue being.
You know
Uh, I think because of the
federal bill in the in the salt
taxing.
You know, the state may not
You know, receive
You know, full funding, so it'll
be a big shortfall and I don't
know how you can make an
argument, maybe this is the best
year to raise some of the taxes
to offset some of those losses.
Uh, from the federal funding,
so.
Uh, I'm, I'm sure like the DOH
has lost, you know, federal
funding, uh, and so it's, it's
gonna affect every agency and
You know, it's, it depends on,
you know.
This may not be a big priority
for RLD.
Thank you. Um, next question is
probably uh uh for the
committee, um, as many of you
know, I, uh, this will probably
be my only uh test committee for
the season due to medical, uh,
interventions. The um
But the hearing from uh the LFC,
not just on the budget and
again, one of the things is, is
what's gonna get cut to
supplement Medicaid and all of
us are gonna be looking at
trying to protect some of the
funds that we have a great
interest in, but, um, the, the
One and, and, and also just as a
committee, you know, what
happened last time things got
tough, you know, this committee
got whacked and that 700 million
got diverted and they will
probably try. I mean,
I'm guessing, I'm just guessing
that this, the fund will be a
target, but we were getting
close to the proximity uh the
fund earnings starting to
surpass uh the settlement
revenue, and when that happens,
that money goes into, um,
active, uh, prevention and, and
other activities. So, um,
hopefully we can hear from not
just uh the
typical, uh, presentation that
that's very helpful for Rubyan
but also from the economists who
understand where that money is
and, and how it'll, how it'll
move. Um, the, the, the last
piece is I, I just texted Larry
Lehman and um uh and uh
congratulations to uh the
chairman of Health and, and to
uh Jeff Steinborn and, and many
others who passed.
The psilocybin bill and that
being set up, um, the, uh,
psilocybin has multiple uses and
the trauma, etc. um, and
addiction, but I, I did ask him,
is there any work being done
with smoking.
Addiction, nicotine addiction,
the gateway, the start, um, in
terms of, uh, terminating or at
least getting people to cease at
some point, you know, could be
with, with vaping as well. And
he did answer back to me, uh,
Quote, uh,
Psilocybin in preliminary
studies from Johns Hopkins are
looking at this, uh, there is
now 3 centers. There are now 3
centers of NIH, uh, starting to
study the use of psilocybin as a
treatment for nicotine
addiction. So it may be
something that we want to look
at in our future hearings. Um,
as well. And uh with that, uh,
Madam Chair, I thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Senator.
Lopez. Thank you. Excuse me.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And as
always, I appreciate the update.
It's, it's, um,
Here we are.
Still
Trying to move forward to
protect our young people.
And the future because it does
carry as they grow older. And
yes, we do, we, we have
increased the age, but it still
hasn't really affected much. I
have a middle schooler and what
I hear from my middle schooler
is very eye-opening when we talk
about vaping products in middle
school.
It's still very much out there,
still very much being used and
uh it's distressing.
And part of it also too, uh,
Madam Chair, is, you know,
schools are not supposed to be
allowing this to happen, but
there doesn't seem to be any uh
end result.
Right, if the students are
caught with vaping products. So
we talk about enforcement, you
know, I mean, there's, there's a
no smoking ban for adults and
such. I mean, it's prominently
displayed, but then when you
know that and and I hear it from
my middle schooler, so it's not
like I'm just saying what I've
read, I hear this from a person
who's on the front lines. It's
in the girls' bathroom.
Right? And she goes, she comes
out, she comes home and she
tells me, Mom, they're using
vaping products, and she hears
from us, she listens to us when
she comes to committee, so she's
well aware about the effects of
nicotine, uh, but Madam Chair,
there's just, you know, we see
what we're supposed to be doing,
but what about the enforcement?
Um, even though we have
increased the age, right? We,
we've done all of these supposed
preventative, but it's, it's
still happening. So, uh I think
we also have to look at what do
we do about enforcement, um,
especially, um, where we have
control because once the
students are off and back at
home, who knows what else
happens and we, of course, we
have ideas as to how they access
the product, um, but again,
that, that's still part of that,
that whole uh education.
and outreach and information,
all the other stuff that still
has to happen. So we talk about
advertising. The other thing my
middle schooler also tells me
about because she's on social
media.
And she tells me quite regularly
that look at this ad, look at
this ad. Oh my God, I mean, so
it's still so much out there.
Um, so I actually said, well,
show me, and she has shown me on
the different social media sites
that she's on, and it is like,
oh my, oh my gosh, OMG, right?
as to what and where our young
people are subjected to.
So I just wanted to mention that
in saying.
The importance of the outreach,
the advertising, and what we can
do for our young people is so
important, um, especially at the
younger ages, you know, the, the
brain is still listening to
information and how it's
presented needs to be short,
sweet, and to the point, and not
long winded because um the brain
development, you know, there's
only a certain window that our
young people can accept
information as it is for us as
we grow older.
It's just a certain limited uh
time frame, and I think that's
what we also have to pay
attention to.
Is not the long winded and
watching some of those ad ads
that are on there, it's, I can
see why it's very um
Oh, enticing for our young
people to think it's OK.
As, as many other things, but
it's just I, I'm
Oh
I'm just made as to what's
happening.
And then Madam Chair, and I
don't know if either of you have
been, uh, are, are doing some
research at the federal level,
but I think um Secretary Kennedy
also has some interesting
perspectives, as for what I've
been able to try and, you know,
do some research myself on
there's there's not much for us
to still see cause I think the
lay of the land is still being
Decided on, designed,
but um I don't know if he's
actually come out with anything
yet that talks about nicotine.
Whether he's, you know, what,
what the side effects because I
know his big deal is on red dye
and some other effects which I
know have some, you know, I
mean, that's been not new. It's
been talked about for a few
years already, but um, you know,
FDA and all of these other
entities, I think are still
under the purview of the US
Secretary and I'm just curious
as to where and what um.
The outcome will be for, you
know, the, the companies that
produce these products.
Um, again, I think he's had some
concerns that I have done some
research on with regards to
vaping, but nothing really
declaratory that says it ain't
gonna happen or whatever. So I
think at the federal level,
Madam Chair, there's still much
yet to be.
Sing
So in in saying that, I still
think it's upon the state.
To figure out what we do and how
we can
Continue to uh.
Do outreach with our young
people?
Um, the education that comes out
and some of the monies that are
supposed to be used, right? Um,
for education and outreach to
our young people and also to the
adults, parents to kind of
understand exactly what affects
these, you know, what nicotine
has. We talk and talk about it,
but Madam Chair, um, in talking
to some of the parents of some
of my middle schoolers such
there it's not even on their
radar. There's too many other
things for them that they're
trying to deal with and
It's, it's just, it's how we do
and do some outreach and
education for even parents. Um,
we still have to figure out how
to do that the right way.
So there's just a lot in the mix
with regards to that. And then,
um,
When we talk and, and the reason
why I mentioned that too with
regards to the US Secretary is
um FDA of course hasn't issued a
ban on flavored products yet.
So
It'll be interesting to see what
may come out the rest of this
year, looking at funding within
the actual federal budget. If
there's any indication on that
as it moves forward. So there's
still a lot of moving parts, I
think, Madam Chair, as we move
um onward, but you know, maybe
by some
Um, spark of
Uh, interest that
There actually would be a
movement forward on the federal
level where we can actually
begin to uh maybe correlate kind
of the efforts with red dye that
maybe we can have something with
regards to nicotine products for
our young people and brain
development.
I don't know. I'm just putting
this out in the universe,
because those are some of my
thoughts that I have. So, again,
thank you for your presentation,
but there's just a lot of moving
parts, madam chair, that um on
the federal level and the
funding that may or may not
come, uh, still to be seen.
Thank you.
OK
Thank you, Senator. Um, I have a
few, uh, comments and questions
too, um.
We're
Using only, I think it's 12
million for prevention.
Or not even that much.
8
5.8, OK. I, I didn't look it up.
I apologize, but um I think our
recommendation even years ago
was for New Mexico to be level
with other states and what they
use as 22 million. Is that
right?
Madam Chair, that's the CDC's
recommendation for how much.
Uh, New Mexico should be
spending on prevention and
cessation programs. Has that
been increased over the years at
all?
Because I know it's Their
number? Yes, their
recommendation. I don't think
so. No, so it's still it's like
a per capita. So we're way
short. Yeah, OK, and, um, we got
3.8 million um from the jewel
settlement.
Um,
And the attorneys got 2.5
million. I think Mahesh you
were.
Mentioning that and then the
state got one or
What numbers were those again
that this and then state got 1.8
million. Is that right?
Uh
Madam Chair, I think, you know,
the
I think every year, Joe, I think
it's 2 point.
You're going to page 27.
I think that's where it said
2.5.
2.1.1.
For the attorneys? No, no, no.
It's the total is 2.1, but. Oh,
the yearly allocation, yeah.
OK. And I think after the
attorney fees or
It's, it's about 1.8 million
that comes to the state.
OK.
Um, and that the state has
allocated all that to new PAC,
is that right? in the last uh HB
2. OK, and, and that, that, that
is about 3.
Let me get the number that's
where you said 3.8.65 3.65, OK.
OK, that's great. Um,
So we're
Looking at not having as much
federal money go into um
Medicaid possibly for smoking
cessation, um, I guess we'll
worry about how that budget
money comes out, but, um,
obviously we need to.
Invest more.
Into these different prevention
programs that we'll hear about
this afternoon.
Um, or in the next committee to
from DOH, but, um, as senator
Lopez was mentioning about, you
know, uh,
How it's so much in the media,
um.
And maybe there are media
literacy classes, um, that are
incorporated into the school,
but um it seems like arming our
kids as far as what the
different industries, tobacco or
alcohol, how they're using them
and attracting them with, you
know, the different things, uh,
such as humor and, you know,
Uh
Sexy things and, you know, um
making that so that we can
possibly counter that, um.
With, you know, uh,
Education in the schools that
will help us make it so that
students are more aware.
And then also the enforcement,
uh, to, uh,
lease for the schools.
To discourage, you know, uh,
students going into the
bathrooms and things like that,
um, making sure that the schools
understand how this is such a
serious problem. It's not just
something that, you know, kids
do, and it's OK, but it does
have lifelong ramifications that
um.
We need to uh address early on
and before it gets to be at the
point where.
They are going on to other
addictions.
Um, and I think, you know,
getting to that CDC um
recommended 22 million is
something that should be a goal
and also how that we can uh
support and maybe um.
What we need to do also is um
make sure that.
People understand if we can
raise the tax on nicotine
products to the level of
cigarettes that that funding can
go into not only prevention, but
also to um.
The cessation, uh, since we've
always wanted to do the Medicaid
match. If Medicaid goes lower,
then we need to put more funding
into it. So this is a really
good reason for us to justify,
um, with our colleagues that
this is important, um, and also
maybe get to uh some of the um.
Some of our legislative
colleagues who have a direct,
um.
Conflict
With this because of their
association with uh uh tobacco
lobbyists and um.
For them to recuse themselves
from voting against this bill.
We need to make sure that they
understand that they have, you
know, uh, this direct conflict
and we, you know, should oppose
it and get them to understand
that.
Um,
So thank you so much for this
information, uh, you know.
We will always keep trying.
As our colleagues on this
committee have worked so hard
for so many years, um, and, uh,
any ideas or recommendations,
you know, we're open to them.
So thank you. Any last words?
OK. Thank you. Thank you very
much.
OK if our next speakers will
come up from DOH.
She turns them in.
Yeah.
Uh, poor baby.
OK
Good morning, um.
Our next, um, uh, panel of
speakers from the Department of
Health initiatives and we have
Anthony Garcia, Chris Harris,
and Josh Swestein.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is uh Josh Swatik. I am the
uh.
On the policy and performance,
uh, director for the Department
of Health. Uh, I've got with me
my colleagues today who are
going to do the bulk of the
presentation. I'll be here to
answer, um, some of the, you
know, some, some questions and
help support them. Uh, but I
just want to start by saying,
you know, I'm really proud of
the progress that NAC has made
in the past year, um, as you'll
see through the presentation, I
think, you know, last year we
were pretty bare bones, didn't
have any staff, um, but I think
this year is a pretty
significant change, so.
Um, as, you know, the
performance side of things, I'm,
I'm, I'm, I'm happy to see the
progress that our programs have
made. So I'll go ahead and turn
it over to my colleagues to
introduce themselves and take
over the presentation.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Anthony Garcia, the director of
NAC.
And good morning, everyone. It's
nice to see you again. My name
is Chris Harris and I'm the
marketing director for the
Department of Health.
fantastic. Well, I just want to
say thank you for having us
here. Thank you for the work
that you do. It's nice to be in
a room where there's so much,
um, support for the work that
we're doing and it's, it's
really much appreciated. um, so
we can go ahead and jump right
into the presentation and you
know, the first slide that
you're going to see the problem
and the solution.
Um, I don't think that's
surprising to anyone, right?
That's what we've been hearing
in terms of the data that has
been presented today, uh,
tobacco use is, is the most
preventable cause of disease,
disability and death in the
United States, but there's been
a decline in smoking and a rise
of other things, right? Other
nicotine-based products,
including even more, more
synthetic based products with
the tobacco industry kind of
beginning to revolutionize the
products that they're using
constantly.
Um, the CDC continues to
recommend that the solution for
that is a comprehensive
evidence-based statewide tobacco
control program.
Um, that is comprised of state
and community interventions,
cessation interventions, mass
reach health coms, surveillance
and evaluation in the
administration and management of
that.
On the next slide, um, you'll
see that there's new pack equals
impact. I want to recognize,
right, when I came into this
position 7 months ago in
January, I was familiar with,
um, the, the most recent
ongoings in, in history of new
PAC is where, as well as where
it's been.
And I think that we can all
agree, right? We've seen
challenges in, in this space,
but there has also been a lot of
really solid and positive work
that I think needs to be
recognized and, and celebrated
for more than 2 decades, new
PAC, which it's known today and
previously Tupac when it was
tobacco use prevention and
control has made a significant
impact on the health and
well-being of New Mexicans.
From what I've been able to
estimate, 120,000 people have
received quit support from the,
the cessation services that
NUPAC provides. In FY 25, there
were 5,346 calls to the quit
line and 2580 enrollments in the
cessation services.
In FY 25, um, are, are, are
evaluator, um, has, has
estimated that we've reached
1.36% of all adult nicotine
users. That ranks as 15 out of
52 states. Additionally, 115,000
students, faculty and staff are
protected by nicotine-free
policies in schools, colleges
and universities.
5000 high school students have
been trained in nicotine
prevention and advocacy, and
that includes some of what has
been previously talked about
today in terms of how the
tobacco industry targets them
and how they go after them and
the tactics that they use that
education does include that. and
8400 plus rental homes are
covered by a smoke-free policy.
On the next slide, as I've come
into my position, um, I tend to
be a little bit more of a visual
person. Uh, I've seen a lot of
the written out five-year plans,
the strategies that people have
put forth together for for how
NUAC is operated.
And I wanted to see something
that could break that down a
little bit more visually for us,
right? And so our mission is to
improve lives by eliminating the
harm from tobacco use and
nicotine addiction. That's our
North Star, having a population
health impact is what we're
aimed to do and how we do that,
the goals and methods are also
going to align with everything
that's previously been presented
to you, right? Our goals, goal
one, prevent initiation.
Goal 2, promoting cessation goal
3, eliminating exposure, and
then through that we're doing,
you know, we also all of those
efforts are informed by research
and insights, and at the
foundation of all our work,
which is our goal for, is to
identify and eliminate
nicotine-related disparities. We
use proven methods of
prevention, education, and
support to protect health.
And we work with the people,
community, schools and
organizations.
On the next slide, I wanted to
break it down even further for
y'all in order so we can start
looking at at what are some of
those initiatives under each of
those goals, right? And so under
preventing initiation, we're
conducting health education.
We're doing youth engagement.
We're working with retail
licensing education, we're doing
massre health coms for
prevention.
And promoting cessation, we work
on health systems change. We
work with community-based
organizations on organizational
change. We do massre health
coms, and we also provide
nicotine addiction treatment
services through 1-800-QUIT-NOW.
Under eliminating exposure.
We have multi-unit housing,
healthcare facilities,
community-based orgs, schools,
colleges and universities that
we're working with on voluntary
policies to be able to protect
people from secondhand smoke or
aerosols.
Across all of our work, we also
have nicotine-free New Mexico,
which is the new PAC sponsored
coalition that provides
education, training, engagement
and advocacy.
With organizations, groups, and
stakeholders.
This year in FY 26, I'm really
excited about the research
component because some of what
y'all have already heard in
terms of the dual settlement
funds have allowed us to expand
some of our work in one of the,
the most important in my
opinion, aspects that we're
going to be doing is actually
starting to get some new New
Mexico specific insights on um
youth use and behaviors with
nicotine, um, in partnership
with the University of New
Mexico COSA um office substance
abuse and and prevention office.
Now, at the
of all that, right? We're
identifying and eliminating
nicotine-related disparities
that includes evaluation,
planning, execution of our work,
as well as CQI.
And we have our new PAC team
plus 8 contractors in FY 26 plus
a partnership with the Office of
School and Adolescent Health.
On the next slide you'll see
today's team, um, really excited
coming in on January 1 of the
priorities for me was rebuilding
out the team and starting to, to
hire folks into to the positions
that had been vacant for um some
of them for quite a while.
Um, and I'm happy to say that
we've been able to fill many of
those positions. We're still
currently recruiting for a
community outreach specialist,
um, but today the team is
comprised of myself, our program
manager, cessation specialist, a
product strategy and content
coordinator, which is a bit of a
mouthful and it's, that's a name
change. It used to be a
marketing specialist, um, but we
felt that that title, working
title represented what they were
doing a little bit better for us
and our epidemiologist.
And then additionally, we have
our regional health educators,
our Northeast Health educator,
Northwest Health educator, and
our Southern health educator,
and then, uh, eventually we're
hoping again to have the
community outreach specialist.
Underneath that, you can see the
organization of how our
contractors um who are Caris
Consulting rescue agency, the
apartment Association,
Constellation Consulting, RVO
Health, UNM Realtime Solutions,
and the Wyoming survey and
Analysis Center fall kind of
underneath our structure and
then in FY 26, using dual
settlement funds were really
excited about a partnership that
we're gonna be doing with the
Office of School and Adolescent
Health, um, to actually impact
some of the work that we're
doing with, with school-based
health clinics and, and folks in
the schools.
So we've heard a little bit um
of some, uh, some nicotine use
metrics already and, and we can
dive some more into some, some
New Mexico-based ones on the
next few slides.
So, nicotine use among youth and
and young adults, um.
This is all nicotine products
for all age levels. We have
middle school, high school, and
young adults. And we can see
that the percent of people that
use nicotine product increases
as the age is increasing, right?
And that's, that's not
surprising. We know I've heard,
um, anecdotal stories of youth,
um, in elementary schools, being
exposed to nicotine products.
Um, some starting vaping in 3rd
grade.
Um
So it's not surprising to me to
see that we have experimentation
and then addiction creeping in
as more continue to experiment
and to see those age groups just
increase as the youngest become
addicted and then more high
school and young adults continue
to try.
On the next slide,
We can see that of current
tobacco use among middle
schoolers that, uh, girls are
using more than boys, with the
exception here of cigars. Boys
slightly use cigars a little bit
more than girls, but in middle
school, girls are definitely
using at higher rates than um
than boys are.
On the next slide,
When we look at high school.
Um, we see that pattern
continue. We see girls
continuing to use at higher
rates than boys, uh, although in
high school, some of the other
product usage, right? The, the
cigarettes, the cigars, um, the
spit tobacco, those began to be
used slightly more than voice,
but girls continue to vape more,
um, and just have higher tobacco
use rates in general.
On the next slide,
We'll see that.
Um, when we look at middle
school and high school youth.
Um, we have large percentage of
them who are only vaping. So,
um, both 61% for middle schools
and 69% for high schools are
vaping only, but then there's
also um another group, 28.8% in
middle school who are using
e-cigarettes plus other tobacco
products and 24.7% are using
e-cigarettes plus other tobacco
products in, in high school.
So we can see here vaping and
e-cigarettes continue to be a, a
huge problem, but there is an
increase there in um in other
product usage. Excuse me.
Go ahead, Sen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just to
clarifying question. uh, do you
have any data on nicotine
pouches. A nicotine pouches will
we'll get into that in, um, a
couple of slides, um, Madam
Chair and senator. Thank you.
I'd also like to ask um why
you're using the word tobacco
instead of nicotine to cover
all.
Yeah, that's a, it's a fantastic
question, Madam Chair, and, um,
it goes along with kind of the,
the questions that are asked in
these studies and some of these
studies have been more focused
specifically on, on the word and
use of tobacco. And so when
we're using data and studies,
you'll see us aligning with what
was asked and how it was used in
those studies.
But tobacco
It,
you're including the nicotine
products.
That, yeah, currently that's the
way that it's included in the
studies is the vapes and
e-cigarettes are falling under a
tobacco use categories, but it's
still reported under tobacco
use.
It seems like they're kind of
behind the times.
Yeah, I think I, I agree, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Yes.
So, when we look at young adults
and tobacco use, we can see um
data from 2014 to 2024, where
there was a really solid path
where we were headed down um in
2022 went down to 30% in 2024
went down to 32.9, um, and one
note is that this measure does
not include oral nicotine
products, um.
But we're hoping to have some
data on oral nicotine products
soon, um, and then I will get
to, we do have on pouches here
momentarily. On the next slide,
when we look at smoking in, uh,
amongst adults, we know that
smoking rates still hover around
15% in New Mexico. And then of
that, the question is, who, what
populations right are smoking,
and we can see that there's
significantly, you know, higher
levels of smoking among certain
populations, um, uh
Especially those with
disability, those who are
lesbian, gay, or bisexual, those
with less than a high school
education or who make under
$15,000 a year, um, we still see
their smoking rates higher than
than others.
For oral nicotine pouches, uh,
the data that we do have so far
today, um, is showing us that of
people that are using nicotine
pouches, it does tend to skew
more towards young adults. So we
have 18 to 24 year olds who are
using it at 2.6%, and then it's
spiking in the 25 to 44 age
range and then kind of slightly
tapering off right now. So, um,
in terms of, of oral nicotine
pouches and its use, what we
have seen is it does tend again
to be more
young adults who are more likely
to use these products at this
time, um, and, uh, and vaping
and other products continue to
still be. Excuse me, we have one
more clarification.
But your speaker. Thank you.
Usually it's the other way
around.
Uh, thank you again, Madam
Chair. The, uh, this 4%, is that
Um, in addition to these other
tobacco products or is it, uh,
alone, uh, we, we had heard
anecdotal stories in high school
that high school students were
replacing vaping because of
smoke detectors, etc. with the
pouches, and so I'm just
wondering how we account for
both of those and the bill that
we wrote last year, um, uh, we
were it to cover kind of all
nicotine because we were
understanding from uh previous
Da predecessors that we were
seeing a major spike in pouches
and a decrease in vaping. So,
you know, maybe if you don't
have that information today, and
you, but you do have a way to
clarify it. Uh, could you send
us a, a memo, please. Thank you.
Madam Chair, Senator, absolutely
we will um look into what
additional data we can provide
on that. Um, I do right now know
that some of our data tends to
be a little bit limited with
that, and I think that's more so
where I'm hoping to go with some
of the research we'll be
conducting this coming year with
youth and understanding their
behaviors around nicotine
specifically more right in, in
New Mexico with um with the
surveys and focus groups we'll
be conducting with you and them.
Um, so then, I want to start
jumping into FY 25, uh, I, I
believe y'all had met just a few
months prior to when I had begun
my position in January, um, and
kind of continue giving some
updates from what's occurred
since that time frame, um, which
has been a huge effort to really
to really revitalize and amplify
new PAC.
Starting with our brand and and
website, so we've strategically
refreshed NAC's identity to
really be able to reinforce
cohesion with EM Health and New
Mexico Department of Health, um,
to present a united presence in
front to the community. Um,
we've also redesigned NAC's
website to align content with
audience needs, while
streamlining navigation and
information. So one of the, the,
you know, one of the most
important aspects of, of new PAC
and when I came on board of what
I wanted to see was making.
Making it friendlier for the
public and for people who were
serving to understand not only
the services and, and programs
that we're offering, but also
how to get help and making that
very clear when you go to our
website if you're looking to
quit, if you're looking for
resources, it can be there for
you if you're maybe um in a
health system and looking to
refer to the quit line, you can
understand it.
Really quickly where to go on
our website to find that
information and get support.
Beyond that, we also did a
community reintroduction
campaign. So, um, we, uh, this
campaign actually uh was in
market from April 3rd through
May 15th, and the, the crux of
the campaign is that we have a
new look, but we're still
serving the same purpose, right?
Um, I'm not familiar to with um
how, how much was done in terms
of the branding once Tupac
changed to new PAC, but I wanted
community members to know that
we're here for them and, and
we're still, we're still going
to be.
Uh, New Mexico's trusted source
for nicotine prevention in 100%
free quit support this media
campaign performance, uh, we, we
gained over 4.5 million
impressions, so how many times
are ads actually were displayed
on someone's um screen, um, and
we also had about 21,000 clicks
to newack's revised website for,
uh, for information, and we
definitely saw those in terms
of, of increases that we'll talk
about not only with Quitline,
but also in terms of those who
are reaching out seeking um
material support or generally
contacting new PAC for
additional support in their
community, which we've been able
to um to respond to these
campaigns were on display, uh,
Google Ads, Meta, which is
Facebook and Instagram and and
TikTok, um, and on the next
slide, we can talk about the
second campaign that we launched
for 1-800-N now more
specifically.
Uh, to promote our cessation
services. This was May 19th
through June 30th, um, and the
media performance we have, it
does not include the final week
of the campaign as we were just
collecting data and getting that
ready for this presentation, but
from what we've seen so far for
the 1st 12 weeks roughly was
about almost 7.5 million
impressions, um, 2.7 million
completed views of our video
asset, which was directing
people to the quit line.
And 21,000 clicks, um, on our
ads that were digital and would
allow people to click over to
the quit line more immediately.
Now, on the next slide, we'll
look at the impact on
enrollments that had, so during
those campaigns, we actually saw
a 22.5% increase, um, in
enrollments compared to the 12
weeks prior to the most recent
media campaigns, um, which is, I
think, a, a great start in
continuing to drive folks to the
quit line and quit and cessation
services.
Beyond enrollment, though, I do
want to point out that campaigns
really play a critical role in
maintaining awareness of the
quit line, um, amongst those who
are preparing to quit and
encouraging others to begin
contemplating to quit and being
able to move them through the
stages of change. So, um,
although we don't have a
measurable, you know, uh, uh
measure, measures to be able to
show that in on a slide, um.
Right now I do believe in, and
from my experience that these
campaigns do play that critical
role. So in addition to the
22.5%. We're top of mind for
people in the community.
Outside of our media campaigns,
we've also been doing in-person
outreach, um, this are a couple
examples of our health educator
outreach coming on board within
the past 6 months. It's, it's
been a newer ask for me to ask
my, um, my health educators to
take pictures and, you know,
come up with summaries of the
events and things that they're
going out to, but these are a
couple of them. So on the top.
Monica Patton, who was our
Northeast health educator and
who also sits on the Rio Ariba
Health Council food action team
was participating on behalf of a
new packet of food distribution
and resource event in Dixon and
on the bottom we have Melissa
Martinez, who's our Southern
health educator, and she was
presenting the You and Me
Together Vare curriculum at Loma
Heights Elementary in October,
uh, Melissa to date has
presented to 210 students, um,
from 3rd, 4th, and 5th grades in
in the southern region.
On the next slide, I wanted to
give you a couple updates on, on
the quit line. So in April we
enhanced our nicotine
replacement therapy offering. So
we went from offering 8 weeks of
single therapy to 12 weeks of
combo therapy. So now they can,
folks can choose patches plus
gum or lozenges, and in June,
um, a really exciting
initiative, um, took place in,
in which all Medicaid health
plans, Blue Cross Blue Shield,
Molina Presbyterian and United
are now supporting
1-800-QUIT-NOW rather than
promoting separate cessation
programs, um, which was a huge
feat in contracting with which
each, each of them as well as uh
revising our contracts with RVO
Health, um, and, um, and this is
gonna streamline the services
that are offered to, you know,
over 832,000 Medicaid members
and being able to reduce
confusion, enhance their care
and ensure that they're
accessing um quit services that
are, are streamlined and unified
for.
For our state.
In the next slide for
nicotine-free New Mexico, which
is our statewide coalition. Um,
they've been operating monthly
advocacy meetings, um,
previously in January, they had
their full first kickoff meeting
in February, participated in
public health at the Capitol,
um, march continued advocacy
with our national partners in
April, they offered nicotine
products and how kids are
getting a hold of them, a
training to folks who are, um,
are, are, uh, participating in
the coalition.
And then in May, Scott Gerber
from Stanford presented an
overview of the Stanford
toolkit.
Which we also use in schools and
in the community, um, and, and
being able to provide those
resources and and an overview
for them. Um, and then in June,
uh, we had nicotine-free New
Mexico's website launch, and I
do want to caveat that real
quick. We did find, um, uh, a
couple of things that needed to
be updated. So currently the
website is, is going to be
launching now in July. We wanted
to make sure that we got all the
details and everything right,
um, as we were finalizing that,
so that is just one update from
that um that we had.
Now I wanted to share a little
bit about what we're seeing
moving forward um for FY 26. So,
um, in terms of on the next
slide, the appropriation for new
pack, it's remaining the same as
last year, which is 5.435
million from the tobacco
settlement program fund.
And we will share a little bit
more about some of where that
money is going to be going, so,
um, these slides here on the top
right, you're going to see the
the graphic that I had
presented, right, that outlines
our goals, so each goal that's
highlighted is the one that it's
gonna be focused on so these
efforts are on preventing
initiation and the strategies
that we used to do that are
environmental approaches and and
mass media marketing.
So through that we're working
with Constellation Consulting to
provide statewide training and
education, Karis Consulting,
who's doing college and
university education and
outreach, uh, a new and exciting
partnership with um OSA, the
Office of School and Adolescent
Health, um, that, um, is going
to be using school-based health
clinic training and education,
um, rescue agency, which does K
through 12 school partnerships,
youth training, including the
evolvement program, education,
and, and engagement and
real-time solutions which
is mass media health comes and
behavior change campaigns.
For promoting cessation on the
next slide, we have um our, our
strategies, our first provision
and referral to nicotine
addiction treatment services and
mass media and marketing. And so
we have constellation
Consulting.
Who's gonna be working in
behavioral health facilities on
a nicotine treatment continuum
of care. So really working with
those facilities to understand
what it may take for either
their campus to go smoke-free or
for them to start um asking
about tobacco use, nicotine use,
and referring to those services.
OSA again is going to be doing
school-based health clinic
cessation education, so.
Promoting fate free program in
our schools so that way youth
can get access to addiction
treatment services as well.
Real-time solutions, which is
doing mass media health coms and
behavior change campaigns to
promote both live vape-free and
um and 1-800 quit now and we'll
have a preview of those
campaigns here momentarily.
And then RVO Health, which is
offering 1-800-NOW liveate free
for youth and young adults.
Health systems change and also
uh a new exciting initiative
this year, but an alternative to
school suspension. So RVO Health
is going to be going out to
schools and working with them to
identify what they're doing when
students are caught vaping,
because one of the, the, I think
the important factors to
remember and keep in mind about
um youth and nicotine use is
many of them are becoming
addicted.
very quickly due to these
products. And so it's an
addiction, and so it's not
enough to slap their wrist and
say, don't do it anymore. We're
gonna put a a smoke detector in
the bathroom, so we catch you,
right? They're addicted and it's
an addiction, so they also have
to find support to be able to
give it to them. And so through
the Livare program, that's what
we're hoping to do is work with
schools to say, hey, if you do
catch youth who are using, you
can have them go through the
free program.
As an alternative to suspension.
And FY 26, the vape cessation
campaigns we have developed two
new campaigns that are going to
launch in FY 26. 1 is promoting
live vape free and one is
promoting 1-800-QUIT-NOW.
So the um
The image on the top is of our
talent, who's going to be
promoting 1-800-QUIT-NOW. and um
as you heard in some of our
data, right, we're starting to
see a lot more use around um uh
girls and, and then women in
terms of using nicotine and so
we wanted to make sure that we
were reflecting not only that,
but vape use. And so in this
particular Quitline ad, uh, the
one that we ran previously in FY
25, we talked about smoking, we
talked about cigarettes in FY
26, this ad is gonna highlight
vaping and the fact that the
quit line can help people quit
with.
vaping. Um, and so that's kind
of an aftershot, uh, that image
there, um, where she's already
received support and quit, and
so you, you can see her dressed
in brighter colors, she's
happier. She's not, you know,
she's not as stressed and stress
actually was a big part of that
campaign as well in terms of
wanting to recognize why people
are using these products and
oftentimes both adults and youth
are using them to cope with
things that are going on in
their life, especially when we,
when when I've heard from youth,
um, in a lot of focus
groups in in in my past
experience, they do it to cope
with their stress in their life,
right? And then they easily
become addicted, and so that's
also on reflected on on the
bottom one which is going to be
promoting live vape-free.
Where it's saying, you know, it,
it's showing a duality there.
Um, I vaped to cope with stress,
but I quit because it got worse.
And so not only do we want to
start promoting the Leva free
through these campaigns, but it
also is still prevention
education through Mass Reach
Healthcoms because you're
starting to actually teach them
that that vaping is actually
gonna make their stress feel
worse. Um, so these media
campaigns will complement um our
in-person outreach and um and
we're looking to launch these
campaigns a little bit closer to
to fall of of this year, um,
particularly the youth one when,
when you are going back to
school.
On the next slide, we have um
our work under eliminating
exposure. Our strategies there
are education and awareness as
well as voluntary protections.
So we have, we're partnered with
um the apartment Association who
works on multi-unit housing
policy, promoting smoke-free
homes to New Mexicans and
providing general education to
to residents of multi-unit
housing properties. Uh, we're
working with Constellation
Consulting, who's going to be
doing behavioral health facility
and community-based organization
policy to try to get either
community-based orgs or, or
those facilities also their
campuses smoke and and nicotine
free, um, and Carri Consulting,
who's working in um with tribal
multi-unit housing policies in
our tribal communities working
to try to um to, to gain um
voluntary adoption of these
policies in those communities,
as well as working with colleges
and universities to try to make
their campuses smoking nicotine
free, and then the rescue agency
which does K through 12 school
district policy, um.
communication and enforcement,
um.
with those school districts.
On the next slide, we have our
research and identifying and
eliminating nicotine-related
disparities or strategies, or
capacity building and equity
focused continuous quality
improvement. Um, so through
this, we're, um, we're excited
to have a couple new initiatives
in FY 26 where I'm hoping we'd
be getting, we're, we're gonna
begin to get more New Mexico
specific insights into some of
the problems that we're seeing.
Um, so we're having the, we have
the partnership with OSA, the
Office of School and Adolescent
Health, in which we're going to
be looking at existing
school-based health clinic data
on youth tobacco and nicotine
use to start understanding what
those clinics are seeing in the
schools.
We're partnering with the
University of New Mexico to do
surveys and focus groups again
around youth nicotine use and
behavior patterns to understand
a little bit more about, about
all of it, what they're using,
why they're using it, when
they're using it, how it got
started. We want a holistic view
to understand and inform our
approaches that we're moving
forward. And then we have the
Wyoming survey and Analysis
Center, which is our independent
evaluator. They conduct our
program's evaluation, help us
with data analysis, CQI efforts,
um, as well as uh adult surveys.
Um, like the tobacco evaluation
survey amongst adults that that
they do.
On this next slide, I wanted to
share a little bit uh about
contractors and, and funding
sources. I know that funding in
general has come up in this
meeting today, right? And, and
tobacco settlement funds a large
majority of our program, and
this is specific to FY 26, this
layout that we have here. So
right now, tobacco settlement
funds will be funding everything
with the exception of our
partnership with OSA, um, as
well as the University of New
Mexico. So OSA and University
of.
Mexico
are going to be using funds from
the jewel settlement, um, that
we're able to do, uh, in, in
years, in future years, FY 27
moving forward, um, I'm actually
planning that tobacco settlement
funds will actually be
supporting University of New
Mexico research so we can
continue getting insights and
data to to continuously inform
our approaches, um, right now,
the CDC grant terms in October,
so CDC had been providing
tobacco control grant dollars to
us for several years past.
um,
the, the grant was done as a no
cost extension for FY 26,
meaning they did not give us any
more money. They just said, if
you still have some money, feel
free to use it through October
and at that point we're not
expecting any additional federal
dollars for tobacco control.
Um, and then we're lucky, like
we've discussed and and
fortunate enough to say that the
jewel settlement funds are
coming in, um, for us this year
to be able to expand on some of
this work and do some of the
additional work that that I
mentioned, like with the
University of New Mexico and um
and our partnership with Ossa.
Um, like you heard earlier today
from other presentations we are
facing a bit of an uphill
battle.
With the, the tobacco industry
spending $22.5 million a day on
marketing their products, um,
and as we've talked about in,
and as y'all have asked and has
been presented on previously,
you know, we're, we're getting a
little over 5 million in terms
of tobacco settlement, which is
nowhere near the 2014
recommendation of 22 million um
for a tobacco control program in
New Mexico. Um, so we, we're
definitely working to make sure
that we're utilizing what we
have effectively and
trying to um to make sure that,
that we are going to make
progress with what, what we do
have, um, for people in New
Mexico and we are going to
continue to do that, but, um, I
would personally just let's take
a moment and just stress the
importance of tobacco settlement
funding for this program.
Madam Chair, senators,
representatives, um, I, uh,
would love to answer any
questions at this time.
OK, thank you. Um,
Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So, um,
on page 3.
Um
And maybe this is uh.
So the fact that um,
That 5300 folks called the quit
line, but only 2500 enrolled. I
wonder if that's pretty much
the, the mix, if that's gone
down, if that's gone up, and to
me, once you take the initiative
to make the call, I would hope
and expect that it would be a
higher uptake, so can you talk a
little bit about what's going on
there?
Absolutely, Madam Chair
Representative.
I would first say that my
estimates right with the 120,000
what I've been able to see from,
from past data that I have
available, available to me is in
general the quit line um for
almost 20 years has received
about 4000 calls a year and then
about 2000 enrollments, um, and
so just wanted to say that's
where that 120001st comes from
in terms of an estimate. That is
all calls to the quit line, so
that also does include people
who are calling for support for
other for questions.
Um, seeing a drop off from, from
my experience working um
In other states with the Hawaii
Department of Health promoting
the Hawaii tobacco Quit line
promoting the Illinois tobacco
quit line and, and from what
I've been able to see, um, a
drop off is, is not surprising,
especially when you're looking
at all calls and folks are
calling also to just ask
questions before they're ready
to sign up. Um, they're calling
to, to maybe, um, to, to chat
with the counselor, get some
information before they're fully
ready to enroll. So that drop
off um is not unusual or
surprising to me. OK. Thank you.
And then on page 11.
And I hope I'm reading this
wrong, um, so let's look at
middle school. So is this graph
saying that only 10.3% of middle
schools are not using any type
of nicotine.
Or is this a subgroup?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
that is a subgroup. So this is
of tobacco users in these
schools we have 61% who are
using e-cigarettes, 28.8% who
are using e-6 plus other
tobaccos, and then, um, the 10.3
are those who are not using any
e-cigarettes, but just other
tobacco products. OK, thank you.
+00 my God, we're in deeper
trouble than I thought, um.
And then for years, um, some of
you probably remember me saying
that the MCOs have been uh
putting the, the cost of, of.
Cessation back onto Medicaid and
now, I mean, it's good news that
it's all put back together, but
I'm wondering, and you may not
know this, if the MCOs have,
have had a cut back on their
PMPM, um, for, uh, since, since
we were giving them money to do
the quit line and they were
still using the Medicaid quit
line. Has there been a change in
their per member per month that
they're given and to
Take into account the fact that
uh so that they can help pay for
the uh the quit line.
That they rode free for so long.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
unless one of my colleagues
happens to know, I think we'll
have to get back to you with
that answer. I'm not sure about
if they've received a change in
their funding. What I can
confirm though is that they are
paying um the, the state,
they're reimbursing the state
for the Medicaid members who do
enroll in our cessation program.
OK. OK, thank you for that. And
then I, I, I told Madam Chair
that I always expect girls to be
smarter than boys at at the mid
school, high school level and.
um, it's disappointing to see
that girls are, are.
Using more than boys and I'm
wondering is there research, I
mean stress levels are high for
everyone. Um, I'm just
wondering, is that a national
trend and if so, does anybody
does anyone know why?
Madam Chair Representative, I
think we can look to see what
what concrete data may be
available both in nationally or
here in New Mexico to answer
that question. Um, I will say
anecdotally what I've seen.
In my past experience for more
recent years, is it's, it's a
trend that I, I feel like we've
seen nationally where there has
been an uptick in girls using
more than boys, um, the reasons
behind that have not been clear
to me in any data that I've seen
to date.
I don't want to speculate, but
it, it, it's does, it wouldn't
surprise me if they're being
marketed um on social media a
lot more to to girls than boys
as well.
Yeah, it's uh, it seems like,
Madam Chair, that uh
big tobacco knows where our
weaknesses are and and goes
right, I mean, LGBTQ and people
of color and low income folks,
it's just, it's heinous what
they do, but um, but we know
they're doing it, and then Madam
chair, I think just one more,
and this is
Maybe a little bit.
have a goofy question. So in
terms of um Kere consulting on
page 28, tribal multi multi-unit
housing policy. I've done a lot
of work on different tribes and
Pueblos and multi-unit housing
is not.
At least in the past, has not
been a common, so does that mean
like apartments or does that
mean housing developments? I
mean, do they have to be um to
be multi-unit housing, do they
have to be attached or is it, is
it, uh, you know, a, a
subdivision for lack of a better
word.
Madam Chair, representative,
it's a great question. My
understanding that it is, um, at
least kind of one shared wall,
um, and, um, not every tribal
community does have multi-unit
housing in them and so the ones
that do are the ones that we're
working in to to try to get
volunteer voluntary policies in
place. OK, thank you for that
and Madam Chair, is, is there, I
mean, and I, I understand the
shared wall and, but even within
the community and you know your
next door neighbor using vape on
on their.
Back
Stoop whatever is there anything
going on in terms of of.
Community, uh, you know, not
just the shared wall part, but,
but close community in terms of
of
What, what Karas is doing.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, um, currently
not specifically community
efforts, um, in those, I will
say that it seems to happen a
little bit more organically from
what I've been able to see. So
Carris also works with schools
and is, is in schools and so
sometimes they have to take
avenues to try to get meetings
with folks and and tribal
leaders in in various ways, um,
and I have one anecdotal story
of um them working in, in a
school and talking to school
folks when a couple of youth
actually heard them talking.
And had mentioned, hey, like we,
we, there's, you know, my, my,
where I live, it's no smoking,
except the the designated
smoking areas on the playground,
um, or, or near the playground
rather and um, and right, and,
and so I know in those
instances, right, like Harris
has, has worked with those youth
to try to open doors to have
those conversations with folks
in the community, so I see it
happening a little bit more
organically that way, um, but
contractually, currently not
that.
And dementia, just it, it's, it
seems like that's not the
smartest use of our money to go
after the few tribal units that
are that share walls, I mean,
and admittedly it's been a few
years since I worked on some of
the pueblos and um Navajo, but,
but it seems like we could get
more bang for our buck.
Going away from the shared wall.
vision, but that's all I have.
Thank you so much for what
you're doing and um please know
that uh this committee is
Small but mighty, at least in
our own minds, we don't.
So, so, so come to us and we
will fight with you, not that
we're gonna get our bills passed
because we haven't been great at
that, but, but we are
passionate. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, rep, uh, Senator
Hickey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
First, let me, uh, tell you, uh,
uh, you, you've, uh,
Exceeded the threshold of what I
call the multiple seas, um, that
was very clean, very concise,
very uh clear, um, and in some
ways convincing and uh I haven't
heard that from.
This
Division of the Department of
Health and and new PAC and the.
4 years on the committee, this
is uh one of the, the best
presentations and thank you for
we were talking earlier moving
from Illinois to take this
position and thank you.
Uh, Mr. Swetak for uh reaching
out and finding talent elsewhere
in the country, uh, where it
actually exists and um and
actually getting him here, so.
That's uh that that's wonderful
that we will benefit from your
experience and and capabilities.
Um.
The uh just a a a a couple of
questions. The uh on the side of
the stress. I mean, yes, uh, we
all have stress. We all deal
with stress. We deal with it
medicinally often times, um,
smoking when you're younger is
the easiest way that eventually
can lead to alcohol then lead to
other drugs, uh, I mean, people
are just trying to achieve some
level of uh.
uh, freedom from, from anxiety
and so forth and and and and
that's something we all deal
with in our lives, but um in, in
your program, not that you can
kind of take on that whole issue
around behavioral health, but.
Um
Finding and finding other
mechanisms or suggesting other
mechanisms of stress reduction.
Uh, I think we'll be very
helpful and if
Indeed, we begin to get off the
ground our behavioral health
program, if that actually
happens. Um, I, I know we have
great intentions and we've done
funding, um, execution is always
a difficult issue for the state,
um.
But if, if we move there, um,
you know, stress is at the
center of of crime stresses at
the center of addiction, uh,
The former head of UNM in a
dictionologist taught us uh
nicotine is the gateway drug to
addiction that helps build the
pathways, the craving pathways
that that uh lock in and by the
time uh men are in late twenties
and women or early twenties, so.
Um, I, I hope that as, as you
demonstrate that you are being
effective, that we all have the
wisdom and the legislature and
that you all are reaching out to
other people, uh, in behavioral
health. We have segmented
behavioral health into the uh,
Medicaid program and then, uh,
uh, under the HCA and so, uh,
you know, the.
The the the while collaboration
existed, it becomes more
difficult, uh, I personally
believe there's a number of
other states have come around to
the fact that, um.
Behavioral health is and an
addiction or such key issues
that they have separate
departments that reports
directly to the governor and I,
I would hope that eventually,
you know, I hate to add to the
bureaucracy, but they're having
much more impact and bearing it
in HCA is not having a lot of
impact, but be that uh be the
fact that that's where it is,
uh, reaching out to um.
Uh, Mr. Bacchus and so forth,
coordinating with him, the
administrative office of the
courts, um, this has a role
earlier, I brought up uh the uh
potential initial of uh
psilocybin potentially in, in,
in quitting, um, that is, uh,
well, not part of the behavior
health bill going to be a part
of our behavioral health program
in time, uh, in 2 to 3 years, we
will be doing starting with
vets.
In particular, uh, but working
on addiction. Um,
Looking at a number of these and
uh uh.
The, I, I learned something this
last week that just practically.
blew me out to where I mean, I,
I was stunned.
Uh, in a very positive way. The
state of Texas.
The state of Texas.
Under the
Um
Influence and efforts of the
governor.
Senator Abbott and former
Governor Rick Perry.
Have appropriated 55.
Million dollars.
For a program in plant-based
medicine.
For addiction, uh, psilocybin is
a plant-based medicine and this
plant based medicine is called
ibocaine comes from Africa, it's
part of the leaf and root
combination and.
Um
It has a non-relapse rate of
almost 85% after the first
administration.
Um, and for those who do
relapse, uh, uh, goes up to 95%
and uh my assistant who is
sitting behind you is uh doing
research so that we find out
more about that, but
Um
You know, if, if, if Texas,
Texas.
Texas.
Can appropriate $55 million to
deal with addictions, um,
hopefully, we will start to do.
I, I don't know, but I, I will
be working on that as a bill,
uh, copying Texas because we
have such a huge addiction
problem, but I want to go back
to and just it's, it's talking,
it's brainstorming thinking,
looking at other states, going
to national conferences, um,
what other ways and what we
traditionally have done, uh,
where we just don't seem to get
much legislative support to
approach this problem. There are
other ways to, uh, potentially
support it, so that's a, I'm not
that I'm
recommending that. It's a 24
hour treatment that has to be
done in an ICU because of a
chance of with an overdose of
arrhythmias, but hugely
effective, um, and of course our
problem in New Mexico is that
once you they.
They are not in relapse.
What do you do with them? I
mean, how do you get them in the
housing, a job, etc. etc. So
those would be things will be
working out, but I wanna, I'm
just trying to, uh, have you
become more aware that, that
there will be different
approaches that come along. Um,
the other thing that I, I, I, I
would love and I'd be happy to
do this offline with you when
I'm back online in November, um,
is, uh, to deal with uh what.
In business, we always had to
do. You have a plan here, I see
it, um, love it, looks like a
real plan. It sounds like you're
capable individual with a skill
base and experience to execute,
and you've got strong support
within your own department,
seeing that now, um, is the
personnel changes have gone
forward. Um, we gotta crack the
nut of the isolation of
behavioral health over in
Medicaid, but not, that'll be up
to.
legislation in the new governor,
uh, that comes along.
However, um,
One of the things that'd be
think would be very helpful is
that, you know, we may uncover
new sources of funding we talked
about, we just got $3.2 million
but as we talked about, we're
also gonna have uh
unfortunately, the negative
opportunity of having to uh
protect our own turfs and
places, and again, the money
being taken from the fund, uh,
to make up for Medicaid is very
real, um, and that, that's gonna
be up to us.
I mean, again, those are value
judgments, I understand that,
But you, in, in, in business,
when you make a plan and you lay
it out and, you know, and this
is in good national not for
profits and, and certainly in
regular for-profit business.
Most anywhere you go, you, you
not only have a plan to make
your, particularly your
financial plan or your
membership growth or uh widgets
made, whatever it is, uh,
usually have 5 threats to that
plan and
opportunities. The threats,
what's going to get in the way
of you achieving that plan and
how you're going to deal with
it. That's what you're gonna do.
What are your priorities if your
money gets cut?
And you, you should have that in
your back pocket, um, for the
next fiscal year, uh, or maybe
even if we do retrospectively go
in and change some currently
budgeted monies. It, it might be
sooner. Secondly, you should
have the 5 opportunities of
additional funds coming in,
where would you put those and,
and the reason to think them
through at this point as you're
doing your planning going into
next year's budget, the those
threats and opportunities.
Is you, you don't lose a lot of
time and very often extra funds
get spent half hazardly or they
just never get spent, uh, which
is probably more common. And
then when the cuts come, they,
they come arbitrarily without
thought, without impact, and
what are the trade-offs. And now
you have the time to think about
that and not react, so, um, as
a, as a former uh um
clinician, uh, we certainly had
to do, um,
A diff a differential diagnosis
and that was, we think it
probably this, but if it isn't
this, it could be that, that,
that, and that, and so what are
we doing to rule out that that
and that. It's the same thing
and it's a business person, um,
that's kind of like ABC. So I
hope that you were able to do
that in the department as well,
um, I'm, I'm just imparting you
some wisdom of
50 some odd years, uh, uh,
getting, getting things done
with people and or uh business,
but, uh, um, again, I, I see an
individual with experience and
the skill base and and
supportive skill bases and
experiences, and I hope you're
able to do that going forward,
but again, I want to
congratulate you. This is the
most optimistic I have been
about Newack in my
Uh, tenure in this committee.
Thank you.
Madameerweiser, thank you very
much.
And Madam Chair, if I just may,
um, uh, quickly, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator Hickey, I think
to your point about stress,
that's very important. I think
there's a really unique
opportunity here working with
the school-based health centers,
um, especially since we got that
$9 million to really fund
looking at behavioral health and
dealing with suicide prevention
through the school-based health
centers and our new PAC program
also partnering with them. I
think this is a great chance to
really deal and dive into that
stress piece.
And address it at the school
with are already successful
programs. Uh, so I think, you
know, that that sort of synergy
between between programs is
really exciting, um, and again,
we appreciate the words and, and
the advice and know that, you
know, DOH is looking, you know,
doing exactly what you said at
this point, um, so thank you.
Senator Lopez
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, thank you for your
presentation.
And I do say, uh.
The organization and your
presentation today is truly
appreciated. Thank you.
Um, I too have sat on this
committee for
Uh, several years and um
What I've seen here today is, is
truly
I think the way that we need to
move forward when we talk about
um outreach and how it's
organized within the state of
New Mexico, so thank you.
Just a few questions, Madam
Chair, and one of them in
dealing with the impact on page
3, just a question is to ask how
many other states have a similar
quit line. Um, do you have any
information on that, Madam
Chair?
Madam chair, Senator, thank you,
uh, for your question.
At this time, I don't have the
exact number of how many have a
quit line of other states have a
quit line. Um, I will say that
I've, I've heard and and from
the states that I've been in
contact with through some of the
partnerships that we had through
the CDC and regional calls, um,
there are a lot of them that um
are scaling down their services,
um, because of federal cuts and
um and if, and, and some worry
that they're not gonna be able
to operate at all. So I think um
it'll also be telling in the
next few months to get an
updated number too as as to how
many um will remain active
beyond this year.
And thank you and Madam Chair,
that was also part of my other
As we're looking at talking
about funding is um based of
what you've presented to us is,
um, even with those who are
contracted with, there's just
one entity, I think, uh, that
showed where there was some
monies from the CDC. Other
monies, of course, are coming
from settlement and other uh
factors. So I think that may
look for us, if I may, Madam
Chair, something more positive,
um, and, and for an aspect of us
and for your comment, Madam
Chair, that you've just
mentioned, um, if other states
are just
lying on the federal dollars.
That's interesting.
Yeah, is what you've just
shared, so for me it's like
Um
That will have a a definitive
impact when you look at it, um,
nationwide uh with regards to um
tobacco cessation programs.
So, um,
And then
I'm just flipping through where
I made some, uh, some notes.
And then, oh, yes, on page 10,
Madam Chair, and
Where you're mentioning about
girls versus boys, um, you know,
current tobacco use. Do you have
any numbers nationwide for a
comparison. This is showing us
for New Mexico.
But what about nationally? Are
we following a national trend?
Is this something that, um, in
other words, is New Mexico
unique, or are we looking
following similar uh trends that
are going nationwide, so that's
a question on that.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, we
will need to look for the, the
data to be able to compare, but
we can provide that afterward.
Um, I, I think anecdotally I,
I've seen from my experience,
that girls using more than boys
does seem to be a bit of a trend
nationally right now, um, but
let's confirm that with data
when we get it in.
No, and I appreciate that, Madam
Chair, cause I think that'll
give us a good comparison,
especially as we talk about
approaching our colleagues,
always giving the bigger picture
so it's not just unique to New
Mexico, but it's a trend, etc.
etc.
Then I appreciate um
Representative Thompson's
clarification because I too was
kind of questioning, going, oh
my God on that on page 11.
Uh, on the middle school where
you had the, the graph, um, it's
just other tobacco products
only, so I appreciate the
clarification, like.
Uh, since I have a middle
schooler, it's like, oh yeah,
just that really helped to
clarify.
And then, um,
I wanted to make mention, Madam
Chair.
I, uh, on page 18 where you had
um just some pictures with
regards to the media, um, your
media campaign and I too have
seen the ads on the social media
that I'm active on. So I want to
say, yes, I've seen it and I pre
I haven't clicked on it yet, but
I may just to go through and see
what the process is, but
Uh, both my, myself and my
middle schooler, we have seen
the ads. So I want to say it is
out there on social media.
And then Madam Chair, on page
20.
And the uh we talked about
health educator outreach, and I
know you just mentioned, Madam
Chair, about school-based health
centers and yes, thank goodness
we now have a line item in the
budget.
That actually supports our
school-based health centers. I
know that Mr. Rodriguez, I know,
is very appreciative, but, um,
what other type of outreach,
especially our it it is um there
with.
Like our health councils. Um, I
know in Berlio County, we have a
very active health council, and
I know that there are in some
other counties. Is there also
outreach and working with them.
Madam Chair, Senator, that's a
fantastic question. Um,
Right now, I'm gonna be working
to bring more structure to our
health educators and and the
outreach that we do. Currently,
I do know a couple of our health
educators are connected with the
health councils and, and working
with some of them, um, in, in a
couple of regions, um, and
similarly I'd like to see um
more collaboration and
coordination. In fact, for me, I
would also say write
collaboration and coordination
is going to be huge for FY 26
and our nicotine control
program. We're gonna have a lot
of efforts and people in the
community and one of the
ways that I wanna make sure is
that we're, we're spreading our
reach and not doubling or
tripling down in certain areas,
um, but rather trying to, to
coordinate our efforts and that
will include um reaching out and
coordinating with health
councils.
Thank you, Madam Chair, because
I know that, you know, they do a
lot of outreach programs, the
health councils, um, your
cessation programs, but I know,
uh, again, here in Bernalo
County, um,
Enrica does some wonderful
outreach and he's, he's very
active and engaged in what they
do, um, but I know in certain
communities in Bernalillo
County, I know that they have, I
think their tentacles, as I call
in in working with um some of
our schools, so I think that may
be uh added value for some of
your staff as they're looking to
outreach um with regards to
to that
particular area of population.
And then, um, Madam Chair,
again, we were looking at
outreach and it was just uh
some.
Notes that I made
Um
In addition to working with our
school-based health centers, but
is, has there been any outreach
with our school, the school
administrators association.
Um, and also our school boards.
Association and Madam Chair, I
bring this up because of course
they oversee policy and
implementation of policy in our
school districts.
And I think that would be
important, um.
Maybe even a present. I don't
know if this is what has been
done, but at least a
presentation during some of
their statewide conferences that
they have, I think would be
important so that the, the
leadership who's helping to
direct policy within our school
districts is aware of some of
this information. If you've
already given it, it's always
good to be um.
Duplicative because some of our
brains as we get older, you
know, short attention span
equates with others, but I think
it helps repetitive over and
over again, making sure that our
leadership, um, both again at
school administrators level who
implement policy and then our
school boards would be, I think,
Madam Chair, if you haven't done
it or if you are just to
continue doing some of the
outreach because I think that's
so important.
Especially since the work that
you're doing is working with our
young people, um, and try to
make sure about uh policies, and
I, I appreciate.
The, the focus of saying so
instead of it's a suspension
because suspensions, Madam
Chair, are now always positive
for our young people, cause if
you're missing school, there's
other um
concerns that come up, even for
those who are um expelled for
other reasons I won't get onto
that diatribe, but if this is a
policy option, I think that
would be something else that can
be um proposed to both the
school boards association as
well as the school
administrators, you're hitting a
wider audience on that, and I
think it's just important to
options that are available.
So that's kind of all I have at
this point, madam chair. OK.
I'll wait for him to answer
Madam,
thank you, Senator, thank you so
much for um for those words and
the, the advice. I, I agree it
would be great to, to, uh, all
alternative school suspension at
a higher level to be able to, to
provide some of that. We do
currently do some school board
presentation and, and outreach
through the rescue agency, the
evolvement program, the 24/7
campaign, no minor sale
campaigns. Um, they, they do,
uh, present to school boards,
um, across the state as well,
um, but I am.
of, of trying to do more of
that, yeah.
And again, Madam Chair, if
you're doing it just to, you
know, a certain
Regional school boards, I think
you can get a bigger audience if
you go to the school boards
association and um the school
administrators, they have annual
conferences that um
School board members are
supposed to be attending, and I
think you'll have a better
opportunity, at least, you know,
for
a bigger outreach at that point.
Um, just, it's just again, uh,
some suggestions.
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you.
And on that same point cause
that was one of my um concerns
also, you know, what kind of
enforcement the schools have
besides, um, you know, uh,
suspension, um, and I thought it
might have been mentioned that
the um live vape free program.
Does that address, uh, could
that be a referral for students
to go through that.
Madam chair, yes, absolutely,
and live vape free, that is the
alternative to school
suspension, so RVO Health will
be working with the schools and
on um on developing curriculum
to help people as well as
referring them to live varee as
part of those services.
OK, great.
Did you have something. If I may
just to tag onto that, Madam
Chair, is this program online?
Is it an online program?
Madam Chair Senator, yes,
it's again,
Madam Chair, it's just for
access purposes, again, rural
districts if they don't have
access to a, um, you know, a
counselor professional,
sometimes that is also a
limiting factor, but I'm glad
it's online too. Thank you.
Perhaps they could.
At school, I have the
counselors, especially through
the school base, go through it
with the student.
And, uh, Madam Chair, Senator
Lopez, one of the things that
we've also done, we are
mentioning school boards, um, as
part of the Department of Health
as we're also expanding um our
region to local governments. We
actually hired a specific person
to work with our local
governments throughout the
state, uh, to talk about things
like this at the Department of
Health does. So really elevating
the work that we do to school
boards to county commissions,
uh, to places that, you know, we
might not have talked to in the
past, so that's a very
intentional effort that we're
undertaking.
Uh, within DOH as well, uh, to
help out our programs and
provide that as a service, uh,
to all of our efforts that we
have.
Thank you. Um, OK, um, I have a
list of questions too. The 5000
high school students trained in
nicotine prevention. Um, how
many do you do every year just
to keep, you know, after you
lose the seniors.
Yeah, Madam Chair, um,
I'm not familiar with the
number, but we can ask that
question and get back to you. I
do know that we, uh, through the
evolvement program and those
trainings, we work with 16
schools a year, um, and so that
does include some returning
students who would be
participating again in the
evolvement program for those who
graduate out, they obviously
recruit some, some newer
students who are coming into the
program as well to keep that
cycle going.
Um
That's 16 high schools and out
of how many in our state.
Uh, don't have the number of
high schools in the state,
um.
Because that doesn't sound like
a real high percentage, but
maybe it is, um, cause it sounds
like evolvement could use more
funding to um.
Expand that and keep the
students if you have 5000
trained to do prevention and
advocacy, um, if they're all in
just those 16 schools, you know,
what are they, what we can ask
evolvement, what they're doing,
but to make sure that, you know,
it's expanded for those
students, maybe in other
schools.
To be able to um do something
with that knowledge and
advocacy.
So I would just encourage you
to, you know, try and keep those
students.
You know, busy and active
besides just word of mouth and
their friends, um, also, um, the
media liters is, well, I should
ask, is media literacy included
in the real-time programs on
page 26.
Madam Chair, can I ask, uh,
media literacy in terms of
Um, awareness of how uh the
industry, uh, tries to entice
them into using their products
and where they are advertising.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So the,
the media literacy, I think is
tackled more through the
evolvement program in, in
training youth in the schools,
um, on, on the tactics of the
tobacco program, um, and then
the real-time solutions and, and
the mass massre Healthcoms
campaigns that we're doing are
then more doing prevention
messaging.
Um, as well as promoting live
vape-free, um, and one of the
things that I'm hoping to do in
FY 26 with the research that
we're going to be doing at UNM
is understanding more of, I, I
have a lot of insights and I, I,
I've seen a lot of focus groups
from other states in terms of
what tends to motivate youth not
to use, right? What works as a
prevention message. Um, I
haven't found a strong
correlation in the past with um
with uh tobacco industry
tactics, uh, youth tend to be
like, yeah, we know they target
us, right? They, it's and
One of the things that I'm
hoping to learn more in New
Mexico this year.
As if that might be different in
New Mexico, and if we can learn
if more of, of, um, that type of
message would be uh a value
added prevention message, in
which case I would want to then
turn that into Mass Reach
Healthcom's communications. When
you said the word focus groups,
that's key, I think. How do we
know, um, how our youth are
responding and, and how to
counter that is going to be
really important, um, and even
some trainings, I think, uh, for
me.
literacy is could be helpful
too, and I noted, um, or
noticed, um, Mr. Chris Harris,
who's your director of
marketing, um, have you been
involved with a lot of this
development for tobacco thank
you for the question. Yes, I've
been involved throughout the
entire process as Anthony is on
boarded, excuse me, into his new
role. We've been working in
lockstep to develop, uh, the
relaunch campaign.
Excuse me, update the website
develop uh quit now phase 1 and
phase 2, also get the live vape
free messaging going to increase
access to resources that the new
PAC team can use at events and
conferences across the the state
and as they do their community
outreach work and then we'll be
continuing continuing to work in
lockstep, uh, in future
iterations of our messaging that
we get throughout the state.
That sounds great. Define what's
effective and going to help
reduce that number and then also
to evaluate it to track, um, are
you doing that?
kind of work too, the
evaluation.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you very
much for the question. Just a
quick follow up, do you mean
specifically for campaigns or or
or for the the work that new PAC
is doing as a whole.
Um, but,
well, thank you for that
clarification, Madam Chair. Uh,
the answer is yes, we are
evaluating the impact of the
campaigns across the board, we
look at age, gender, we look at
uh geographical location, uh, we
also look at uh how the calls to
action that correspond with our
messaging.
actually drive action towards
the outcome that we want,
whether it's a quit now uh
enrollment, uh, whether it's
reaching out to a family member
to access services or have
conversations about their their
nicotine usage, um, we are,
we're monitoring it through a
variety of data points.
And
OK
Great.
Um
Thank you for that. Um, also,
um,
OK, we've already answered some
of those. Um, do you borrow from
other states some of your uh
campaign ideas, what's been
effective.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the
question. Appreciate it. Uh, the
answer is yes, we absolutely do,
as Anthony's come on and as
we've started to develop the.
The messaging for our quit now
campaigns uh which draw people
to or uh drive people rather to
the the quit now services that
we offer as we were working to
develop that messaging, uh,
develop that imagery. Anthony's
experience at Hawaii uh played a
a big role in how we actually
chose to showcase uh which
services are available to help
people uh quit nicotine.
Do you want to extend on that?
Um, I noticed on your uh media
impact on enrollments, um, week
11 and 12 had a drop off from
what it uh taken place, the
preceding
12 week period. I'm on page 219.
Um, is that typical? or do you
think it just the campaign wore
off and maybe you should stop at
week 10 and start another one.
Another a different campaign.
Thank you very much for the
question, uh, Madam Chair. Uh,
the answer is that this is a com
uh
The, I, you know, I would want
to look at um the full extent of
the run time for all of our
campaigns, uh, and, and break
that out by individual campaign
to see if it was a correlation
uh of.
The messaging being in market
for an extended period of time,
uh, or if we're starting to see
changing.
Habits related to how our
audiences are consuming media,
what's going on in the national
news that may uh.
Supersede interest in in the
campaign.
Uh, and so I, I that's a
long-winded way of saying, let
me look into it, and I'd be
happy to provide that
information to you, Anthony. I'm
not sure if I can add a little
bit to that too. Um, I would
say, you know, from, from my
experience leading campaigns in
other states, it's not
surprising to see smaller drop
offs over time, um, and that's a
great question that you asked,
right? Is it, would it be more
beneficial to keep those
campaigns shorter and, and, and
then kind of um run another one.
and I think the answer honestly
is, it's
gonna be, it's gonna vary quite
a bit. There's a lot that
affects people in their decision
to actually enroll in Quitline
services, and that's, um, that's
why, you know, I wanted to
stress the importance of, um,
when we look at media campaigns
and in my particular opinion,
um, there is the direct benefit
and correlation that you can see
to increased enrollment, but
then beyond that, you know, I
would stress again that the
importance of keeping the quit
line top of mind for folks um
who just are not ready to quit
at this very moment of seeing an
ad, um, but if they can continue
to get that messaging, what I've
seen works well in the media
landscape is if you can continue
being top of mind, um, and then,
you know, even, even though
there's a drop off, you're still
getting that awareness out into
the community about these
programs when that future
campaign does come about, maybe
at that point they will be a
little bit more apt to actually
enroll in services, um, because
our ads got them thinking about
quitting. I agree with
everything you said, just um.
You know, for a whole year to
see the same ads, it might be
better to just start something
new.
You, Madam Chair. Uh, one of the
tactics we're starting to use
across all of our campaigns is
instead of doing one off in
market for a month or two, and
then calling it good for a year,
we're.
Creating behavior change within
DOH to focus on multiyear
pulses, so we have different
messaging sets in market at
different types or in different
times throughout the year. This
is a a tactic that we haven't
quite yet explored with new PAC,
but we are looking at it for uh
medications for opioid use
disorder, alcohol consumption,
we're looking at it for
immunizations and vaccinations
and what we're starting to see
along that trend is uh is a
positive outcome as
a result of being in market more
often.
The, the messaging itself
doesn't the core themes don't
necessarily change throughout
those pulses, but the creative
and the assets that we use uh to
showcase that themes or showcase
those themes do, and so to
Anthony's point, this is a good
way for us to stay in market
longer, uh, with slight
variations in the messaging, uh,
while continuing to be top of
mind and drive to the outcomes
that we want to drive.
That sounds great. You also, I
don't know, do you evaluate, um,
The industry, um, marketing.
You know, especially against
youth and when their peaks or
when, I mean, they might be
trying to counter what you're
doing, you know, at a certain
time, and that might also
influence it too, but also might
drive.
Um
When you are trying to do
programs, especially uh.
For education.
Thank you, madam or Madam Chair,
I appreciate it. Um, the answer
is we do evaluate, uh, at the
onset of the campaign
development, the current market
that we are going to be entering
into looking at behaviors of our
chosen audiences, uh, what you
know what they're interested in,
what they're not interested in,
where they're engaging with us
and how
On a national and to as much of
an extent as we can on a state
level, we can get a sense for
where they're engaging with
different types of content and
which
Interest groups, um, topics that
that we can, we can behaviors
that can be nested up into a
category that we can then use to
target. We evaluate those
interest groups to see uh how
well the messaging is gonna
correlate with that interest, we
do evaluate what
Campaigns are happening on a
national scale, um, and then we
come back midway through
campaign to do a quick check in
to see how is the, the DOH data
aligning with the marketing
campaign performance data, how
has the marketing landscape
changed, and we do uh tend to
Modify the campaign midway
through based on the data that
we're getting.
Uh, but I do think we can do a
little bit more on that front,
uh, especially on from a
competition analysis
perspective, uh, to see how.
How our competitors, so to say,
are changing their tactics
midway through their campaigns,
uh, it's kind of like get that
feedback loop, so to say.
Right. OK, that sounds great.
Um, and on all the other um
Anthony, the new PAC programs,
um,
I, I don't see much in as far as
evaluation of their
effectiveness. Um, how are you
gauging that?
Madam Chair, thank you for that
question. It's a fantastic one.
so, Wyoming survey and Alicean
Wisak um is our independent
evaluator, um, and currently
we're still waiting for a lot of
FY 25 data from our contractors
and others to to roll in, but
they um are contractors are
preparing their final reports
for FY 25, um, to be able to
submit those to us and submit
finish submitting reporting
details once we have that
information, um, why Sack, the
evaluator will be going in and
actually conducting analysis.
On on using kind of trends in
their past data as well as
looking at the goals that were
set earlier this year to see
how, how performance went, um,
at this moment in time, I don't
have too much of an update
because we're waiting on those
reports, but we, we will be
doing it through ISAC.
Um, I'd like to ask if you could
give us that evaluation report,
um, in our November, I think it
is meeting.
We can invite you to that. Yeah,
that would be great. OK.
And that'll be in Santa Fe.
Um, also, uh, my last question,
um.
Oh, it's well, close to my last
page 20 where you talked about
outreach, um.
We heard and maybe you've
rectified this where there were
like 4 regional coordinators,
um, and I only saw reported or
mentioned the uh north northeast
and the south. Do you have all
four regions back in in working.
Yeah, Madam Chair, so we, we
currently have.
Um, our Northeast, Northwest,
and then our southern health
educators, so we have 3 regional
health educators. Um, I'm
assuming that the, the 4 that
you're referring to is probably
when we used to have 2 in the
house, so we used to have the
Southeast and the southwest as
separate positions, um, it's
been my understanding coming on
board, um, to, to newAC that,
um, that, that one of those
positions, one of the South, the
southern positions came open
during COVID and just became
really difficult to fill.
And it sounds like that position
was, um, was removed from the
new PAP team and so it's
condensed, um, Southern health
education into just one position
right now, um, which is, it's a
lot of territ lot of territory,
a lot of region for, for one
person it's something that I've
been talking with folks within
the Department of Health about
as well as trying to understand
what might be within my own
control at the moment to be able
to help that situation, um,
which is, is likely going to
include an FY 26 evaluating, um,
you know, what activities the
other.
health educator, what contracts
that person may be overseeing
and if, if maybe we don't have
that person overseeing any
contracts so that way they can
specifically focus on outreach,
um, in the southern region in
general, um, while we try to, to
work on seeing if we'll be able
to bring back the other
position.
Thank you, I being from uh
southern New Mexico and knowing
how much travel and everything
is required if you don't have
that constant, um, you know, one
on one or contact, not just by
phone or Zoom that I think it's
really important for the
programs in the southern part of
the state to have that position
come back.
So thank you, I hope to hear,
uh, and I'll ask you again later
on, maybe in November, see how
that's going. Um, and then, um,
when you mentioned all the
contractors, um, can you tell us
how much, I mean, you don't have
to do it now, but in reporting
again, how much funding is going
to each of these different
contractors, um, is it enough?
What needs to be increased.
And um you know how they work
and outreach can help us in, uh,
you know, maybe to get to that
$22 million CDC recommendation.
Madam Chair, that's definitely
something we can provide um
after I don't have it at the
moment in terms of how much is,
is going to each of the
contractors, um, I will say with
the um
The timing of us having the
jewel settlement funds come in
is um was very helpful,
especially with the exit of the
CDC funds, um, and so we're this
year in FY 26, uh, all of our
contractors will be able to
expand upon the work that
they've previously been doing.
So for example, and, and again,
I know that 18 is still not
going to be a big number, but
when I had mentioned 16 schools
are typically what we work with.
We are looking, for example, at
increasing um uh evolvement to
two additional schools.
In FY 26 through settlement.
These are plans that aren't
fully fleshed out at the moment
and that's why I hadn't really
mentioned them or presented on
those, right, but, um, and
that's also why, uh, you know,
I, I want to go back to a
statement I said earlier in
terms of um collaboration and,
and coordination with outreach,
I think recognizing that even 18
schools through the evolvement
of program alone.
there's a lot more schools in
New Mexico than that, but then
what I, what I eventually will
want to see, um, and perhaps,
perhaps this could be a question
in November as well, right? But
I, I'm looking um to put
together a map of all of our
outreach that we're doing, um,
especially schools, so we know,
right, that we're gonna have
evolvement in schools. We know
that we're going to have, um,
uh, the office of school and
adolescent Health and the
school-based health clinics. We
know that we're going to have
RVO Health working on, on, um,
on the alternative to
school suspension program. One
of the things that we're going
to need to start doing and, and
we've already started doing it
from the schools that we do have
and, and through some of our
long standing, um, programs like
evolvement in terms of knowing
where our footprint is, but
eventually I want to map out
that footprint, so I can make
sure that we're we're
coordinating efforts and um
being able to um to, to supply
other, other programs, other
contractors, our health
educators with um the
information and outreach to
expand the footprint overall
rather
than um than just
Doubling down or tripling down
like I mentioned in certain
areas.
That sounds very promising and
um thank you for the work that
you're all doing. We appreciate
it and the coordination with
other, you know, department, I
mean, not just departments but
within the department too. It, I
think is really important, um,
so, uh.
You know, we appreciate it. We
need more funding, we need, you
know,
More concerted efforts to um
stop as Doctor Sedonis used to
say, our gateway drug, so thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
senators and representatives.
OK, let's see. Oh, we are just
almost right on time, um, we are
having a lunch break until one.
1:15, 1:30.
OK, we'll start at 1:15 with our
um one evolvement presenter and
um and then the second one will
come at
1:30ish, is that it?
Still.
OK, Madam Chair, could we maybe
do move our public comment.
to right now, either right now
or um like at one o'clock or
something um.
That's a great idea, um.
That way we can finish right
after evolvement is done. I've
got a 2 o'clock meeting, so, OK,
and before, um, is
Can we announce on Zoom, uh,
anyone on anyone in the audience
that would like to make a
two-minute public comment.
OK.
Sure.
Seeing none. Is there anyone on
Zoom that has signed up for
public comment.
OK. OK, is the person on Zoom if
you'll raise your hand, we'll
know you'd like to make public
comment.
They're not raising their hand.
OK, we took care of that, um, so
we'll, uh, we want to thank you
and M for uh providing our
lunches, um.
I don't, and then we will, um,
come back at
Uh, 11:15.
Right?
OK. Thank you.
