So what does that have to do?
What does any of this have to do
with the state wildlife action
plan? Well, the swaps, as we
call them, shorthand throughout
the country or the way that we
guide protection and
conservation of species that
your constituents care about
most. So these plans, which are
revised regularly, provide a
list of wildlife species of
greatest conservation need in
geographically specific
conservation actions that need
to be taken to recover them. Uh,
so one mechanism for how they
guide our efforts are the
federal state wildlife grants
that states have
To have a swap in place to be
able to qualify for. Uh, so
since 2002, that's accounted for
about $30 million and in federal
dollars invested in, uh, uh,
wildlife management in the state
of New Mexico. But the SGCN
species in the swap go beyond
just the state federal state
wildlife grants. They guide, uh,
Pittman Robertson spending and
now with a commitment by to uh
put
in the legacy fund awards. The
swab will in a partner.
as well.
Uh, but the biggest thing that
really does the
the same what does is it raises
the alarm bells so to speak in
the of conservation in need of
our
and to keep them off uh much
easier to manage more than
before they get listed. So we
need to um the
the same.
Go ahead to the next slide
please.
So we do need to revise this
plan regularly uh service is
asking every state to revise
their plans uh this year by the
end of 2025.
Um, we do that because you need
extra words and knowledges we
Species in New Mexico are at
risk of extinction by the end of
the century under a 3 degree
warming scenario which we are
barreling towards every day. Uh,
and so we know already that
based on our best data, we're
going to lose about half the
bird species in New Mexico, uh,
within, you know, kids that go
to this elementary school's
lifetime.
Go on to the next slide, please.
So here is the uh
Some changes to the actual list
and you can't really see those
numbers on the side, but uh rest
assured that from 2017 to 2025,
revision, we saw
an increased number of species
on the list, some categories
increase more than others. You
see some of the insects on
there, the bees, butterflies,
moths, uh, those had 0 before,
but the decision to include
pollinators is now included them
and grown that list,
but almost across all tax that
we've seen a few additional, uh,
uh, species get
added to the list because new
information has come or, or
trends have continued to
decline. Let's go ahead to the
next slide, please.
The swap is organized by 6
different ecoregions. Uh, each
of these ecoregions has a
variety of unique ecosystems in
them. These are sort of a coarse
filter, but the whole plan is
organized so we have
geographically specific
regionally specific
prescriptions for what we need
to do to address the species
that exist in those places. So
I'm gonna go through a couple of
those ecoregions and, and
introduce you to a species or
two in each. I'm not going to go
through all 6 of them, but, uh,
let's start by going to the, the
next slide, please, Tom.
So High Plains and Tablelands,
uh, you know, a fancy way to say
our grasslands of, of, uh,
eastern, uh, New Mexico. Uh, we
know these are tremendously
important lands for producing
food, fiber, and fuel for the
country. We also know that these
lands are home to a variety of,
of wildlife, uh, including a
number of declining species. Go
on to the next slide, please.
Including the chestnut collared
long spur. Uh, this is a bird
that not a lot of folks know of,
but spends its winter here in
New Mexico. The graph on the
Right shows the current
nationwide population of this
bird. If we were to show just a,
a New Mexico population while it
would be smaller numbers, it
would be the same trend. Uh,
that data is from the National
Breeding Bird survey, which is,
uh, a survey that's been run
since 1968, uh, volunteers drive
a 25 mile route, stop a half
every half mile and count all
the birds they see. And so those
are direct numbers looking at a
number of birds encountered on
those routes. The Chestnut Colar
Longspur is one of the fastest
declining birds in North
America.
It's currently not listed as an
endangered species, I would
predict it would be in our
lifetimes. Go on to the next
slide, please.
In the Colorado Plateau, uh, you
know, we see a lot of that is
pin and juniper uplands
primarily. Go ahead to the next
slide. And that's where we see a
bird like the pinion Jae occur.
Uh, this is one that has been
petitioned for listing, uh, and
you can see why on the curve
showing the decline. Now this
one's particularly scary to me
because it's really consistent,
it's really good data, and so
it's, it should be pretty,
pretty trusted that we're
showing what's really happening
with that data. And that's quite
honestly what extinction looks
like. That's what happens when a
species
starts to decline to the point
where they approach 0, that line
starts to flatten out, uh, and
ultimately ends with no more of
those birds around. Pinjas
depend on Pinion pine primarily
in this region, and we know we
are losing that plant due to,
uh, beetle kill, wildfire,
drought, all things driven by a
changing climate.
Go ahead in the next slide,
please.
And in the Southern Rockies, we
know that the mountains are
important for birds like Clark's
Nutcracker like I mentioned, but
also for the rivers that they
feed and the habitat that those
rivers provide. Uh, so go on to
the next slide, please. So in
New Mexico, our riparian forests
or Bosque, uh, account for about
2% of the landscape, but they
provide homes to about 50% of
the bird life. Uh, one of those
is the Southwestern willow
flycatcher. This is a bird that
is listed as endangered and just
to show the impact and many of
you probably know this that
Uh, when a bird like that gets
listed as in danger, the reach
of the, the federal regulations
are, are far-reaching and, and
strong. And so management for
the Southwestern willow
flycatcher in the Rio Grande
Silver and Minnow really drive a
lot of the management that
happens on the Rio Grande and
managing flows on the Rio
Grande. And so there's very big,
you know, consequences to
letting a species get on the
list, and we've seen that with
the, with the flycatcher, but
also things we need to do to
protect them that come as a
result. Go ahead, next slide,
please.
So the actions that are laid out
in the plan are, are, there's a
list of about 10 of them. I
won't address all of these. Each
of these could be a, a talk in
their own right. Uh, but these
different drivers are threats
that are listed here are each
addressed regionally, uh, in the
plan and each account for what,
what, how their impacts on
species and how they're driving
those, those declines or, or
those populations.
Go on the next slide please.
Uh, and so we know that we don't
have uh enough resources to meet
the need that this plan is going
to charge us with. Uh, right
now, if you look at, and I
should note, I should have noted
this at the top. I'm talking
mainly about birds here because
that's my background. Uh, and so
I'll continue here with that,
but, uh, this could go for
across all tax and across all
species experts. Uh, but if you
look at the bird program at New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish, we have
You have an upland game bird
biologist, a few less species,
you know, those are your quail,
pheasants, grouse, maybe 8 or so
in the state. Uh, lesser Prairie
chicken biologist, we have one
biologist position that's
dedicated specifically to that
endangered species. Uh, and then
our non-game bird biologist has
about 200 plus species that they
are responsible for managing. So
there's a big disparity between
the amount of resources we've
put towards game and non-game
species historically. It's
obviously good reasons for that
because, uh, the, or there's,
there are reasons for that
wouldn't necessarily say that.
But, uh, historically, most of
the funding or all the funding
from the for the agency has come
from licensed dollars, and so
they have, uh, uh, made game
species a priority. Uh, what
we're seeing and what the with
the swap and the SGCN tells us
is that the species that really
need to be worked on are
probably not the game species
right now and that we have
constituents across the state,
uh, that care very much about
all these species, even the
non-huntable ones. And so we
love to see more commitment and
more
Our resources go into some of
that non-game work, uh, as a
result of this plan revision.
Uh, we need public investment,
but we also need private
investment, uh, advocacy
organizations like Audubon and
others to join the, uh, join the
effort and save these species
across the state.
So that's, uh, go ahead, Tom,
last slide. I think that's it
for, yeah, that's it for me. So
thank you very much. I will pass
it along to Director Sloan.
So Mr. Hayes, we have the
question, what's the bird on
your last slide. Uh, that's a,
uh, Clark's Greeb. So all those
birds are all New Mexico birds.
They're all species on the SGCN
that Clark's Greeb is, that's
the one if you've ever seen the,
uh, the birds that when they're
doing their mating display, they
run across the water, really
weird. They also carry their
young on their back, and that's
what you see in that picture is
the young hanging out on their
back. And so that is a local New
Mexico bird, great. OK, so.
Next, uh, we're going to
Director Sloan on Zoom.
Uh
This could be.
Director Sloan, how are you
there?
Yes.
And.
Victorslow hold on, hold on a
minute, we're trying to get you
louder.
Mhm
So
Yeah.
Sorry, Director Sloan, we're,
we're having some audio issues
if you can go, go ahead and just
uh speak a little bit and see if
we can pick up your sound.
To
OK
You need me to keep testing.
Yeah, a little more please.
OK, so that I, I guess is as
good as it's gonna get.
One more time.
Tur some test.
Director Sloane now we can't
hear you at all.
So I'm gonna assume Director
Sloan is still there and we're
trying to get him back.
OK, so director Sloan, we're
gonna go uh
Uh, the next speaker, Kevin
Bixby, and we're gonna keep
working on audio and come back
to you.
Hopefully you can hear that.
He
Doctor.
Folks can hear Director Sloan on
the webcast, so that's
something. Um, anyway, um, Mr.
Bixby, go ahead.
Um,
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, can you all hear me
OK?
Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you
today. My name is Kevin Bixby. I
am the, uh, senior advisor at
Wildlife for All, formerly known
as the Southwest Environmental
Center.
Um, I live in Las Cruces.
And uh I have some slides.
Just to
make it more complicated.
So Mr. Bixby, that's a slide, so
maybe we could just follow along
and again for the public at
home, the slights are available
online for the people in the
audience. Um, I apologize.
OK, the, the first slide, I hope
you have in front of you in your
handout, uh,
Is uh
Entitled New Mexico's
Exceptional Biological
Diversity.
Um, you.
You may know all this already,
but it's, it's always good to
remind ourselves how lucky we
are in New Mexico, how blessed
we are with the level of
biological diversity,
um, we have approximately 550
bird species, which is the
second most of any state in the
United States.
We have 180 mammalian species,
which is 3rd among the states,
110 reptiles, which is 3rd among
the states, um, 70 fish, 27
amphibian species. So we really
are blessed with a uh a lot of
abundant wildlife diversity, and
each of these species is part of
the wildlife public trusts and
all the people of all the people
of New Mexico are the
beneficiaries of that trust.
And all this diversity.
Uh, as, as John pointed out, is
threatened as it is in other
parts of the world by a variety
of factors, climate change,
habitat loss, um,
and etc. other factors.
So moving on to the next slide.
Oh, thank you.
Yeah. Next slide please.
Uh, so historically, the New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish, like most most state
wildlife agencies has
prioritized providing hunting
and fishing opportunities over
protecting all of New Mexico's
wildlife species
Standing and, and I'm not an
expert, is that about 10% of the
agency's budget is currently
devoted to swap implementation
or species of greatest
conservation need.
Uh, so that's a great start, but
we need more to protect our
great wildlife heritage, avoid
federal listings and prevent
extinctions.
So many species of graze
conservation need are on that
list.
Simply because we've, we've
neglected them for so long, we,
we just don't know how they're
doing, what their status is. So
it's going to take an infusion
of funding to clear that backlog
of a lack of information.
Next slide.
These are
The current main sources of
funding for the
Uh, Department of Game and Fish
rounded to the nearest $1000.
There are some other minor
sources that are not shown here.
But there's two main types of
funding the department gets.
Federal grants and, um,
License fees
And the federal grants, there
are 3 main types, Pittman
Robertson, which is the big 1,
25 million, um,
dollars a year and that's,
that's a growing share of the
department's revenues. And
that's tied to the sale of guns
and ammunition. It's a federal
tax that is returned to the
states.
And then there's Dingell
Johnson, and, and Pittman
Robertson can only be used
currently for mammals for the
benefit of mammals and birds.
Uh, then there's Dingell
Johnson, which is, uh, less than
a third of Pittman Robertson,
and that can only be used for
the benefit of sport fish and
sport and fishing.
And then there's state wildlife
grants that John talked about in
his presentation. Uh, but
they're, and, and they are
dedicated to uh the species of
greatest conservation need, but
they're relatively, that's a
relatively small, uh, source of
funding for the department's
about $100 a year.
So all these federal grants
require a match, I believe it's
25%.
Where does the department get
the matching funds from?
Currently, it's mostly from
license fees which are paid by
hunters and anglers.
Um,
but as of this year, the land of
enchantment fund, which is $2.7
million a year is a new source
of funding for that purpose.
But this funding system that is
heavily reliant on federal
grants that are matched by
mostly by license fees is not
sustainable, um, because we're
asking the department to do more
in terms of species of graze
conservation need, which, you
know, a modern wildlife agency
needs to do. It needs to look
out for all our wildlife
species, but we're asking it to
do more and uh
Or
We're using license fees from a
declining number of hunters and
anglers to match those federal
grants.
So that's not going to be
sustainable moving forward. So
that brings me to some
recommendations, uh, for the
legislature.
To consider
The first is to establish new
dedicated funding sources that
are for specifically for the
conservation of species, the
greatest conservation need.
Um, and your slide shows some
various mechanisms that are used
by other states. Uh, the gold
standard is a dedicated portion
of sales tax as uh the state of
Missouri has done very
successfully and in Missouri,
that generates $100 million a
year for conservation, which is
twice the budget of the current
budget of our Department of Game
and Fish.
Um, uh, you know, none of these,
it's each state is different, so
it may be that a combination of
these mechanisms works best, but
whatever option is pursued, we
recommend that it be as
broad-based as possible and not
tied to any particular use or
activity.
Based on the understanding that
wildlife is a public trust and
that we all benefit from that
trust and we should all share in
its uh,
Uh, uh, in its conservation
financially.
Next slide please.
So my second recommendation, our
second recommendation is to um
amend the
Statutory language that created
the land of enchantment fund.
To require that it only be used
for species of grayest
conservation need. Now, it's
current policy of the
department.
2 only use land of enchantment
funds for species of graze
conservation need that I've been
told that, and that's great, but
that's not in statute. It could
change with the next governor,
the next game commission, the
next director. Um, and that
money is currently the largest
source of funding for SGCNs.
And it would be a disaster if it
was diverted for other purposes.
And our final recommendation.
is to has to do with the federal
government.
Uh, and this is kind of a.
an obscure.
Policy topic, but I think it's
could have significant
implications for New Mexico and
other states.
And the recommendation is to
petition the US Fish and
Wildlife Service to do
rulemaking to change its current
restrictions on Pittman
Robertson funding, uh, only
being available for to benefit
mammals and birds.
The original 1937 Pittman
Robertson Act passed by Congress
did not contain that restriction
in it. It was for wildlife
restoration and wildlife was not
defined.
Um, it was only in 1956 that the
US Fish and Wildlife Service,
uh,
ruled that the monies could only
be used.
To benefit mammals and birds
which are of course most game
species.
I was 68 years ago.
Um, we know a lot more today
about the importance of all
species.
But that single rule, which is
still in place.
Basically robs New Mexico of in
other states of federal funding.
A growing source of federal
funding, Pittman Roberson, that
could otherwise be used to
benefit our species of greatest
conservation need. And just to
put that in context of the
499 species that are being
proposed to put onto the uh revi
revised state wildlife action
plan list of species the
greatest conservation need.
60% of those are not mammals or
birds, and they would be
ineligible to benefit directly
from Pittman Robertson grants.
So
Thank you
OK, thank you, um, we're gonna
try to go back to Director
Sloan.
Cameron, is this any better at
the moment?
Mr. Chairman, is this any
better?
Yeah, I think that's better.
Great.
Um.
First, I wanted to apologize for
not being able to be there in
person and appreciate the
opportunity to participate via
Zoom, um.
Your life gets in the way
sometimes, so.
Um, second, I wanted to, to say
that I think both Mr. Bixby and
Mr. Hayes made excellent points
about the the swap and the way
the department operates. Um, I
do want to add a few things, um,
just so it's clear, the, the,
there's often a misconception
that the state
Funds that Mr. Bixby mentioned
about $1,000,000 a year.
Species was listed as threatened
or endangered either on the
state list or the federal list.
We've broadened that obviously,
so that's why the number jumped
from 235 and
Species of greatest conservation
need in 2017 to 499 um on the
proposed list today. Um, we're
looking at a broader selection.
Um, you know, climate change,
vulnerability, declining
disjunct
and deck Keystone, vulnerable or
core range species, and then
we've lumped those into groups
of of
You know, a current focal
species, a species that we're
currently working on like Pinon
Jae. Conservation impact
species, those are species where
if we do a project, we know we
can make a difference for that
species.
Data needed species and as I
think Bixby alluded to, that
represents almost 300 of the 499
species on the list. Um, so we,
we, we really do have a, a data
deficit about a lot of these
species and, and while it would
be great to get a big chunk of
money to spend to to get that
data, that data as I think,
again, both Mr. Bixby and Mr.
Hayes implied
Requires years to collect, so we
need that revenue stream that's
consistent over time, um, in
order to hire folks that can go
do the work and and develop that
data and answer those questions.
And then the last grouping is a
limited conservation opportunity
species, a species that comes
into New Mexico occasionally. It
doesn't really reside here, it
doesn't use the species, doesn't
use the state very much.
Um,
You know, I, I, I agree that
that.
As a general trend across the
US, we're seeing less hunters
and and more viewers. Um, I
don't think that trend holds
completely true in New Mexico.
Um, but as a, as a trend
statewide and that that's why in
the wildlife Conservation Act,
there's a statement that, you
know, the
The conservation of species,
non-game species, if you want to
call them that, should be, uh,
is a benefit to all and should
be funded by all. So, so I agree
that that finding additional
revenue sources that are
consistent and can allow for
long term.
Um, programs to be built,
employees to be hired, and
projects to be completed is, is
essential for us to move
forward.
It's also true that um
The agency is committed to
spending the legacy fund money
on species of greatest
conservation need that should
make a difference.
Um, and if the recovering
America's Wildlife Act, which
we've discussed before.
Were to pass Congress that could
result in up to $36 million and
that $36 million number was
based on the 235 species of
greatest conservation need, um.
We had in the old one, obviously
with 499 proposed, that number
would be much larger. Um.
There was one other point I
wanted to make.
Uh, so, you know, I think that
the the title talks about
funding and uses, so I wanted to
just run through a little a
brief list of a few of the
projects that we've undertaken
in the past fiscal year um
related to SGCN.
So we've done, we've uh habitat
selection gradient and pinion
juniper woodlands, factors
influencing white-tailed
ptarmigan survival, river cruder
research.
Pinon Ja tracking, Pinyon Jay
surveys, Martin surveys, Arizona
toad surveys, a modus stations.
That's what I'm really excited
about. That's a, a system that
will be building across the
state that will passively
monitor Songbird movement and
migratory bird movement so we
can get a better handle on what
species are passing through the
state, where they're going, when
they're here, what habitats
they're using. So that, that's
pretty exciting. Uh, Narrowhead
garter snake surveys, spotted
owl research.
Um,
I could go on some more, but
I'll, I'll switch to fish, um.
We've built a he an interstate
Hele trout database to track
conservation efforts for hea
trout among other species.
Um
Habitat restoration in both
Willow Creek and the Hila and
Costilia Creek in the the Bidal.
We've purchased
Pit pass equipment which we can
float on a stream and collect
data on tagged fish that we know
are in the stream.
Rio Grande chub genetic
analysis.
Uh, genetic analysis of Hewlett
trout, genetic, uh analysis of
brown trout, which sounds like a
game species project, but we're
actually building a brood stock
of what we call Superman YY
broodstock that can be used to
convert a population to all male
and cause a collapse. Um,
therefore opening that space for
native species.
Um, again, I, I, I could go on,
but I don't wanna take too much
of the committee's time. It's
just we are doing a very broad
array of work across all species
in the state and, and certainly
additional funding would be
great. We would build out
additional programs. We're doing
the best that we can with, with
the money that we have, but um.
I, I, I couldn't agree more
with, with some of the things
that both presenters brought
forward. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I, I think I'll stop
there and answer any questions
you might have. OK, thank you,
uh, Director Sloan. Uh, thank
you for your presentations.
We'll go to the committee. First
up, we have representative
Ortez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters. So I have a
question around the swap. Um,
when do we anticipate that
happening, that starting?
Miss
Represented as.
The swap, there is currently a
swap in place, and so this is a
10 year revision which should be
adopted by the State Game
commission in October of 2025.
Well, probably in August of
2025, then it needs to go to the
fish and wildlife for service
for final approval October,
November of 2025.
Website and as they're
developed, they'll be up there
more and then we'll, we'll
certainly have the entire
document out for public review
as well as to have public
meetings to walk folks through
it. And the the last document I
think was 400 and some pages I
anticipate this being the next
document probably being a little
bit longer, so it is quite a way
to get through.
Great, thank you, uh, director.
Do you feel, and I think maybe
this is a question for the other
panelists, um, do you feel that
there's enough stakeholder input
that's broad and diverse that
really takes into account, you
know, some of the concerns we've
had that, you know, hunters and
fishermen aren't part of the,
you know, is it
Is it a process that it, that
could be improved or do you feel
like it's
Doing a good job.
I actually, I meant to say this
in in my presentation.
Uh, you know, industry folks
that have expertise in these
different species, they've done
an incredible job. I, I, I will
just because it's for a good
reason, I'll call out one
individual employee, Virginia
Siemster, who's running this
process for the agency is doing
a tremendous job of organizing
and, and hurting all the cats.
And so I would actually say that
they, that it's, you know, it's,
it's hard to be 100% inclusive
and 100% representative at any
time. Uh, but I do, I, in my
opinion, it has felt like a very
inclusive process that seems to
be representative of
Uh, a wide diversity of New
Mexicans. Thank you so much,
those are all my questions. I
also commend the, the department
on that. Great. Thank you, Man.
Thank you very much. There are 4
more people on the list, um,
before we go on to the
presentation that we already
finished that we haven't
finished. Representative, um,
Armstrong, then Representative
of Lujan, then Representative
Ferrari, then Representative
Ream. Representative Armstrong,
please.
Uh,
Uh, I just want to first thank
Director Sloan for helping, uh,
with all he did for the, uh,
trout hatchery in, uh, Glenwood.
So, uh, he's been very
responsive to some of the issues
we've had over there, and I just
want to thank him, uh,
specifically for that. Uh, one
of the questions I have is for
Mr. uh, Bigsby. And I, I was
curious on your first
recommendation. I, I don't see a
page number, so but on your
first recommendation, um, you
wanted,
To establish a new, can you tell
me about the dedicating fund
source again and that you don't
want it to be specific. Did I
hear that correctly?
Uh, Madam Vice Chair, members of
the committee, uh,
Representative Armstrong, um.
The, yeah, what, what we need
is,
in my, in our opinion, the
department is constrained in,
um, what, what it can do, uh,
particularly for species of
graze conservation need by its
restrictions on the funding it
currently has.
So, um, our recommendation is
The department needs more money
to be a modern wildlife agency,
uh, and, and pivot, you know,
make that transition from
primarily
Focused on providing hunting and
fishing opportunities to
protecting all of New Mexico's
wildlife species. It needs more
money. And um,
But it really needs money that
is going to be predictable,
reliable, and dedicated to um.
Species is the greatest
conservation need, which is, you
know,
a large number of New Mexico's
wildlife species. Um, if it's,
you know, general funding
appropriations that vary from
year to year, that's not really
sustainable. That's not really a
way to staff up and and and hire
the people you need to, um, to
do the work that needs doing. So
yes, we're recommending that the
legislature established new, a
new source or sources of
dedicated funding that the
Department can rely on that are
dedicated to species the
greatest conservation need, uh,
and is not tied to a particular
use like hunting or, you know, I
even, you know, backpack attacks
on backpack equipment, uh, but
it is really broad-based.
OK, so, so you don't want it to
be, uh, right now, uh, Madam
Chair, Mr. Chairman, it's, it's
a little bit too specific.
Where what can't be used, and
but on the second recommendation
you want it to be more specific.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, that does seem
contradictory, but because, um,
The Land of Enchantment Fund now
is the uh largest source of
funding.
Um.
That the department has to use
for species of greatest
conservation need. Um, all
species of greatest conservation
need. It's important that it
continued to be used for that
purpose.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, I, I
heard Director Sloan say they're
using it for that now, which,
which I appreciate, but I also,
um, it is contradictory to me to
not want it to be specific and
then want it to be specific just
for whatever, you know,
whatever.
Agency or entity is in front of
us is what they want. So that
it's, it's a little confusing to
me. Um, one of the things that
Uh, you know,
I know that you all are about
the protection of endangered
species, specifically, or, and
we don't want them to be
endangered. So, but there's
other projects out there and
other programs that need this
money too. So I just want to
make sure that the, the,
Powers that be here that I hear
you and I understand where
you're coming from, just so you
know, I, I, I totally
understand, but I also know
there's other programs that need
that money too, so it's like
when you start getting into
social issues, do we do one
thing or do we do the other, or
do we do a little bit to both or
do we leave it up to the game
and fish department to decide
where they're needing that money
right now. So, um, one on my on
the 3rd recommendation, uh, Mr.
Chairman,
Um, if the, if rules changed,
could be, could use PR funding
for more.
SGCNS like native fish,
reptiles. So why do we not have
native everything in front of
that instead of just in front of
fish.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Armstrong.
If I understand your question
correctly, um.
Pittman Robertson, the rules say
it can only be used grants under
the program.
Need to benefit mammals or
birds. Now I know the department
is very creative in the way it,
um,
You know, uses those grants to
benefit as many species as
possible, including non-mammals
and birds, but the rules are
that
That's what the funding can be
used for.
Um, but we also have fish, we
have reptiles, we have
amphibians just to, you know,
stick with the vertebrates and
then we have all the
invertebrates in the state that,
you know, needs some level
perhaps of conservation and
research and Pittman Roberson.
Because it's tied to the sale of
guns and ammunition, it's a
federal tax. It's really, uh,
it's, it's been a
Increasing annually for the past
20 years as the sale of guns has
increased in this country and it
will continue to grow, I expect.
So, um, you know, those rules
are preventing New Mexico and
other states from having more
flexibility to use Pittman
Roberson for the whole suite of
species in their states.
Thank you for that. I, uh, but
my specific question is why is
native only in front of fish and
not in front of reptiles and,
uh, amphibians and others. Why
is it just in front of fish?
Oh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, that's just, uh,
native was meant to, uh, apply
to all those different kinds of
species.
OK, thank you. I just didn't
seem that way, the way it was
worded.
Uh, but I was, I was, uh,
interested in this one here
where if, do you have
information specific to just New
Mexico?
So unfortunately, that's a,
that's a national survey that
Fish and Wildlife Service does
and when
Excuse me, uh.
Mr. Chair, Representative, uh,
that, uh, they, they tend to in
their
Together as a group. And so it's
the 6 Rocky Mountain states, you
could, that's the finest sort of
level of analysis they've
provided if you go to that
survey.
Thank you for that. I was just
curious if there was
Mexico outdoor recreation
economy provides 1.2 billion and
that's a New Mexico specific,
$1.2 billion in income annually
and 33.5,000 jobs. And then the
mountain state is lumped in
together for the wildlife
viewers for 15 billion700
billion.
So,
I'm, I was, I had asked the
question before about
Does Outdoor Recreation include
hunting and fishing, and does
that include the trickle-down of
Taxidermy, meat processing,
guiding outfitters.
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Armstrong, uh, so I, on the, the
first number on that bullet that
those come from directly from
NMED. I, you'd have to, we'd
have to ask that, and I, when I
heard you ask that question
earlier, I tried to Google it
and couldn't find an answer. I'm
not sure what how they define
outdoor
Those estimations, and they do
include everything from, yes,
taxidermy fees, guide fees,
lodging, restaurants, all those
things, and the, and on both
sides, on both the hunting and
wildlife viewing side, uh,
that's, that's captured and
recorded. So yeah, it, it, it
includes all the sort of uh uh
related spending beyond just,
you know, directly what's spent
on that activity.
OK, thank you for that. I, um, I
really am trying to dig into
those numbers because it's, uh,
in Catron County, this is a
huge, um, we call it economic
development in in my area, um,
and just so, just for
information, uh, I am a cattle
rancher with a conservation
easement on my cattle ranch.
With 50 kills.
Of, uh,
A hybrid wolf that has killed 50
head of cattle on my ranch. So,
um, I'm trying to live.
Uh, a lifestyle of conservation.
But it is, um,
Sometimes bite me in the butt.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong. Um, so we are, uh, we
started late, our first panel
ran long. We've had technical
glitches now. Uh, so we're
running late and we have 4
people on the list. So I would
just ask you to keep your
questions brief.
Um, represent Lujan. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, for the presentation.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, one of the
most influential books I ever
read was Silent Spring, by
Rachel Carson. Um, so,
Where this is, yeah, it's
important to me that we are
looking at conservation efforts
About this, this amendment, and
if so,
What was the response, Mr.
Chair?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan.
I have not had those discussions
with the department, but it was
um.
I understand a
topic of discussion when the
legacy fund.
Legislation was being considered
in 2023. Um,
And there is a.
And I wasn't privy to those
discussions. Uh, I wasn't as
close as other folks, uh, so you
may, I'm sure you know better
than I do, but uh there is
consternation or concern in the
conservation world, wildlife
conservation community that
how the department would use
those funds and whether they
would be used for species of
greatest conservation need or
continuing to, to, you know,
they, uh, long standing programs
to manage game species, um.
And it's really gratifying that
the department has chosen.
For whatever reason to uh
currently to only use those
funds for species of grace
conservation need. I just think,
you know, that's, that's great
for now, but it could change
with the.
New governor, new director, etc.
so.
Thank you Mr. Chair. I'm just
wondering if they would need,
um, additional funding or they
need a new division or something
because the language is, is a
new division or something
because the language is, is uh
very different from what we
actually put into the bill, and
I would, I can only, um,
Assume that that, you know, that
they, if they were to have to uh
go into restoration and
protection of species of
greatest conservation need. They
need more efforts towards
conservation of species, and I
don't know that that that is
under their scope, uh, other
than what we put in the language
for protection and propagation
of game and fish. That's, those
are two very distinct things. So
further discussion, Mr. Chair, I
think would be needed and if we
can get those meetings going to
see what the game and fish's
feedback is.
And understand what that would
mean for them if we were to
amend that, that, uh,
A piece of legislation. Um, the
other thing I'm looking at, Mr.
Chair, is
All the how these statistics are
changing and pretty greatly.
What I didn't hear, um, in your
presentation, maybe I, I just
didn't hear, I.
missed it was the effects of the
fires, the wildfires, and, and,
um, some of these, these areas,
particularly up here in the
north since that's where we are.
Were those the effect of those,
um, devastating fires to the
species of greatest need, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Lujan, I, that, that is a
As a fascinating topic that I
could talk for hours about. I
won't, uh, the, but just the
sort of the main point is, you
know, we know fire is a natural
part of the ecosystem and most
wildlife have adapted their
lifestyle or their abilities to
be able to, uh, survive through
an individual fire event. Now
what we have now is we've gotten
to a condition with climate
change and with poor forest
management over the last 100
years where these wildfires are
catastrophic and they are much
bigger, much more intense than
they've
ever been. And so the impacts on
those, the wildlife that have
evolved to respond post-fire,
uh, post-fire is different now
than it was 100 years ago
because the severity of these
wildfires. And so we do see
changes to these habitats,
changes in the understory
vegetation that certain species
depend on, especially in
fisheries where we see, uh, the,
you know, the, the ash and the,
the sediment come down and, and
it can absolutely wipe out a
fishery in a river. So, so
absolutely, the, the wildfires,
the
of catastrophic wildfires is a
major threat that we need to
understand while still
understanding that fire is a
natural process and that we
still need fire on the landscape
as well.
Thank you. I'm going to cut my
questions short there because of
time, but thank you for, I, I
think we have more to talk about
there. And as you're relating
some of your data needs, um, and
the changes because of climate
change. I think it's very
relevant and, uh, look forward
to more conversations. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
Lujan, Representative Frari
briefly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Bixby, on page, uh,
slide 2, you were talking about
clearing the backlog of species.
Um, can you explain to me more
of what that entails.
Representative Ferrari, uh,
I was referring to the the
backlog of lack of information.
Um, we just, um, you know, for
more than 100 years, the focus
has been, uh, on managing for a
harvestable surplus of a handful
of game species and sport fish,
and we know a lot about those
species, but we don't know a lot
about most other species. And
that's why, uh, of the more than
half of the species that are.
Currently being recommended to
add to the
List of species of graze
conservation need are data need
species just because we, we just
don't know what, how, how
they're doing.
Thank you. And Mr. Chair and Mr.
Bixby, um, a few years ago,
there was, um, uh.
A lot of birds that were dying
in our community in Las Cruces?
Did they ever figure out what
that was as they were migrating
through our community?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrari, I would defer to my
colleague here who's a bird
expert and who undoubtedly knows
more about this than I do. Yeah,
but I was hoping you were Mr.
Chair, uh, Madam Representative,
uh, honestly, the answer to that
is, is kind of no, we don't have
a great explanation. It was
likely a number of compounding
factors. There's, there's some
research that suggests that the,
uh, intense wildfire season that
they were experiencing in the
northern Rocks.
uh, were a part of the reason
and that's likely true. Uh, but
really what we saw is we saw
birds coming down from their
breeding range with really poor
body conditions. They hadn't
been, for whatever reason, they
had been stressed or starved on
their breeding range. That's
what we don't necessarily know
because these birds may be
coming from the same species of
bird might come from eastern
Canada or Western or Seattle and
both come down through New
Mexico, so it's hard to kind of
locate what the actual local
effects would have been in their
breeding range. Uh, but we do
know.
That that die-off coincided with
a massive cold front that came
through. And when you have a
bird that's already stressed and
low and has trouble.
Providing the fat stores to, to
have the energy to keep flying
and keep hunting, uh, uh, 90
mile an hour headwind is enough
to, to put that bird down and,
and ultimately cause mortality.
So it was compounding factors,
bad conditions on the breeding
ground, running into an out of
season storm and cold front,
that sort of kind of caused the
acute cause, but it's still kind
of, we're all still kind of
scratching our heads a little
bit. OK, thank you Mr. Chair,
just, uh, real quick from Mr.
Sloan, um, I was wondering, um,
As we're talking about
increasing the dollars, um, when
we increase to the 499 species
that need to be included, um,
and we get 25 million for the,
um, Pittman Robinson, how much
more would we need?
Yeah, representative, the, the
best estimate that we had when
we, we were looking at something
called the Recovering America's
Wildlife Act, which is a federal
act that Senator Heinrich was
sponsoring was that it would
take about $36 million to do the
work required for the 235 at the
time species of greatest
conservation need. So I think, I
think you could probably safely
double that 36.
Um,
$1 million number to something
closer to $72 million with with
the $500 and as a as kind of a
ballpark, but I don't think we
have a real solid number, but
Somewhere in that $50 to $70
million dollar range if we
really wanted to gear up and do
all the work that needs to get
done for all of the species of
greatest conservation need.
Thank you
That's all.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari. Representative Ream
briefly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My, uh,
questions are for Director
Sloan. Uh, Director Sloan, who
is currently in charge of
managing uh the endangered
species in New Mexico.
Federally endangered species are
managed by the US Fish and
Wildlife Service if, if that's
the type of endangered species
you're referring to.
Mr. Chairman and Director Sloan.
So would you talk about the
money that the US Fish and
Wildlife and their resources
that they spend in New Mexico
managing those.
Mr. Chairman Representative, I
don't have specific numbers. I
know that that we partner with
them on a variety of projects
and we get about $250,000 for
some of that work, um, and I
know that they have a number of
biologists across the state and
field offices that that are
doing work, um, but, but I don't
have any specific dollar
amounts.
Uh
Director Sloan, do you think
that they're doing an adequate
job or an inadequate job of
managing those species in New
Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, I,
I feel like there's so much work
to do that that no one can do a
good job, but there, there's we
need more people and more money
to get to the point where we
don't have species that are
listed folks can get out on the
landscape and do the things they
want to do while we still
maintain our
I think what 4th highest
biodiversity in the nation.
Thank
Director Sloan, are you aware of
a letter?
That I wrote to US Fish and
Wildlife, about the Pittman
Roberts money when there was a
proposal. I'm going to guess
about 68 years ago to uh manage
endangered species here in New
Mexico buy game and fish.
Mr. Chairman representative, I,
I don't think I am aware of that
letter.
Like
Director Sloan, I think you need
to find it. Uh, it said that if
the money was co-mingled, uh,
and managing endangered species
that the dingle robber or the
Pitman Robinson money would be
retracted and would not be given
to New Mexico, um, I have a
2011, um, information. There's
34,000 hunters and anglers.
And they spent $579 million in
2011 in New Mexico.
New Mexico sportsmen and women
support spending per day of 1.6
million salary and wages 258
million federal taxes, 56
million state and local taxes 58
million.
So the ripple effect is 819
million.
The hunters and fishers are
paying for their activity for
hunting and fishing in New
Mexico.
And what if we're going to do
something with endangered
species, we need to create
another division so that they
can go ahead and handle it and
not
Jeopardize what game and fish
mission is and the money they
receive. Thank you, Chairman.
Next up, Senator.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Director Sloan.
So
We're using a lot of Pittman
Rodman money.
For land purchases.
So are you proposing
More land purchases used for
this money.
chair
Chairman, Senator,
The money to which you're
referring is the legacy fund
money or the uh state wildlife
action grant money. Neither of
those are we proposing to use
for land purchases.
Um, Mr. Chair.
On a thought which I wanted to
talk about the Pittman Rodman
money.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, there is
uh the legislature passed a
bill, capital bill, giving the
city of Raton some funding for
um the purchase of a ranch net
bordering sugary and Colorado.
Um, we are partnering with the
city of Raton to purchase that
property, um, and then there is
a small piece of property next
to our Albuquerque office, um,
that we're also proposing to
purchase.
But those are the only two that
I'm aware of at this point.
And
Loan.
Are you at liberty to tell me
how much we're going to spend on
that ranch by Rattoon.
Um,
I, I don't have the numbers
right off my fingertips. I know
that the the capital bill was a
little over $500,000 and we'll
be that we'll be providing the
balance of in federal funds for
the purchase. I think it was
somewhere in the order of
$2,000,000 total purchase price.
And do you have uh
Does your agency have complete
discretion on that money? Or
does any of that come to the
legislature at all?
Sure, are we, are we
To approve or disapprove or to
just sign the check or tell me
how that works.
Chairman, Senator, I think that
kind of depends. We, we build
our budget out every year, um,
that shows the revenue we
anticipate from federal funds
and that sort of stuff. So in
that regard, you are included in
that.
On those occasions when there is
outside match and we can bring
in 100% federal funding. We do
what's, as you know, a BAR
budget adjustment request that
goes through LFC and DFA and
we're allowed to bring that
funding in because it is
additional funding outside of
the legislative process.
So I'm actually chair
The 500,000 we're talking about
on this particular purchase.
Uh, I thought you said was state
money. Was that totally, uh,
match money or or or.
Is someone donating that money
to us?
Did a misunderstand you about
that 500,000?
Do to make the
the purchase, the total
purchase.
So much
Stone.
The city of Ratone will own the
ranch in Mexico along the ranch.
And we'll manage it.
Mr. Chair, Senator.
Because the federal funding
requires that the game
commission maintain control of
it it will be added to the game
commission properties. It will
be a wildlife management area
because it borders sugary pork.
We will work with Emner to have
them manage it for us as part of
the sugar it allows hunting, so
it'll be part of sugary Park and
it's part of the overall plan
for the city of Raton in terms
of
Recreational development and
trying to connect to a larger
park on the Colorado side such
that folks can move back and
forth across state lines on um
Either wildlife areas or state
parks.
No wait.
Now we're talking about Colorado
land and New Mexico land.
Senator Woods.
So this panel is about species
of great conservation.
Way off into acquisition.
Well, I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman.
I'm sorry that I'm, I'm
questioning too long.
Maybe we could spread these out
a little bit further next time,
so we could have more time to
get to the questions.
But if you want me to quit, sir,
I'll quit. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator Woods, and we
do, um,
You know, it's like going into
a, a restaurant and ordering
more than you can eat like cause
it all looks good. I mean,
there's all these panels we want
to do all this information we
want to hear. Uh, we tend to
pack it every time we, we fall
into the same trap. We put more
in, then we can really cover. So
I apologize about that. Um, but
we are, um, you know, we're
trying to cover as much as we
can and you know, my comment was
just,
you know, I recognize her
running along. We started late.
We've had some, some technical
glitches, um, the focus of this
panel wasn't acquisition, is my
point.
So thank you, Senator Woods.
And uh thank you panelists.
So our next panel is department
Game and Fish, and state
commission reform, um,
This um
You know, follows along nicely
and you know, some of the
topics.
Uh, I think we've already had
sort of a good introduction to,
Um, so once again, we have, uh,
3 panelists, including Director
Sloane, who remains on Zoom, of
course, uh, our first panelist
is, uh, Jessica Johnson Shelton,
uh, whenever you're ready.
Good morning.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, it's so great to be
here with you today. My name is
Jessica Shelton. I am the, uh,
senior program and policy
strategist for animal protection
voters, um, and for the last 40
some years in, uh, along with
our program arm Animal
Protection New Mexico. We have
been working on advocating for.
change for the well-being of all
animals, including wildlife. And
I'm here today to help represent
a very large and diverse
coalition that has been, uh,
focused on systemic change to
wildlife management in New
Mexico.
Um, so on the 2nd slide,
Uh, you'll see the logos of all
of our coalition members, uh,
since the last time this issue
was before this committee, we
have grown from 12 to 16
organizations, and we really run
the gamut when it comes to
perspectives on wildlife and the
constituencies we represent,
um, my panelists here, Mr. Jesse
Dubell, um, he and I have
sometimes been on complete
opposite sides of a given
wildlife issue. Um, so what you
have for you today
Like the full Jess Jess spectrum
on mys. Thank you for the
chuckles. I told my husband that
joke and he didn't think that
was funny.
Um, but what we do all agree on
wholeheartedly and vigorously is
that we need a 21st century
wildlife management system.
Next slide.
So our collective goal is to
build that 21st century system,
and by making changes to the
law. And, um, our common goal is
really focused on providing the
tools, authority, and funding
for the department, uh, for the
work that they already are doing
and want to do, and, and empower
and equip and enable the staff
working for the department who
have the expertise.
Uh, this has been a, a work in
progress over many years, as I'm
sure you all know, um, and we
have made some progress and
really productive conversations
with the governor's office and
the Department of Game and Fish
Leadership, as well as
legislators and stakeholders
that are in and outside of our
coalition. Um, so we're really
excited about that progress. I
want to express, uh, our
gratitude to Chairman McQueen
for his leadership on this issue
and, and in ensuring that all
voices are heard as part of
This process. Um, and I also
want to note that a portion of
uh these proposals that we're
discussing today have already
enjoyed a really strong
bipartisan support in the
legislature, so we hope to see
that continue. Next slide.
So what our coalition is
proposing is a three-part
package. And those three parts
are as follows. One, update the
department's mission to fix the
game commission.
And 3, fund our department to
protect our wildlife traditions.
Uh, so my focus, uh, in this
talk today, I'm just going to
focus on the first part and then
my co-panelist Mr. Dubell will
focus on the 2nd and 3rd part.
Next slide. So when we talk
about updating the department's
mission, what does that mean?
We've identified 3 legislative
actions that, uh, we think are
the best first start to updating
the department. First, we need
to clarify the department's
overall mission to make sure
that we, uh, that the department
is reflecting modern day views
on the role that wildlife plays
in our society.
Uh, second, we need to update
the department's name as well to
make sure that we are reflecting
New Mexico's wildlife as a
whole, uh, not just game and
fish. And third, we need to
codify explicit authority so
that the department can perform
the the conservation work and
regulate the take of any species
needed, um, and in turn,
leverage more federal funding
and get more dollars to fund our
programs.
Next slide.
So,
um, the Department of Game and
Fish is staffed by many, many
wonderful staff that we deeply
appreciate the biologists, the
conservation officers, everyone
who makes the department
function day in and day out.
They're out in the field,
Also the ingenuity that they
bring to the work. But they are
suffering from an outdated
system that they are, uh, having
to work with, they are
disempowered by unclear or
completely missing statutory
direction in order to do the
work that they know needs to be
done. And it's, it's a system
that really was designed for the
1920s. That's when the original
statutes were passed to
establish this whole system and
they really have not been
meaningfully
updated
since then. So nearly a century
later, here we are, we have a
patchwork of laws that they
piece together, uh, in order to,
uh, manage some species, but,
but not all species. Um, and
they, uh, don't have clear
directive to dedicate resources
to non-game species in
particular.
Our understanding over many
years of, uh, having discussions
with the Department of Game and
Fish Leadership is that they,
um, are limited to regulating
the actual take of species that
are designated as game and fish
species or endangered and
threatened species. Um, they
have a little bit more
flexibility when it comes to
habitat work. Um, and in some
cases, what I've been told is
that they are able to kind of
work on species that
that are directly managed and
protected by identifying habitat
for a species, um, that is
protected and managed, uh, that
shares that same habitat. So
it's really commendable that
they've been able to to do all
the work that they can, but they
really deserve clear direction
from our statutes in black and
white so that everyone
understands what the
department's responsibility is
and what they can do. Now, we
know
The Department of Game and Fish
Leadership may not agree with
the way that we characterize
this. We know that we have been
told, um, at least in broad
terms that the department.
does have authority over all
species.
And I would say if that's true,
if that's indeed true, then
great, let's, let's go ahead and
codify it. You know, we need to
be able to see it in black and
white so that we don't have
leads us to this point
Um, in, in some studies, it's,
it's equivalent to hunting and
angling and other, uh, sporting
activities like that. Um, and,
um, so non-consumptive, that
just means that people are
enjoying wildlife by watching
them, um, they're hiking and
camping around wildlife. Um, it
focuses on, uh, activities
outdoors with living wildlife.
And wildlife watching is one of
the fastest growing sectors of
outdoor recreation. Just as an
example, there's the festival of
the cranes, as I'm sure many or
all of you are aware of, um, in
the Bosque della Pace, um,
brings in 6000 people every year
brings in $2.5 million to the
economy in Socorro County. Um,
so that's just one example of
what we can continue to work on
here in New Mexico you heard in
the prior presentation we have a
growing
list of designated species of
greatest conservation need. And
with all of the biodiversity
crisis, the habitat loss due to
climate change, natural
disasters. We're seeing these
population declines. That has
all led us to a funding crisis
in the department.
It no longer does. It's been,
that work has
biologist. There's only one bird
biologist in the department, um,
and, um, you know, that's
compared with the state being
2nd in bird biodiversity.
Next slide.
Um, and you can see from, from
the graphic here that the
endgame truly, uh, let me be
clear, is, um,
That
a modernized updated department
with clear direction from
statute will lead to less
federal intervention and
regulation, which leads to
saving taxpayer dollars in the
long run. So a better system is
better for the people. It's
better for the planet, and it's
better for our pocketbooks as
well. Next slide.
Um, I wanted to end, uh, with
just a note on funding, so of
course the legislature receives
requests for funding year after
year. Um, and I want to be clear
that our coalition, uh,
appreciates thanks to the
leadership of many of you on
this committee that we're not
starting from scratch. And what
we are envisioning and want to
work on is a phased in,
manageable process for adding
more funding to the department.
As you all know, the department
is considered an enterprise
agency that relies primarily on,
uh, hunting and fishing license
fees, uh, and which brings along
matching federal dollars, um,
and that alone, even if we
increase, um, make modest
adjustments to those hunting and
angling fees, which Mr. Dubell
will talk about more in-depth.
That's not going to be enough to
cover all of the needs that
we've identified. So, um, you
know, we are really excited and
grateful for the Legacy Fund
bringing in 2 to $3 million
dollars.
now a year to work on this. Um,
we're excited to explore maybe
the growth fund having
opportunities to fund certain
work and projects. Um, we know
that, uh, the, uh, Rawa is still
in front of Congress and there's
no guarantees about when that
will happen. Um, but if and when
it does pass, that's going to
bring in some more federal
dollars.
But we know that we need to
continue to look at all of the
options on the table. So want to
be clear as well that when we're
talking about how much it costs
to fund work on species of
greatest conservation need. We
are absolutely not advocating
for working on all of them at
once and asking for a $70
million check to be written, OK?
So, um, we're, we're going to
advocate for a phased-in
process, um, but we do know that
every dollar invested, again, is
going to lead to less federal.
Intervention and regulation and
saving taxpayer dollars in the
long term, next page or next
slide.
So I just want to conclude again
our large diverse coalition
stands ready to, uh, support a
foundational three-part reform
package. We do believe firmly
that all three parts need to be
included in this package because
they're all intertwined and rely
on each other. The mission
change needs to come with more
funding. More funding needs to
come with, uh, a 21st century
model for wildlife management
and we're hoping, uh, sincerely
that this.
can be tackled successfully in
the next session.
Final slide.
I just thank you so much again I
really appreciate being here and
I am happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you for that. Uh, we'll
save questions for the end. Next
up we have Director Sloan.
Director Sloan, are you with us
still?
Mr. Chairman, I am and and I.
Mr. Chairman, I, I
Conservation Act does in fact
allow
was adopted in 1974 and it does
allow for regulation if a
species gets to a point where it
So
Here I think we spent, we
Spent 2 million of that on
species of greatest conservation
need and, and that's, that's
wonderful, but it's a one-time
thing, and if the economy had
gone bad, it's possible that
that money could have been drawn
back, so.
Dedicated funding will allow us
to.
Develop, um,
Programs hire staff and ensure
that we do the work that I think
we all want to do. Um, that's
allowed in statute and that uh
Needs to get done to ensure we
maintain our biodiversity and
prevent listings into the
future.
Um,
With that, Mr. Chairman, I, I, I
think I'll stop there and maybe
there'll be questions later.
Director, uh, next up we have
Jesse Debell.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair,
committee members, there's been
a lot of discussion about
funding today and, uh, there
will be some more of that here
in just a second, but I, I'd
like to say that pouring
additional resources into the
New Mexico Department of Game
and Fish today as the agency
operates and as the commission
is structured, would be like
pouring oil into your pickup
truck when you have a giant hole
in the oil pan, you know, we've,
we've got to fix some of the
issues with the agency and the
commission and absolutely then
properly.
the agency, so we're going to
get into funding, but before we
do that, I want to talk a little
bit about the New Mexico State
Game Commission who, uh, as, as
everybody knows, oversees the
department or at least that's
the intention.
The New Mexico State Game
Commission was actually
originally, um, formed as a
result of work done by the New
Mexico Wildlife Federation back
in 1921. At that time, it was a
three-person commission and then
later was upgraded into the
seven-person commission that it
is today. And
I, I've been attending Game
commission meetings for most of
my adult life. Uh, and I've seen
the dysfunction. And if you've
never been to a game commission
meeting but you've read the
newspaper anytime in the last 6
years, you'll recall that any
story that you've seen on the 5
o'clock news or in the newspaper
in any town in the state over
the course of the last 6 years
has been about the dysfunction
of the State Game Commission as
it currently exists. It's
important though to recognize
that this dysfunction and the
challenges of our state game
commission predate this.
Governor. They're not specific
to this governor. These
challenges have been around for
a very long time, and we need to
fix the commission. We've seen
situations, uh, recently where
we didn't have enough members on
the commission to form a quorum.
We've had meetings where we've
lost a quorum during the middle
of the meetings. We've had
numerous canceled meetings and
the good news though, I don't
want to sound all negative. The
good news is there are some very
Specific and simple fixes for
this issue. We can fix the State
Game commission and make the New
Mexico State Game Commission,
one of the most efficient and
effective
Already I think we just need to
ensure that as we work through
the Game commission reform
process, we recognize the
Because we don't have that
insulation. We're dealing with
insulation with an R value of 0,
The next thing I'll get into now
is the funding piece.
We've heard a lot about funding
already this morning. And I
think it's, it's critical to
understand that the user pay
system that we've become
accustomed to in New Mexico for
New Mexico Department of Game
and Fish, which is an enterprise
agency, is not a long-term
sustainable solution, but it is,
it is the system that we have in
place today and we currently
What a pickup truck for a game
warden might have cost in 2006
compared to today, then it's
easy to understand why the New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish is really struggling
financially and why they need an
instant boost in revenue. And
the fastest, most efficient way
to get that boost is for hunters
and anglers to to agree to pay
more for their
Match, uh, we've heard a lot
this morning about the Pittman
Roberts and Dingle Johnson Act,
but those excise taxes that are
collected at the federal level
match our, our license dollars,
3 to 1, and that's what
ultimately funds our department.
So by generating more license
dollars, we're able to leverage
that federal match. In the
beautiful thing about this is
New Mexico Wildlife Federation
was founded in 1914 by Aldo
Leopold, were the oldest and
largest license buying
organization in the state. The
majority of our membership is
comprised.
Of hunters and anglers who buy
licenses every single year. And
we're asking for this fee
adjustment. We're not looking at
this as something that's going
to be a negative impact. We
recognize the need for
conservation dollars. We
recognize the need for a
well-funded Department of Game
and Fish. We recognize the fact
that we are consumptive users of
the public trust wildlife, and
we're willing to pay our share.
We're we're willing and, and
excited to make this
contribution to conservation
funding. Again, that's not to
negate the fact that we need a
broader
Funding model we need to
continue working on broader
conservation funding, but in the
meantime, the, the New Mexico
hunters and anglers are going to
be excited about the opportunity
to better resource the New
Mexico Department of Game and
Fish. So by fixing the game
commission, modernizing the
agency in the way that Ms.
Shelton just described and
providing better resources for
the department we're able to
take the New Mexico Department
of Game and Fish and turn it
into the 21st century agency
that it should be. Thank you.
Thank you for that. Um, going to
the committee, uh, first up, we
have Senator Pearl.
Senator Perle, welcome to, uh,
Water and Natural Resources. Why
don't you
Um,
I took a little break from this
committee for a few years, but
I'm happy to be back on, happy
to be here in Questa. It's
beautiful.
See, the leaves change, you
know, it was a little bonus. I
didn't realize we were going to
see that. So thank you, Mr.
Chair for scheduling this
committee here at the perfect
time. I did that. I just want
Senator,
you sort of need to talk right
into it, not off to the side, so
put it in front of you so we can
pick it up better. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, and then the
acoustics of an old school
gymnasium kind of adds to it,
but wouldn't have it any other
way.
Uh, I just want to dive into the
first presentation. I don't know
if anybody else was kind of
feeling the same way as I kind
of felt like you said a lot but
didn't say anything.
As, as far as like specifics,
you know, on the surface, it
felt good. We need to reform. We
need to save the wildlife, like
all things that I agree with,
uh, I assume the chair, uh,
McQueen agrees with, but I think
we need to, in this instance,
get into the weeds a little bit,
um, kind of what is the vision,
you know, I've heard the
department needs modernized, but
what specifically is broken,
where do you see it going? I, I
think is what, what I need to
know, um, I mean, I'm not gonna.
this next coming session, but I
do have a little bit of a vested
interest. I've held a hunting
license in New Mexico since I
was 12, um, and, and one place I
will disagree is I don't think
hunters and fishers should bear
this burden alone. Um, there's
plenty of people that shoot
animals with a camera. How do we
get them to pay their fair share
of doing the habitat. So I do
have some concerns there as
well, but if we could get a
little bit more into detail on
what it means to update.
Hunting, and it doesn't seem
like there's any middle ground.
So if you could just go into a
little bit more detail as to
what um your plan is or what the
idea is for updating the
department and fixing the
commission.
Sure, Mr. Chair and committee
members and Senator Perle, thank
you for the question. Um,
Um, you know, I, I think the
beauty of this coalition is that
collectively we are all for
hunting and also not for
hunting. And that has brought a
lot of strength to our ability
to work together, um, to solve,
uh, help solve some of these
problems. Um, the reason why I
didn't include like line by line
details about, you know,
potential legislative language,
for example, in these slides is
because there are very much
productive conversations.
actively happening and I'm sure
Mr. Dubell can, um, he may speak
to that in greater detail. Um,
but maybe just to give you a
little bit of a snapshot, you
know, some of what we're talking
about is, um,
You know, in terms of clarifying
the department's mission, there
are parts of Chapter 17, where
it is setting out like a, like a
vision about what the department
is about. And, um, there are
places where it's very focused
on, uh, simply or solely supply
of game and fish species for
hunting and fishing. And so what
we are exploring is adding some
other language to encompass all
of the other ways that New
Mexicans appreciate wildlife,
whether it's hunting and fishing
or hiking, camping.
photography, um, or you just
have a family with small kids
and who love going outside and
learning about wildlife. I mean,
2 days ago, I spent 25 minutes
on the sidewalk with my toddler
and preschooler looking at one
caterpillar.
25 minutes.
So I know anyone that has raised
kids or spent time with little
kids knows what's that, what
that's about. So, um, you know,
it's so
like to make sure that there is
a pathway for the department to
elect to work on any other
species that it feels like it
needs to, you know,
scientifically speaking. So, um,
hopefully that helps to kind of
provide a little bit more
information about, uh, what, uh,
these details are and some of
these ideas, of course, have
been included in previous
versions of legislation that has
been filed in previous years.
And thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for that answer. So what,
what kind of species are we, are
we speaking about? I assume uh
coyotes.
Has, I mean, what, what species
would people be taking currently
that aren't a gay mammal. Those
are the only two that I can
think of maybe pigeons, that's
where I'm kind of confused as to
where are we going with that?
What, what is already not say
illegal federally to um take
that would be even added to this
list.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator Perle. So I, I think the
important part is that that's
not for me to say. That's for
the department biologists to
say, and, um, when we are
looking at the current system
and it shows that there are
obstacles to staff taking action
when they see species are in
decline, but they're not quite
bad enough to get listed.
The department deserves the
ability to start working on
those species in any important
way that it deserves that it
that it needs to and determines
that it needs to, um, in order
to prevent listing, and that's
what helps us keep our, you
know, our listing down our
federal regulation down, and our
spending down on wildlife
conservation after the fact,
after these species are already
in trouble.
Mr. Sheriff, uh, Director Sloan
could possibly answer that
question. I, that's what I'm
confused about most of, you
know, growing up, there's only a
certain number of birds as a, as
a 12 or 13 year old boy you can
shoot with your pellet gun that
aren't protected, um, by federal
law or state law, um, most of
the mammals are either fur
bearers or their hairs or
coyotes that there is no.
Hunting season on. So I, I just,
I'm curious as to this specific
issue, what, um, species would
we even regulate the taking of
that already is not protected in
Invertebrates.
Regulate the taking of.
Other species. So I just want to
make sure we're not going to get
into this coyote argument
because I think that opens a
whole another can of worms went
down that road a few years ago
with the, um, I think it was
Representative McQueen and
Senator Moors, who successfully
passed the
Uh, coyote calling contest bill,
and I don't
are protected or regulated now
whenever they take someone's
goat or lamb or something along
those lines, the state is going
to have to pony up money. And
then where's that money come
from? So I think these are
things that should be, um, done
at the legislative.
Level and not just again granted
to a department to say at some
point in time, you can just say
that this is a regulated
species, and then now that puts
the state on the hook for paying
for it. So that's why I was kind
of wanting to go down that
route. Um, unfortunately, we
couldn't get there. So I, I
understand the issue with other
species, monarch butterflies,
etc. etc. Nobody appreciates
them more than me when they're
out pollinating my alfalfa
field. So I mean, I, I
appreciate that. I understand
it, um, but I do have a
question. What do other states
similar to
So we're not going to say Texas
because Texas is 98% private
land, I believe, somewhere
around there. What, what do
states like Colorado, um,
Arizona, Utah, Nevada, do they
have a similar department in
name and mission, um, as you
guys would like to see in New
Mexico.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Perle.
Obviously there's a, there's a
wide variety of, of state
Name of the department. So in
Missouri, for example, in the
earlier panel, we saw Missouri
as a gold standard for their
conservation funding model,
which which it certainly is, uh,
hunting numbers in Missouri are
as strong as they are in any
state in the country, and it's
the Missouri Department of
Conservation, so they don't have
the word game even Texas that
you just mentioned is Texas
Wildlife and Parks or, uh,
And, and thank you. And I don't
think we have to look for, you
know, Colorado, very similar
politically, um, their, their
economy is a little bit stronger
obviously, than, than New
Mexico, but I think they do a
great job of balancing, uh,
managing wildlife and, you know,
continuing the tradition of
hunting, which is is my greatest
concern is that we we might be
going in a direction, um, and so
that's, you know, changes, is
usually met with a little bit
of, of pushback, but, uh, I'm
not naive enough to think that
We don't need to update the
department, but I want to be
very clear that we have to be
very careful. Biologists have a
place, but then our game
wardens, the boots on the
ground.
Sometimes they get neglected,
their, their opinions aren't
heard and they're the ones.
In the woods, out in the
grasslands, that see with their
own eyes. And I just hope that
we value that as well, because,
you know, it's kind of like
engineers, people engineer a
building and then a contractor
has to come in and fix it,
right? So that you have to have,
it's easy to design it from
behind a desk, but then
sometimes when you show up on
site and you run into maybe some
foundation issues or, uh, the
dirt is different. Well, the
contractor's job to make those
adjustments. So I think you have
to have both. You want to go in
with a plan, um,
So the biologists come in, but
then we really got to listen to
our game wardenss. I have a ton
of game warden friends that,
that was their frustration
working through the years is,
you know, things would come from
Santa Fe, but then when you got
on the ground, you know, there
were more elk than what they
counted and however they
counted, there was, uh, their
system is flawed in counting
elk, and there should have been
more licenses issued than there
were. So I think there has to be
um better communication with the
department, better
understanding.
between the different arms of
the department to ensure, um,
that we're managing wildlife.
And, and also, I think there's
a, a part of this that that
we're kind of missing out and
that's habitat, um, you know,
the drive up here.
We want to manage wildlife, but
we won't manage our forests.
And so I know it's kind of an
elephant in the room, but you
look around and there's just
matchsticks.
Sitting on hills, well, it's
hard to manage wildlife and, um,
have owls and have, you know,
little mice or shrews that
nobody even knew existed
whenever we won't manage the
forest and, and there doesn't
seem to be in my 12 years of
being here and it seems like we
were talking about this 12 years
ago in this committee, um, doing
what actually has to be done.
To manage wildlife. Yeah, we
want to throw some money at it.
We want to modernize the
department when in all
actuality, if we would just go
manage the forest like we know
how.
I don't even know that we would
need all of this conversation or
that
And until we do that, all of
these discussions on, on
wildlife and and things when the
habitat is broken and owls can't
even fly and find the ground to
to catch a mouse. Well, you're
not gonna have owls. So I think
that's a part, I mean, they're
the next panel coming up, but I
think that's something that has
to be melded into this as well.
Um, money isn't going to fix it
and hopefully we can find a way
for the people that want to stop
on sidewalks and look at
caterpillars to pay their fair
share, um, and not just
Um,
have hunters and fishers as
myself and my, my children
moving forward paying for, for
all of this. So if, if we can do
that, I think it'll be
successful, but, um, you know,
at the end of the day, until we
fix habitat, we won't have a
healthy wildlife. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And,
um,
I'm just gonna, I'm gonna make
this comment later on. Again, we
see where we're giving free or
discounted hunting licenses and
I'm going to make the same
comment again when, uh, we see
the, um,
State parks come in and ask for
money, but this is exactly what
happens. I don't have a problem
with a discounted license trying
to encourage like youth hunters
or something like that, but.
This is what happens. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman and thank you
for your presentation. Um, I
couldn't agree more with you on
commissions in general.
We've, we've noticed the
rulemaking process in several
commissions, uh, superseding the
legislative process.
And so, um, I don't, I don't
have a problem looking at, at
reforming commissions in general
across the board.
Um, some of my statements and
questions were asked by Senator
Perle. Uh, I couldn't agree
more. Uh,
we,
You know, we, we talk about
changing, but all of the things.
Community that have been, uh,
lost their grazing leases
because of the jumping mouse or
other things. And so how do we
As a New Mexicans.
Work together.
To protect the wildlife we need
to protect.
Enhance ranching, which is a way
of life.
In, in the area that I
represent, ranching is economic
development. Ranching is a way
of life. Ranching is where we
choose to live and raise our
kids, hunting and conservation,
and how do we balance all of
that?
Um, Mr. Chairman, we have
probably 200 miles of pipeline
on our
Our ranch
That we, we bought.
It's a private ranch.
But we are mandated by certain
entities because we have wolves
where we can't use certain
trapping mechanisms. On our
private ranch that we bought and
paid for, not from a trust fund.
Because we worked our butts off.
That we work with the game and
fish to let them come in.
Count Elk.
collar elk, figure out they're
migrating. We work in
conjunction with people. We
donate a lot of our hunts to
kids with cancer, to kids
missing limbs, to wounded
warriors.
But yet we keep getting smacked
down again and again and again.
So when we talk about.
Uh
New Mexico, New Mexican's
relationship to wildlife has
changed.
We, I think all of us want to
work together, but when you,
when you talk about not
politicizing it and then
We're politicizing it. So, uh, I
don't really have a question,
but I think that the
Uh, the E plus system, I think
the Game commission, I think
when we put too many laws in,
we, we, we passed the legacy
fund. We're already wanting to
amend it.
It gets amended. We pass a law,
they want to amend it. And so
how do we, how do we work
together to where we're not
picking and choosing.
The livelihood of New Mexicans,
whether it's a livelihood you
agree with or you disagree with.
I just don't want to pick and
choose livelihoods for all New
Mexicans, so, uh, if I know
there's no answer to that,
except
When you're invited to the
table, sit at the table.
And, and be heard. And, and
luckily I'm in a position where
I can sit at a table and be
heard. And, and you're invited
to the table to be heard.
But how
I, I just want people to
remember, Mr. Chairman, that we
all live in New Mexico. I am a
proud New Mexican born and
raised, and I will never leave.
And I don't want my children to
leave. And I want them to enjoy
the same things that I have.
But how do we do that?
Not picking and choosing
livelihoods. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative, um,
not seeing any other members of
the committee. I had a couple of
questions. Uh, first off,
Director Sloan, are you still
with us? There I am.
OK, so director slower.
of Armstrong first. I'm sorry,
uh, Rosanne Lujan, I apologize
again. No, it's OK, um.
Thank you for the president. I
know we're taking some um extra
time here and I'll try to be
quick on this. Um,
Just directly does.
I get right down to it I guess.
Uh, does Game Fish have an
account or a database of all the
species that they do manage, Mr.
Chair.
Anybody
Mr. Chair, Representative,
I'm not sure how to answer that
question. I mean, there are a
variety of answers. One is we
have a list of protected species
in statute. We have something
called bison M which lists all
of the species in New Mexico. We
certainly have individual
biologists that have
spreadsheets with.
All of the species that they're
managing, thinking about doing
projects on um
I guess I'm not 100% clear on
the question. Mr. Chair,
Of a full account or data of all
those things you mentioned would
be great for us to have, to know
how you are mitigating and
moving, um, and understanding
your data and how, um, you are,
you are keeping to what your
mission is and where, where we
can look to see where we need to
amend and look at adjustments to
that mission if necessary. I
think that we need to just start
there with a clear account of
data and information and,
moved from there, Mr. Mr. Chair.
So I'd ask that maybe we get
that account and that record of
that information. Um, the next
thing.
Let's see, I think those
questions that have been asked,
um, my question on modern day
wildlife trends that we have a
slide on here and looking at
outdoor recreation, are we, and
I maybe this will be for the
next, um, panel, but just what
are the effects of, of that
industry.
In reflecting on our endangered
species, if you will, or
management of those lands and
protections of those species and
lands, what is the effect of
that? Because this is a 2 point.
$4 billion industry that we are
looking at in New Mexico. It's a
question that I keep repeating,
but you're looking at this and
maybe it's, it goes to the next
panel, so I may reserve my
question there, Mr. Chair. The
next thing I want to know is
when you're looking to use the
grow fund for funding and that's
$70 million that you're looking
to, um, ask the legislature for,
Mr. Chair, is that correct?
Sorry,
Mr. Chair and Representative
Lujan, no, when I said $700
million I was uh recognizing the
upper end of what director Sloan
had said about how much it might
cost to uh do management of all
of the species of greatest
conservation need. Um, I think
if we're looking at grow fund
requests, it would definitely be
smaller than 70 million. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, because with our
growth fund, you know, we, we
We're going to have many, many
requests. I'd ask that you go
and you speak to the finance
committee and have those
meetings to see where we could
um really actually appropriate
that that type of funding for
this next session. And really, I
think a lot of my, my questions,
I, I usually talk to you
offline, but the reform in
benefits, how will this save
taxpayers' dollars through your,
your model here, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chan, Representative
Lujan, so, um, what the, the
numbers bear out and the, the
experts in this field, um, is
that if we are able to do if if
the state is able to do uh
preemptive management work of
species in decline before it
gets to be listed, that costs a
lot less money than once a
species is listed and all of
this, the actions and the
spending that has to happen
after that and
to get the species recovered.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and that
goes back to my point of having
the data and the information in
order for us to actually look at
what those dollar savings would
be. Um, as well as the other
reforms that you're mentioning
here, I think I'll just end
there and say I would like to
get a record of the date of, of
um, all the species that are
being managed by.
Gish. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
um, now I, I had a couple of
questions, uh, Director Sloan,
uh, well, one question for you,
Director Sloan, um,
you and I have talked in the
past about the, um, you know, my
belief that we need to modernize
the mission and uh your belief
that you have the authority you
need in the wildlife
Conservation Act. And I wondered
if you could just sort of
Expand on that, like, it seems
to me if we made the authority
clear for the department beyond
that, uh, you know, how you get
to it in the wildlife
Conservation Act, but also gave
the department discretion as to
what species it wanted to take
an active role in managing, um,
that that would be an
improvement, and I wonder if you
could just sort of touch on that
issue in terms of how that
relates to
Existing authority under the
Wildlife Conservation Act.
Yeah, you know, as you alluded
to, we, we have had those
discussions on multiple
occasions and it's my position
that the wildlife Conservation
Act, both in its declaration and
in the body of the Act, allow
for the department to work on
the whole suite of species in
the state, um, and we do
undertake that work as with
everything we have to prioritize
one species over another due to
costs and those sorts of things,
but I believe that that
Language in the wildlife
Conservation Act allows us to do
the things that you're
proposing, um.
And has criteria for when we
would actively need to regulate
a species versus just do
projects to benefit that species
or manage it in some other way.
So
You're saying is that
OK
You have that authority and what
I think it's being proposed is
uh more of a clarification of
that authority then in the
expansion of that authority. Do
you, do you think that's
correct?
Mr. Chairman, I, I, you know,
obviously the devils are always
in the details, um, the bills
that we've seen before lead to
questions about this
discretionary element of the
commission can pick and choose
what species they might want to
regulate or or take authority
over, and that that gets back to
something Senator Perle.
Uh, raised, which is, you know,
we certainly will be confronted
with advocates who want us to
regulate coyotes.
Um, or, you know, butterflies or
any number of other species, and
You know, they're not every
species needs to have take
regulated. Not every species is
taken, um,
So I, I think that that that
leaves open a bigger question
about how that authority gets
picked, selected, and how the um
how that might change over time.
OK, thank you.
Happy to uh
Uh, continue those discussions
with you about the, the details
of that.
Um, Ms. Shelton, uh, I, I
appreciate the three part uh
package uh in thinking about
though, it, it seems to me the
part 3, the funding, there's in
essence, uh, two subparts, uh,
parts A and B, Part A being the
fee increase that the department
has asked for and part B being
other funding for the agent.
to address non-ga and fish
species. Um,
Yeah, I know there's been
concern about that that it's not
fair to to fund that expanded
mission or other work, uh,
simply by hunting and fishing
licenses. Uh, and I think that
that's been widely acknowledged.
So I just want to make it clear
that that's part of the uh
proposal is to address both
those pieces. Um, and in terms
of what that second piece would
look like, I think the goal,
the, the, uh, manageable.
Goal is recurring funding, uh,
dedicated funding is more
challenging. And I think the
department is an executive
branch agency and like any other
executive branch agency, uh, you
know, they should be able to
receive general fund monies.
That's not necessarily uh a
dedicated funding source, uh,
but it, it should be recurring.
Um, one other thing I wanted to
touch on in terms of the money.
I appreciate, um, Mi Shelton,
the comment that
You know, investing in some of
these species now could save us
money down the road, uh, because
once something gets listed, uh,
federally threatened or
endangered.
It becomes a lot more expensive.
Uh, and, and this to me is a
little bit, uh, to go back to
Senator Perle's comments, it's a
little bit like our forests.
You know, I think we could
invest in managing our forest
now, and that would save us a
lot of money in terms of
fighting, devastating fires,
paying compensation for
devastating fires, addressing
the, the flooding the aftermath
of devastating fires. I mean,
it's to me it's the same sort of
the logic that we should be
making those investments now,
and that will save us money in
the long run.
And the the last um the last
piece I just wanted to touch on
was I had the conversation with
one of the advocates, uh, and I,
I think they're listening
online.
And I asked them,
About, you know, expanding the
mission to clearly include
invertebrates, insects, and
there are a lot some people that
don't want to go there. But my
question was, if there was a
threatened or endangered insect
that required state action
required state cooperation, who
do we want to send to the table?
And I think it's pretty clear
that the answer is the
department, whether it's a
wildlife department or the
Department of Game and Fish is
currently situated. That's where
our expertise lies. And so
that's why I think that um
Authorities should expand in
clearly include uh those other
non-game species.
Uh, so this is, um,
This is a bill I've obviously
worked on in the past, we'll
work on in the future, uh, for
the comedian's benefit, you
know, we do have, we have
another committee meeting in
October uh in Redoso focusing on
energy and then we're back in
Santa Fe in November and in the
Santa Fe meetings, you know, my
hope is to spend the day doing
budget stuff and do it they
reviewing potential legislation,
uh, and I, I hope to have a bill
ready for this committee to look
at, uh, in November.
So, uh, thank you, uh, to our
panel. Uh, I think that was uh
very helpful.
So our last panel this morning
and we're doing OK on time, uh,
is the State Parks panel. Uh, so
if the, those panelists could
come forward to the table, we
might need an extra chair.
Just, you just grab one.
I saw Miss Baker earlier, so
hopefully she hasn't come far.
Um,
Well, let's get started, uh.
So we have a lot of people that
are apparently here for the last
uh session. If you want to chat,
I would ask you to go outside.
The folks in the back, Michael
Dax.
Michael Dax.
Thank you. Um, so, um, um.
Director Velasquez, welcome.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, it's
great to be here in Questa. I'll
just start off with something
quick. I know we're short on
time, but uh.
I used to play basketball here
in this gym when I was in the
5th grade and uh I remember
scoring a lot of points, but
you'll have to verify that, uh,
trust it, but maybe verify it.
Uh, it's always special to come
back to, to these areas where we
have so much in common with in
northern New Mexico and uh I
used to come up with a running
angers from Mora to come and
beat up on the Wildcats and uh
we always brought our best team
and, and I have a great team
here with me again today. We're
not the running Rangers, but
we're the park rangers. And uh
we're, we're happy to be here
with you.
and uh we look forward to
sharing some information. I just
want to introduce uh our team
here real quick. I have Jared
In that role before bring the uh
yeah.
And she's now our new deputy
director for administration and
we have a new addition to the
state parks team, which is Angie
Richmond, um, she was the former
park superintendent for the
National Park Service at
Theodore Roosevelt National Park
in North Dakota. She's our new
deputy director for field
operations.
Please.
You have the slides in front of
you, correct? OK. Well, no one
likes to see fees for services
increase. We all realize that
over time costs for services go
up. The last significant fee
increase for New Mexico state
parks occurred in 2004 when our
day use fees went from $4 per
vehicle to $5 per vehicle. Our
camping fees were last increased
in 1998, and our boat
registration fees were last
changed in 19
84. While we've made multiple
attempts over the years to
increase fees. We've not gained
administrative support for the
process until this last year.
To begin the process.
We completed an assessment of
our fees through a comprehensive
fee study completed in July of
2023. Based on our findings, we
began development of a rule
change and a fee increase that
we brought to the public in
February of this year. Next
slide, please. Throughout this
process, we've been asked why we
need to adjust state park fees.
First, New Mexico State Parks is
an enterprise agency. We're
expected to self-generate
revenue to help offset our
operating costs. In addition,
our
Parks are vulnerable to many
factors, including climate
change, economic conditions, and
natural disasters such as
wildfire and drought.
Any of these factors can have
serious impacts on our
visitation and revenue and
impact operations.
When state revenues are
decreasing.
Oftentimes recreation is thought
of as a non-essential service.
This means the focus is on
maintaining budgets for
essential services such as law
enforcement, education, and
healthcare.
And while our operating costs
have been increasing over the
years, our operational budgets
have been mostly flat over the
last 15 years, leading to
reduced services as we deal with
these challenges. Next slide,
please.
As mentioned, New Mexico State
Parks is an enterprise agency.
The fees that we charge provide
critical funding to our
operation for New Mexico state
parks.
These fees are set up so we have
a user pay, user benefit system,
ensuring the people that utilize
the recreational facilities we
provide, pay to maintain those
facilities. Next slide, please.
When you look at state parks
operating budget over the years,
you can see that we consistently
receive approximately 25 to 30%
of our operating budget from the
general fund while the remaining
70 to 75% of our budget is
self-generated revenue and
federal grants. Next slide.
Of course, as our visitation
fluctuates, so does our revenue.
You can see, uh, based on the
chart we have in front of you
that our visitation and revenue
took a significant hit. During
the pandemic, but we've since
rebounded, seeing over 5 million
visitors per year post-pandemic
with revenues to match.
Next slide.
As you would expect, our
visitation is seasonal. Most of
our visitors in parks come out
during the summer months when
schools on break, they're most
of them are out there from May
through September. Next slide.
When looking at our state park's
operational budget over the last
15 years we've remained mostly
flat since 2010. Our operating
budget in fiscal year 2010 was
just over $29 million. In fiscal
year 2024, are operating budget
was just under $29 million
meaning we remain flat or less
than a flat for approximately 15
years. In that time period, we
not only maintain services, but
we added 3 parks, Pecos Canyon
State Park.
Surreal's Hills State Park and
Massa Valley Boolski State Park.
And as you'll be hearing a
little bit later today, we're
considering expanding to Broad
Canyon.
Well, we were fortunate to see
an increase in our budget from
FY 24 to 25 to put us at just
under 31 million, we're still
behind where we need to be. Next
slide, please. The best way that
we can improve our fiscal
position and resiliency as an
agency is to bring in additional
revenue. To ensure we were
charging adequate fees, we
completed a fee study in 2023.
This study ran from January to
July, and in this study we
compared our fees to surrounding
state park systems. We also
looked at our
fees compared to what they would
be based on inflation. Based on
our review, we found New Mexico
state parks were substantially
behind surrounding states as
well as behind inflation.
In the study, I'm sorry, next
slide.
Uh, in the study, several
recommendations were made,
including implementing free day
use for New Mexico residents.
Increasing day use fees for
non-residents to $10 per
vehicle.
Eliminating the differentiation
between primitive and developed
camping and setting our camping
fee at $20 per night per
vehicle. Setting our utilities
at $10 per night for each
utility for water, electric, and
sewer, eliminating our annual
pass program.
Increasing entrance fees at
Living Desert Zoo and Gardens
and Smokey Bear Historical Park,
increasing boat registration
fees.
Adding a non-motorized vessel
launch fee, and adding a peruse
fee to our RV waste dump
stations. Next slide.
We're lying on our fee study, we
developed the initial proposals
shown here. Based on our initial
estimates, we expected to
generate an additional $5.4
million in revenue. Next slide.
With this proposal, we developed
a rule change and began a public
input process.
We published the notice of
proposed rule change in February
of 2024 and conducted conducted
public informational meetings
across the state and virtually
to gather public input and
better inform our decisions. We
conducted 12 informational
meetings across the state, and
we had over 400 participants and
received over 900 written
comments to our proposals. Next
slide.
We compiled the comments
received based on their
opposition to each proposal. The
area that received the most
opposition was the elimination
of our annual camping passes and
annual day passes.
40% of the responses indicated
they were opposed to elimination
of our senior and disabled
annual camping permit. 33% of
the responses indicated they
were opposed to eliminating the
resident annual camping permit.
And 29% of the responses were
opposed to elimination of the
nonresident annual camping
permit. 23% of the responses
were opposed to elimination of
the annual days pass. Another
large area of opposition was
related to our proposal for free
day use for New Mexico
residents. Approximately 19% of
the
Respondents were opposed to this
proposal. Next slide.
We had several shared shared
concerns among the responses
received, including a concern
that eliminimation of
elimination of annual passes
hurts families and retirees.
There was a feeling that these
passes and permits are necessary
to provide affordable recreation
for families as well as for
people on fixed income.
There was a general feeling
among the, among the public and
our staff that elimination of
day use fees would lead to
overcrowding and resource abuse.
Many of our parks already have
overcrowding issues. Many people
felt that camping in primitive
sites should not be the same
rate. They felt you shouldn't
pay the same for camping on a
beach as you would for camping
at a site with a table, a
shelter, and a grill.
There was a concern that
eliminating annual passes makes
visiting parks more inconvenient
with an annual pass, you come
and go as you please. If you
don't have an annual pass, you
have to pay each time you go in.
There was a concern that New
Mexico is a poor state and
increasing our fees hurts people
on fixed incomes. Along those
lines, there was a general
feeling that our comparison of
New Mexico to surrounding states
who are economically better off
skewed our results in our feeE
study. Um, there was a common
question of, how can you compare
New Mexico to Texas when our
median income is much lower.
There were also general
statements indicating that we
needed to improve facilities and
staffing before raising fees and
that we should consider dynamic
pricing. Next slide, please.
Based on the comments we
received, we went back to the
drawing board and reconsidered
our initial proposal. We
gathered additional information
to compare our fees to states
that are similar in economic
situations to New Mexico,
including Arkansas, West
Virginia, Kentucky, Mississippi,
and Louisiana, all of which have
similar median incomes and
similar poverty rates.
We incorporated the comments
received and the data collected
and made the decision to
compromise on the
but still allowing um some
residents in, in the offseason
to, to recreate where they might
not otherwise be able to.
Uh, we maintain the
differentiation between
primitive and developed camping.
We
Next slide.
When looking at our revised
proposal for entrance and
camping fees, we differentiate
between residents and
non-resident fees offering a
benefit to New Mexico residents.
Our proposal is to charge $5 a
day during our peak season from
May through September to New
Mexico residents, and $10 per
day year round to New Mexico or
to excuse me, to non-residents.
Our primitive camping proposal
is $10 a night for residents,
only a $2 increase from our
current rates and $15 per night
for non-residents. Our developed
camping proposal is $15 a night
for residents, only a $5
increase of our current fee and
$20 per night for non-residents.
We're proposing a $5 water fee,
a $10 electric fee, and a $5
sewer fee, where those are
available at the campsite. And
we're proposing a $10 dump
station fee for individuals not
camping in the park.
So if somebody just comes into
the park to dump the trailer,
they would pay a $10 fee, but
the visitors that are staying
there will be able to use it for
free.
We're maintaining our
recommendations for entrance
fees at Living Desert, Zoo and
Gardens, and Smokey Bear
Historical Park, and the Rio
Grande Nature Center.
Next slide.
Um,
We decided to maintain annual
passes, but to increase the
prices for those passes. The
proposal to have annual days
passed for residents set at $75
and for non-residents at $150
which comes out to about 15
visits at the standard daily
rate. The annual camping pass
for residents.
is set to $300 per year, which
comes out to $20 or 20 nights of
camping at the standard rate,
$600 per year for non-residents,
which comes out to 30 nights of
camping, and $150 per year for
seniors and people with
disabilities, which would equate
to $10 per night or $10.10
nights of camping, excuse me.
And based on significant public
comment and the desire to
improve services for our
military and veteran populations
were proposing adding an annual
camping permit for New Mexico
military and veteran personnel
at $150 per year.
Next slide.
For our boat registrations, we
decreased our proposal for the
two most popular classes of
boats. We're proposing a $60
registration fee for Class A
vessels every 3 years and a $75
registration fee for Class One
vessels every 3 years. This
registration fee is less than
what people would currently pay
to register their UTV or ATV in
the state.
We maintained our proposals for
our registration fees on Class 2
and larger vessels.
And based on all these estimates
and these changes that we made
to our proposals, um, we're
looking at a potential increase
in revenue of about $4.8 million
annually.
Now, throughout the process, we
heard from people that increases
being proposed were too large of
a jump. Obviously, when you're
dealing with 25 to 40 years of
inflation, it, it is a big jump.
There's a big increase there. In
order to avoid this in the
future, we're proposing a rule
amendment that would require New
Mexico state parks to evaluate
their fees every 5 years
compared to inflation and make
adjustments based on that. So
the adjustments are made
incrementally over the years
rather than in large jumps.
We took this revised proposal
back to the public through a
series of 5 informational
meetings. We held meetings in
Truth or Consequences in
Albuquerque at Navajo Lake State
Park, in Tuan carry, and we held
a virtual meeting as well. At
these meetings, we received
mostly positive feedback.
Next slide.
While people, while we're still
gathering comments.
The comments received to date
show that people are pleased
with the decision to maintain
the annual camping passes. Uh,
they're pleased with the
decision to maintain the
differentiation between
primitive and uh developed
camping.
And many people were pleased
that their input was taken into
consideration in our revised
proposals.
Some of the areas of concerns
that we've heard about so far
include differentiated fees for
non-residents. A lot of this is
in uh areas where we have high
non-resident populations, for
example, Angel Fire, Ute Lake,
uh, Elephant Butte, where
non-residents have homes in
those areas. Um, we've heard
concerns about the increase to
the non-resident annual camping
pass, and there's been some
concerns expressed about amended
stay limits. Overall, though,
the comments that we've received
to date, um,
been mostly positive.
Next slide. Our current timeline
for implementation has us
holding our rule hearing on
October 22, 2024.
This is also when the public
comment period ends, we'll be
taking comments up until that
date.
After uh rule hearing, we will
adopt whatever changes we adopt
and then hold a public
information, uh, campaign to get
the word out about what the new
fees will be. That way folks are
ready for it whenever it's
adopted on January 1, 2025.
Next slide.
In summary, I think that we've
worked diligently to include the
public and gather their input
and inform our decisions.
Throughout this process, I
believe we've developed a
proposal that's widely
supported. We're continuing our
public input period until
October 22nd, and we'll use
those uh comments to better
inform our decision, and while
no one wants to see increased
costs, I think these changes
will ensure that our state parks
remain viable for many years to
come.
Mr. Chair and committee members,
thank you again for allowing us
to present today, um, at this
time, I'd be happy to answer any
questions.
OK, thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, do you want, so
we're, we're doing both
presentations in one hour. Do
you want for us to do the next
portion of the presentation and
just open it up to general
questions for both or do you
want to deal with one at a time?
No, no, let's let's hear from
the panel first and then we can
do questions on either.
Mr. Chair, just before you go to
the, the, the panel, I'll just
say that, uh,
We are now transitioning to the
broad canyon feasibility study,
which is, was a, uh,
legislative, uh, request through
uh Senate Memorial and Colleen
Baker, our deputy director of
administration, is going to take
the lead on this presentation.
Thank you, uh, Chairman McQueen
and members of the committee,
I'm happy to be here this
morning. Actually, I think it's
afternoon now. Um, I'm fortunate
enough to present on the Broad
Canyon Ranch feasibility study
that the division just recently
completed.
Next slide please.
The feasibility study was
prepared, um.
In response to the Senate
memorial that was sponsored by
Senator Jeff Steinborn and
Representative Nathan Small,
which was passed in the 2023
legislative session.
The memorial asked the the
division to consider the
establishment of the Broad
Canyon Ranch as a state park.
Next slide, please.
The study area is located in
Donana County. It's
approximately 20 miles north of
Las Cruces. It is downstream of
Cabao Dam in upstream of
Leesburg Dam. It's approximately
7 miles north of Leesburg Dam
State Park. Uh, it's about a 10
mile drive.
The bright Kenyon Ranch was a
privately owned until the the
State Parks division acquired it
in 2008.
Next slide, please.
So there are 3 parcels in the
study background area. Uh, there
is a northern parcel that's 130
acres. It was a smaller parcel,
look at about 2 miles north of
the rest of the, the land that
we purchased. And it was
purchased in 1985.
The other two parcels are
further south along the river,
on the Rio Grande, uh, there is
a, a riverside parcel right
along the River on the west bank
of the river. It's 128 acres
right right along Highway 185,
and then there's an upland
parcel on the west side of the
highway that's approximately 664
acres for a total of about 783
acres in that combined area.
And those two parcels were
purchased in 2008. Next slide,
please.
The the property was purchased
by the Trust for Public Land in
2008. Trust for public land is a
nonprofit agency that works with
communities to protect
significant natural areas. The
division then purchased that
property from the Trust for
Public Land, the cost of the
purchase was totaling
approximately
And doing continuing uh
conservation efforts on that
property. Next slide, please.
So they process for a
feasibility study is laid out in
our New Mexico state statutes,
Chapter 16, Article 2, and the
study was prepared in, in
response to those requirements
that Chapter 16 lays out. The
assessment involved
Um, evaluation of the natural
and cultural resources, uh,
looking
Trails.
And following that picnic areas
at 63% of all toilets, 54%
restrooms at 39% campgrounds at
25%.
No development, 19% of
respondents and visitor center
at 18% of respondents.
The second question, if Broad
Canyon Ranch were developed as a
state park, what types of park
activities would be appropriate
and this question was to select
the top 3 choices. Uh, hiking
was the top choice at 105%
birdwatching at 88%, picnicking
at 65%.
Education and interpretive
programs at 53% non-motorized
boating at 40% horseback riding
at 39%, uh, biking, fishing and
camping on the 33 32%, and
swimming at 21%.
Next slide please.
So then moving into the the
results of the study, uh, we
considered a range of
development and management
alternatives based upon the
study findings, alternate one
involves no development of the
city area, so maintaining it as
it is now.
Alternative to involves limited
development of the riverside
parcel and up on parcels
collectively now the Rot Brad
Keinon ranch for day use as a
state park, recreation area,
that's associated with Leesburg
Dam State Park, or as a state
park.
Itself.
Alternatively, involves the full
development of R Canyon Ranch as
a state park with camping
options. Next slide, please.
Next slide, please.
The study recommends that state
parks pursue alternative to, to
develop either a day use park or
recreation area associated with
Leesburg Dam State Park.
On both the riverside and upland
parcels.
And then determine a course of
action for the northern parcel
which they had determined did
not meet their criteria for a
state park that's outlined in
Chapter 16, section 2. those
alternatives include State Parks
division retaining that that
that parcel and looking for
potentially future opportunities
to connect with the Bureau of
Land Management on um
connections into the Oregon
Mountains desert Peaks National
Monument, uh, potentially work.
With BLM to lease it to them or
transfer that that parcel to
them for the same purpose or
potentially looking at a sale or
just putting the property in
conservation.
Um, next time, please.
The State Parks division
supports alternative to as the
excuse me, preferred
alternative, alternative to
contemplates the development of
the riverside and upland
parcels as either a day use
state park or a recreation area
that functions as a satellite of
Leesburg Damsday Park.
If there is support for full
development of Broad Canyon
Ranch as a state park with a
camping option.
alternative to, there would be
funding required for both
operations and staffing, as well
as capital development.
The development of alternative
to is estimated to cost between
$4.8 million.06 million.
The staffing alternative for
alternative 2 would require
creation of 1 full-time position
and two seasonal positions.
budget is estimated at 13,000 or
total operating budget of
120,510.
Next side, please.
In conclusion, the feasibility
study indicates that development
under alternative to of the
Riverside and Upland parcels
would result in a unit which
would perform similarly to
comparable parks in the
southwest region and contribute
value as part of a cohesive
state system of state parks.
Alternative two meets the land,
Water and Conservation Fund
goals identified at the time of
the purchase of the Broad Canyon
Ranch, which included permanent
public access to the property
with parking and comfort station
or restroom.
Non-intrusive trail alignment
with the proposed Rio Grande
Trail.
And future development of
additional trails to support
wildlife viewing.
This alternative also allows for
phaseed development of the State
Parks division decides to pursue
further recreational development
of the study area in the future.
Thank you for that, um, and did
we have comments from, uh, Ms.
Connolly?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity today. I, as
mentioned, I'm the chair of the
State Parks Advisory Board, and
I represent a broad group of 9
citizens from across the states
from different areas of
expertise and professions and uh
all of us committed to the
mission of state parks. I'm
bringing to you a message that
the the uh our committee or our
advisory board really
stands in support of the fee
proposal and the proposed rule
changes, and we especially want
to commend state parks for, for
good government and um as you
heard through Jared's
presentation, the sheer amount
of public comments and taking it
out to find out what our
citizens want and value about
state parks, really, I think
speaks to the integrity of this
process. And I think that that
putting this into rule change
does provide an opportunity for
State parks to be more resilient
in the future, and, and really
serve both the citizens of our
state, but also the significant
number of people who are coming
to New Mexico to recreate and
enjoying our state parks. Thank
you so much.
Um, director Vasquez, anything
to add before we go to the
committee?
Um, thank you, um, Chairman,
I'll I'll just
Echo a little bit of what um
Chair Kenneally mentioned, I, I
think we modeled as a state
agency what it means, uh, in the
notice of rulemaking process to
engage the public and the people
who enjoy and would be most
impacted by any changes to our
state park fees, um.
And I'll just give one example,
which I think is a shining
example when we did the 2nd uh
public information session at uh
Truth or Consequences in a gym
very much like this one, we were
applauded and thanked. Uh, the
first meeting didn't go that
way.
Yeah, it was, it was a
challenge, and it was honest and
it was a tough conversation on
both sides, but we got through
it. We promised them we would be
back. We promised them they
would see changes from what they
shared with us and the fact that
when we went back, they
applauded us for hearing them
and integrating their thoughts
was one of the most rewarding
things I've done in quite a
while in this position. I've
been doing this for 26 years,
and I do agree with our Madam
Chair that it demonstrate
good government. It demonstrated
outreach and not just checking
the box.
Uh, as far as Broad Canyon, uh,
we followed the guidance of of
the legislature to identify the
opportunities for this potential
expansion within the New Mexico
state park system. I just want
to remind everybody we have 35
state parks that occur in 25 of
33 counties across the state and
are supported by 41
decentralized locations in order
for them to be as successful as
possible.
And so, uh, any addition to the
state park system is going to be
unique, but it needs to come
with the uh support in order to
be able to execute these
properties to be popular and
interesting and something that
can be maintained in the system
for years to come. My final
note, Mr. Chair, New Mexico
state parks are essential to New
Mexico. We have been here.
And we stand on the shoulders of
many people who have come before
us for 91 years.
We are turning the quarter
turning the corner towards our
centennial. And we believe that
what we have discussed with you
here in both programs will
strengthen the system
improve formative experiences in
state parks, create generational
interest in the outdoors and
continue to contribute.
To a tremendous economic impact
to the state of New Mexico
across our state, um, and one
last note, we are currently
engaged with the New Mexico
State University Arrowhead
Center on a state park specific
economic impact study so that we
can come back next year and tell
you how much we truly mean in
the economy of our great state
of New Mexico and hopefully
continue to get that support
that has been so important for
all of you moving forward. Um.
Mr. Chair, thank you for that
opportunity and we're available
for questions.
Thank you very much for your
presentations. Uh, we'll go to
the committee, I think, um,
you're welcome to ask questions
on either portion of the, the
presentation. Uh, first up, we
represent Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all, um, as someone who in
the 80s, I was probably.
Close to one of those pictures
you showed at Elephant Butte,
um, every weekend we would go to
boat and, um, I, I don't think
any of these, uh, changes,
especially your 2nd round, are
unreasonable and should be
really well supported, um, as
you said, um, you got a great
applause from the tier C group.
But, um,
I'm
Uh, wondering how many people
from out of state, have you been
able to track because when we
would go to Elephant Butte and
people still, you know, are.
Next generations are going now,
um.
How, how many people we would
notice a lot of people from
Texas, especially.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrari, uh, that's a good
question. That's something we
get asked quite often is how
many people in our parks are
from in-state and how many from
out of state. That out of state
portion brings, um, not only
visitors to the park, but
revenue to the local economies.
It's important for tourism.
Um, we don't have a specific
breakdown on that whenever
somebody comes into a park right
now, they pay one fee and that's
all it is. We don't collect that
data. We collect some of the
data on our reservation system,
um, but that's not all of our
visitors. With this economic
impact study that we'll be doing
going forward. I think that's
going to be a big part of it, a
big part of what we're going to
look at is where do people come
from, how far do they travel to
get there, what are they
spending? How many nights are
they staying there? And I think
that will provide us that
critical information that
going forward. And, uh, thank
you, Jared and, and Mr. Chair
and, and, uh, representative,
I'll add a little bit more. So
the reservation system who we
use as Reserve America, uh,
their business name is Espira.
We're able to get that kind of
information, but it's from that
set of people who only use a
reservation system, uh, and
that's about a 55-45 split, uh,
55% come from New Mexico and the
45% comes from out of state, but
we have seen a broadened uh
demographic of people.
Coming from out of state, it's
not just Texas and Arizona don't
get me wrong, Texas is our bread
and butter that's when you show
the bar graph it's Texas and
then everybody else after that
was so we love Texans and uh
we'll we'll we're happy that
they're coming over. However,
we're seeing Minnesota in the
top 5,
want to be able to package that
so we can better answer your,
your interests.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
We have the same level of um
offering and, and really nice
infrastructure and things like
that to um welcome people to our
state and I think that is going
to be reflected in the
improvements that you make with
this funding, and I'm anxious to
see what that feasibility study
says about, you know, how much,
because you don't know yet how
much this, these proposals are
going to generate or do you?
Again,
Mr. Chair, and Representative,
we are, are projected estimation
is between 4 and $5 million but
as we all know when there's
something that changes, there
may be a year or two that it
takes for people to find their
rhythm within that new fee
schedule. So we're, we're, we're
hoping that by the 3rd year
we'll have a very solid
projection as to um how our fees
have been received out in the
field by visitors both in-state
and out of state, but we're
hoping that, uh, initially uh
it'll be a $4 to $5 million
dollar increase in
Self-generated revenues based
off of park fees. Mr. Chair,
and, um, Mr. Velasquez, how much
total then will you have?
because 45 million doesn't sound
like very much to make all of
the improvements that you
probably would like to make, Mr.
Chair and Representative, you're
right, um, it, it's a, it's a
humble ask, it's very modest,
but 50, let's just say $5
million to to to our division is
huge. Um, it doubles our revenue
in state parks revenue right
now. We're we're at about 4.6
million, uh, with our
fees, which have been held over
for many years and so being able
to double that with a very
modest increase uh with support
from the public will further our
mission, but it gives us an
opportunity to better invest in
operating costs as well as, uh,
other state funds that we can
match with towards, towards
federal funds. For example, in
the boat registration fees that
haven't changed since 1984. That
was the same year I was in the
5th grade playing basketball
here, um.
Those funds are specifically
matched to every, every dollar
is matched to a federal dollar,
so we get a maximum leverage uh
in previous uh discussions this
morning we we talked about the
Dingell Johnson boat axis, uh,
portion of the federal funding.
That's a 3 to 1 match that we
work with, uh, and, and use
other state funds in order to
maximize those funds, so the
potential is more than just the
4 to 5 million because we have
the option to use this for
matches well towards federal
funds.
And Mr. Chair, um, if
If we were to infuse um state
funds to get the infrastructure
and different um parks to where
they could be,
Proud to announce through our
team and Colleen's leadership,
uh, we have spent over $17
million of that and we are still
1010 months out from having to
meet the deadline. There has
already been, uh, because of
that trust that the legislature
had in New Mexico state parks
and knowing the need that we had
in infrastructure, you're
already starting to see or you
should start to see if you're
visiting your state parks. Big
changes where these funds have
been uh invested.
What we saw in FY 25 in our
budget request, we made an
aggressive ask. I thought it was
aggressive at 100 million. You
all had the faith in us to say,
Because of what you've done,
you've given us 16 million
folks, I've been doing this for
26 years with State. I've never
seen that kind of investment by
the legislature in New Mexico
State Parks.
So initially with what you've
already done, you're going to
start to see huge uh
improvements in infrastructure.
And unfortunately, not all of
that infrastructure is above
ground. The majority of it is in
walls, in grounds, in pipes, in
dams, uh, in roadways, those
kind of things. And so, um, our
27 ask is a little bit more
aggressive, and we're going to
go for $20 million in capital.
This is unheard of in the 91
years of state parks existing,
we have never had this type of
capital.
Support that you all have placed
in us now and so representative,
the future is bright with what
you've already uh supported
Really going to be part of our
operating budget, being able to
keep up competitively, we have
80 law enforcement positions
within the division, uh, being
able to compete in law
enforcement when statutorily
state police is now the most
high paid police agency in the
state by law, we, we're not
competing with that. Uh, many of
our state agency law enforcement
are not considered in that bill.
And so we have to be able to
really be nimble. So hiring
staff, hiring our technical
staff, hiring engineers,
architects, we have a, a, a
need, uh.
To continue to grow our
operating budget, but we also
have a need to grow in capacity
with the people and the programs
that support the mission. And I
hope, Representative that was
broad enough that uh it it was
what you're looking for.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That's all.
Thank you, Representative
Ferrari, Representing Vortez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks so
much for that presentation. I
have a question for Deputy
Director Baker, um, on the Broad
Canyon Ranch. Did you do a
budget analysis of, um,
alternative 3, and what it would
cost and what revenue you would
bring in if there were camping.
Chairman McQueen and
Representative Ortez, yes, in
the feasibility study, those
figures are there. Um, it's not
in our presentation today, uh,
because we selected what we had
time to present, uh, are the,
the full study is on our
website, or we're happy to
provide that to you. Um, I can
also pull it up. I did this on
my computer so if we can talk
offline, I'm happy to do that.
I'll take that question off
mine.
And, um, uh, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative,
So we have annual camping and we
have a New Mexico senior with a
discount.
Why did we not have an annual
day use resident senior with a
discount.
Mr. Chair, Representative
It's available for most people
to get. Our current pricing on
it is uh $40 for a year, um,
going up to 75 is a little bit
of an increase, but uh it still
covers 15 interests to a park,
um, if you go into a park 15
times during that year, you've
already paid for it.
Um, you know, that's obviously
something we can look at going
forward, but for the purposes of
this study, we didn't, didn't
evaluate that. We evaluated the
passes that we already have in
place.
Mr. Chair, you may want to look
at that, but I'm really glad you
didn't get rid of the yearly
fee, that was where I was
getting a lot of comments, um,
Mr. Chairman, and one of the
things that, and I've criticized
earlier with game and fish in
this.
I can't remember if it's last
session or the session before
and it was a proposal to not
charge Foster parents with their
kids and I raised the question
about and that was for day use,
and I raised the question about
you're going to let them in free
and you all didn't oppose that.
And yet right away you're coming
back and going, hey, we need a
fee increase.
And this is an example of
You know, these discounts that
end up having repercussions. I,
I think the parks in New Mexico
are great. I'm glad that we're
putting more money into them. I
think that we really should be,
you know, the number one
destination based on our parks,
um, Mr. Chairman, my next
question is you're proposing a
five-year review of the fees is
that
Are you asking that it's an
internal review and an internal
adjustment.
Or are you gonna come back to
the legislature for a fee
increase.
Um, Mr. Chair and
representative, technically,
Even the current process.
We don't need the legislature's
approval. This is all an
administrative rule.
Uh, and so that distinction
would also be an administrative
rules, so we will not be, we
would still be communicating
with the legislature at that
time and keeping you involved,
obviously you represent
representation of your
constituents is important to us,
but these are in administrative
rules. The portion of statute
that was mentioned by Deputy
Director Baker was for the
feasibility study and the
feasibility statutes, in order
to to create or expand into a
state park.
So our fees are in rule, but we
would always come back to inform
the legislature of those plans,
but not necessarily.
Get your approval for it because
it would be an administrative
rule if that makes sense
to you, Mr. Chairman, and uh,
are the boat fees by regulation,
Mr. Chairman and Representative,
that is correct. Uh, both
registration fees are also an
administrative rule, not in
statute.
Yeah, I, Mr. Chairman, I don't
understand that because in, uh,
Governor Richardson's
administration. I carried a bill
for them to increase the voting
fee, but uh I, I'll move on from
there Mr. Chair and
Representative, I was with you
on that bill, uh, and you and I
got laughed out of the Senate
Finance Committee because um
John Arthur Smith told us if it
quacks like a tax and looks like
a tax, it's a tax and uh so I
remember that and, and so.
So goes the story that our boat
registration fees haven't
changed since 1984. And the
annualized cost right now for a
runabout boat, what you would
see, uh, at Eagle Nest just
down, down the mountain here is
$9.50 a year. Yeah.
Can't buy a Happy Meal for that.
No, Mr. Chairman, and, and
director, I agree we need to
increase the feet, but um.
Mr. Chairman, and, uh, Mr.
Director, I'm going to tell you
that the untapped resource and
when Dave Simon was there. I
tried to get him to do that. So
you're looking for law
enforcement.
The best law enforcement retiree
job could be a state park
officer. I mean, you're offering
a uh a living facility for him
at many of the parks and uh I
think that that would be one of
the areas you ought to look at
and if you need some help
contacting them I'm willing to
go ahead and help you. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you. We,
we agree that um that would be a
great option for us to reduce
our vacancy rate, um, right now,
the majority of our vacancy rate
overall is 23% across the state
parks division, and the majority
of that percentage is because of
our law enforcement positions.
Um, I, I will tell you,
representative, that I
Wrote an FIR for that bill last
year to include other state
agencies in that consideration,
uh, because we do believe that
um the double dipping bill has
uh severely limited agencies
with law enforcement needs to be
able to bring back peril-related
law enforcement retirees in
order to continue to fulfill the
mission and we we get notices
like that all the time. I, I
retired from Pera. I'm a law
enforcement officer. I'm 43
years old. I would love to be a
park ranger and, and, and just
contribute my training and.
back to the Mission of State
Parks. Um, so I, I agree that
that would be a great benefit to
many agencies including the
State Parks division, and thank
you for bringing that up.
Thank you, Representative Vre.
um, we've got
And adhering to the letters that
we sent and the, and, and doing
what you promised you would do,
and that's why you got applause
at, uh, in tier C, uh, and
that's all I wanted to say. That
was quick. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you so much,
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Lou Hun.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I just wanna say, um, I think
you got a lot of your, um,
Your finance request was due to
a lot of the work that we did in
this committee. So, um, that was
I think my 2nd year here, um,
serving and we really
put a focus on on the needs for
our state parks. So I always
want to thank our committee, uh,
for doing a lot of that lifting,
um.
I was looking at page 16 and 17
on the, the, the fees. I think
you're gonna get.
Um, down the road you're gonna
get some blowback on some of
these a little bit with our
disabilities communities and.
I think I heard you got some of
the veterans issues taken care
of, but also with our youth.
I'm wondering if you're going to
consider through rule making
maybe days of free days where no
one has to pay to go into our
parks, Mr. Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and Representative, thank you.
You know what, maybe we didn't
um clarify that enough. So our
rules that we, we are moving
forward with right now will make
free day use for all New
Mexicans for 8 months out of the
year. OK.
Um, which is
Unheard of, um, in, in most
areas, uh, if you're a state
park system in a state that's
fully subsidized by the
legislature, you'll see that
type of allowance, but where you
were a state park system that's
um business or enterprise
agency, uh, those kind of
giveaways don't happen, right?
However, we felt that it was
important for New Mexicans to
have free access to their state
parks. The only caveat for that
is, uh, in order to maintain,
uh, natural resource integrity
as well as not run all of our
staff out of the state.
Um, we're, we're not going to
allow free day use access for
New Mexicans during the peak
season from, uh, May to
September, which was the, the
graph that was showing that peak
in the middle of July, but this
will be the first time in 91
years that New Mexicans will
have free days use access to
their state parks for 8 months
out of the year. Thank you for
that clarification. Thank you,
Mr. Chair, for that. Um, my, my
next,
Question is regarding your uh
law enforcement. Did you
Did you give us any information
regarding like as as it would be
an enterprise type of funding
with the return on the value is
if we do have that enforcement
in place in our parks, Mr.
Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
representative, I, I don't
really have a qualitative
quantitative type presentation
for that. But when we think
about the crime issue in New
Mexico having park rangers, so
the uniqueness of state parks is
it's a facilitated experience
when you go up here to the
Floresta in the Forest Service
you pick a spot and if there's a
grizzly bear, we don't have
grizzlies, but maybe, you never
know. If there's a grizzly bear
there, you're on your own,
right? You're on your own. If
there's a loud party, you're on
your own. Um, if you find
yourself in a water feature and
you're struggling, you're on
your own.
Uh, the difference with New
Mexico state parks is that
there's a facilitated experience
we have in many areas bathrooms,
showers, hot water, hot, hot
showers. Uh, we have rangers on
the water, we have rangers on
the land. Uh, we have rangers
doing emergency response. We
save lives every year. Um, we've
seen some of those press
releases over the course of
years. Uh, we also recover, um,
do a lot of recovery operations,
which is a sad news, but what
you would see is more response
from our staff, more, uh, you
know, there's folks that could
go to a
right now and we hear it and
they say, you know, I was there
a day and I didn't see a ranger
and it was because of vacancy
rate there was so high and that
ranger had a day off.
And so what we're trying to do
is make sure that we can improve
our operating budget in order to
uh recruit and retain law
enforcement professionals, park
rangers that will be out in the
field serving each and every one
of you, responding to fire,
responding to abandoned boats,
uh, people in the water,
everything that you can imagine
that happens in a state park
with 5.3 million visitors per
year happens from suicides to
murder suicides, uh, we deal
with it all, and it is
Very significant in some uh in
some years, the New Mexico State
Parks division has more
fatalities than most of the
counties and most municipalities
in the state of New Mexico. So
what we're dealing with is what
every other municipality deals
with with law enforcement and
what we hope that we would be
able to show Representative
Lujan is more of a presence,
more of a visitor, uh, meet,
meet and exceed visitor
expectations and always focused
on preserving our natural and
cultural resources in order to
be able to provide them for
future generations, so.
Uh, and, and it's not just our
park rangers, we have our our
staff that do maintenance, do
the beautification efforts, um,
without them, we couldn't do
much. Uh, we wouldn't be able to
maintain that. So we have a
diversity of staff that we need
to support and we need to create
more outdoor professionals and
the one challenge I'll have for
this crew before we leave is if
you know anyone who wants to
work for the best agency in
state government.
Please direct him to state
parks. We need them. We need
volunteers, we need, uh, every,
every type of person that we can
find, uh, to support this
mission is critical at this
phase, and I will tell you that
you're going to hear the same
from the Forest Service, the
Bureau of Land Management,
Department of Game and Fish, we
need outdoor recreation and
protection professionals more
now than ever. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, my last question and
I.
I keep on asking this as we're
developing our, um, outdoor
econo economy, uh, what does
that, what pressures are you
experiencing or?
Additional fees or upkeep and
those sorts of things, are you
experiencing because of the
additional focus we have for
outdoor recreation and are we
meeting those demands? Thank
you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Lujan, that's a
great question and thank you.
Um, so what we were averaging in
visitation prior to the pandemic
was at about 4.5 million people
after the pandemic, we have now
reached 5.3 million and are
averaging well over 5 million,
so that's almost, you know, an
800,000 visitor increase in just
a short period of time. That has
Uh, our operational impacts are,
are going through the roof and,
and Representative Lujan, you've
heard me and I'm hope, I hope
you're not tired of hearing
this, but the infras we're doing
great and inviting people to our
state. And I just said this at
the New Mexico Outdoor Economics
conference which was held in Las
Cruces earlier this week. We do
a great job. Come to the state
of New Mexico, New Mexico true
Terra and Canta we do it in
English, we do it in Spanish. We
invite them here and when they
get here, they don't have the
back end in order to responsibly
recreate in our state. They,
they don't know where to deal
with solid waste.
I know that Senator Stefanix has
heard the conversation about
Pecos Canyon and the fact that
it's overrun with solid waste.
It's overrun with gray and black
water. It's overrun with RV high
liquid concentration, you can't
find a dump station if you don't
go to a state park. You might
find one at a giant in
Albuquerque, but if you're
coming from Cuesta, from Caresto
Lake, you're not going to carry
all of your waste to
Albuquerque. That's going to
land up somewhere. It's gonna be
in an Arroyo. It's gonna be on
the side of the highway. It's
going to be piled in a state
park because they know that
we're
Steward of the property. Uh, and
so Representative, your question
as we are seeing visitation go
up, it is definitely having an
impact on operations. The
expectations uh that these
visitors have need to be met.
And as a state, we used to have
sewer, uh, dumps or RV dump
stations at our highways and
byways along our rest areas.
Those got plugged.
They don't exist. So when you're
coming to New Mexico or you're
going from um Albuquerque to
Questa.
What are you going to do with
the byproduct of your
recreation.
Most small communities can't
staff their transfer facilities.
They're closed on weekends. When
is this, this, this product
being produced on weekends?
They're closed on holidays.
When is it being produced on
holidays. It's not their fault,
but they're so small that they
don't have the capacity. We need
to help our communities across
the state of New Mexico, get
more capacity to be able to deal
with the back end of recreation,
and we need to be able to
support state parks and
operating budget so that we can
continue to be the responsible
steward for those who cannot be
in other means. So thank you,
Representative. I'm sorry to
keep pressing that's my last
question. I much appreciate it.
There is a trade-off and I don't
think we've kept up with with
that trade-off is and what that
means for us in, in many ways,
Mr. Chair, I think we need to
really focus in on that and
maybe get a, a study report on
it. Thank you.
So thank you very much uh for
your presentations. I know
there's a state park in my
district, the Hills State Park,
uh, I suspect Miss Baker is
familiar with that. I worked on
that before I was in the
legislature. Uh, and it's a
tremendous asset for that
community. And I think our state
parks are sort of, I think too
often we take them for granted
and I think, um, you know, as we
focus on tourism and outdoor
recreation, this is, this is one
of the areas of growth and some
I think we can very much
enhance. So, uh I love to hear
all the good things that you're
doing. So thank you all very
much for your presentations. Uh,
the committee, we have lunch,
uh, we, we'll be back at
1:30 um.
Oh, and our lunch is provided
today by Kate Carson Electric.
So thank you to them. Mr. Chair,
have you been to the borough
race at Surrillos Hills. Uh, you
know, my son has soccer game, so
I missed it, but next year I'll
tell you it is a that is going
to be a huge event. It's growing
