Good morning we're going to try
to get started I apologize for
the lateness of everything
representative a chair make
queen is stuck in the middle of
the countryside with the flat
tire and no way to get it
replaced I of course along with
many others hit the accident I
was not in an accident I hit the
accident in the album area and I
apologize that we are starting
late
we are starting with the
promotion vice president michael
jackson please come forward
thank you for your hospitality
first of all
the university is taking care of
three of our committees this
week so they have really
extended themselves for all of
the legislature you might be
having almost the entire
legislature here this week
but welcome and we are happy to
hear you this morning.
Thank you very much senators
representatives welcome on
behalf of the mexico tech and
president music are who extends
his regrets for not being able
to be here this morning we want
to welcome you to our campus and
the city of secure
you know it is a great time of
the year to go ahead and have
you here at the start of our
academic year because the campus
is a wash with energy excitement
enthusiasm and a little bit of
trepidation at the start of our
full semester and so we hope
that you can take this energy
and excitement and turn into
having an immensely productive
meeting this week so I I am
indeed by jackson uh i'm
provosed and vice president for
academic affairs
because my background is physics
I have a natural version of
having to speak in front of
groups let alone having to see
and look at the people whom i'm
talking with so so this weekend
what I decided to do was trying
to use maybe chat gpt to go
ahead and create my welcome
message and I think it did a
fantastic job the only problem.
Is that the output a gave me was
a bunch of punch cards and my
punch card reader doesn't work
anymore so I had to not only do
I have to talk to my IT
department about this but I have
to I had to actually write my
welcome address myself so it is
it was a compounded set of
things I had to do last night so
the first thing I just wanted to
start off with is just to stay
thank you thank you for
everything that you're doing for
new mexicans and so you know uh
there's a wide range a very
diverse range of opinions that
are out there and members of the
legislature their staff members
to the agencies have to find
ways to go ahead and navigate
that and that that in in in very
much resembles a campus
community there's a wide range
of opinions on this campus and
everyone feels very comfortable
telling me those opinions and
all the things that I need to do
and all the problems that I need
to fix and so knowing that I
just want to say thank you very
much for everything that you're
doing on behalf of the state and
helping us move forward so
that's the first thing i'd like
to say the second thing i'd like
to just say is I i'd like to
also thank you for your support
of education
cater twelve as well as higher
education um you know it's
important to have
this for work for development
it's important to have educated
citizens citizens bring is
paramount to this cases of our
of our state in our nation
we need individuals who can
identify what questions they ask
what information we need and how
to get that information then
once we collect the data how to
go ahead and evaluate it and how
to use it so we can go ahead and
advance innovation so we can go
ahead and
enhance our economy and promote
national security
so again um while we can all
benefit from increase support.
Especially new mexico tech and
since i'm an at will employee I
need to make sure I say that
because president moves a guard
would have my head otherwise but
why we could always use more
support we do want to go ahead
and thank you very much for
everything you've done for this
sector of the state
along with members of the
various legislative committees
who are meeting with us this
week i'd like to also extend our
welcome to all the guests and
visitors here to the campus into
the city of sakora please enjoy
your time with us along with
having a productive meeting I
hope everyone can leave here
knowing a little bit more about
one another perhaps how your
interest aligned so that
together we can help move
forward the state of new mexico
so once again welcome to the
coral and welcome to tech thank
you
thank you you have time to stay
for some questions
sure okay so first we're going
to go to introductions from the
committee so you know where
everyone is from around the
state but I think that people
will have some questions about
some of the money and some of
the projects that we've given to
your of university so let's
please start representative
matthews you don't have a mike
could somebody show that mike.
The.
Ok
thank you madame share
and thank you just heard the
last few minutes because I was
looking for the building for a
while
um my name is mary and matthews
on state representative from
albuquerque
and I
have been on his committee for
several years of very interested
in water issues and it's a
pleasure to be in sacrament
thank you.
Thank you representatives
tomorrow thank you madame chair
members of the committee and
everybody
in the audience and in presenter
my name is martin zamora
district sixty three house
member I represent the south
half of curry the north have for
roosevelt all all of the the
backer other guy looping at
touches unmeganed county and
madam chair wish to make a
little announcement today about
senator pat wood says his
mother's not doing well and he's
not going to make it to
committee today and like
everybody to keep her mind his
mother and his family in a in
their prayers thank you manager.
Thank you center companies thank
you very much madame chair
members of the committee of
course the people that are here
with as those people that are
paid attention online it's great
to go ahead and be here in
sakora and I just want to go
ahead and indicate one thing uh
doctor jackson as you go forward
gosh that energy the two bring
to the table is is exciting that
select refine and I really enjoy
it I was got here about seven
thirty this morning started
walking around capitalists
talking to the students they're
excited about their learning
environment and so I I can
attest to not only the energy
that you have but that are
fascinating presentation it was
great just so much energy new
mexico state senator peak compus
representing all parts of the
seven counties in northeast new
mexico it's always a delight to
be here in sacorda was here
about a month ago with a
legislative finance committee
and we continue to be impressed
not only by the educational
environment here but by the
growth of thoughts the ideas of
how this community is truly
behind this institution it
really shows the vitality of uh
soccer new mexico thank you
thank you very much
representative I think you chair
my name is representative of
kathleen cates i'm from district
forty four
the grapes on the back table or
from my humble two vines and
rear rancher new mexico I too
was arrived here civil hours
earlier and what a lovely campus
it's it's a great environment I
am hopping from several
committees the next several days
and espace is so beautiful i'm
going to take a moment for my
introduction time to just say
that one of the break places
that I get to represent is the
village of koralis who is really
struggling with water are farm
community there has gone as long
as forty days without water
being released from the river
understand that they do not have
a quasi government a sake you
association or water shed
representing them they are
completely relying about the m r
c g d.
And um and I hope that we all
have um good energy and thoughts
on some solutions for that ad
community thank you
thank you madam prode cam
I good morning everyone think
amount of chair a state senator
mimi store from the
international district and east
gateway area of kirky district
seventeen where beautiful drive
down very happy to be here in an
educational setting where the
enthusiasm is so high
great thank you representative
madrid.
Documentary
wonderful drive early this
morning coming in and the glad
to be here state rep district
fifty three
proud to be here in new mexico
and in glad to be here with us
are committed today and get some
insight to the some of the
futures thank you
thank you representative i'm
strong in your home area
thank you madame chair and ah
thank you to all the community a
special things to new mexico
tack for hosting so many
committees over the past few
months and especially this week
I believe there's three
committees here and always with
open arms and I am gate alarm
strong state representative for
district forty nine which
incumbences sakoral capturing
valencia and sierra county it is
the largest house district in
the state uh I was born here in
saquora are raised in catering
county and a.
I am bound and determined to
fight for water and new mexico
and especially for the people
and I am a farmer and a rancher
just FY I thank you madam chair
thank you very much senator
lopez and I think you madam
chair and good morning and thank
you new mexico tech for hosting
us as senator compo said this is
a beautiful campus over the
years that we've been here for a
different committee hearing
we continue to see I continue to
say the beauty of
with the students but also the
technology and the advancements
that new mexico tack gives and
brings to new mexico and other
communities across this country.
Ummm I think we are a hidden
shining store that the rest of
this country needs to understand
what value we bring um and just
as an aside madam chair this is
where my family comes from.
Louis sloppes langround that's
where my family comes from and
cousins and search through this
the whole community let me third
political by that and all the
other places is where home is my
grandfather was born here in
course you know during the oh
late early twenties of the last
century is when things used to
move around but lopezville which
is worth the other committees
being held I was asked a
question of madam charoni said
well because it's welcome to my
family home
but anyway thank you very much
for hosting.
Thank you representative rameral
thank you chair women
representative andrea metal from
northern santa fe county home to
the city of santa fe all and for
sovereign public i'm here
because look at the people in
the audience right now there's
my favorite people to learn from
and um really shape the policies
the.
Or our future of new mexico so I
really appreciate having so much
going on here
that we can learn from and made
the have heard to drive down
this morning which was again so
beautiful arm such a great drive
and it's grateful to be here to
think about i'm sure thank you
i'm listening I am senate
district thirty nine posts of
six counties bernalio lincoln
semigal santa fe torrents and
valencia and sarah would you
please introduce yourself and
the rest of the staff here
thank you madame chair members
of the committee the mexican
tech for hosting us uh many
mister read my earlier staff
fair water natural research as
we have tom christopher drafter
and angela decon are support
staff thank you.
And sorry
at least bob um with
a webcast services thank you
thank you all for coming to this
meeting so questions comments
for our provos here.
I have a senator composing them
I have something thank you thank
you very much madame chair and
again going back to a few of the
issues here as you've heard
already water really is
one of our most
I would go in call it top
priorities for for new mexico
and so many of our communities
if not all uh as new mexico tech
continues can you give us an
idea in terms of the research
that's going on to help us to
better improve if you will not
only our water sources but also
to deal with the geology and the
octofers that the extent
throughout the state and what
kind of educational environment
you all have created here to
help us address those issues
why I think many of these issues
are are going to be into
disciplinary and nature though
that the solutions are going to
have to be in to display our
neck in nature so a lot of our
programs kind of
take advantage of that into
disciplinary kind of aspect that
we have here on campus I think
one of the things that makes
tech unique is the fact that not
all do we have this this
fantastic educational
environment but we have the
research centers that are here
whether it be the p r c whether
be the bureau whether be I cost
a weather our new national
center for hydrologic innovation
all of these opportunities bring
researchers and and scientists
and engineers to the research
centers and we leverage those
opportunities at expertise in
with our education and so trying
to go ahead and and actually
expand the partnerships that
exist here in order to go ahead
and address these kind of
problems and bring those
problems into the classroom
through through undergraduate
and graduate student research
through other types of
experiencial learning those are
really the key things that that
in my from my vantage point that
i'd like to highlight and so
really trying to go ahead and
and and bring in.
The research centers into the
academic world that's probably
one of the key things I think
that would be critical and
preparing students to go ahead
and and leave tech when they
graduate whether be
undergraduate graduate level and
be able to transition seamlessly
then into the into the private
sector or international labs or
any type of anywhere within the
work force and then the academic
programs that were actually
focusing on
some of them are long standing
like our earth environmental
science programs at the
undergraduate graduate level the
hydrology certificate hydrolegy
undergraduate graduate and and
peeked masters and p h d
programs as well as new programs
that were looking into whether
it be an areas such as
sustainable engineering so all
of these kind of things are are
things that we'd like to go
ahead and continue leveraging
and trying to attract studies to
show them the great
opportunities at a stem career
can have and again by having by
expanding the mentoring that
we're able to do here by
leveraging those research
centers oh thank you very much
madame chair and the course
doctor jackson as we go forward
what it really leads to there
and in order for us to go ahead
and help resolve the water issue
that a flex all of us here
throughout mexico how are we
going to continue with the
collaboration let's say for
example with new mexico state
and possibly some of the other
institutions that are focusing
on the hideology on the water
issues and so forth can you give
us an idea in terms of what that
collaboration looks like for new
mexico tech and these other
institutions rather state.
Oh that that's no problem so
there are a variety of different
research initiatives that that
the vice president for research
right now is leading a number of
those are are engine proposals
uh some of which we've already
received kind of certain types
of or preliminary funding four
other ones were applying to and
those specifically or to go
ahead and draw in the research
institutions across the state
the national labs as well as
companies from the private
sector so those are those are
some elements that we have there
and then in other elements are
just the standard kind of
collaborations that we have
amongst faculty and amongst the
different kind of academic
centers that are uh the the that
that we have here on campus and
that exist already at new mexico
state for example in u and m
thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much doctor just
a closing statement we're not
going to be able to do this
alone it's going to take all of
us here in your mexico as we
address the issue of water
shortage what are usage and in
the long run how we're all going
to pitch in because the water
issues are definitely across the
state thank you very much
manager thank you senator
representative.
Thinking about him terror again
thank you for hosting just a
couple of questions about
whether or not your students
are engaging in some of the
entrepreneurial opportunities
that the sac has been funding
through our v c the v c's that
are getting funding and others
climate technology water
technology a number of
opportunities that are looking
at the um.
Advanced energy future of new
mexico and i'm just curious if
there's a programmer conduit to
some of those um.
You know reinvestment
opportunities into your students
and into uh you know economic
diversification with students
here as well.
There are some opportunities on
this campus to do exactly that I
don't know any of the details
that with this point i'd have to
i'd have to check in to see what
the specifics of that are we do
have
several types of entrepreneurial
kind of activities that the
students are engaged in several
types of clubs and organizations
and they're doing that either as
part of the the curriculum and
within the management area or
engineering management area or
they're doing it outside in the
form of clubs and organizations
or perhaps through the
internship experiences but those
specific programs that should
mention i'd have to actually
look to see the level of
engagement that's involved in
that think you manage would love
to follow up with that as we
tried to call to be a
relationship with the best in
the brightest of builds the next
generation companies want to be
sure that our students are also
looking to the folks leading the
charge and knowing that we're
putting historic funding into
this the spent her capital
that is supposed to be leading
claim attack around the world I
would love to be able to make
sure that students know about
that and and how to engage
further thinking
thank you very much I did my
only comment is that we have
funded this university for
this institute to do quite a bit
of data for us to set up data
boards to look at wildlife to
look at water and as senator
compos said we are looking for
collaboration across the state
and we would appreciate your
efforts in that my last well
thank you very much again for
your hospitality but as you
leave could you ask a staff to
bring in more chairs because I
aren't some of our audience are
standing but thank you very much
for waiting for us and we're
sorry we were late this morning
madam chair representative
senators again welcome to our
campus and just to let you know
I have in my job description.
Other duties as a signed so
we'll go ahead and get right on
that
thank you again okay we are
going to move to the second item
and have the introduction of our
new state engineer.
List anderson please.
Push the people person on there
in the turns red and we have to
turn it off and when you stop
talking you turn it off until
you respond again
thank you i'm good morning madam
chair members of the committee
I am honored to be here with you
today I have so much to say so
much to talk with you about and
for that reason i'm pretty much
just going to read my statement
because I think I could take all
morning just talking to you so
i'm thank you for the
opportunity to introduce myself
today I know you have a packed
agenda and I appreciate your
time and will keep my
introduction brief it is a true
honor to be designated as new
mexico's first female state
engineer I think governor lee
hungry through the appointment
and I look forward to getting to
know each of you and working
together to tackle new mexico's
water challenges.
I also want to think they
predecessor my cameran who I
worked with over the past year
and the role of senior advisor
and who I know worked closely
with many of you and this
committee I hope to follow in
his footsteps and earn your
respect as I know he did
I want to take take this
opportunity to let you all know
a little bit more about me in my
background and what my
intentions are a state engineer
and my vision for the agency
I grew up in all the cookie
graduated from the university of
new mexico with the bachelor's
degree in civil engineering and
decided to stay and pursue a
master's degree in water
resources and environmental
engineering while in school I
and turned its the indian labs
working on water conservation
projects after graduating I
spent a number of years working
as a consultant for new mexico
for each two hundred engineers
and worked my way up to the role
of water operations leader for
new mexico and west texas we
built many of the large water
and was water projects here in
new mexico so my background is a
lot of that is in water
treatment engineering
we built surface water treatment
plans both in alba cookie and
santa fe I also worked on the
design for the eastern new
mexico rural water systems and
very familiar with the issues on
the eastern side of the state um
after having hids I decided that
I want to work closer to home
and they took a drive managing
engineering and design and
construction projects with the
other cookie burning your county
wider utility authority at the
water at the redia served in a
number of interesting roles that
help me get a broad perspective
on utility operations
administration policy and water
resources with my final rule
being chief planning officer
where a managed water resources
conservation the education
program asset management and all
engineering through the agency
are regarding construction
projects and and variety
familiar with infrastructure
construction projects.
And excited to help recruit as
many federal funds into the
status we can um end and get
some stuff get some stuff built
gets a project stand um
I also helped her found the
standing tramma project
contractors association and
served as the first chair of
that association
I am a level for water operator
and a level three wastewater
operator so i'm not afraid to
get my hands dirty i've been out
there i've done the work in the
field
and I love it i'm optimistic and
excited to take on this new
challenge my goal is to help new
mexicans move forward with
policies programs in projects to
support our water future as
state engineering intend to
deliver on the governor's water
pro priorities including those
laid out in the fiftier water
action plan we must ensure that
future generations of new
mexicans have a secure water
supply resilient water sheds and
thriving local economies I also
intend to be a strong advocate
for new mexico's water interest
with other western states in the
colorado river and real grand
basins it is important to me to
be a good neighbor to the states
we share stream systems with and
mostly importantly the stand up
for new mexico's needs I plan to
continue the agencies programs
in a fear and reliable way
resolving complex water
management decisions based on
the best available data and
science it is also important to
collaborate with all stay
holders and decision makers when
tackling our complex water
challenges I believe everyone's
voice deserves to be heard I
also plan to continue to work
with the skilled professionals
on staff at the office of the
state engineer and interstate
stream commission to maintain a
competitive and modernized work
for us across the agency I am
passionate about water building
our water work for us educating
the public on water issues and
supporting our beautiful
statement has been jeremy has
also a water engineer we have
two beautiful smart thoughtful
datas.
Who hear a light about wire
if I am not talking about water
that i'm probably talking about
my kids and all the great things
they keep us busy doing
primarily skin breaking and
attending other activities so I
look forward to getting to know
all of you and I am so excited
to be in this role and thank you
for the opportunity
and it's there for any questions
thank you and you go by
elizabeth
most people call me liz okay
thank you madame state engineer
we will now
so we're now going to go to
questions and comments from
committee i'll start with
representative kids.
I think you chair and and thank
you
madame steach and engineer I
very much appreciate it I uh it
was a a very um
a very mindful and thought for
presentation a where you touched
on so many things can you are
talked to me about increasing
water work force in which you
mentioned what are the plans
outside of what we have been
doing and what sort of further
investments are you looking into
that
thank you.
That's a great question
i'm just getting my feet under
me if the agency so I I probably
will need to defer to others I
or get back to you and you know
what are we doing right now is
an agency I know personally in
the past when i've been engaged
with
with
what building the water work for
us and when I was in consulting
we had a mentoring organization
that I hope to develop in the
agency that was all built time
growing in turns and staff
throughout that organization at
the water authority we've done a
lot of projects with explorer
getting people out there i'm
helping to build the new wing at
explorer and developing
mentoring opportunities there I
think we need to do more and
more of these types of things I
think we need more internships
we need to be out in the
community talking about water to
kids and I get very excited when
I see people doing that and I
think we just need to do more of
it so in terms of more
programmatic approaches and
that's around that i'm going to
have to go back and talk with
more people but i'd love to talk
with you more about that and
another time in a help you
address it more to date to cause
there's a lot of resentations on
the agenda thank you thank you
and thank you chair in just just
for our audience explorers not
just a a world class science
museum but it is a great example
on urban water conservations on
how it is built how it creates
water shared
it's a wonderful place to go and
and just look at how that is
captured thank you for your
answer I too believe that we
need to have water professions
when we're talking about
internships skill labor people
who are children who are
interested in community service
there is nothing.
A greater and maybe even more
honourable than serving its
community by making sure that
they have access to clean and
free water so thank you very
much.
The.
Thank you next I have a
representative of romero then
representative matthews and then
senator accomplished thinking
about him chair first
congratulations seconds where do
you stand on first and time and
and in rate and official use and
the extra central threat of
commodities of our water can we
just no making i'm getting
totally kidding that chair these
are very important
questions that you will be
answering
and that we have tried and I
think uh in many ways.
You know we'll be wrestling with
there's a legislature in the
coming years and i'm so thrilled
to have you at the home
wondering as we've attempted to
modernize so many parts of our
state government including this
position that you are
there and so look very much
forward to working with you and
answering he's very challenging
questions for a water future but
just want to congratulate you
and thank you for taking on this
role and I know you have an
amazing team and hope that we
can continue to stay in touch
and support so much of what you
will be challenged and with and
wrestling with and that you have
allies in our legislature as
well so very thrilled to to have
you at the helmet and looking
forward to talking philosophy
and perhaps that's involved
about how to sell some of these
major issues thank you manager
thank you representing matheus.
Thank you and congratulations on
your position I I think that's
terrific
to
one of the things i've learned
on being in this committee and
having dealt with order issues
before I became a state
legislator is there is any
number of both government
organizations in institutions
and non government players who
are involved in water in this
state and my question is my
question to our
do you foresee
how do you foresee working with
these various organizations and
do you think that one of your
walls is to try to coordinate or
which you're all relative to
these various organizations and
evidence.
Madame chair representative
matthews I believe
that we all have to be talking
and collaborating and that's the
one of the most important things
that we can deal as a state is
is to be communicating
effectively with each other and
getting to the table and I think
that
the way that we're doing that
right now
deputy owner director waited
hannah is is doing the regional
planning work under the water
security planning act and I
think that that framework is is
really establishing an excellent
platform for those conversations
to happen in addition to all of
us working together and it's a
small state we and a lot of
cases we already know each other
and we're already talking but
that gives us a great table to
sit around and have some of
these hard conversations and it
gives everyone a voice so I
think that what we're doing
right now getting people
involved the more we can get
people involved in those
regional planning efforts right
now we're making going through
the rolemaking and and then
after the rule making as done
will be more getting more into
the nuts of in bolts of actually
having these regional planning
meetings in getting getting
those plans together but that
that a great opportunity to pull
pull together all those
different interests and and make
sure that we're that we're all
talking and putting together
plans that we can act on
thank you
thank you so my questions
thank you very much center
senator compass thank you very
much madam chair thank you very
much for the presentation and
congratulations to.
To you as you move forward with
a a danting task of working with
each and every one of us and
help in us too.
Resolve so many other water
issues the amount I get too much
in depth and two some of the the
questions but if you can kind of
give us an overview in terms of
some of these issues that I will
bring up.
The first day as the water
quality in your mexico for both
domestic use if you will or
waste water use
the aquifers or water shirts the
kind of issues that we are
experiencing now because of the
fires and floods the
contermination so in other words
and we're going to get into the
fifty year water plan shortly.
But to at least get started what
are your thoughts and terms of
these additional issues that are
you definitely will need to
address possibly first time in
order for us to move forward to
where the good water quality
here in new mexico.
Madame share senator coppers
thank you for the question I
think that's a great lead into
the next the next presentation
on the fifty year water plan and
I know that i'm under the under
that plan with the governor's
priorities that secure water
supply for people throughout the
state is one of the primary
concerns and
and areas of focus so I think
that when it comes to
when it comes to a water supply
and the water quality in that
there's going to be a lot of a
lot of people looking at you
know regionalizing water systems
and providing providing systems
that you know there's there's
issues with just the quantity of
water operators that we have
around the state
wastewater systems as well and
being able to effectively treat
the waste water and make sure
that it's not contaminated
contaminating our ground water
systems all of those are things
we need to be looking at
so
so I think that you know I think
that we will cover that and more
detail in this next presentation
but I think that that those are
those are key issues we need to
find ways to focus somewhere
there federal finding that's out
there right now and help those
people on the ground implement
much needed projects a lot of
them are aware of those projects
and maybe don't have the local
resources but I know that the
state is also working on
providing resources through dfa
and some of the new programs
that are to be an established
through the new cap where to cop
the
oh i'm gonna get a list missed
that right now but i'm sure
you're covering it during the
next presentation but there are
lots of programs that are being
developed in and hopefully we
can get some of those resources
to help those people on the
ground get projects bill
thank you very much madame chair
state engineer anderson as we
move forward one of the other
issues uh is something you vary
alluded to and that's level to
level three level for operators.
And I know that within our
workforce development that
continues to be a significant
issue can you tell us how you're
involved in helping to
rectify if you will not only the
situation as we deal with our
level operators for our
wastewater treatment facilities
but
what what your thoughts and
ideas are as to how you're going
to keep people involved in
invested in taking care of our
quality water system.
Madame chair senator coppers
eighth I believe
that we need more programs
established to help train
operators and I know that some
of the the things that we're
going to be talking about more
later today in terms of funding
for those types of programs and
establishing frameworks to be
able to do that is at the type
of people's minds right now
at the water authority there is
a lot of internal training and
they have a lot of resources but
when you look at when you look
externally item smaller
communities it is very hard to
find those operators that you're
that are you very needed and
very sight after so the more we
can create those programs and
get people into that work first
the better I think in a large
case as people don't even think
about that as a potential career
path so getting in to high
schools and letting people know
there is there's a lot of need
out there it's something we're
gonna need to be focusing more
and more on in the future and
now thank you very much and so
madam chair as we go forward we
we can see that they're
definitely our programs that are
out there that are in high
demand and of course it's up to
us to continue to educate our
young people educate those that
are our adult learners that are
on these pathways to ensure that
they do have a a very positive
career ahead of them what are
the other issues that continues
to surface is the use of water
and in particularly as we deal
with canabas
and of course agriculture
overall that in the count of his
area as we see some of these
areas that are growing way
behind if you will what they're
compliant a number of plants
would be in terms of what they
can do and that definitely
affects our water supply
throughout the state.
Are you coordinating or will you
coordinate with other agencies
let's say for example rld
department of environment and
others to ensure that there is
going to be the level of
compliance necessary so that
there is going to be the
effective end uh positive use of
the water that we do have here
in new mexico.
Madam chair senator compos yes
there's a lot of need to a
coordinate across agencies I
think that that's being done
well now in a antenna to
to make that one of my primary
focuses to work very closely
with senator with secretary
kenny and others other
agency had to be able to to make
sure that we're all talking and
working together
um when we're trying to sell
some of these these bigger water
quantity issues that are also
related to what wanted quality
to so there is
certain they said that's gonna
be one of my primary focuses
thank you and madam chair and
secretary anderson the other
issue deals directly with
damns our water shirts are
assectors are water systems in
general you alluded to this.
What and how are we going to
continue to seek the resources
necessary
in order for us to take care of
the growing
problems with our ardams are
wider systems we don't have the
the resources to address all of
them the night I know this is a
precurious question but as you
go forward how are you going to
help us address those priorities
let's see for example eagleness
down and the need for possibly
seventy million dollars there
are two to rebuild that or some
of the other uh dams and water
sheds that have been affected by
the fires and plans.
Madam shares and here compass
I agree there there are a lot of
downs and need around the state
in need of support and
communities who know on an
operate those damn student who
also have in our challenged with
there with the.
The cost associated with that
and the the level of extra
expertise meted to be able to
i'm ted minister those projects
to maintain that infrastructure
so that that is definitely going
to be an area that they spend a
lot of time working with and i'm
am really glad to be part of
this agency out of my background
and infrastructure I think will
be really helpful and I think
that working closely with our
down safety bureau is gonna be
gonna be one of my focuses as
well
thank you my last question
madame chair and
matter state engineer when.
It comes to the ftes within your
operation do you believe that
you have
an apple staff in order to go
ahead and address the growing
water needs that we do have and
if not this is an opportunity
for you to to make a pitch and
terms of what it definitely is
going to take under your
leadership and vision for us to
be able to move forward and
address the quality in our water
systems that definitely is
needed throughout the state.
Madame chair senator compos
I believe that the legislature
was very generous last year
providing positions to the
officer the state engineering
the interstate stream commission
and we are so grateful for that
there is an incredible need of
of work to be done and we're
still evaluating all those
different things that need to be
done so
I think I having had the
opportunity to work closely with
my camera and his staff for the
past year digging in getting to
know the different departments
i'm looking forward to the
opportunity to keep doing that
and identifying those needs but
I do know that we we are going
to be looking at
certainly how to support some of
these different areas you know
and forcement of water use
developing more indian water
rate settlements there are lots
of meats out there and so
figuring out how to do that I
think that it's a balance
between modernizing the agency
and finding ways to do more with
less making less paperwork more
automated systems of better
customer interface at being able
to access the agency and also
making the the processes with
the in the agency more efficient
will will make the staff that we
have more effective but I do
think that looking long term um
as as we have less water in the
systems and there's more work to
be done in terms of
administering water it's likely
that that we will need more
stuff and I am sure we will be
coming to you and talking to two
more about that we're still
working through their agency
budgets and so there's more
discussion on that upcoming but
a I know that another major
focus is making sure that we're
pain competitive weakers and pin
paying our stuff.
To really aren't maintain a
highly qualified and.
And it work first that can can
do the jobs that were asking
them to do so thinking for that
question because they may do it
will be talking more about it
that's good thank you very much
madame chair my camera has been
a great mentor to both you and
myself and others i'm sure and
in that uh I thank him and you
have my full support as you move
forward as we deal with our
water issues here in new mexico
thank you very much manager.
Thank you i'm gonna finish up
this section before we go on
i'm really pleased that you're
out you were appointed to this
position i'm pleased with all
the female lead leadership
working on water and
the climate in environment but
there it's a toll order and
there is many things that do
need to be addressed that can't
just be said i'm gonna look into
it.
You know we might move ahead
with a moratorium on grow permit
some water permits on canabas if
it's not grabbed and taking care
of because right now or farmers
and ranchers are losing water
because of just rampant
disregard for what they are
allowed to do and so.
I don't just see it as a
canaba's division.
Issue I also see it as a water
issue and we really need to grab
that the three hundred plus dms
that need work all the advocacy
groups that are come to the
table need to be listened to
because.
They have a feel for what's
going on all across the state in
their communities and we can't
ignore it
they are bringing something to
us we understand the state
bureaucracy may be the federal
money that's coming in but
everybody needs to be at the
table while we're doing this so
I hope you will consider all of
that if you move forward there's
so many issues
surrounding water at this time
but thank you very much for
being here today and i'm sure
we're going to be hearing from
you in the future as well
thank you thank you very much it
worked we're moving on now to
the fifty year water plan and as
the speakers come up will have
the
new
participants introduced
themselves represent a sign
younner thinking out of chair
i'm debits or any
representatives district twenty
one in burned your county thank
you
thank you representatives loo
home the morning man cherk
morning everyone a
representative terrible honor
represent house district forty
eight instant affair thank you.
Thank you very much that I miss
anybody else okay great
okay so with us a right now we
have a record roose and tiny
trio talking about the fifty
year water plan and overview and
the funding please go ahead
thank you good morning madam
chair good morning members of
the committee my name's rebecca
rules infrastructure advisor in
the office of the governor it's
a pleasure to be with you today
thank you for inviting us to
talk about the governor's fifty
year water action plan you
should be getting at a short
presentation that deputy said
engineer tiny turkio and I will
go over with you and then I look
forward to questions and
discussions once we're once
we're finished with our
presentation
okay so and just to set this
stage in the fifty or water
action plan and that we're going
to be talking to you about this
was released in january of this
year it is a culmination of
years of work across many state
agencies are principally the
office of the state engineer in
the interstate stream commission
lead but I
typical research that was
coordinated right here out of
new mexico tack out of our
bureau of geology and mineral
resources and the resulted in
what we are generally referred
to is that leaper had report it
is what are the impacts of
climate change on our water
resources in the next fifty
years and will talk to you a
little bit about that scientific
underpending of the fifty or
water action plan this morning
and but that report was
developed by scientists rate
here in new mexico and completed
and twenty twenty one and then a
built on that is the work that
sort of lead into the fifty or
water plan and which also draws
iron incredible work and
contributions from experts.
Cross the state of new mexico
outside of the executive are
many many partners collaborators
and contributors of ideas both
in terms of what the problems
are and where the solutions are
and what we need to be doing so
were it's really a privilege to
be at this point of not just
having the fifty year water
action plan in place but we can
talk a little bit more now about
what's happening around
implementation of that plan
which we will get to you and our
brief presentation so on side
too
just a very quick as stage
setting here when we talk about
water security and the like a
dialog that you just had with
state engineer designate
lizanderson and and your
comments from the committee
really highlight this already
and how much is at stake around
water security and how it's
imperative that we continue to
build one work and progress at
the legislature of governor and
others across the state in
recent years and because the old
way of doing things isn't going
to cut it in a future where we
have less water replenishing our
aquifers and our surfacewater
systems.
So that's why we have their
slide around both the complexity
and intersections in that wheel
and the various components of
water security and what we're
working toward their elements of
all of these inner related
components throughout the fifth
year water plan action items and
and they're really imbartible
through the work that we deal
and then you know you see
funding and technology data
collaborations planning policy
all in the mix there and we see
the line that connects them all
together is the people who do
the work and that gets to the
water work force issues and
challenges that have already
come up this morning and it gets
worth the capacity of our local
entities be that I mean a
cipality or a mutual domestic
what was water system or water
system or an essential
association and beyond rate
there's so many people who are
integral to everything we do
around water resources
management be that at the at the
most local level regional or
state wide and then beyond our
state across and through our
interstate basins.
So that the need for work force
the need to continue investing
in the capacity to do this work
is absolutely essential.
And with that i'm gonna turn it
over to my colleague and
deputies state engineer tonight
you're here to describe the
plan.
Thank you very much thank you to
the committee for holding this
important session of water
issues and i'm just going to
take a moment to acknowledge the
fact that the governor has
appointed a a design to be the
first female state engineer in
the state of new mexico that's a
significant deal and we're very
excited at the office of the
state engineer for this for this
to go forward you the senate
will have an opportunity to
grill miss intercent on her
background and her plans but
we're very excited to have her
on board at the agency I also
want to acknowledge the role in
an important ten year of our
interstate stream director
hanner risely white she spend a
with the agency for over ten
years in the tremendous asset
and I look for return working
with them in a in a hand in hand
way as we move forward with
these issues last month at least
it's great to have rebecca roose
and the team her extensive
background in water quality
issues among other areas really
puts us in a really good place
to have to make progress on
these on these difficult water
issues and coming back to the
plan that's what the governor
recognized is it are scientists
tell us that we may be seeing a
future where we have up to
twenty five percent less water
coming in to two our regions and
that's going to mean we're going
to have to make choices and make
decisions about how to manage so
that we can insure our
communities can continue to
thrive.
You know the plan that we put
together we had instructions
from the governor to to make
sure we could put together
something that was accurate that
was accessible to a broad range
of our communities not only our
scientists and something that
was action oriented and so we
came together and developed
eleven
action items action elements of
this plan but they work come in
complementary way to several
other ongoing efforts and those
are acknowledged in the plan it
is built on a foundation not
only of the science that came
into it but also the policy
elements and so one of the
important policy elements in
many of you were participating
in that was the water policy and
infrastructure task force that
came together under the
leadership of my camera our
prior state engineer that the
task force recommendations form
the basis for what we have in
the fifty year water action plan
there are several other
important ongoing efforts and
many of the topics that you'll
hear about later in this in this
two day session of the interim
committee meetings will
highlight more details and
several of these elements so
we're going to provide a very
high level overview of of what
is contained but just
acknowledging some of those from
the start making progress on our
indian water rate settlements is
hugely important to all of our
communities around the state
hearing making sure we can make
advancements in our region of
water planning process in
specifically implement the
legislature's directions to us
through the water security
planning act.
Making sure we can work with our
other sister agencies on
implementing the land of a
chantman legacy fund and I want
to acknowledge as we go through
the plan you'll see that we are
working very closely with our
colleagues at the environment
department with our colleagues
at the agriculture department
with the energy minerals
department with our indian
affairs folks with our economic
development teams all of these
issues are interconnected and we
acknowledge that from the start
we have definitely important
work that's going on
simultaneously with the water
trust board and the great value
that that board provides to our
communities
of course the legislature is
involved with our capital outlay
funding process for water
projects and infrastructure
efforts we have a there would be
a presentation later on water
data initiative which underlies
all of these elements and we've
all already touched on the
importance of making sure we
have a strong water work force
and water education programs
going forward
the water eleven priority areas
of the water action plan or
divide it into three major
buckets the first of them is
water conservation and i'll talk
a little bit more about each of
those elements the next is
development of new water
supplies and recognizing the
need to supplement our existing
supplies and third acknowledging
that water quality matters as
much as wider quantity and that
water shed protection is is very
essential and important so with
respect to water conservation
efforts that the first action
item is acknowledging the need
for more water education and
that can extend through the
explorer type of examples that
we have here in a area up in
alba kirky it can extend into
the classrooms making sure all
of our students are aware of.
The importance of water in the
ways that they can make a
difference in terms of water
conservation and across our
general public that those
efforts are going to tie
together and weave through all
of the actions that we have
going on we are recognizing the
need to make sure to get input
from our agricultural producers
about how they can develop tools
and programs and priority
resources to be able to continue
there livelihoods even if we are
in a situation with less amount
of water coming in and that is
a matter of fact with respect to
surface water and ground wire
we're thinking about both of
those pieces with respect to our
agricultural producers.
We have to make sure we can do
the same and have the same
mentality with respect to our
municipal and domestic water
resources so are the plan calls
for a program headed by the
environment department to to
detect leaks and repair leaks in
our infrastructure systems
throughout are domestic systems
we are also looking on a state
wide level and overall system
management needs and that will
be very important will highlight
some of those efforts in the in
some of our subsequent
presentations as well.
With respect to new water
supplies the next panel app is
about the strategic water supply
which will highlight those
elements lead by the environment
department.
And also a connected element of
that is to make sure we have the
proper regulations and the rules
in place to bring those new
water supplies safely to the
public for use throughout our
communities and then also
there would be fut further
presentations on the important
apple for mapping and ground
water resource programs that we
have many of them centered here
at new mexico tech.
With respect to the water
quality focus there is an
acknowledgment that we need to
address contamination and our
ground water several areas
throughout the state so that's
an important program highlighted
we'll hear more in this two day
session on our surface water
program service what are
permitting program that new
mexico environment department is
undertaking and will we also
have already tested on the fact
that we need to modernize the
wastewater systems as well and
and address that inner connected
issue of our water supply needs
and last but definitely not
least where highlighting the
need to take care of our water
shed so working very closely
with the forestry division in
the energy minerals department
to make sure that are for a sore
cared for that where we have
seen damages as
a result of wildfires and run
off situations as a because we
have these erratic storms that
never seem to start been my
backyard these days but um
making sure that we can take
care of that element of our of
our landscapes is critical.
So all of those efforts are
combined I have copies over the
fifty or water plan if you
haven't already gotten them we
have the resources available
online as well and really look
forward to continuing to work
with these team with our teams
and on these important efforts
i'll kick it back over to miss
routes.
Think you china so i'm in a wrap
up our presentation I shifting
from what what's in the plan and
how it was developed to what's
happening around implementation
is first in foremost this is not
just a another water plan of
which we have many and are
incredibly important to the
state but this is an action plan
so implementation is is where it
happens so aren't on side six it
has several bars on that slate
about implementation activities
I am going to walk through that
slide now.
A end just at a at a high level
there's
some of the things that we're
going to touch on very briefly
this morning in the interest of
time are as as I think you're
all well aware you'll be getting
deeper dives on some of some of
the program areas that are
relevant to implementation of
the plan throughout the rest of
your meeting the next two days
by
our implementation work is a
coordinated process
tiny trio is taking a leadership
roll around coordinating all of
that implementation the eleven
actions in those three buckets
that tiny are just talked about
stretch across a number of
different agencies that are sort
of the owner of those actions so
the opposite state engineer is
in a leadership role on two of
those the new mexico environment
department on six of those
eleven actions for your
department of agriculture on one
the bureau of geology mineral
resources here new mexico tech
is the lead on one and am not
forestry division is the lead on
the water shirt so that is am
five different agencies that are
already right out of the gate
needing to work together to
implement this plan and
whichever agency i'm noting as
the lead of one or more actions
are not doing it in a vacuum
they're not doing it on their
own and because many of the
elements even in a carefully
crafted action item about
wastewater system modernization
for example that touches not
just the environment department
in a leadership role as the
regulator of our waste water
treatment plants and in many
cases the funder of the
infrastructure projects but
there's coordination with the
after the state engineer there's
coordination with the water
trust forward at new mexico
finance authority and there's
coordination with many of their
technical assistance providers
like roll water association.
And of course the actual and
people on the ground for a
managing waste one of the plans
across the state of new mexico
in your districts and and across
the state so that's just one
example of the real importance
of bringing these actions to
life is an are hands on dac
approach regardless of which one
we're talking about.
And in order to.
Integrate are implementation
with other work that's ongoing
that isn't necessarily cute up
in one of the top and priority
actions there's other work that
is actively under way such as
implementation of the water
security planning act which
you'll be hearing about from
director raceley white later
there is implementation of
senate bill one from twenty
twenty three supporting
regionalization of smaller or
any any size really water and we
swater systems so lots of other
intersecting work going on and
it's imperative that as our
agencies take a leadership roll
and bringing these eleven
actions to life that they're
tying in with those related
efforts.
And then the the item in the
middle of the side I think is
the most important and the most
rbs we have to pay for it.
This is fifty year water action
plan is largely unfunded or
underfunded depending on which
part of it you're looking at and
so as an executive we're taking
that very seriously as we work
with the agencies on their fy
twenty six budget requests as we
look at our needs and priorities
around non recurring funding
going into the sixty day session
and next year and how we're
going to work with all of you to
coordinate and fund the
implementation of water security
programs projects and priorities
for the state of new mexico and
it is commendable that we are
putting more funding as a state
into our water resources
programs then we have in the
past and so we are in a better
place than we would have been if
you all and your colleagues
hadn't been making those bigger
investments making straights in
those directions over the past
few years and but the the fact
remains were not where we need
to be.
And the fact that this bull the
action focus plan isn't fully
funded as clear evidence of that
fact and I want to know that if
as you get into the fifty or
water action plan or get back
into it if you haven't looked at
it in a while you'll note that
for every one of the eleven
actions we
**** up now just a jenna short
description again it's tiny I
said trying to make it nat two
detailed not too technical make
it excessive description of what
each action is but we then
proceeded to talk about
immediate next steps what are we
doing in twenty twenty four and
twenty twenty five that we might
not otherwise have been doing or
double down on the things we
were already doing because
they're absolutely essential and
then there's another section for
each action that's the return on
investment and those are laid
out in the fifty or water plan
it south and that return on
investment is.
It's a start of how are we going
to measure our progress how are
we going to know if we've gone
from where we've been to where
we're trying to get to in order
to make sure that we have
thriving communities a thriving
economy and a healthy state with
healthy water sheds in a world
fifty years from now where we
have less water so how do we
know if we're moving in the
right direction so that return
on investment element for each
action is a guide post for us as
an executive and hopefully for
all of you as well for us to
track our progress and so back
to the the summary here on
implementation activity is
there's no of a dashboard to
engage the public and show
progress that's under
development right now you have a
water security web page that's
mentioned on an earlier slide
that's on nm dark of water
security you can find the
entirety of the fifty year water
plan there
as we move forward and develop a
dashboard we will be putting
those return on investment
targets in to a display and
showing the public where we are
how's it going what's our
progress and how are we
measuring in how are we
communicating that progress
publicly and I will say again
back to the budget piece.
Our progress will be a lot
slower and incremental where
until we have all the right
funding in the rate places to
move these various actions
forward.
So i'm onto our last
our last side we want to talk
about this funding piece a
little bit more
we have been in conversations
with several members of the
legislative body a lot of stay
colders and advocates and the
members of the water task force
from twenty twenty two the water
ambassadors lots of people
talking about this question of
how do we fund it what will it
cost how much do we need more
than what's already going into
our water programs and how can
we most effectively set the
stayed up for sustainable
investment in our water
resources for years to come and
so a honor last uh substantive
side here slide seven
these are some of the questions
that we're asking we aren't at
the point where we have a
proposal where we can
discuss with you a specific
ideas of how to get go forward
with funding and but we are
looking at existing models both
in the state for other programs
and where the legislature and
and the executive of worked in
recent years too set money aside
from our existing revenues so
that it continuing to give us
returns and and support longer
term investments so the land of
what are the land of insurance
fund as one example and you know
many others that you all are
very familiar with so we're
looking at those models we're
also looking at how other
western states are setting aside
funding and prioritising funding
for water resources looking at
what models they're using are
they drawing from existing
revenue are they coming up with
ways to generate new revenue for
some combination thereof so
we're looking at those kinds of
models where we are welcome
inplate front members of this
committee and others are to help
us move continued moving that
direction and ultimately trying
to put put together as strategic
package.
For investments in our water
resources and so
ah we're looking at existing
funds in the state as well like
the water project fund the water
trust fund is that a place do we
involve that to fund some of the
programs that are in the fifty
year water action plan as
opposed as a post of a local
projects that the water trust
for it is in the business of
funding today so we're graveling
with oz ideas it's a work in
progress it's a big undertaking
and we look forward to talking
more with the body and this
committee in the coming months
as we continue to get closer to
next year's session and budget
process
and with that I think will pass
their madam chair welcoming your
questions at connects thank you
thank you very much before we go
to questions i'd like to have a
representative work or test
please introduce yourself
thinking madame chair members of
the committee of the public i'm
christina or test I represent
house district forty two which
is in most of telstra county i'm
really glad to be here and
that's the mother of an eighth
grader i'm really excited to see
one of the schools that is on
her list that is also free for
her
thank you
so so far I have represented a
some more representative i'm
showing representatives so in
younger and reversal of luhan is
there anyone else who wants to
be on the list.
Representative of keeps anyone
else.
Okay so if you all could keep
yourself your comments to five
minister less please represent
them some.
Thank you madame chair thank you
members of the committee and
thank you for the great
presentation so many center
center to compares we're looking
at a little equation here if you
take the price of oil today and.
You look at it at eighty dollars
and and if you walk into all
stuffs and you pay two dollars
for a little bottle of water.
You're paying four hundred and
forty dollars a barrel.
You know and in the end I heard.
Elderly people years ago say
that the price of wider is going
to be higher than the price of
oil.
Where are we today.
It's it's very interesting fact
and
how we go forward
will be very interesting and and
why they were successful for our
children to have plenty of water
in this state or tool will be a
tough job to handle.
The.
The.
One of the things madam chair
and members of the committee and
and presenters and and audience
that I don't see us as a
legislator
legislators doing is I don't see
our
national congressional people
sit in here in front of us.
Farm policy has so much to do
with how much water we consume
in the state and your mexico and
how we go forward with this.
Uh.
Senator benry lohan is is
probably well first and in
what's going on in washington I
know we've had him in the
eastern side of the state
helping us with ag policy and
he's very responsive has very
good people working with him.
But as we go forward into the
future.
I believe we need to look at the
national.
Policy the foreign policy that
were created and creation in
washington
one of the first things I did as
as a legislator when I got
elected was I did a memorial
asking.
Are congressional delegation.
To look at new mexico and some
other western states separate
then what we look at.
Whole union.
And.
I still think that that's a key.
Tool position that we ought to
be looking at.
If if you I I have farn my whole
life and I was blessed enabled
purchase my own farm and moan
ranch and in the past three
years i've i've sold both them
and.
For various reasons but.
When year farming.
You're being paid and supported
by the federal government and
the reason being as is is the
farm act was put into place.
To support cheap food prices or
inexpensive food prices for the
citizens of the united states if
you look at a prices today you
can go back to the.
Forties and fifties and price
see the same weight prices.
But the policy changes as we go
forward and it encourages
farmers to use to grow different
kind of craps according to the
support prices that is that are
paid from the national policy
making levels.
And I think it's so important
that.
We should not.
Have the same policy made
for new mexico as is made for.
Eastern oklahoma eastern texas
louisiana.
I think we are to be looked at
different
and I think we are to be
incurred.
The.
To keep our businesses and do
everything we do
any
and.
Go forward with technology and
prove the technology and
everything but their thomas the
technology part to me as i've
seen it progress over the years
is almost a catch twenty two
because if we if we'd be growing
the same court today as we were.
Forty fifty years ago.
We wouldn't be growing corner
new mexico anymore because the
technology has lead us to corn
varieties that if we have
produced that used less water so
then we're still growing corn.
Even though with the amount of
water that would have now we've
been not be grown corn if we're
going the same bride is back
then so we've improved a
technology but then it.
It encourages to keep using up
the water so that so there's so
many things to look at there.
But one of the biggest failures
I think we have here in the
state of new mexico is we're
not.
Ing real good connection with or
though.
Congressional people that are
serving in in in at the federal
level and in washington i'd like
to see an improvement on there
as we go forward.
Uh.
And and that's just kind of a
statement for for all of us to
start learning on on foreign
policy and and how it affects
our water usage.
Whether it'd be canaba's core
now falf sort of whatever it is
we're growing in the state.
Uh.
Another another thing i'd
have a question on is is how is
the governor's office a madam
chairman and misruse how is how
the governor's office
supporting.
The contaminated areas with
peafos
in.
Keep in safe water to the people
that are in those areas that
to be to me I think water and an
includes we have an area that.
That was put into the p fast map
and then wells were tested and
is a contamination there is
they're not I think I believe
there are some and i've talked
to secretary kenny offline on
this before we've had some
conversation look forward to
having more conversation and
working with him on this further
but we probably have
i'm going to say.
A hundred a hundred plus homes
on the south western part of
clovers that are out in the
county
some of those homes have been
devalued by the tax assessor
already as much as seventy five
percent value.
So you could almost ask yourself
for those homes even selling any
more are those homes.
Yeah.
Those home owners what what are
they facing in all this
happening.
So.
The.
I think that we.
As communities are to be
supporting those people and not
after.
The.
Where we're doing blood testing
and clovers
and I believe across the state
in different people serious but
not only support those people if
we find out they have p fast in
their blood or in their bodies
but maybe be doing preventative
maintenance as to not ever let
him get a hold of that p fast
water.
So so i'd like to see some
preventative maintenance across
the state and around clovis.
To keep those people from ever
having that contamination every
ever consuming that and.
Keep in their their property
values.
In a good place also because.
Not only other people going to
suffer but the counties are
going to suffer because if we
lose those hundred people
hundred holms.
We're gonna lose revenue for the
county and everything else and
end uh i'd kind of like to see
how you look at that in and how
we go forward with these p fast
issues and
also in there.
Probably we're going to be seen
some issues and the or the burns
cars are on.
On water quality.
Thank you matcher
thank you representative now
just for all of information that
was about nine minutes so we
need to kind of
that all right I was using us a
test
so if people would think about
the five minutes or mark your
own phone through things like
that so representative do you
want a response from our
presenters on um.
Representative tomorrow you want
to response from presenters are
with that mostly giving them
direction if if I could have a
response on the p four thank you
thank you manager thinking madam
chair and I will do my best to
be brief and representatives
more a product so many really he
issues around people as
contamination in a nutshell I
feat several things came to mine
in terms of what we're doing in
the governor's office
and in in support of the
environment department and the
incredible nationally leading
work that they've been doing
around people ask in termination
both on the prevention side and
in response to contamination
both of those pieces are
absolutely essential and so in
the governor is office we are
were fully behind and secretary
canny in the environment
apartment and the work that they
are doing to hold the department
the fence accountable and so
this is on the response side of
things you talked about property
values last decrease and
property value is an example of
damages associated with an
environmental harm and so we as
an administration are fully
committed to helping everyone in
curry county and in that area
impacted by
dod contamination in and around
canon as well as down south
around holland to be made whole
fast on those damages whatever
those damages look like however
many different types of entities
like counting last tax revenue
that you talk about those damage
alfax that cascading impact and
harm so were
fully committed to holding a
violators accountable and then
on the prevention side um we
have been working at the federal
level secretary canny is
testified before congress about
the the work that the the
federal government means needs
to do to create more
comprehensive nf active
regulatory programs nationally
consist.
So that we are preventing people
as contimination before it
happens and that we have all the
necessary sweet of regulatory
and enforcement tools available
when people's contermination
does happen and we need to be
looking at all of the available
approaches
where the comment on this is we
as an administration again
working with the environment
department are looking closely
at what we as a state need to be
doing to showing up our laws to
protect consumers from potential
people ask contamination because
it is quite uhm a present in our
environment and lots of
different products and you know
department of defense
contamination is just kind of
the tip of the iceberg in terms
of how key fastest getting into
into our communities so lots
going on there
and I also just wanted to know
it on your first point that your
observation about foreign policy
and foreign policy at the
federal level is absolutely
essential and in the
collaboration round their tiny
and I spoke to our work with our
federal partners is essential
and were fortunate to have tony
at having just previous to this
position work directly for
secretary holland at the
department of interior I and
many others in the
administration have a background
with the federal government and
it's a it's essential that we
work with and sometimes put
pressure on uh members of our
delegation and federal agencies
and and the white house and
congress as a whole to get where
we need to go and make sure that
new mexico there isn't in and
one size fits off approach thank
you thank you we want to go on
to other questions
representative armstrong
thinking out of chair and thank
you is trues for your
presentation I apologize for
stepping out for a minute but
III will definitely have read
this the fifty or water plan
it's a nice big book
one of the things that I want to
make sure that we are are
talking about is have you seen
madam chair have uh have you
seen the alfce water rep.
Worth it was given last week in
riod also.
Manager representative armstrong
I have not read it in detail
i've seen an earlier draft and
i'm familiar with it generally
thank you for that madam chair
because that's going to be uh
imperative that we address those
issues in that report uh there
were some some scathing
reporting going on for several
large counties santa fe being
one of them.
And lost christmas being the
other one and then nah sierra
county was also noted in there
for having large water issue
problems where um that that
aren't going away there were
going to have to address and so
I just wanted to make sure you
knew about the report and I see
on here
um one of the improving
opportunities for community to
the leverage capital outlay
funding for water projects I
really don't think that's the
way to go just my personal
opinion when I first was a state
representative my very first
year we got no capital outlay.
We I have a million dollars
sitting in a capital outlay
request that I gave to mag the
village of mcdelina for a well
that they can't use because they
need three million.
They needed a million at the
time now they need three while
we get maybe two point five
million on the house side and
that's in a good year and so I
don't know that that capital
outlay is the way to go with
that I just wanted to to you
know rural new mexico small
villages and towns for having a
hard time managing those
projects we've taken some good
steps madam chair in in
implementing some ways that we
can help them and I appreciate
all of that but I just want to
tell you it's capital outlay I I
think it needs to be.
Water project should not be done
through capital outlet they need
to be done through one process
and with reporting and a lot of
things but i've been talking to
calling a lot about that so who
runs the in works for lfc and
runs the capitality
department the other thing is
the you know we made him chair
we implemented and passed the
canaba slot.
And we've got the farming of
canada's.
And we are not regulating.
The way we should be all the
different entities through the
state engineers office through
the licensing through everything
about it is a pretty much a big
disaster and so we really need
to take a look at that because
all of these all water.
Has fingers all across the
industries every industry has
water and so are we going to
pick and choose madam chair are
we going to support canada's
more than yes it's agriculture
but it's not feeding new
mexicans it's not feeding people
and so how are we regulating
them are we doing a good job
regulating them and i'm not a
big regulator I I would be for
less regulation but at the same
time when it comes to water we
have got to figure out.
Who gets the water how is it
allocated and how do we please
the majority of new mexicans.
In a safe.
The.
Manner.
And so I just I really didn't
have a question other than two
um stop the silos.
Stop the silos and and let's all
you know take all of those
things into consideration to
make sure that we are looking at
it all to see how we can do
what's best for the state of new
mexico and happy to have a see
that the table and and helping
mitigate that so my my main
question was if you had seen the
lsc report so I I would
encourage you to read that and
look at their recommendations on
on what they are recommending
and and let me know how I can
help thank you manager thank you
and serve representative arms
over and I think we'll ask the
staff descended that out to our
committee members so everybody
is aware of that thank you so
much representatives around her
and representative armstrong was
right on the dark for five
minutes thank you
thinking manager thank you for
your presentation i'm gonna get
right to it and paid five
b three improving groundwater
mapping and monitoring where do
you stand in this process can
you give me a ball park on
funding and does board is
produced water fit into this do
we know the amount of produced
water we're using and words
stored.
Those are my big questions that.
Thank you
thank you madam chair
representative sergeant I in
terms of where things stand on
the prefer mapping a monitoring
program I believe you have that
on the agenda tomorrow yes okay
and cc ten mins and and others
will be here to talk about that
so
i'll leave it to that panel to
get into more detail with you on
where things stand on that but
it is a good example of what I
was seeing earlier about the
many elements in the action plan
being underfunded and i'll just
emphasize as a as a teaser for
that panel tomorrow that when we
were putting the plan together
and came up with this action b
three for
fully implementing the architect
mapping a monitoring program we
needed to come up with that
return on investment what are we
going to measure how much
progress are we trying to make
how fast and the the return on
investment i'm looking at the
plan itself right now says that
if we fully fund the program
starting with that being year
zero it would take us twelve
years fully funded and we're not
anywhere near fully funded and
you'll hear more about that
tomorrow oa suspect
to fully characterize all our
major in minor aqua first in the
state of new mexico fresh water
and brackage and and
you might ask if that's as fast
as we can go with fully funded
what if we put more money into
it could we make it six years
instead of twelve years I trust
the scientists and the technical
experts on how fast we can go
this is a lot of drilling wells
it's a later data collection it
takes time and so that is as as
I understand it are most
accelerated path and we're going
to see a suspect
associated requests in the
executive request which is very
much still under development but
this is one of that and
priorities for the governor and
our team to fund this plan
on your next question.
About how much do we know about
the produce water and where it
stored we know more than we ever
have before thanks to
implementation of the twenty
nineteen produce water act and
the through implementation of
that act eminer's oil
conservation division and the
oil conservation commission
adopt rules requiring more
reporting i'm from all producers
across new mexico then they were
ever required to do before I
what type of what are they using
for all of their operations is
it fresh water is it recycled
produced water where are they
storing how much are they sorry
how much are they using and
there is data available through
eminer's oil conservation
division their provides more of
the outlook on that but we have
seen the percentage of produce
water generated by oil and gas
recycled within oil and gas
operations go up on a nice trend
line since twenty nineteen I
think we're that high sixty
percent now of um.
Recycled produced water as the
source water being used and oil
gas activities are
something and oh I thought
secretary can he was whispering
to me I think it's somewhere in
the sixty nine percent range
recycled as of twenty twenty
three
and
still work to do to get that
higher and so more to come more
more than we could follow up
with frame that oil conservation
division if you want more detail
data thank you think about you.
Thank you very much
representative luham thank you
very much i'm gonna ask a few
questions so if we can be
released to sync about it in
following representative sony
and let's talk about the water
new water supplies the service
establishing a five hundred
million dollars strategic water
supply
so my question is who's going to
have oversight over that
local agencies if you can be
just as the other agencies you
mentioned I just want clarity on
that
madam chair representative
behind and we do the next panel
will get into more detail on
that how the strategic water
supply will operate and short
answer is and we definitely see
a role for the environment
department and coordinating and
regulatory role from the office
of state engineer particularly
on any bracket water activity
and treatment and pumping that's
going on with the strategic
water supply and depending on
and the the fine tuning of
legislation that we're working
on to bring forward in the
twenty twenty five session there
could be other entities with a
role in managing the actual
strategic water supplied funding
and that could be a department
of finance and administration
for the finance thank you that
they're I I just wanted if there
is a quick answer to that and
you gave me that and I know
we're gonna be talking about it
later but I wanted to just
follow up on that here thank you
next thing are you mentioned
that we're looking at other
policies or other legislation in
other states now nevada is one
state is the dryer state in the
united states recently mount
sure I went to a water
convention in sound and
they presented and they said
they have some of the most and
for me when they presented some
of the most impressive
technologies available
especially in los vegas nevada
where they use obviously the the
most amount and water and they
receive the the lowest amount or
lowest allocation from the
colorado river for their
the water supply.
I would like to know if you've
been talking with about it and
some of their strategies that
they're using madam chap.
I can take that for us thank you
madame chair and representative
we partner very closely with
colleagues and about it about
learning from them in terms of
water recycling in particular
and I think that's what you're
referring to they do a
tremendous amount of recycling
within their communities so
that's enabled them to use less
water now than they did in the
past even though their
population has grown and we've
seen that same example here in
new mexico as well.
Mount air another technology is
water metering now there was
another were are we considering
water metering and management
through through technology in
any of the planner policies that
you're going to be moving
forward and.
Absolutely thank you madam chair
and representative looking at
absolutely doing more metering
monitoring measuring that
important water data element is
key to success of all of these
programs I am checks of and are
you budgeting that with with the
ask that you're going to have
for us because it's simple it's
as simple as us monitoring our
water usage if we adapt we
create an adaptable
air kind of technology that we
can distribute through our two
our taxpayers is that something
you're considering i'm sure.
Madam chair and representative
lou hand yes as we develop our
budgets we will be thinking
about ways that we can work with
communities on that essential
piece so what tools are
available what products are
available what programs are
available that helpless manage
throughout our rural and
municipal entities thank you
matter insurance um I appreciate
that you're trying to get this
fully funded it's something that
many of us have been working on
to do even just through the
workforce peace and we need the
big numbers we need the real
numbers we need to broke it down
in the transparency thank you.
Thank you represent the keys I
think you chair and and thank
you very much I to have a
serious question so i'm gonna
ask you one is you mentioned
about addressing contamination
in the ground water one of the
things we don't hear
in this committee we do here a
lot of that address then count
to him and I may be it's an
appropriate for the water
committee maybe goes an
infrastructure but given your
background is contamination of
the infrastructure carrying our
water we've gotten reports of
lead above levels and our public
school system and sand I know
that on my city street just
yesterday they were testing all
the water meters for levels of
lead um we don't have a lot of
ancient
infrastructure but we do have it
what is part of the plan and
addressing that.
I think you madam chair
representative kits there it's
it's a it's suddenly related to
the fifty year plan even if it
doesn't and jump off the page a
I think of
the potential potential or our
actual contamination within our
infrastructure itself as tied to
you know the action on
addressing weeks and our
drinking water systems and how
are we investing in that
infrastructure as well as on the
waste water site the
at the federal government
government level there's under
the safe drinking one or act a
rule that is being implemented
nationally call the leading
copper rule and that is
requiring public water systems
all across the country to
conduct and complete a lead
service line inventory and all
of our water systems that are
subject to that requirement in
new mexico have a deadline of
mid october so you may be seeing
more activity going on in your
communities as your water
systems work to meet that
deadline and inventory all of
their pipes they have to know
where they are and for some of
our communities that's that's
easier so than done and then
identify what material is
underground in that paper and is
it lead is it potentially lead
those inventories are doing
october and we are going to have
a much better sense after that
date and all those inventories
being completed how much lead do
we have in our public water
system infrastructure across the
state and then there's a slug of
federal funding waiting for us
once we know where the letters
and we know what those projects
to replace the lead pipes look
like we can start funneling
those communities into the
funding pipeline to fund those
replacement projects thank you
so much
the slug a federal finding
that's beyond other t shirts do
you I have another was a you
said communicating in the public
is this the same form out when
your communication about the
fifty year plan this is the same
for amount that.
From mainstream from the
interstate
commission with their with I
know that then and no longer
doing the in person
communication they have an
online service is this one of
the ways of communication you're
talking about when you reference
that.
Madam chair and represent case
not specifically though the
public engagement work of the
inner chaser in commission on
the mainstream effort is
model for us to draw from and to
the extent that you all have had
positive experiences with that
let us know because uh we can do
more in that then by
specifically for a fifty year
water plan
sharing information with the
public we are have a dashboard
of status of implementation of
the plan that is under
construction and not yet ready
for a prime time that will be
separate from main street but we
fully intend it to be
complementary thank you so much
and and yes I will say I had a
positive effect to that my last
question is you have an example
of a new revenue from another
southwest state that is funding
water projects thank you.
Thank you madam chair and a
representative i'll take that
one and we we are looking very
closely at what's going on in
colorado with some of their new
programs in texas they're doing
some pretty innovative water
funding programs
arizona has some interesting
examples california has huge
programs that were looking at
several several options for us
to consider.
This.
So you can give me an example of
wine that is different though
more using right now well skis
me mem madam chair from colorado
and example is they have a
sports betting tax that they've
undertaken over the past
probably now five years where a
part of the revenue generated
from that tax is used to fund
water priority projects that
come up through their planning
process so that's one thank you
madame certain i'm so sorry but
this indulgent industry woman
say so we have a geoffense for I
know okay we have a geoffense
for sports but in so you're
talking about the retarding
person in person betting tax in
colorado
night I confess I don't know the
details of how it's implemented
there but it's just an example
of something thinking outside of
the box in terms of how to find
new revenue sources in texas
they have some programs that
were looking at very closely as
well.
The.
Thank you very much we're gonna
close out this session because
the next session is pretty
important to us.
We appreciate the information we
look forward to more detail as
time goes on thank you very much
if the next session on this
strategic water supply rackish
and produced water would please
come up.
The.
And is that if chermore queen
was here he would say we're
going to go in the order of the
agenda so that is a revecarous
james kenny tricia snyder tennis
fox and norm gum.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So do you get you need water
you have some great I travel
with water right okay so go
ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Here I am again rebecca is
pleasure to be with you and this
panel to talk to you more in
depth this morning about the
strategic water supply one of
the eleven actions in the fifty
year water action plan I have a
joint presentation where
secretary canny and you should
have a copy in front of you or
it's coming around soon it's
very brief.
And I will try to hit some of
the highlights and then
I inform the conversation for
the rest of the session this
morning on this topic
so is it starting point I want
to know that
you know just to back up a
little bit the governor first
announced the strategic water
supply initiative last december
the climate meetings in july
and that went up to robust
conversations during the sixty
day legislative session with
many members of this committee
across both chambers and and we
have learned a lot through that
process we are continuing to
learn a lie also right around
that time during while we were
in the thirty days session the
environment department launched
their strategic water supply
request for information to
gather more information from
experts from companies that
treat water from companies that
use water and from others
interested in and end with
concerns and expertise on how we
treat and use water in the state
of new mexico and so we'll talk
a little bit about the results
of that request for information
process again one of the ways in
which we're continuing to learn
as we go and we are engaged in
many ongoing conversations
through
throughout the inner and are
working diligently internally as
an executive across the
different areas of expertise
from finance to water treatment
to water use and are and beyond
and are continuing to work
toward I a new proposal or
advise proposal for the
strategic water supply i'm
leading into the twenty twenty
five session so will previous
some of that and and catch you
up on where we are today.
Generally speaking that
the big picture approach for
creating a strategic water
supply is very consistent with
what you heard from the
administration before and but
with a light to be worked out in
the details so on this side arm
slide to I just wanted to
highlay very quickly because you
just heard from myself and tiny
and a tricia about the fifty
year plan but this new water
supply bucket of three actions
is important we're obviously
going to talk more on this panel
about the street she did water
supply itself but these three
pieces I consider to be the
three legged store of a new
water supply approach which
means the
I add item to is the water
policy and regulation components
to it so that we know where
we're going we know what safe we
know what treatment levels are
needed and we are regulating
around whatever the various
possible end users of treated
bracket and treated pretty
swatter might be and the third
item is where the science comes
and particularly for the
brackish water side of the
strategic water supply which is
focused on advancing both
brackish water treatment and use
and produced water treatment and
reuse.
And that argue from mapping a
monitoring program is essential
for us to fill data gaps around
where our brackish water is how
much
and how accessible is it and at
what levels of solinity which
leads to ability to assess
treatment needs etc and then the
strategic water supply itself
action be one is that the sort
of economic driver the catalyst
to accelerate more development
safe development of brackish and
produced water treatment in
years across new mexico so that
I just wanted to tie those
together they are very
intertwined in our minds and
they didn't want that to get
lost as we get through the panel
and focus more on the nuts and
bolts of the strategic water
supply itself.
And with that I will turn over
to secretary kenny.
Thank you rebecca and good
morning it's good to be here
thank you for putting this panel
together
to pick up where rebecca just
left off and to highlight one of
the legs of that three they
could store and on the prior
slide for just one more moment
yeah there we go on on number
two there I just wanted to
acknowledge the water reuse
rules that are before the wc
right now the water quality
control commission I know many
of my panelists here are aware
of those rules as they actively
engaged in participated in the
in those
those that that rule hearing
but with respect to insuring
both a carrot and stick approach
in terms of the strategic water
supply being a policy incentive
if you will and the water reuse
rules being a regulatory
component that keeps our water
receive and provide
antibacksliding measures on
water quality issues those rules
are before the wc that initial
role making is before the wtc
again not part of our
discussions here today per se
but wanted to acknowledge that
effort and that like a visal is
a solid one by which were
proceeding.
So now we can move to the next
slide on this slide what we're
really focusing in on is the
strategic water supply now and
how it all kind of comes
together the water sources as we
know as stated in the first
bullet
you know our reservoirs and
groundwaters are simply not
recharging and and that's been
acknowledged by many of the
questions in commons that have
come up already this morning by
by the legislative body here.
And therefore the water scarcity
issue is real something we need
to focus on and then the next
two bullets some might focus in
on the two waters that we've
been talking about for the
strategic water supply brackish
water and produced water and I
know
already this morning madam
chairman representative of
syriana that you brought up the
the question about how much
produced water is being reused
and offsetting fresh water going
into the oil and gas industry
and I think rebecca I just walk
back into the room you had
indicated it was in the upper
sixty percent you're actually
that's correct
that around sixty five secles
percent of water in the oil and
gas sector is being reused.
And enter again we could push on
that as a state and and get that
percentage up to something like
ninety five percent through
policy and regulatory drivers
however that still leaves a
significant amount of produced
water to deal with at very
significant about one point nine
billion barrels and produced
water
so.
I'm sorry
yeah that would that would take
about one point nine billion
barrels off the market.
But we still need to find a way
to deal with the rest of the
significant quantity of produced
water that's being that's being
injected today this strategic
water supply elements really
moving into that second bold
bullet now our focus it's
focusing in on one of two
mechanisms and we talked a lot
about in the fall and into the
the legislative session about a
an advanced market commitment
we're also considering now in
advance purchase commitment so
these are kind of push paul
mechanisms in which they're used
in other industries that that we
will explain a little bit
further as we get towards a
feasibility study that we plan
to put out for um per review in
the month and next month.
Uhm.
But the.
That the whole focus here to
land that a little bit a little
bit more around the strategic
water supplies to use one of
these market mechanisms that
were guaranteed and reduced the
risk of water treatment such
that we can move forward with
brackets you are produced water
and really further the goals of
that that the legislature and
the the administration have put
forward focusing in on
everything from clean energy
production and storage pride
projects to advance
manufacturing and ideas there
are solar panels when her bins
zero mission vehicles charging
infrastructure and more and I
think this last point on this
slide sometimes gets missed in
the discussion and the the
proper discussion about the risk
reward scenario around the
strategic water supply
but but as we've set our sights
on a zero carbon our carbon free
energy source and that will
inherently drive up the reliance
on water fresh water resources
in in those energy areas
finding something like this
strategic water supply that will
help us reach our goals under
eta or our goals under the
advanced energy tax credit clean
car is clean trucks clean fuels
and even those bil and ira
investments that are happening
throughout the state are really
important
we need something we need
something to to kind of go low
carbon and low fresh water at
the same time.
So wrapping up your madam chair
as we get to these last two
slides slide for the as I I
think we've alluded to this
multiple times already this
morning in through this
presentation but the the van
diagram is is pretty clear her
preserve fresh water advance are
clean energy transition and
diversify our economy in
accordance with the strategic
water supply drivers as well as
the fifty year water action
plan.
Um.
I'm gonna in the interest of
time i'm gonna move on to the
final slide here because I think
this is probably the want one of
the more important ones for our
slide presentation today
you'll see four boxes listed
here and these boxes sort of
provide that road map of where
we've been in where we're going
so as rebecca indicated we we
had the request for information
that went out and those fifty
rfi's are posted on the new
mexico environmental
department's website
folks can look at those there
and then following up on that we
had a state of the science
symposium in june of this year
where we brought together top
researchers to focus in and talk
about the
issues about tox and detection
water see if the uh technologies
treatment matters etc is
purchased the participation for
normal from agency's industries
ngos tribal governments
purchase speeding in that event
in las crucials then we've in
the second box you're as I
alluded to earlier we have a
feasibility study that I was
hoping would be finished by
today but it's not and we have a
feasibility study that our
contractor put together that we
plan to put out for period view
it's a really solid document
that explains everything on
around the economics to the
technologies further
technologies around how the the
strategic water supply may be
feasible for us to proceed with
and again we want to put that
out for public
review so that everybody can
wait and on that and and other
great minds including those at
this table can have a chance to
to to drive the the the
narrative forward.
We're concurrently box three
working on what does the next
bill look like for the strategic
water and supply manager I know
representative luhin asked about
that who's at the table in terms
of the the how this program
would stand up from a regulatory
perspective that will be made
clearer as the bill gets
developed in the and we'll
can not wait to share that with
you actually and then finally in
the third fourth box there is
our continued discussions with
everyone at the I at this table
at your table in the audience
and getting more
integration of data and input
under the bell curve so that we
have a better a better
a better bill a better
feasibility study moving forward
I I have heard rumor is that the
new mexico chamber of commerce
would like to host another state
of the science symposium coming
up this falls will keep you
informed about how that is
sheeping up.
And madam chair my last point
that I was going to make in this
presentation simply is that I
was here about a week ago two
weeks ago and here in new mexico
attack and really enjoyed
getting a tour of the
laboratories around those who
are researching the topics of
produced water I would encourage
you if you have any time to get
over to the labs and to meet the
researchers there are there's
research going on here that you
won't see anywhere else in the
country and as an engineer I can
get with that I i'm down with
that
but the selective residence that
they're building and polymerous
to not only make produced water
clean but then to filter out
selectively the critical
minerals like lithium so that we
are both cleaning up our water
as well or cleaning water as
well as selectively pulling out
the minerals that are so
critical for our energy
transition.
I that's happening here I don't
know how many of you are as
excited as I am about that but
that I am beyond excited to be
part of of of this great state
and the work we're doing that
they're doing and I can live I
carriesly through manager that's
all that I have thank you.
The.
Thank you going to tricia
snider.
Good morning think you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is tricia snater and i'm
the rivers and waters program
director for new mexico wild new
mexico wild as a state wired
fiber one c three organization
that is advocated for the
wilderness wildlife and waters
of new mexico for nearly thirty
years i'm here today to talk to
you about the brackish ground
water piece of the strategic
water supply proposal discuss
them of our concerns ask for
your consideration of specific
points as you think about how
this idea might move forward and
highlight a potential workable
path for this piece of the
proposal there is of course also
a produced water component to
this proposal which my colleague
tennis facts will be speaking to
momentarily.
You can go to the next slide
historically across the american
west we haven't done a great job
of dealing with groundwater
we've struggled to appropriately
account in our government
structures for the ways in which
in our acts with surface water
and we vastly over estimated the
amount of groundwater available
to us illustrating this point is
a photo some of you may have
seen before from a magazine ad
in the mid nineteen eighties
when it was believed by many
that the aquifer under
albuquerque was limitless we
know now that that's not the
case and we've done a lot of
work to better understand not
only this awkward for but also
you know just how much we know
and still don't know about our
groundwater state wide.
Now there is a strong belief by
many that there is a huge supply
of brackish ground water at our
disposal if we can only treat it
the reality as we see time and
time again is more complicated.
The bureau of geology and
mineral resources completed work
in twenty sixteen if you can go
to the next to better understand
our broccos groundwater
resources and I think there's
two things that are important to
take away from this work that
are relevant to the strategic
water supply proposal.
First is that we largely don't
have a comprehensive
understanding of where rocket
swater exists particularly at
the staff how much there is what
the quality of the water is or
other information about the
aquifer that help us to
understand how difficult this
groundwater may be to extract
and how likely it is that it's
connected to shallower aquifers
and surface water.
And two existing water supply
wells aren't sufficient to get
the water quality information
that's needed.
The bureau of geology is doing
great work through the app
awkward from mapping program and
the water data initiative more
broadly to understand our water
resources but the bottom line
here is that more information is
needed particularly before we
undertake an effort like this.
I won't bury the lead a
fundamentally we believe there
may be specific opportunities
where the treatment of racist
water is realistic and useful
but there are also some key
considerations that need to be
thought through before moving
forward I want to appreciate
recognize the willingness of the
governor's office and the new
mexico environment department to
hearing some of these concerns
and I look forward to continuing
discussions on how we can craft
a path forward together.
So lets talk about some of the
things that we would like you
all to be thinking about in
regards to the proposal.
First do we have enough
information to ensure that this
deep broccos ground water is not
connected to shallower or ground
water or surface water as we've
seen proposed the strategic
water suppliers looking at a
extracting and treating brakish
ground water above one thousand
total dissolved solids which is
generally the accepted limit for
pottable water and below two
thousand five hundred feet there
is no doubt that some of this
deep rackish groundwater is
connected to shallow groundwater
or surface water some of which
is already being used there is
multiple studies that on the
real grand and the papers river
that point to this.
It's critical that we be as
certain as possible before we
move forward any idea on
extracting this jeep got bracket
groundwater though we are not
impacting those resources.
The office of the state engineer
doesn't regulate brackers ground
water at this depth but anyone
proposing to drill well is
required by new mexico state
statute to submit a notice of
intent for public notice before
that while can be drilled.
The form that os he currently
uses does require the applicant
to include information on the
quality and the quantity of the
water in the aquifer as well as
information that allows you to
assess whether the targeted deep
groundwater may be connected to
shallower waters.
However it's important to note
that none of that is required in
state statute or rule it's
acquired at the discretion of
the agency and perhaps more
importantly in my mind the
information that is needed to
adequately make an informed
decision on weather deep
groundwater extraction could
impact this shallower waters may
not be available available or
may have key data gaps that
hinder our ability to make this
determination with reasonable
certainties.
Second we ask whether we have
sufficient protections for water
rates owners to ensure that
their water rates are not
impacted by this proposal.
As it cranly stands there isn't
any ability for an existing
water rate owner to protest if
they believe the extraction of
the steep groundwater could
impact their water rate before
that extraction begins if a
water rate is impaired as
because of this built
development their ability to sue
and wait for injunctive relief
from the courts is protected by
state status but we question
given the large amount of
uncertainty and critical
information that's not currently
available whether that's good
enough.
We ask you to consider whether
additional oversight by the osy
to ensure the existing water
rates are not impacted is needed
as part of this proposal.
Thirdly well ask you to consider
whether we're promising water to
industry in communities that may
not be there in the future.
The state has been clear in
public publicly available
information about this proposal
that the intent is defined more
water to attract new industry to
mexico and preserve other water
sources for existing needs
across the state.
But brackers ground water at
this deep level has in many
cases taken millions of years to
accumulate and in some places
recharge is not possible because
of the gaps in the information
currently available to us we
cannot say with reasonable
certainty at this point how much
water we may be able to generate
or for how long we need to ask
ourselves how to use it
responsibly and with an eye for
the future we have the potential
the exasperate our water
security challenges if we
promote this water is an
available resource only to if I
find that our actual ability to
utilize it is short left.
Lastly we ask you to consider
whether there is a clear enough
plan to dispose of the
concentrated waste from
treatment of this bracket
swatter it's critical that if
this idea moves forward the
state insurers significant for
thought is given to how and
where the concentrated was
resulting from the decelination
process will be disposed.
This concentrated waste could be
ecologically harmful and
disposing of it is another
financial consideration that
must be factored into the
overall feasibility of moving
the idea forward.
In addition to the economic and
environmental considerations
disposable of this concentrate
has the potential to be an
environmental justice issue and
must be taken seriously
historically it has been our
most marginalized communities
who have been forced to bear the
brands I have waste disposal and
other negative impacts of
research extraction we know
ensuring harm doesn't come to
any of our communities as
important to the governor's
office and to enemy but
highlight this point so that we
can all have a threatened center
in our minds some of the
unintended consequences that
could be possible from an idea
like this.
There are number of serious
questions and concerns around
the idea of restrict over the
strategic water supply as it
stands now we think it may be
possible to identify a path for
word for the bracket swatter
piece of this proposal if at a
minimum these four items happen
first first as has been said
before we must fully fund the
awkward formatting program so
that we can be sure we have the
data and information we need to
make informed decisions about
extracting this bracket
groundwater and particularly
what a fact it may have on our
other waters.
Second we should identify where
practice water might be used
after its treated and then
thirdly investigate in those
specific places the feasibility
of extraction including an
analysis of potential impacts to
the environment and overall
economic feasibility and finally
we need to give further
discussion and that to what
oversight rule the office of the
state engineer should play.
There is always attention
between taking necessary action
when faced with a problem as big
as managing our water resources
especially given the realities
before us and ensuring that we
are not making the situation
harder down the road for
ourselves and future generations
of leaders and decision makers.
We think these elements at a
minimum can help us to make the
rate car.
The fact is we know that new
mexico's future is hotter and
dryer we know that our waters
and the plants wild life and
human communities that depend on
them those waters are facing
serious challenges now that will
only get harder in the future as
you consider the key questions
and information still needed
around this idea I also ask that
you consider where it fits in a
broader strategy to secure new
mexico's water future given our
available resources in capacity.
While the idea of the strategic
water supplies still nascent
being announced in late twenty
twenty three there are other
ideas broadly recognized as
important to many of which were
discussed in the previous panel
that had not been moved forward
as i'm sure you all know in
twenty twenty two a group of
leaders from across the state
with a wide range of protect
perspectives and expertise can
be by then state engineer my
camera published the list of
recommendations that were seen
as critical to securing this
future.
Many of these recommendations
you heard about in the last
panel you'll hear about over the
quotes of the next couple of
days some of them you've been
hearing about for years.
Although we've made progress on
some of these recommendations
many of them also remain
unfunded underfunded or have
otherwise not moved forward.
I encourage you to look at this
long list and want to take a
moment to highlight just a
couple as some of high
priorities.
Full funding of the water data
initiative which will help us to
ensure that we have what we need
to make informed decisions as
questions only get harder.
For funding of for regional
water planning which the
legislature passed unanimously
in twenty twenty three thank you
for your efforts on that.
And which provides a mechanism
for communities to ensure that
their values are reflected and
water management and planning.
And the transformation and right
resources that are needed for
our water agency is to ensure
that they have the authorities
and the capacity to meet the
challenges of the twenty first
century.
You'll hear from any experts
over the next couple of days
about the serious problems or
state is facing right now when
it comes to water I hope would
you take away from these
discussions is that water can't
wait and we need you our leaders
to prioritize moving policy and
funding initiatives like these
recommendations that already
have bride consensus.
The ability of our communities
our economies and our natural
world deflurish in the coming
years depend on it.
Thank you.
Thank you and so we're moving on
to town as far.
Per madame chair members of the
committee my name is tanner
sparks i'm a lawyer with western
environmental last center.
And done my hand out as up on
the screen.
Um secretary kenny alluded to
the
produced water reuse roll
hearing
that is going before the water
quality control commission right
now
uh i'm canceled their proceeding
to amigos bravos and sierra club
in there a number of other
parties including industry and
ngo parties in that proceeding
in that perceiving
slide to
the
environment department proposed
a strict prohibition on the
discharge of treated and
untreated produce water to
ground and surface waters in new
mexico.
Discharge to land is considered
generally speaking a discharge
to ground water because of the
potential for infiltration so
it's also a prohibition
effectively to land application
of produced water treated or
untreated.
The proposal also authorized
what they called demonstration
projects or studies to study uh
territorization and treatment of
produced water and it also
authorized industrial use so
long as there is no discharge
and that prohibition against
discharge also applies to the
demonstration projects
or to the studies.
The thai
of the rule making to the
strategic water supply is the
authorization for industrial
use.
What is produced water all of
you here are probably familiar
with what produced water is but
I didn't want it to go without
being said that produce water is
a waste water that is produced
from drilling or producing oil
and gas and includes formation
water flow back water and added
chemicals through hydrolic
fracturing.
What's in produced water there
is a lot of stuff in produced
water and you can see this sort
of very you know um actually
short list
of the potential constituents
and continents in produced water
um which does include a lot of
salts a light of volatile
organic
compounds um added as from the
hydro like fracturing process
and in new mexico in the premium
base and
naturally occurring radioactive
material has been found and
produced water along with pefas
in and done representative of
some more hard talk they think
very movingly earlier today
about the.
Can dramatic effects that can
occur if you have ground water
contamination from p first.
There are known hazards in
produced water which have the
potential to have adverse effect
on
our development reproductive
systems and others and then
there is also unknown
contaminants that come from the
hydrolike fracturing a process
that have treed secret
protection.
A twenty twenty per reviewed
study arm identified one
thousand one hundred and ninety
eight unique
constituents that could be in
produced water
produced water from the permeate
and the thing about produced
water is the
constituents differ well the
well formation to formation base
in tabasin.
Produced water from the permian
and send one basins has not been
fully characterized for example
there is one robust study out of
the out of new mexico state
university from twenty twenty
two
that looked at characterizing
produced water from the premium
basin and they sample five
locations.
Think about the thousands of
wells that are in the premium
base in the sample five
locations and you know
identified various constituents.
Um that
you know we're in were in that
those five locations which did
as they said include naturally
occurring real act of material
and p foss
there's no disagreement that
more characterization and more
researchers needed to identify
the potential constituents and a
potential contaminants in
produced water in basins and new
mexico.
So you got this whole ray of
constituents and potential
connect contaminants in produce
water and the question may arise
will do we have water quality
standards you know for all these
various constituents.
In the answer is no
the environmental defense fund
conducted an analysis a couple
of years ago
on the potential constituents
and produce water comparing them
to the water quality standards
that are in place and new mexico
and as i'm sure i'll have you
know we have um where to call
numeric standard water quality
stancers for both ground water
and surface water in new mexico
and.
Uhm.
That study are identified a
hundred and eighty constituents
that are potentially taxic for
which there are no water quality
standards in new mexico and so
that is one reason the new
mexico environment department is
recommending no discharge to
ground and surface water in new
mexico of untreated and treated
produce water because we don't
have water quality standards at
this point in time for all the
potential contaminants there
could be in produced water
is treated produce water ready
for discharge at scale and here
I take a quote from one of the
witnesses from the environment
department doctor
lee hue who
has a phd from under mexico
state university and specialised
in territorization and treatment
of produce water the environment
departments are very lucky to
have how
in his testimony he stated
currently their exists and
notable deficit in defensible
and reliable data to underpin
the development of a mature
treatment plane to attain a
consistent and protective water
quality for discharges are
produced water in new mexico so
discharge to land uh to surface
and ground water is just not
ready for prime time even for
treated produced water
now with regard to industrial
use which is authorized proposed
to be authorized under the rule
and proposed in the strategic
water supply
the requirement is is a stated
in the rule is that industrial
use
must be non discharging and
that's a very good thing
however the industrial use
authorization is not bounded by
quantity.
It is not bounded by time so it
is fall on industrial use that
is being proposed to be allowed
we all know that spills
accidents and unintentional
discharges occur with regard to
the discharge of contaminance
and also with regard to
industrial use there are risk to
work worker safety specially
when we consider that
radioactive material can be
produced water
there has been no either
qualitative or quantitative risk
analysis for the use of
industrial for the use in
industrial setting of produced
water treated or untreated
in the
request for information and that
was put out by the department
that secretary can referred to
the rfi in the next slide stated
please describe the nature and
extent of impediments to the
development and utilization of
treated brackage and or produce
water resources as relate
related to sufficient
information data availability
and monitoring capabilities
select waters solutions which is
a big player and the water of
treatment word world in new
mexico and actually was a is a
party in the rule making
proceeding stated but stated new
mexico is going to have to
establish water quality monetary
requirements for any treaty
produce water that is intended
to be used outside of the oil
and gas industry and those
standards do not exist today for
the reasons I have described
it's not because enemy d hasn't
been doing its jar it's because
the sciences and their right now
to establish those monitoring
requirements.
What are the considerations that
state agencies and you all
should take into consideration
with regard to authorizing
industrial use
in an or view
before that happens before.
Many hundreds of million dollars
or expenditure in some former
fashion before contracts or an
entered into um additional
research and work should be
carried out to ensure protection
of human health and the
environment I know there's
nobody here that doesn't
believe that human health and
the environment should be
protected as we move forward
with trying to develop new water
resources on adequate
characterization produce water
still needs to go forward that
science still needs to go
forward and it is going forward
here and it new mexico state um
we need to be an insurer assured
that there's proven an effective
treatment at scale and we need
to develop the water quality can
the standards there to protect
our human health in the
environment
finally i'd like to direct the
committees attention to the
approach that colorado has taken
colorado of course is an oil and
gas producing state like new
mexico and in twenty twenty
three they passed a bill that
focused on conservation of water
in the oil field by recycling
produced water in oil and gas
operations and we have heard a
little bit about that today in
terms of what is going on in new
mexico
the colorado legislature
directed their oil and gas
commission two require a rapid
reduction of the use of fresh
water into increase the
recycling produce water and oil
and gas operations so they are
focused right now as
recycling a produce water in the
oil conservation of fresh water
and use within the oil field not
use outside the oil filled at
this point time as the research.
Goes on.
We've heard a lot about the
numbers about what's used with
the water fresh water and
produce water that's used in the
well field today and it's been a
very good thing that the oil
conservation commission requires
since
twenty twenty one the reporting
of the amount of produced water
it's been recycled in the oil
field the amount of fresh water
that's being that's being used
in the oil field and fresh water
refers to water in the previous
yeah there you go
slide to water with one thousand
milligrams per leader total
disall sounds or tdashor less
and that's a treasure referred
to that water is generally being
considered political water one
thousand or less what's
protected in new mexico is water
with t v s
up to ten thousand million grams
per leader because some of that
water might is useful for
agriculture and other uses so
the fresh water which is which
is
uh zero t ds to ten thousand t d
s about thirty percent of the
water used is still fresh water
and about thirty percent
produced water is at about fifty
eight percent over the reporting
time since january twenty twenty
one through july thirty thirty
first twenty twenty four and
then another almost ten percent
is
water over ten thousand t d s
which is not protected and for
those of you has seemed to be
interested in his numbers I do
have a compilation if anybody
would like those by year over
time and so
has been
stated we've made a lot of
progress in new mexico.
In terms of recycling in reusing
produce water in
in the oil filled but we do have
a ways to go and we should be
concentrating on that there was
a legislative effort initiated
by the energy and minerals and
that resources department last
year that representative or test
is very familiar with and there
was discussion during that
ongoing and very robust
stakeholder process to
put more constraints on the use
of fresh water in the oil field
but that legislative effort are
failed.
And the one other thing about
the colorado
approach if you will that I
wanted to mention in the next
slide was that by statute they
have developed a produce water
consortium and you all probably
aware that we have a
produce water consore cm
initiated by the environment
department in your mexican state
university here and this
consortium in colorado is
established by statute there's
thirty two members and it's just
a vast array of members I put
you know you know who could is
by statute designated to be on
this consortium i'm up there and
there are four industry
representatives among those
thirty two members and the
produce water consourcing in new
mexico is
more about the voluntary um
there is a payment that's
involved in order to be a number
of that consortium which you
know it's can be a bearier for
non profits like I organization
and seventy five percent of the
membership of the new mexico can
source him is industry
so um considerations are for you
all for the framework for
industrial use of a produce
water
it's clear I don't think any I
guess anybody disagrees that
there needs to be more research
and more science
about how to make it safe for
use to produce water outside the
oil field.
Think we should consider a
greater emphasis on using
produce water within the oil
field and conserving fresh wider
in the oil field and
diversifying the composition of
the produced water research can
consort
and thank you very much for your
time I really appreciate it.
Thank you tennis norm you're
next thanks thank you
members of the committee.
I'm a divide in to my
presentation going to the second
slide
i'd identify a key issues that I
think you need to consider the
first is that the problem is one
billion barrels for a year of
permian based on public oil and
gas waste that needs to be
disposed car.
Industry recycles the board the
remainder but the current
disposal uh a billion barrels a
year through high pressure salt
water disposal wells is
dangerous unsustainable and is
up down in texas and new mexico.
The owner gas industry says
treatment for either papers
river discharge or authorial
feel reuse is it's nect best
disposal option
for this water is being marketed
as a resource.
But the one gas industries
intention is disposal through.
The scientific evidence and
technical testimony from the
hearing that the town is fox
just described to you is very
clear
fluid oil and gas waste
presents extreme hazards to
human help in the environment
fall sustained treatment and
even a small field scale for
permit based in portal invest
waste has not been demonstrated.
The treatment can produce a
discharge that is safe for off
oil feel reuse of the words that
you treated water to be used off
oil field were years from being
able to show that public place
that it say.
Senator sorry I have a sector
kenny mentioned that low carbon
is one of the goals well
treatment of either brackets
water or produced water is in
chats
it takes a tremendous amount of
energy and it's willing to huge
amount of carbon and i've not
seen anybody
quite a fight that yet and
finally
the environment department's
proposed rule in my professional
opinion violates the produced
water act and short circuits the
water quality act and I will be
specific in a moment
I wanted to give you an overview
of my recommendations before I
proceed first.
I think you need to require.
It here is to the twenty
nineteen status joy protections
that were passed as part of the
water i'm sorry to produce water
and they are the water quality
act I decided the sections
elsewhere in this presentation.
We need a program of research
and testing to provide the data
to the environment department
just support standards
regulations and permits for
abuse in the sports
welfare handling and uses a tree
to produce water let me say that
again the environment apartment
testified that they do not have
the data that they can use as a
basis for developing the
standards and the regulations.
Yeah.
I did not coordinate this
presentation with any other
panels but my recommendations
include legislative actions to
establish a true research
consort
and you could find that with
class fully offset by one penny
of barrel tax on produced water
production
actually that would raise about
forty million thirty million
dollars if there are a three
billion barrels of produced
water produced and we have
problems disposing of one
billion.
There's there's money there and
that could also be used to find
infrastructure so I think that
there needs to be a disincentive
to produce all this produce
water because of southeast new
mexico is is overpointed by it
though I like gas industries.
Mandate disclosure of all
chemicals used in fracking
governor luhan grisham enter
twenty eighteen platform on page
seven said the she would require
disclosure
at the produced water rules
hearing I was there for all
eleven days of the hearing.
The data just it just simply
doesn't exist in in order to
move forward and a
matter that would be protective
of public health in the
environment i'd like to go to my
next life please because I see a
strong parallel well between the
way that the healer diversion
project was handled many of you
are aware of that it was going
on for sixteen years and the
state spent sixteen million
dollars I believe chasing a
program
while avoiding a feasibility
study that was sound from very
beginning
so the common characteristics
are are these ideas are
politically initiated with an
expansive version and no
justifying scientific data
both sought really broad
outcomes but those outcomes are
shown by unbiased review of
readily available facts to be
impossible the consequences of
the project were ignored or
covered up
and government officials i'm
glad to hear that secretary can
he has a feasibility analysis
ready I can't wait to see it
I believe that they refuse to
conduct conceptual feasibility
analysis that certainly applies
to the produce what a research
consortium in the mexico they
hike grossly adverse facts and
analysis and they displayed for
pervasive deception
disinformation and dishonesty.
My next leg is about the in the
mexico produce what a research
consortium and it's uncorrected
management failures first of all
there is intentional secrecy
essential environmental and
safety data on produced work and
cabinets is not disclosed the
consortium's database designed
biolates the twenty nineteen
water data act in the public
trust because it intends to keep
contaminant data secret from the
public forever
I twenty twenty two independent
review committee audit report
has been kept seek
so secrecy is a big problem
there's no transparency the
current management of the
consortium says that sufficient
research to serve as a basis for
standards and regulations will
not be available for eighteen
months and i'm highly skeptical
that it can be done in eighteen
months
is marketing tree to produce
water or the country i'm sorry
the current management is
marketing treated produce water
as a drinking water source to
the mayors of southeast new
mexico.
Ordered that the environmental
department in the mse board of
region signed an agreement to
conduct identify severe
management failures
I have a provided two
legislative council services a
copy of that audit report I dug
it out with it for request as
part of this hearing process in
its very informative I didn't
make copies of it but it's short
enough to read it's mostly power
point slides the findings
acknowledge the quality of
enemies you academic research
while they are sale the lack of
scientific rigor and data
integration and for infeal scale
testing
to date there's not an
assessment of feasibility i'm
not going to talk about that
more there's a total lack of
transparency and and
accountability there was
testimony a sworn testimony that
feel tests are designed
conducted and reported or not
buy their commercial proponents
if we are doing research about
treating produced water it's is
important to know what failed is
what worked and I think one of
the reasons that we don't have
any treatment results from
testing that supposedly is going
on is that it and working out
they don't read it to tell us
here
but that's injection
and finally I believe that what
is being proposed this is not
the produce what a consortium
but it is the environment
department the environment
department proposed rule in my
professional opinion violates
state loss
it would allow fract waste water
and dustrial and demonstration
projects without public notice
without permits without
standards or without regulations
for all oil fields
transportation handling storage
etc which is a violation of
seven g thirteen.
For d
which requires permits and
seventy four ninety six thought
for arm which requires standards
and regulations for all of your
hospital field handling next
like please
in the interest of time i'm not
going to go over there except to
say that that the audit report
was not things short of scathing
skating as it has it pertained
to the consortium management and
if you read the agreements three
of them have been signed between
the environment department and
the enemies regions you will see
that the enemy d has grown
increasingly disturbed at the
lack of data coming out of the
produce water research can sort
of
next lie please i'm gonna read
you the summary of this external
review report.
The new mexico state legislature
directed enemy deed to develop
regulations for produce water
and the consortium is an
important part of that process
it is unlikely that the
consortium can accomplish its
state admission of generating
the data needed to support the
development of regulations if it
has inadequate with funding and
unclear organizational structure
and lack of clarity in
expectations and research and
outcomes the recommendations of
the committee or some similar
actions are needed if the
consortium is to continue
that report was dated december
twenty three
twenty twenty two
a lot of time is a lapse yet the
testimony and pros examination
of the consortium manager if the
rules hearing revealed that the
consortium has not responded to
the auto report
at least not in any visible way
my next line addressed is one
slide on bracklish water
desalination
you must recognize please that
new mexico has not done its
water resources homework
in the mexicans deserve to know
how much good ground water they
have left but we can't even tell
them that
and we know even less about the
ceiling and bracket waters of
this state this is apps of
looting not ready to go forward
as a government program
second inlinda salination is
much more complex and expensive
than ocean decelination
if you're in line you have to
source the brackets water you
have to get the scale forming
chemicals out of it before you
can the salimated because
they'll found a salination.
It's quite complex and then you
have to find a way to despaid to
safely dispose of the concern
traded waste I think in both
produced water treatment and in
brackets water treatment
disposal of a concentrated
influence stream is likely safe
disposal is likely one of the
biggest problems
and I wanted to just summarize
what doctor stacy tunes aired
disabled before the legislative
finance sub committee the water
subcanadian carls bad
what she said is that the far
listed bands concept for the
mexican salination it's near sun
on part needs five years of
defensible research to figure
out where to get the water and
where to cut the way
and from the experts perspective
it's far more preferable to tell
the experts where water is
needed for a project so they can
make the highly sight specific
determination if brackets water
is available for that
in the framing should be the
opposite of what is called for
in the strategic water concept
and I characterise that can't
set is have uninformed political
water solutions
seek problem with that solution
will get
pay half a billion dollars
please send information now
we've got to start somewhere but
we need to go slow on this
because it is not ready
this is my I believe well next
allow substantial slide
one of the most valuable
witnesses.
To testify before the water
control permission this is my
opinion was one of the mexican
oil and gas associations
witnesses are guiding right
maturity though I met when I was
on the produce water research
consortium technical research
steering comma
what he said was that verified
testing of a full series of pre
treatment primary treatment
desalination and polishing
territory treatment there are so
many processes that have to be
stoned together you string those
together feel scaled the ideas
you produce good safe water for
drinking pure water that still
aspiration it's never been done
not even in texas where
where they say that research is
going on that was the test the
money of
mr
any further said that four
sequential types and sizes of
testing your need first in the
lab
and then at a garden hose size
flow in the field you know with
real produced water and then
it'll larger scale in the field
large enough that there can be
valuable engineering and cost
information drawn from that
experience so they can estimate
the cost of a call scale
facility and then finally you
can get to a demonstration scale
facility and that you know is is
it is a small the real thing
the other thing he testified
about was that two full sized
produced water treatment plans I
believe is that one oh hile and
win west virginia that were
designed for highly sailing
produced water marcellas shale
failed and were abandoned by
their owners one was abandoned
before
and these are facilities that
cost hundreds of millions of
dollars
I have a number of
recommendations they are in
tiny.
Type
i'm just gonna say basically
what they were done that summer
rise them rely on the
protections you already signed
in the law section seventy
thirteen for d and section
seventy four six four p
statute annotated nineteen
seventy eight day require
regulations to be implemented in
enforce by the environment
department for quote
discharge handling transferred
storage recital treatment for
the disposition of treaty
produce water
and I won't call the rest of it
for activities on related to the
expiration drilling production
treatment or refinement or
boiling gas
I believe that you should create
a new fluid oil and gas research
consortium that has the mission
of public safety
the current management of the
consortium unless cruises their
mission is the market treaty
produced water
and that isn't working for the
citizens of new mexico
I think they are the legislature
should require the executive to
define and that it's proposed
for a project using the same
kind of rules with the
legislature has imposed on
regional water planners in the
twenty twenty three water
security planning act
everybody else in the state has
to justify and bet their
proposals might as oil and gas
and the strategic water supplied
get a pass on that and finally I
think the legislature should
require the state in the mexico
natural resources agencies that
participated in the twenty
twenty two water policy and
infrastructure cast force
to report
to next year's interim committee
their coordinated consensus to
accept modify or reject the cash
force consensus recommendations.
Treasure showed the water policy
at the search of cast force
report there was a lot of work
by a lot of people that went
into that liz anderson and I am
look on a claim were co chairs
of the water man has been in
planning
and I can tell you right now
that the fifty or water plan
action plan does not do justice
to most of those recommendations
from the castles.
Finally and you don't need to
show my qualifications for this
that that's my last slide I I
just want to say that
I imagination is getting way
ahead of reality and I would ask
the legislature to do a factor
and put the breaks on this we
need to go slow because we
absolutely aren't ready to do
this and worse it's taking all
the air and money out of the
room and talking about the good
water projects that we need to
do that are listed in the task
force report thank you madam
chair members of the committee
thank you norman thank you to
the entire panel I have a
running list here I have
representative we're test
representative armstrong
representative luhan
representative selling younger
man protem anyone else
and matthews okay represent a
matters so
now this
is an important topic but I will
say that it's gonna keep you
from lunch so if we would try I
know this is a serious topic but
if you try at the five minute
mark it'd be appreciated
representative or tess thank you
manager may have five questions
so i'm hoping that I can ask it
and you can answer in a minute
or less
so i'll start with the first one
uhm you can keep it you can keep
it short and what has enemy de
done for a stakeholder
involvement
on on this issue of using
produce water for the creating
the strategic water supply.
So map madame chair and
represent it thank you for the
question
since we ended the session
we've worked with the
new mexico eight months in a
month or dimes you to put on the
state of the
science around this topic
and invited stay holders to
participate in that
in terms of other outreached
that we've done
doesn't feel like the session
ended that long ago to have
accomplished that much however
you know the water reuse rules
are another place in which state
holders are coming together to
talk about that the topic of
produced water
and and brackish water
but let me let me check with
myself there may be other
engagements that have occurred
that i'm just not thinking of at
the moment I I know there's been
a number sorry I know there's
been another a number of
meetings that have taken place
they weren't necessarily
convenient but it by the
environment department but
attended by state agencies the
governor's office and various
state colders that are
interested in this topic I would
have to put that together I
don't recall all of them have
taken place thank you madame
share think he's actually can I
guess that the concern I have is
that there are lots of looks in
the room representing
environmental ngos who are
pretty opposed have that have
you meaningfully engaged with
those folks
madame chair and representative
we have met with a number of
ngos they requested a meeting at
the far at the end of the
legislative session we followed
up had a meeting with them to
talk about and here they're
concerned some of what you're
seeing at this table others are
in the room
so I feel like the the
engagement is happening
thank you but i'm sure thank you
secretary can he.
In a life I feel like a lifetime
ago I did work on what a
conservation and efficiency and
rec
I think that there is incredible
opportunity and this is
something I raised last year in
this last session when we met at
the eleventh hour to kind of
come with something you know I
is there anything that your
office and the governor's
officer are
supporting or you're not pushing
that would focus on water
conservation and efficiency I
feel like there are great great
gains to be made there and we
have not even
scratched a surface on that
she's been sorry I madam chair
representative march has a short
answer is yes there's work going
on around water conservation and
well the three buckets in the
fifty or water action plan
aren't necessarily order of
priority it isn't
accident that water conservation
comes first that's what's rate
in front of us we need to do
more and better so i'm launching
the public education campaign
more coming soon from the
environment department on work
with google to identify leaks
and conserve water through our
public infrastructure and work
on going with and between the
administration and secretary
witty and his team at the new
mexico department of agriculture
to come up with strategies and
proposals for the upcoming
session to a incentive eyes
greater conservation in the
agricultural sector
so your example chair think you
were brecker and I think it's
not just agricultural sector
it's it's you know it's all
commercial industrial ad
residential and we we can we can
find
that new water through
conservation that's my strong
belief and I think if we were to
invest five hundred million
dollars in it we would find a
lot of new water through
conservation and efficiency but
that's me editorializing I
wanted to echo manage her
norms concerns that we don't
know what the contaminants are.
I mean and tennis you mention
this as well I think that that
is a
first step is understanding you
know like what those secret
secret chemicals are that are
used that just I I can't move
forward until we know with with
those are and I I guess I I
really like the question I
really have in my head is like I
feel like produce water is a
waste product and I don't
understand why the state would
be paying for a waste product
that that's just
that that's like sort of the big
issue that i'm just really
trying to wrap my arms around is
it feels to me like it's a waste
product it seems like that's not
something that we should be
using tax peer dollars for help
me understand that
a brief reply and then we'll
move on to the next person
manager representative march has
at that brief reply is that it
oil and gas wastewater produce
water is a waste product for
stuff yes and so is was water
that's comes from lots of other
industries and sectors and cute
including municipality is our
homes or businesses and we
invest public funds in public
infrastructure to treat and
reuse wastewater and waste
products i'm in lots of other
areas outside of the oil and gas
sector and so are seeing it as a
potential resource if properly
treated and invested in is not
new to me as as we think about
lots of other waste water and
otherwise in our environment.
In a manager I know keep this
brief
representative that the
all of the evers that we put
into police prevention and and
reuse around many pieces of our
economy hence the circular
economy which is getting big
play under the federal
government right now
these are these are
opportunities to take waste from
the the cost side of the leisure
and move them into the revenue
side of the ledger I will tell
you with twenty five plus years
of environmental regulatory
experience at the federal level
and now at the state level if we
can do that we will see better
managed
materials and in many of these
materials are just things we
can't walk away from because
they're so important to that
energy transition so I
understand your point I get it.
Thank you very much okay just
for people's information after
this panel and questions will
take a short break and pick up
lunch which is outside those
stores that can bring it back
for a working lunch so that we
won't end up
buried late so
okay let's keep going
represented by restaurant
thank you madame chair sorry
think you madam chair and thank
you for your presentation I know
and I I was curious but i'm
pretty sure secretary kinney
that we have and do other states
have these decelinization and
brackish water type of
infrastructure already in place
manager and and representative
yes there's there's this type of
infrastructure in place all
throughout the country our
country as well as other
countries thank you for that I
just think we can learn from
people that have already done it
once and then and hopefully
um learn from their mistakes and
let them make the mistakes first
so one of the things that I just
want to talk about really
quickly is if we're going to
talk about and I believe it was
in your
presentation secretary can
either solar panel components
and the
zero admission vehicles and
charging infrastructure then we
need to support mining in the
state and new mexico like copper
mining that produces for though
that industry and be held have
its sell it from new mexico we
could bring in fifty sixty
million dollars for our general
fund a year if we would just
support that
and is like first solar is
concerned madam chair is in the
capacity is not there are
infrastructure capacity is not
there and we keep which i'm off
for I i'm all for oil and gas
i'm all for.
Transmission lines i'm all for
wind and solar but we have to
have we have to build out our
infrastructure capacity we have
given away so much to corporate
solar though we don't have
enough capacity for local and
small own businesses to tie into
the great with their solar they
can do it specifically for
themselves but not tie into the
grid
I want to give a push for new
mexico tack for the mapping and
the data
I think there's a lot of
entities in new mexico that
could handle that but I think
new mexico tack is the place for
it to be they've already been
doing it they know how to do it
and I would really push to have
it all in one area because we
get different we get so much
different information from
different entities that it
becomes untrustworthy and in the
general public's eye
the last thing i'll see madam
chair is that
it's unfortunate that we didn't
tour the
patrol I am recovery research
center here right at new mexico
tap we should have toured that
wish we could have done that
very easily so next time
we should tour that and i'm also
disappointed that there's no
direct industry at the table
we've had guess presenters in
the past
lsc and carls bad in other areas
where we've had industry and
people that do this for a
business
present to us and to have not a
single person from the oil and
gas industry into just sit there
and slam the oil and gas
industry with no present
representation at the table I am
appalled actually thinking
manager
thank you very much
representative of luham
thank you manager
I just came back from.
Foreigned him last week read us
and then farming to me that i've
seen that we had economic
developments in farmington where
we did have a presentation on
produce water from industry
and senator share so there was a
bill last year that we had for
pretending to
the needs and and what produce
water is that sort of thing
we've had research and please
remind me the the bill that was
passed on the produced water
actors in twenty nineteen how
long is a research been going on
in our state manager.
Manager and representative the
research that the real predicts
why i'm sorry yeah produce water
research has been going on in
our state since I was a d p a
prior to the produce water act
passing at at many of our higher
education institutions so uh
subscribe to twenty nineteen I I
i'm not sure I can quantify the
how much research is changed I
think there's been changes and
in industry behavior as a result
of that but in terms of research
i'm i'm not sure you have any
way it's quite a buying that
madam chair represent a little
high I would just say that
the creation the produce what a
research consortium was
established in the fall of
twenty nineteen it really got
started at the beginning of
twenty twenty january twenty
twenty was like the kick off and
through that there has been more
refunding a more projects in
produce what a research at new
mexico institutions but also in
coordination with institutions
outside of new mexico as well
because there are
researchers and an academia and
non profits and private sector
who are participating and
bringing forward their research
in the federal government is
participating in that consortium
and bringing forward federal
government funded research as
well so an
increase in focus on produce why
to research since january of
twenty twenty roughly thank you
manager i'm just trying to put
all this together and maybe be a
little bit of a a devils out of
advocate just because we do live
in a desert climate and am
trying to put all these pieces
together because we've just last
year was the first year we we
saw legislation for usage of
produce waters that correct
madam chair.
Manager and representative last
year is the first year this
procedure water supply was
brought yes
so
we have on two sides of us to
the american voices and glad
they're here in the represented
and I I fortunate maybe the
others haven't heard from our
industry site but I just did
last week and just how strongly
that there is a need for the
produce water in the economic
round of things also last year I
heard from our local governments
that there is necessary for
industrial use and i'm just
being honest this is what i've
experienced to the hearings as a
legislator i'm not hearing some
of those reasons or not hearing
how this is all being put
together what i'm alluding to
use there's not a plan so if we
want it if we want to get to a
place where we can manage this
be it politically if you will
are be scientifically which I
prefer that we need to have a
plan in a strategy that we're
working through this and we're
so we're hearing you know
we're hearing
people we're not making headway
is what i'm saying and what i'm
hearing and i'd like to see how
we get there
because if this is a national
issue and there are states that
are using produce water but then
we're hearing that they are
they'll drawing back from using
their produce water and that
there are states that are thirty
celenization plants are being
shut down or not even started
but we know that there's one in
l passages close to us that we
actually visit him we're getting
all these sources of information
and I think it's very confusing
not just to me but to all of us
now i'm on the side of
questioning what is in that
produce water and really going
into that scientific round of it
and noin that we are having
transparency and that we are
having accountability and I like
a lot of the these ideas
from town is thank you some of
those recommendations the legal
recommendations before we get.
Really aren't an implementation
of policy because I see this is
something that is a huge force
that is moving not just a new
mexico but across our united
states not as a fact how are we
going to how are we going to
deliberate this in our own state
when we are a number number one
number two oil producing
state in in the us and we are
producing record levels of oil
and gas where do we cut where
where do those produces come in
in their responsibility with
this and how are they using it
and if our sister state colorado
has been able to implement
legislation to reduce their
fresh water usage in production
I would assume that we could do
the same thing here
but then we have a problem we're
asking well is this is this
water waste martyr yes we know
it's waste what we have all
sorts of wastewaters that we
have to clean up and then then
they were able to use them so I
don't I need and I think we need
bound chairs to hear a better
collaboration of others entities
because there's a lot of concern
I have concerned my constituents
have great great concern with
produce and bracket water I want
to get us to a place where we're
understanding.
With climate change
what our future is if we don't
take
a step in one or the other
direction we don't have time is
what we keep your and we don't
have time we don't have time we
don't have time so what does it
mean on both sides if we put the
brakes on this which normally
under normal conditions not
under climate change we would
have that opportunity and we
should have that opportunity but
what does that mean for us if we
don't do something and we're
living in the desert erid
climate
and like I mentioned if we think
we have a bad end of of the deal
let's talk to nevada who is has
the worst
and there have been they're able
to do things I don't i'm not
sure in those solutions in the
in the vein of where other
solutions madam chair and that
brings great concern to me so
this is more commentary I don't
know if they want to anyone
wants to come that's it that's
it thank you.
Are you expecting an answer I I
think if it's a very quick one
that if that's in person who
would you like to answer
secretary kenny once to say
something manager again i'll be
brief I I would just I
appreciate your comments
representative and and I
appreciate the panels here I I
think we are making progress and
we are with it it sometimes easy
sometimes hard and and a lot of
times it's harder than easier
however I I think the a couple
things that i'm hearing from
from the committee right now is
that new mexico is leading in
terms of its consortium in terms
of its research in terms of what
we're doing in the southwest at
colorado texas consortiums will
tell you that they will say we
look to new mexico as to what's
going on so when we were at the
state of the science down last
crucials and their worst i'm
legislators there I think they
might even have a different
opinion then then others in this
room saying that we are making
progress on these topics it will
be a contentious it should be
contentious this is a difficult
topic
but if we don't make this
progress then I think we're
looking at everything and
whether your point we're looking
at all these issues of we're
going to not have the economy we
need we're not going to have the
water quantity we need we're not
going to the water quality we
need
so I I just if if we're not
involving you all to the point
that you see the good that's
coming out of this and and
you're only hearing the the
confrontation and there is
confrontation and it's sometimes
painful but I believe we are
making good progress and we do
have a good
we do have a good group of
people come to the table
actively and engaged fully right
here so I I just don't want you
to feel as though we don't have
a planet we have a water
action plan that we're
implementing right now this is
there this is not a spectator
sport at all this is of.
Fully engaged group of people
who are working on there's
across all state holder groups
so
again I I think we're making
tremendous progress and I think
we are the model by which epa as
well as other states are looking
at right now
thank you mr secretary next is
representatives sorry they came
out and chair thank you for your
presentation I was good to hear
from a guys
okay so what i've the big
picture is produced waters not
at a safe point for you us to
use outside of contained or non
discharge rate okay so last year
at this time same committee we
talked about we had no movie
here and they talked about five
percent fresh water they could
do five percent fresh water but
in the slide it said first maybe
i'm reading wrong thirty one
point six percent it is fresh
what are used right now is that
correct
which hand out of the references
can.
Madam chair representative
when we get my numbers here.
So the numbers that I presented
were from the very beginning of
the reporting period of
beginning of twenty twenty one
through last month
you know an aggregation of those
and so
in the oil field produce water
is used about fifty nine percent
of the time recycled produce
water
for twenty twenty four through
the end of july that number was
at about fifty nine percent so
about the same
the amount of fresh water is
about thirty percent but that's
comprised of to these two
categories of fresh water a
thousand tds or less which is
considered potable water and
fresh water a thousand to ten
thousand and so that number that
total number was about at thirty
percent which is a white but
most of that water that was used
was above the one thousand mark
and it's only five percent six
percent
was the potable water one
thousand or less
through
it just in twenty twenty four
that number which is this is you
know there is some good news in
terms of as I said there has
been crop progress mean but we
can make more progress so in
twenty twenty four the amount of
water fresh water one thousand
tdst or less it's use is at like
one point five percent so and
what has increased so that has
decreased in what is increased
is the uses use of water
over ten thousand
sorry through all the numbers at
you but I do have a chart that
at your say aggregates by year
and the four different
categories of water if anybody
would like that
my question i'm so you talk
about sixty percent produced
water res.
Well how much of that still
comes out and is still produced
in and still part of the problem
do we have a number or how it
works depending I know it
depends on well I don't big that
well is
well that water is recycled
reused and then also comes out
then has produced water so okay
do we have a percentage I mean
how much really stays in there
I don't know that
I think that's it thank you.
Thank you represent a math use
them represent the kids thank
you
man i'm sure and thank you
panelis for the presentation I
have an enforcement question my
question is that the
environmental department goes is
no discharge of produced water
when it was being used for
industrial use but a lot of
produced water
doesn't come from discharge but
it comes from pipelinks and
spills
during reuse
leaks and spirals are regulated
by the oil conservation division
which is not part of
the environment department how
do we insure robust enforcement
we have two different agencies
with different jurisdictions and
how do we avoid the risk of what
your job know it's your job
that's my question
and who is your question
directed to
one person one person while i'll
stop well do not directed to
secretary kenny thank you
madame chair and representative
I I don't think that could
happen in state government
that's your job that you're
no very much understand that
deal with that all the time but
your question on the
implementation side is a good
one in terms of enforcement and
the oil conservation division
handles releases of or leaks of
produce water in when it's only
when it contained on the lease
what if produced water to
was treated or untreated removed
from a lease than that would be
this the jurisdiction of the
environment department to handle
those enforcement matters.
Man chairman click follow up so
dr coordinated all had this is
how does it work in real life so
that we're making sure we're
enforcing these yeah madam chair
and and representative it's a
great question and I you know
under our administration's
irrespective of of you know
changes in at the top or changes
in the staffing levels we
coordinate with the oil
conservation division from our
surface water and groundwater
programs that's an ongoing
conversation whenever there is a
release
jurious diction and an often
times are even our surface water
program will take an enforcement
action for violating statewater
quality standards if the if the
release occurs I leave but then
impacted like the pickles then
we would then we would look at
the water quality standards III
would never say that i'm i'm
confident it will always be
great but I know the
coordination is very high and
are successes strong
thank you thank you
thank you I have represented
categories then representative
I thank you chair and think you
to all the presenters this was a
very good panel I I for interest
of time I have one question are
there any proposed projects on
this governor's plan for the
either the reuse the cleaning
or research of produced water
that you are asking for capital
outlet to find.
Manimum chair represented cats
are you thinking about
agency capital outlay requests
is that where you're getting at
are there any executive agency
capital outlet requests related
to that scope is that your
question
no my question would be for
legislative capital out
so
madam chair represented kids
to my knowledge
and I this is not comprehensive
but I can't think of any from
recent past years and i'm not
yet familiar with what
legislative capital outlook
requests we might see for the
upcoming session
thank you.
Thank you represent a remarrial
thank you matter
I guess i'm
seeing your presentations and
getting unfortunate desperate
sort of ideas of of how this is
going to go forward and
certainly the alarm
bells that are going off
i'm trying to understand a few
things about
the cost benefit to the state on
this framework with produced
water and certainly under the
perview of our constitutionality
of the people of new mexico on
the water and perhaps this is
for tannison and
maybe norm as well
when we're thinking about
constituents within the water
that are proprietary and that we
don't even have the ability to
yet navigate what that would be
is industrial use water
considered waters of the state
of few mexico anymore
as a constitutional protected
rate of the people if we can't
even pursue what it is that we
know what's in it right now
so I guess i'm trying to figure
out this logic tree between
what we're trying to protect for
the people and then also while
and if we have an opinion
legally about how that's meant
to be
governed and if we're getting
into a place where it's so far
from water any longer that it's
not constitutionally protected
under
that framework
and did you direct the tennison
I think probably norm thank you
madame share representative
romero the produced water is not
perceived a water of the state
it's it's not a ground water
it's not a surface water
in terms of disclosure.
However
for example the state of
colorado has required disclosure
of chemicals in the hydro like
fracturing fluid so that that
can be done there are some
protections for a treat
secretary in those and those
laws but that kind of disclosure
uh could be done by the
legislature there's a role
making procedure before the oil
constribution commission right
now to require that as well hope
that answers your question.
Um manager did you direct to
that question anyone else to
normally possibly if you want
you can comment
madame chair representative
this waste is certainly you know
not a protected water cos it's
really not water it is an
extremely toxic waste is it it
hazardous by every measure and
the only reason it's not treated
that way under the law is
because of federal exception but
that doesn't change the fact
that it is really toxic stuff
and if I could just good to tell
you I think part of the hype
around this has to do with the
magnitude one billion barrels
that produce waters being
injected and to sought one or
disposal well sets are pretty
consistent number for the last I
think four years even though
produced what is going on the
amount that's been injected as
state about the same.
It when you treat produce when
you are desalinate
tree to produce water
you will recover at most about
fifty percent and I think fifty
percent is optimistic so if you
convert that billion barrels and
acre feed and then you recognize
that half of it is going to be
concentrated waste that still
has to be disposed of
a billion barrels is only sixty
four thousand acre feet and for
the oil and gas industry to talk
about abundance and how it can
solve all of her problems it it
just that is pipe that is not
fact
a one other last point of it
came out time and time again in
just the money at the end of the
day
that well first of all
sector kenney's
subordinates who were testifying
as experts before the water
quality control connection said
that they would have no copacity
to enforce no discharge large
that were on private property
that they simply don't have the
staff to do it
oil and gas industry says that
for not using people and
cracking anymore that they
aren't using any dangerous
chemicals when I that's the case
why don't they disclose why
don't you force them to disclose
as governor to honor grisham
proposed in twenty eighteen and
why don't you make people's use
illegal that would take care of
that there's so many things that
can be done but the hype is way
ahead of the facts thinking
madam chair I think
just understanding the cost to
this day and the loss of
water that is the people of new
mexico's and the more we go down
the road of how much and at what
cost
the protection of this water
that is no longer under the
pervie of the constitution.
We will not be able to protect
and so what is the value what is
the monetary value of that what
is the externality in the cost
of that and and how is it that
we are essentially giving it all
at some point it's gone
but if you're saying to me that
legally it's no longer
waters of new mexico so anyway I
would like to to continue the
conversation then you manager
thank you very much i'd like to
thank the panel very provoking
no answers yet but as you can
see we have up questions about
information misinformation
collaboration etc thank you very
much
ream welcome to the committee
and I think you brought
something to share with
everybody.
Thank you madame chair bill ream
albert mexico i'm sorry i'm late
but there's some features in
zukini back behind the desk
there
thank you okay committee members
we're gonna take till one
fifteen so people can walk
around go to the bathroom get
your lunch please come back and
I think couldn't need to staff
we probably only have enough
lunch for the committee and the
staff members and not the
audience so committee members
it's right up straight
thank you.
