Thank you everyone our next
panel is the water data act and
I prefer mapping program miss
times when you're ready
good morning mr chair and
a few of you members of the
committee who are here right now
thank you for that sticking
around for a discussion about
some of our awkward for mapping
and monetary and water data
interests here in new mexico
I mean it gives kind of a
presentation which you should
all have is a hand out to review
some of the kind of just basics
of our ground water and then
what are some of our states big
challenges around groundwater in
particular and highlight a few
ways that we're working to
address that right now and then
end with some really bold moves
I think we need to be making to
further address
our ground motor management and
grandmother planning so we have
well informed
decision making powers so i'll
just a
move on quickly to a slight
number too do I do it here
yeah
just as a quick reminder the
bureau of geology is here on the
new mexico tech campus and we
were established as an agency in
eighteen twenty seven or non
regulatory and we serve as the
state geologic survey our budget
is listed under higher education
so under a kind of a different
section of a state government
that most of our other water
agencies I just like three the
three water programs that are
now at the bureau of geology
includes the argument from
apping a monitoring program
where we do a variety of
hydrogeology studies from small
to larger scale groundwater
level monitoring and
our budget in the past I would
say since two thousand and six
has have heard somewhere between
two hundred thousand and three
hundred thousand dollars a year.
This year thank you very much
for your support we are now
moving toward nine hundred
thousand dollars of and your
operating funds through the app
for mapping and monitoring
program the water data and there
should have begin in two
thousand and eighteen with the
water data act and that work is
convening our agency convenes
multiple state agencies
including a osce and media and
eminer and as well as regional
and local data providers to
really make our water data more
accessible and more modern so
that we can answer the questions
that we have many of them
highlighted in the last day and
a half of panels here at this
committee
are budget at the bureau of
geology is now also just
increased five hundred thousand
dollars annually for this
program and we're also supported
both of these programs by
a handful of grants and film
topic contributions i'm not
going to attack today much about
the water education program but
there is a a little highlight
i'll give you at the end this is
a program designed specifically
for you offer for legislators
and legislative staff who are at
the kind of at the table making
decisions and to provide the
background information that one
might need to really dig deep on
water issues and get to see some
of them I and fill trips and and
outside so that program is now
annually funded at two hundred
and fifty thousand a year so
those are the three water
programs at the bureau of
geology so just a quickly jump
into a few basics about ground
water on slight for I just think
it's important to remind
everyone that aquifers are not
giant lakes under ground they
are typically
existing as water between greens
of canned and gravel or between
cracks and larger well cemented
racks
and very much
different from our service
water.
We really don't have a good way
to
see that ground letter except
for where it's coming out of the
ground and springs or where we
see it
in a well so a lot of the work
that we do is collecting
information to try to interpret
very large
resources underground by looking
at a very few small points as
and piecing those things
together so
grandmother's studies are not
simple grammar to recharge is
very slow typically especially
in new mexico in most places and
it is generally happening much
slower than we are pumping the
water out
and then changing ground with
her is a
it takes time to observe so we
might see a declining
groundwater level in somebody as
well it may take years for that
to start really decreasing to a
point where a pumper is having
problems so some of the changes
are happening very quickly but a
lot of them are are slow to
observance so
that's an important
consideration with grammar the
some of the considerations about
exploring our deeper resources
we know that there can be it's
generally the more rock you have
stacked on top of material it is
much tighter as you go deeper so
some of the wells that are
drilled quite deep have poor
production and can have really
high mineral content so
sometimes drilling deeper is an
option for communities for
deeper wells for alternative
supply but in some areas that is
the formation is not ideal for
that so i'm going to jump into
some of the challenges that we
have here in new mexico many of
them you're familiar with
we live and a desert state and
so our water supply is limited
you guys all know this and it is
now being further exaserbated by
by claimant change increasing
temperature as sarah highlighted
in the previous panel is causing
increasing so everything is
taking out more water.
And there has been a number of
reports and recommendations
highlighted on in the screen in
many of which you've seen before
that really emphasising the need
for better information on our
aquifers and how much ground
whatever we actually have
available it's really hard to
plan and manage our water
resources or to do water
planning if we don't have very
clear information about those
water resources
one of our other big challenges
is that as I alluded to
previously grounded is not super
easy to characterise and on top
of that new mexico's geology is
is not simple the map on the
slide here has a lot of
different colours each of those
colors are different geologic
formations with different
hydrologic properties and then
they're chris cross with little
black lines those are faults
that all of that is highly
distacted in compartmentalized
in some areas and that really
just makes understanding our
ground with her further
challenging and also to to
really define the boundaries of
our operators we really need to
understand the geology
and there's a lot of important
questions that we can answer by
knowing about this round water
about the geology and hydrology
of our state
exactly how much water is
available as one of those key
questions that we want to know
what is the quality of that
water we need to know that if
you're considering brackage
water options or if there's
contaminance of concern in our
grandmother and then also what
is the recharge look like two
that ground water
I want to go offscript for just
a moment and acknowledge some of
the work that was done
previously prior to my role as
associate director of hydrology
at the bureau of geology piggy
johnson previously ran on the
uncle from app and program and
paul bower was geologist to work
to closely with that program
both of them have now retired
and poll just vacated is office
at the bureau of geology and
brought me this folder of
materials there was actually
three more boxes with this but.
In that I found a number of
interesting articles that I
wanted to share with you a
little newspaper peace and
talking about agreementing in
particular and i'm doing a read
just for a second from this
article this is from two
thousand and five so year in in
your out new mexico legislators
confront water issues many of
them hinging on how much of the
stuff the state has no one knows
for sure it's hard enough
measuring water in our league
streams and reservoirs but it
gets really difficult when it
comes to underground supplies
for years the new mexico geology
and mexico attack has been
attempting to map our states
occur now perhaps that effort
will get a boost senator
carlistes narrows from costa has
introduced a bill to expand
awkward for mapping the process
involves geological and
hydrological analysis that can
go a long way to determining
adequacy in sustainability of
grandmother's systems the sis
narrows bill and skipping ahead
is six hundred and twenty
thousand dollars to invest in
the next fiscal year for further
awkward for mapping tack has
already had some hard work on
had regionality studies and the
school will need more for state
of the art equipment to carry
out the careful study of our dry
surfer state needs this was
senate bill one eighty nine
which had the backing of
governor bill richardson at the
time and it was basically a call
to launch her program and fully
find what would be awkward for
mapping and this is in two
thousand and five from the
service for new mexican and I
just want to highlight this as
a concern and that we didn't do
it then that building positive
go very far at all and I think
this is a time where now that
that urgency is even greater now
that we are facing increasing
temperatures and even shorter
water supplies
uhm
the attempt was made then and
it's been made multiple times
over the past several years and
it would be good to finally get
going on the full commitment for
for mapping our agreements so
that was.
Two thousand five our third
challenge I wanted jump into is
just thinking about the data
that we need
with this increasing oriented
unless surface water and more
groundwater use we really need
to have even further data about
what these ground water
resources look like the map here
which you can maybe see a few
points the red ones are points
that we measure on a regular
basis it's about six hundred
well some of them are data
shared to us and this is a
program that we have funded by
the hearing foundation right now
so filling trapically supported
the US g s in the state
engineers office have a
cooperative network that's also
about six hundred wells measured
annually there are as you can
see on the maps and pretty
significant gaps in coverage
across the state areas that
don't have any measurement
happening and then there's also
what you can't see on a map is
the time aspects of this there
are a lot of places that aren't
measured frequently enough a
month later seven for those
keeping up with me there
frequency is not high enough for
some areas where it's changing
quickly and a lot of these wells
are simply somebody's old
irrigation well or private
domestic well and there is
problems with reusing an
existing well it's a it's after
times it's a pumping well so the
the transit you may be seeing
maybe affected by pumping in
some of these wells we don't
have the depth of the completion
of the construction information
on them and so we really don't
have a good picture of what what
that account for might be
if those wells aren't completed
for the purposes of monitoring
so we're working to try to
address them of these challenges
right now and it's hopefully
into the future.
One of the things I also wanted
to highlight in light of
practice water understanding is
on slide eight
in most regions I I think we do
not have enough information to
really fully characterize what
our bracker swatter awkward
first look like i've had several
calls in the last year asking me
to say how much practice what
are exactly we have what is the
shape of these opportunities
where is it what is the quality
of it the data that we have
available is largely focused on
drinking water wells that's
where we're where our wells are
now so
the
characterising these are prefers
is an important next step and
it's something we need to invest
in
the map that you can see on
their image on the slide here is
basically we grabbed all the
data that we could get
particularly for water that is
for wells that are deeper than
twenty five hundred feet and
greater than one thousand
milligrams per leader total
disabled sell it so the the
those are the i'm criteria for
it to be deep non portable water
rates that one can get from with
a permit from the state
engineers office so if that's
the round that we might be
thinking about for brackish
water there is only ninety four
day to point so we have to work
from across the entire state
that's what shown on this map
here ninety four data points
over a twenty five hundred feet
there's probably handful of
other states that I don't have
because they're not
electronically available or
publicly available
and so that's a really important
thought to add to the
consideration with a strategic
water to play and rackish water
utilization potentially
i'll move on to the some of the
work that we're doing to address
challenges that I have just
highlighted working on
ten big regions we are trying to
put together groundwater
summaries and fact sheets this
is presently funded by foreign
birth foundation.
The idea here is that for water
planning needs communities need
to have a little bit of an
understanding of what their
groundwater options might be so
we're creating a technical
summary document that is then
well down into a two page fact
sheet that communities can then
look to as they're thinking
about their ground water in
their water planning processes
the the regions that were
working with our ten big regions
shown on the map here we
broughtly lumped them so that we
can write these summaries in a
tamely fashion in about a year
we'll have our first draft of
those in may of twenty twenty
five
another move on to
another project we're working on
this is in progress not yet
fully
complete in terms of the
paperwork and funding but we're
working to build the first ever
state focused awkward for map
which is a two dimensional map
of aquifers for this state the
map that you can see here on the
slide ten is basically it's
pulled from a national map so
when you look at the whole
entire country they coursely
love together
aquifers and so this is one way
to look at aquifers in new
mexico and you can see it leaves
a lot of places unmapped with no
aquifers
and I think we can do allow to
improve upon this by keeping it
very state focus so we're going
to work on this using the
existing well data that we have
another previous reports and
geologic information to really
build this as a starting point
for the next phases of acquirer
for characterization so this
will be work in progress in the
next two years I believe
I want a highlight just a couple
the things that the governor is
fifty year water action plan
calls us to do is the beer of
geology and the mapping group
basically by the year twenty
thirty two and twenty thirty
seven we are to have other major
auction first characterized.
For the state my twenty three
two and the minor aquifers and
also building a one hundred well
dedicated monitoring network for
the state by twenty thirty seven
I think this is a really good
example of a flag to eam for a
pin in the ground that were
we're moving toward so try to
get the answers then the
information that the state needs
for for water management and
planning and what that looks
like is several different steps
to build that information this
slide on twelve just kind of
highlights that the main process
that we will be following it
begins with compiling all the
existing data that we have and
we've made a lot of progress on
that so far and building some
initial draft models so we can
piece together what that data
looks like in a and it's
redimensional sense and then see
where those data gaps are and
with those with when we identify
the data gaps that's where we
can then go out and apply new
technology so we can go and
drill wells to to understand
what is in those places where we
don't have any other information
couldn't collect geophysical
data which is a way to see
through the subsurface using
geophysical techniques so you
can start to see the difference
between the rocks and what the
what the water potential might
be in those rocks there is ways
to do that where you fly over
with a helicopter multiple times
and collect that information
there's also ways to do that
that's land based and there is
going to be places in your
mexico where that's not going to
work where we have too many
roads or fences or
infrastructure but there's a lot
of space that we I think can
apply this sort of technology
further refining the geologic
mapping can really help us get
to this filling of data gaps and
measuring ground water levels in
existing wells where we haven't
previously measured can also
help as well as i'm doing a
significant significant amount
of geo chemical sampling and
that should include things like
getting ground modern ages so we
know exactly what the recharge
process looks like for those
operators and then we go back
and rebuild our models with new
data and and then establish any
of those wells that are drilled
can be converted to.
Monitoring for for you know long
term change and and I would
I was want to highlight that the
work that we're proposing to do
going for would be would be
characterising the fresh and the
bracket swatter operators and
and so in some places that means
drilling deeper to see what is
below our fresh apple first.
I'm in a skip over the slide
cause it comes up again at the
end i'm answer slide number
fourteen
just it kind of highly the way
that we're proposing to do this
is to set up a small steering
committee that would help us at
annual goals and make sure we're
hearing from communities of
different variety to make sure
that the work that we're doing
is addressing community needs as
well as state needs are
collaborating with a variety of
different research groups from
state to federal to local
agencies and universities
contracting with her state or
may be perhaps at a state
experts and
who have done this kind of work
in other areas
I staff hydrogeologists would do
a lot of the work of
coordinating this and building
the interpretations and making
sure that the data are
accessible for everyone to
utilise and long term I think
this is an important way to look
at this is that this is going to
help if we're doing this that
new mexico taken at the bureau
of geology working with other
research universities as well we
can build
what is really needed right now
is is the workforce to fill in
some of our our agency staff to
that have the background and
expertise in new mexico's
what a resources.
Just a couple of points to
highlight about why we need to
really work on our prefer
characterization
one thing is that the by having
a little bit more information
are a lot more information about
our account for resources this
can help us know what's in the
water and protect that water if
it's a water quality concern
it can help us be more prepared
for some of the climate related
hazards and changes that are
happening as we think about
communities that have a water
outage that whether there's
short term a long time we need
to have information about where
alternatives may be right there
locally and and also thinking
about alternative water
resources if d cell is an option
there's always a waste disposal
consideration having really good
information about what our
awkward first actually looked
like can help us be a little bit
more headed back
disposal option in the
subservice and also thinking
about regionalization of water
systems again having that
detailed ground matter
information can help us piece
things together across different
regions where it makes sense and
map on the right here earn sly
fifteen is highlighting a
project that we did with the
water authority and obviously to
really identify places that are
ideal for account for recharge
and this sort of thing can be
done more badly in the state
with a rate level of information
so basically we can help
identify using this
hydrogeologic information where
the apple for would be receptive
to receive recharge water or
where maybe it should be avoided
so this kind of mapping is
really important it's we're
thinking about managed operator
for recharge charger absence in
other areas of the seat
overall I think what we're
hoping to achieve with the
prefer mapping and monitoring
program in coming years is that
we do build toward this real
ground water monitoring network
of at least a hundred well so
that wells are drilled for the
purposes of monitoring.
And and that the from that we
can have if you can imagine you
know a stateway dashboard where
we can quickly see what ground
motor level transart anywhere in
the state where these monitoring
sites are set up so that's a
really important kind of just
like long term vision for this
program I think to think about
having visuals about what your
aquifers look like I think can
help people you know have a
little bit more information for
planning purposes
and and eventually getting to
that point where we have
boundaries that were awkward for
well understood we can start
doing what needs to be done for
estimating ground water
availability for fresh or
bracket swatter so when my phone
rings with that question about
exactly how much bracker shotter
we have hopefully we in fifteen
years have an answer for that
so I just a really quick
highlight when I jump over to
the water data program
on slate seventeen we are
presenting at the same time
technology committee i'm
thursday on the water data act
and so i'd encourage you to
track on that as well get into
more of the details but I just
wanted to highlight a couple of
quick things about the water
data act here for this committee
we are seeing a an impressive
amount of coordination between
the state agencies that are
working on the water data act as
well as with federal and some of
the local communities so there's
like bernilia county as a
example an organization that's
really worked at over the last
five years to improve how water
data is being made available
we're also crediting with
national groups like the usgs
the pa and the
larger group called the internet
a water that helps bring all of
these data together it's it's a
really impressive amount of
cornation that's been happening
over the last five years and the
data literacy at the state
agencies I I just have to tears
also really improving
all of the state agencies
involved in the water date act
now has.
An api and application
programming interface which they
did not previously have prior to
the water data they are all
moving towards a much more
modern way of sharing their data
and that to me is a huge success
where we're working on making
sure that those apis are highly
interoperable and functional but
the fact that they have
accomplished site in the last
five years is good
we're also seeing funding
improvements the agencies with a
little block on the rate about
this that has where the funding
needs are far some of our state
agencies entered his filled
their box they do not need more
state funding right now
and there's a lot we're doing
right now to build towards
integrated data so that all
advice can quickly access and
work with that data so this last
slide I second last lie quickly
is lied eighteen and this
highlights the funding goals
that we are working for for the
new mexican bureau geology so
we're going to use those long
term goals for alcohol for
mapping in characterization and
building those monitoring wells
is a significant investment and
then the recurring goal that we
have for that program
specifically is to add an
additional one point two five
million to our annual recurring
budget and then a non recurring
budget over the next twelve to
fifteen years and the order of a
hundred and seventy five million
or breaking that down into a few
different year chunks so if you
jump to the bald text below
we're still seeking funding for
water data initiatives or our
budget requested into each ed
right now is for an additional
one point five million for water
programs at the bureau geology
and a non recurring budget for
forty million for the next three
years that helps us get to that
one hundred and seventy five
million larger amount so
happy to discuss that more
here or a flying that is a work
in progress.
I also wanted to highly unplayed
eighteen just real quickly in
your hand out packet there is
the water data plan for twenty
twenty four that is your in
those are required by statute to
be provided to water committees
by september first so it is I
guess twenty seventh were ahead
of schedule so you now have that
in your hands water data plan is
done for this year and will be
emailing that out to water
committees as well as the
governor's office as required
and then there's also a one page
that's a save the date that I
would love for you all to put on
your calendar is right now it's
april fourteen to the sixteenth
the partial day on the
fourteenth and a personal day on
the sixteenth the meet of it is
on the fifteenth this is the
water leaders work shop that'll
be in silver city
in april of twenty twenty five
so I hope to see you while there
will be reaching out and i'll
have there and others make sure
that you guys get that
information for registration
purposes and I hope you can
drink us
I think that's it for me and I
will pass it after my other
panel members thank you mister.
Thank you mister chair members
of the committee
my name is kitty's i'm like and
I work for the office of the
state engineer i'm the chief of
the hydrology bureau and um work
closely with stacy and other
staff at the bureau of geology
and today i'm here to talk about
the role of opportunity
characterization which
my colleague has already
described in great detail the
role of that in how the state
and ministers are groundwater.
So the state the state engineer
has the authority over the
supervisor and measurement
appropriation and distribution
of all surface and groundwater
in new mexico and in recent
years there's been a greater
percentage of reliance on
groundwater as compared to
surface water
the
the entirety of the state is
administered by seven water
water resources allocation
program districts and within
that there are approximately
forty basin so the entire
surface area of new mexico is
covered by
declared ground water basins.
And the hydrology bureau as it
is a group of
approximately twelve senior
hydrologists myself included and
we are one of a number of
technical bureaus within the
office of the state engineer
we have backgrounds in hydrology
geology engineering climate
science data science programming
we provide technical support to
the agency for a number of
reasons including expert
testimony but really what today
i'm here today i'm here to talk
about is our role in the
development of administrative
hydrologic models and how our
ability to do that task is
improved with better better
science
in addition to the new mexico
bureau of geology we collaborate
with a number of other state
federal and local agencies
the US geological survey and the
new mexico bureau of geology are
our our primary go to in terms
of hydrogeologic information
we collaborate with data sharing
but also administrative
responsibilities with a number
of other state agencies and sort
of balance what our specific
roles are
and what i'm getting out as we
we aren't doing it alone and I
don't think we can do water
management alone
and our role in it hydrology is
developing
tools technical tools with which
we can evaluate
hydrologic impacts throughout
the state
and in part we do that with
groundwater models so as you can
see and the mapped the right i'm
on side for
that's coverage of the state
with administrative groundwater
models and that means that a
ground water model developed
with modflow which is a us
geological survey develop
software
has been developed over time
calibrated validated.
And under set of guidelines were
developed for it for all of
these we've we've heavily relied
on collaboration the middle real
grand was done in collaboration
over more than a decade with the
use you had lot geological
survey and we utilize these
models as predictors in terms of
the effects of our existing
water rates on drawdown when we
were when we're able to identify
areas of the excess of drawdown
decision makers can then
potentially
make different decisions about
how water is managed in that
area whether it's restricted to
newer to existing appropriations
or areas the amount of drawdown
is restricted
these models are also used for
planning purposes and I just
mentioned uh the planning
purposes and especially in the
eastern portion of new mexico
rapidly to declining groundwater
levels
lead to a sort of from
hydrologies point restricting
the amount of drawdown that
could occur in addition to what
was happening in the existing
system
there also to develop to your
address existing and emerging
water management questions that
require detailed understanding
of hydrogeology and water level
changes over time which is
essentially awkward for
characterization.
And my next slide is I was
learned
quickest through examples and on
a bottom right hand corner of
the map that was on the previous
slide is red box of southeastern
new mexico
this is an area that's not
covered by an administrative
model currently
and typically before you develop
one of these tools there is
there's an
I demand for it and in in this
case there was a rapid increase
in applications to the office of
the state engineer for new
appropriations they're primarily
from the oil and gas sector
and many of these applications
were targeting deeper occupiers
than are existing models
represented and it was important
that we be able to understand
and predict the cumulative
effects of pumping in this
complex multiocripher system in
a heavily ground water dependent
region and really existing
data was very limited so in
twenty twenty one the that
region approximately was close
to new appropriations and at the
same time or prior to that
we began collaborating with the
bureau of geology on the
development of a geologic model
of this area in the delaware
basin
so in collaboration with a
bureau staff
a number of students reviewed
thousands of oil and gas
geologic logs many of these um
deeper formations that I
mentioned weren't well
characterized and so the data
that we went to was from oil and
gas wells whose target wasn't
necessarily water so it was
often challenging to find a
representative files the the
bureau then compiled these into
a map that you can see there
representing the geologic units
in the base and
and hydrology south compiled a
comprehensive file on diversion
so when we talk about water
balance.
It's important to understand in
this area how much water is
actually being used
and currently we're developing
an elevation based on the
american groundwater model
that that I should mention it's
it's not just a groundwater
model in these hydrologic
regions that have surface water
connection as as this one does
in a limited way
it includes
service water as well.
And so why do we need improved
data in my experience improve
data can lead to improved
management
many regions of our state don't
have administrative models
we use other tools in those
areas and that figure on the
rate is an image that represents
a new project that were
embarking on to
have a map base model for
analytical analysis of effects
of of grown water pumping and so
that's sort of the step that you
use when you don't have a new
miracle model and to to be able
to cover most of the regions of
the state so we can at least
understand and communicate those
effects more rapidly
alcohol for characterization and
water level monitoring will
provide more reliable data on
which to improve our existing
models
models need maintenance and data
helps to allow us to do that and
doing that collecting the data
in in in the way that's been
described benefits the
scientific process of
maintaining those models
improve models enhanced the
efficiency and consistency of
water rates applications so that
big roll of what the office of
the seat engineer does having
tools that are that allowed for
you know both of those to happen
and ends up benefit benefiting
our customers and the public and
refine models allow for more
accurate and rapid evaluation of
current and merging problems and
i've heard everyone mention this
and I think that what we see in
our authorities as that as
surface water ability
availability are fluctuates
groundwater is seen as
potentially and a way to
increase reliability and it's an
important that we understand
what those effects may be in the
long term.
Thank you.
Thank you mister chairman
legislators
my name is still king and a
little background first at a me
retired professor from the
mexico state university where I
was on the faculty for thirty
one and a half years I mean a
civil agricultural and water
resources engineer
and i've had a a few side gigs
along the way
first of all I worked as a
consultant with elephant
beautiful district
still and working as a
consultant for a lot of computer
regation district for almost all
of that time and I have worked
with the state of new mexico and
various respects as a as the
consultant going back into the
early two thousand with the on
the development of the regional
water model that you saw their
earlier version of it after the
lower real grand
so I
I guess what I would aim to do
here and III don't have a power
point but you do have a little
hand up from me they're
summarizing my remarks here is
is give you an old timers
perspective on on some of this
first of all I also in in my
various various rules I I was
one of the
contributing authors to the
climate study report you saw
that was produced by the bureau
of challenging mineral resources
back in twenty twenty two
and when
we were finishing up that report
talking to the some of the other
authors on it
really fantastic panel to work
on it was unlike it was probably
the finest panel i've served
going to my academic career
we were worried that we were we
would we produced this report
and if you've looked at it in
his rather bleak
it's very blick
and our big worry was that it
would go and sit on the shelf
and gather dust like so many
other reports that are turned
out.
However we were very pleased to
see that it
was foundational in the
creation of the water policy and
infrastructure task force which
I also served i'm
wrapping up about a year later
and since then I have been a a
water ambassador with the state
of new mexico and
broadened my perspective from
the lower real grand to to
little more state wide and i'm
currently serving as an adviser
to the bureau of mining up of a
geology and mineral resources
bit of disclaimer here I do not
speak for ebid or
the the bureau or the state of
new mexico or even to mexico
state university I speak to them
so keep that in mind but the one
that the dynamic that I wanted
to convey and the importance of
this groundwater
the grandmother worked at that
station and treated you talking
about
is that
we're facing a dynamic where we
have reduced surface wider
supply that reduced surface
water supply is reducing our
account for recharge and at the
same time surface water users
who are now short of surface
water turned to more ground
water use hence the double wammy
on the groundwater system that
someone to born castle referred
to yesterday yes i'm that guy
it is
a dynamic leads to rapid decline
in groundwater and we're seeing
that in various parts of the
state where we can see
and one of the
one of the key
issues in addressing this is
being bable being able to better
see what's happening with
investigation monitoring.
And then predict what's going to
happen with the systems with
modeling
and so that is really why we
need to invest in the agencies
and entities that the carry out
his activities
one of the issues that we also
see is that
investigation
monitoring and modeling on on
their own do not manage surface
water ground water in our focus
here is on ground water because
that is well while the state
started out governing primarily
circus water the decline in
surface water the increase in in
use of water overall has made
groundwater all the more
critical and when yesterday when
you're hearing about issues of
of compact compliance certainly
the real grand compact above
elton beauty reservoir and
potentially below health and
beat reservoir there it is a
circus water compact but it is a
groundwater issue groundwater is
absolutely critical but above in
below in managing for compliance
with those car packs same on the
pickles crown water is
absolutely critical to the
compliance with the surface
water compact
given that it's that important
there is a a group that has
multidisciplinary
individuals a few of the the
water ambassadors and in various
other water professionals who
are
developing the groundwater
alliance which is a
consortium of of water
professionals to look at and
recommend cheat how we can
better
evaluate and maintain and
monitor our states groundwater.
And when the my take away
message for her them I don't
have an ask for you but just
information because
will be back we've undertaken a
synoptic study of of ground what
are governance in the state to
look at given the the
development of groundwater
governance in new mexico as it
is historically proceeded as it
exists today and facing this
climate driven crisis that we're
facing in the future
how do we cope how do we adapt
what is it that we need to do to
take improved understanding
approved data and provide
modeling and put it to work to
better manage our groundwater
systems
I set myself five minutes I am
five minutes in ten seconds so
let me stop there and we'll turn
it off for for questions
okay and thank you for that
were you done or
you're just stopping
i'm done okay
going to the committee for
stephanie center's failings
thank you mister chair I have
some brief questions first of
all what does a closed area mean
i'm on your maps.
Thank you mr chair
senator stevanics an area can be
closed for a number of reasons
some areas are close to new
appropriations some areas have
many of those closed areas to
new appropriations have
additional restrictions
on additional draw down
I think those are the only there
there are some other areas of
clothe closure due to a quality
but I could send you additional
information on the ones that are
represented at that map as well
okay so while I look for the
slide the other question I have
from his times is
all the data
it's available publicly online
is that shared with the
universities
mr chair senators the everything
that we do at the bureau of
geology paid for about a state
or federal funding is need
publicly available in that yeah
that's the antenna is that we
may be that we sometimes we want
to put you and then really said
but yeah it's all intended to be
public okay so mr chair and it's
for mister men's on your slides
it is
I don't know what change it says
it's received
it's
the new mechanical bureau of
geology is working to address
these challenges in several ways
and it says central close
so that's what I was asking
mr chair senator yes the central
close basin we called it that
because it is technically a
service water closer doesn't
have a flow three flow through
river river flowing through it
so it's that's just our
geographically referenced.
Term these down to base until
the rose of asian and self
decent clump together will give
it a better name thank you
mister chair I thought it was
more a mysterious in there
than he said her sooner look as
and welcome center look at
I think you mister chair and
thank you so much for the
presentation
I know that when we talk about
mapping and
what new mexico tax abilities
have been over the years this is
just wonderful just too bad we
can't do it faster rate I mean
just there's always so many
other factors involved in what
we look out and what you look at
what we see
with regards to mapping in all
the issues and letters that we
do have with regards to our
geology here in the state of
mexico
so i'm
twenty thirty seven is a long
time
when we look at aging and stuff
of human beings it's like wow
but I I just appreciate the
presentation it'd be nice if we
could just ramp it up but I know
it's not possible just a
statement on out but mr chair
what I wanted to just sit as is
listening to some of this
information over the past couple
of days but also over the years
relates back to
when we talk about governance
of water here in the state of
new mexico and I think mister
mister king doctor king you kind
of on your statement here with
your white paper here in front
of us
mentions it.
Mr terror it seems as though and
I know local government has
control all the other governance
issues and stuff but when we
talk about availability of water
I have had concerns
granted it's not my community
it's just south and just north
of here and bullets your county
with the draining of the water
for a water company who sells
bottled water
that's drained in awkward for a
restriction that is very
important as we talk about as
you have apple explained surface
water we turn now to ground
what's your stored underneath
and with the giving away of more
water yes we are they're
charging for whatever the
business aspect of it is but um
mr chair just looking as to what
we talk about governance and
responsibility who owns the
water
you have the cost of it in what
is the future cost of not having
the availability of that water
and I know that the their
commission I think the county
commission just approved more
ground feed being used
it is just gives me concern I
may not be around in the next
twenty years when other issues
continue to surface about water
but for the kids from my my
children and others who are
coming what are we going to
leave them
so it is just to concern that I
have because we're looking for
the hearing now for bottled
water access
it's just a concern and I wanted
to share that mr charges to put
it out in the air of
what are we doing and how do we
work with local government
to make sure that there is
responsibility and understanding
that that water is to be used
for everyone and not just for
business
purposes other than farming and
other necessities that we need
to survive here the state of new
mexico so thank you mister chair
my comment I met expecting an
answer but I wanted just to put
that out.
Of a concern that I have thank
you
thank you center look as
representatives.
Thank you chair and thank you
very much for your presentation
thank you
so much they see for all this
work and despite all this work I
am still confused
let's so I understand is because
once we pull that thread so much
else happens so to math the
entire states apple for now we
realize all that's going to take
a hundred wells so that we are
are able to do that and then if
we're in a drill hundred wells
we might as well have might we
have to have we should have
monitoring equipment so we were
not just mapping it but we can
continuing to get that
information
why is it because cheer horrar
and I this is a big importance
to us and and it was not lost on
me
document that was
written nineteen years ago
asking for six hundred thousand
dollars which probably wouldn't
cover the paper clips budget
that needs it nowadays and so
this to me is the number one
priority for twenty twenty five
and I know that cheer career is
is worth me as well
why
and you have reoccurring a nine
reoccurring is this a five
million dollar ask is this a two
million dollar ask
mr chair representative case
it's
I I hear what you're saying and
I can see the complexity where
i'm trying to propose here and
and I think that we have been
talking about the same exact
process since the early two
thousand basically what that
article was referring to is what
we been trying to do it's
building the funding like we
just don't have any other way to
see through their ground other
than applying these.
Geophysical techniques and
drilling some wells to confirm
that what we're seeing with
these geo physical surveys is in
fact what's there
and so and also to
send it a low poses point you
know maybe if we had started
this back then we'd be a lot for
their of the way through this
and have many more answers to
these questions than had I
appreciate is that but the
cheers are going to cut me off
you don't have to convince me
that this is the most important
you you have I understand we
can't do planning we can't do
monitoring we can't decide on a
lawn or agriculture or bottled
water whatever it is unless we
know what we have it has to
start with this the map has to
be
the utmost importance i'm trying
to figure out though i'm trying
to rate a bill
so help me
do you are you looking for this
first phase to be the
reoccurring platform so you know
that's going to be one of the
things like that's the like we
want to separate these bills
into four different or maybe
even seven different
appropriations with reoccurring
anonymous ukraine I need that
guidance since i'm gonna
probably cut off soon i'm going
to ask you also the five
vacancies what what are they
doing or are they auditors are
they engineers are they
administrators and then I want
to know how
I understand that basically all
awkward first are
most aquifers are attached to
other awkward for
but at least the wine because
the city of a real rancho that's
how they get their municipality
waters through their aquifer and
they do reinject they do
reincharge the aquifer through
treated wire so i'm is that is
that an aquifer that has been
mapped in some of them have been
individually maps so.
We just need to be able to get
the entire state because they
are connected to make some sense
out of it.
Mister chairman representative
yes that's a lot of material to
cover and are very short about a
time and I would love to come
back and have a detailed
discussion to go through exactly
all of those things I will i'd
be happy to work with you on
language for recurring a non
recurring efforts we are putting
in our etd request right now
already submitted a recurring
request of an additional one
point five million for water
programs so that'll be hopefully
making its way out of et and
over to the legislature for a
review
the non recurring request it's
huge so we're breaking that down
into smaller chunks too worse
considering the first three
years as our kind of palette
fees of this and that would be
forty million dollars for the
next three years and that's a a
small chunk of that we're we're
working with other entities here
in the state other open to other
ways of exploring this maybe
there are some ways to water
trust for that we can set aside
some funding to help kind of
consistently find this I think
it's really important to
highlight that we need some
amount of recurring funding at
the burgeology to staff this to
to actually coordinate this
effort with multiple
organizations and consultants
and research groups to make this
happen so that's why we need
that recurring peace
and then to your point about
their five vacancies those are
ones with the funding that we
already have and that's two
staff hydrogeologist one that
focuses on modeling in
particular
to levels of different lives are
data administrator and data
entry specialist and then
another
help us with some of the budget
aspects those are the fave
positions that were we're
working towards so
and an in terms of which
aquifers have been mapped
already mr chair there are a lot
of data and information
available around the santa fe
albert curky and that's crucial
regions to some extent the close
number tallis.
And so what we would propose to
do with those regions that start
with a lot of the existing data
and look to see if there are
some data gaps which I think
there will be a few and it's the
rest of the state that needs
more of a top to bottom complete
awkward for map started there is
there's a lot of bits and pieces
across the state but not a
comprehensive map of the out of
hers thank you very much mister
chair thank you very much
thank you representative
represent luhan
thank you m- thank you mister
chair thank you for being here
again this year
we keep hearing a lot of the
same things mr chairman of
things it stood out for me again
i'm gonna look the white paper
new mexicans water governance as
we know it today developed in a
time of greater water
availability and lower water use
and population growth and
economic production drove the
development of water management
that favored maximization of the
use of the resource
just with that mr chair we have
not kept up with with what our
water uses in
who's using it and given
favorable outcomes to those that
continue to use it and use a lot
of it
and that's just that's how we
have developed our
revenues for our states that's
how we're going to continue to
move forward as we know mister
chair those revenues for our
state are gonna be stable for
the next I know how many years
so my question
is with our account for aquifers
that are being used for
for a research development
special specifically oil and gas
we are talking about less
yesterday we're looking out
produced water in others effects
and everything and asking the
questions of how much fresh
water they're using so we got a
percentage in a breakdown of how
much fish waters being used and
we're looking at possible
legislation and may be reducing.
That amount to fresh worded that
are used but what is the
percentage of the apple for
force that are going to oil and
and gas production so.
If this director to me i'm
afraid I am
not very current on oil and gas
production I have tended to stay
away from from there produced
wider side although I have done
significant work on a
disalignation of of a bracket
ground water in the senators
area but I I really do not have
sufficient background on the
produced water oil and gas
production great so in your
expertise mister chair you look
at working on decelinization and
talking about produce water as
well as it's it's been before so
it's part of the the research
that we're doing here in our
states universities
the selling station issue is the
biggest you are is there
anything comparable in the
research that we're doing in our
state universities and looking
at produced water because my
understanding status wanted the
biggest issues and trying to
clean out or clean those waters
if you will
comparable to the
the desalanisation plants the
didn't work or went out of
business or are those sorts of
things
what is the the research on
water that needs to sell
annotation I know we we compare
it to see water and things that
were being told that it's even
more selling than see water and
there's a lot of problems with
that I am so my question is i'm
sorry
it's a lot of course that we're
trying to income this year as
far as
science and research is there a
problem or is there a pathway
for decelinization of a produce
water new mexico
mr chairman representative line
again up the produce water is
not my billing
I
I think it's certainly an it's
it's an area with with extensive
ongoing research
it's
i've i've been working with
brackish
breakfast ground water.
Which is not where near sea
water in fact it's
a tenth tenth of solenity
and in certainly basic because
it's just
there is a
produced water consortium of
universe there's a lot of
research clearers
mister chair i'm just trying to
I guess i'm going to interrupt
you and I apologize to mount a
time there are just again we
keep talking about how working
in silence and I think these are
all interleted especially when
we're bringing the scope of
climate change into the
conversation we should be so i'm
trying to get and talking about
data and information I do not
believe that we have enough data
information to be making these
big huge decisions because I
don't think everybody is working
together and you know we have
now the groundwater conservation
I I commend your efforts and
doing that but how are we all
working together for a plan
because we're hearing you know
how do we even get a plan by by
representative catholic kids
there's so much information out
there and in when you're not if
we're not talking to each other
and we're all looking at what
we're trying to accomplish under
climate change in a dry climate
climate new mexico I think we
need to have all those things
and we were talking about them
all but i'm just wondering if
how you all are talking amongst
each other and that's it
all panel how are you all
talking about climate change in
the planning in the usage of
water I know we need the data I
think that's the most
significant thing and I can
that's what we keep here in your
after year after year and i'm
looking at your proposal for
what you're going to ask is for
from our budget and a lot of
this is
it's financing this year too but
this is non recurring funding
that you're gonna ask for over
twelve to fifteen years and that
is frustrating because you're
fighting every year for this and
you're saying you need this for
twelve to fifteen years and
again the timeline we don't have
the time.
I am frustrated I think most of
us here are frustrated I can
only imagine how you are feeling
but we're not getting all the
answers and all the information
and looking at it in a in a
spectrum and having an arm for
another so how we're going to
make this planning and create
strategy for this planning for
our water use mister chairman
mr
and represent looking at
yeah that's there is a lot there
I would just offer for the
groundwater alliance we're
actively working to continue
building that group of
collaborating researchers people
who are subject matter experts
and and I think you're point
about including somebody you
know a variety of different
water groups in that group to
represent produced water and
other industry needs I think is
a really good one definitely we
can consider that and then with
regard to
just to kind of like play out
the scenario that let's see we
suddenly received a hundred and
seventy five million dollars and
we want to just knock this out
and get all the occur first
mapped in a year it's virtually
impossible
partly because we don't have
enough capacity human capacities
to do that level of work state
procurement is quite challenging
to work through we can't move
large amounts of money really
correctly there's reasons for
that i'm sure
that it really is like if we
were private industry maybe
somebody can really crack the
move through that but I don't
know that I would a hundred
percent trust that process
either and we need to make
everything public unaccessible
and and transparent so
it's i've had that thought about
how can we do this faster
it it really does come down to
the fact that we need people
with the right level of
expertise to do this kind of
work and it's going to take some
time to build that that human
capacity and and get the bar
rolling
I wish we had been able to get
this started twenty years ago
and really do at the right way
we'll do it the right way as
fast as we can.
Thank you.
Any other questions from the
committee
okay thank you all very much for
your presentation we appreciate
it we are going to take a lunch
break we will reconvene at one
fifteen
so
we got two more could
presentations this afternoon and
