So we're gonna go ahead and get
started.
Um
so I would ask the folks in the
back who are still mingling
around and chatting. Uh, if you
want to continue your
conversation, uh, you can take
it outside or in the hallway.
So Tom Patterson, Charlotte
Little. We'll see you back
there.
OK, we're gonna need to quiet
down in the back
Yeah, I, I'm not wearing my
glasses. I can't see everyone,
um.
so our next panel, our first
panel after lunch is local food
access, suppliers, community
partners, and the role of state
agencies. Uh, we typically go in
the order that you appear on the
agenda, uh, so do we have, uh,
Alina?
OK, you grab a microphone, put
it right in front of you, and,
uh, whenever you're ready.
Good afternoon
Marks
All right. Good afternoon
everybody. My name's Elena
Paisano. I am the approved
supplier program director with
the New Mexico Farmers Marketing
Association. I'm here today to
talk a little bit about the
valuable investments that you
all have made into our food and
farming economy that supports
small scale producers all over
the state. Um, I really
appreciated some of the
commentary earlier asking about,
you know, in our meal programs,
um, the impact in this current
environment, not only for those
that benefit from the food, but
for our producers and land
stores, so
I'm gonna do just a very high
level about the approved
supplier program and then rely
on my colleagues up here to tell
some more stories from on the
ground.
So at its core, the approved
supplier program is um an entry
point for producers that are
looking to scale up their
operations to access wholesale
markets. Uh, it was created to
have a need to be able to serve
institutions, primarily the
public school system, um, so
that our students could benefit
from healthy local food and then
we've seen the constant
expansion and opportunity that
approved supplier program not
only provides um food safety
training but also other capacity
building supports for growers.
Um, some of the things that we
' re really proud of is that we
are all across the state working
to serve our farmers and
ranchers and that we really
focus in on integrating
strategies and leveraging
resources that are available for
farmers such as again, many of
our partners here we're all
working together to see that
systems level change so that
your investments aren't
piecemeal, but they're actually
felt in a more comprehensive
way, uh, by our communities.
So, um, as I mentioned, the
markets that are served by our
New Mexico Grown Approved
supplier program are what we
call, you know, kind of
nutrition and community food
programs, those programs that
are administered by the state
and public partners to be able
to serve folks, um, where they
eat and play and work every
single day, so that looks like
schools, childcare centers,
senior centers, nutrition,
community-based nutrition
programs, um, and all in all
that market is really
significant for our farmers by
unlocking opportunities to, to
get their products into those
markets, they're able to scale
up, um, not only in the
practices that they're using and
the production outputs, um, but
in how they work with other with
their markets and with other
producers to meet the demand. So
we're seeing kind of organic
relationships or what we like to
call value chain coordination
occurring, um
in this slide we talk about it
as our supply chain and I know
my colleague Erin will talk
about the state investments and
supply chain, uh, but without
farmers growing food, we don't
have food, right? Um, and then
without the infrastructure to be
able to move that product to
market. We don't see the impact
in our communities and then to
be able to evaluate it and
continue to invest in what's
working and that's what we're
here to tell the story of today.
We also work really hard, um, to
be able to promote again small
diversified farming. So we're
talking about folks that are
using traditional
production systems that are
keeping food in their
communities, reducing food
miles, improving healthy soils,
and taking advantage of our
water rights.
The approved supplier program,
as I mentioned earlier, was
created to be able to, uh,
increase the capacity of
producers wanting to sell to
wholesale market so you'll see
up here in the green that looks
like the New Mexico grown, uh,
marketplace which is
administered through the public
education department serving K
through 12 students, aging and
long-term Services Department
and Office of Indian Elder
Affairs serving our elder
populations, early childhood
education and care departments
serving, uh, preschools and now
this year, um, some home-based
centers as well and then our
partnership with the Department
of Health
Senior Wick and Farmers Market
Nutrition Program to ensure that
producers are accessing those
markets with the best quality
food that can come back into
community. In addition, we are
also working with partners to
leverage infrastructure
resources, um, so my colleague
here with the economic
development department, uh, the
Mexico Department of Ag, the
RFSI program that was mentioned
earlier, we've seen lots of that
investment impact directly the
producers that we work with and
then also the environment
department and opening pathways
for minimally processed foods
coming
into our school's senior centers
and preschools. These very same
farmers are also doing a lot of
direct to consumer sales and so
many of these growers came up in
the farmers' markets and, and we
would observe that at the end of
the day there was extra products
that they couldn't market. The
approved supplier programs have
been really key in helping them
to connect in a way that
preserves their time and then
allows them to stay out in the
field farming and doing what
they do best by doing wholesale
production. That said, we know
many of our growers really value
that direct relationship
with community, being able to
engage in the direct space and
we're also seeing um an
expansion of opportunity with
the Double Up Food Bucks
program, which we also s stored
on behalf of producers and
getting that work um to help
some of our growers enter into
grocery stores, and we hope into
an expanded way into the food is
medicine programs.
I'm not gonna spend too long
here on the buyer side equation,
but I wanted to talk a little
bit about the impacts of your
investment in New Mexico grown
to date. New Mexico grown, um,
has been around for about 12
years and it's a state incentive
program to increase local foods
in schools, senior centers,
early childhood education
centers, um, and food banks
through the regional farm to
food bank pilot. Uh, the program
grew from 2012 when we had just
a couple dozen producers serving
a set of 10 schools and now
we've expanded to well over 250
farmers and
ranchers across the state, um,
and the markets are continuously
growing as well as you'll see
here. uh, our, our approved
suppliers are generally very
small farms operating on less
than 10 acres. uh, majority of
which are considered by USDA to
be historically marginalized or
disadvantaged, so we're able to
leverage those federal
investments to support them as
well, um, and overall we see
somewhere between a 4 and $5
million dollar market
opportunity, um, that's going
straight back into the pockets
of our farmers and ranchers.
Double up food bucks. Um, I'm
not gonna spend too much time on
this here today other than to
say, uh, we talked, I heard a
lot of uh really valuable
conversations today about the
impact of, uh, nutrition incur
on New Mexico. Double up
Foodbucks is a proven strategy
to address that in a way that
uplifts community autonomy and
supports our farmers with a
dependable reliable market
through uh the match program.
We, we encourage and hope to see
that continue because there are
many growers that utilize all of
these programs some here
today that will talk about that
that are accessing multiple
markets through their entry
point into the approved supplier
program.
This is my favorite part, but I
won't spend too much time
because I'm first, uh, but to be
able to talk about the stories
that actually happened on the
ground. We know that the folks
that benefit from this program
know the difference between
local food and food purchased
from mainline distributors. The
food tastes better, it's more
nutritious. They're able to get
products that are culturally
aligned that you simply can't
get from a broadline distributor
like Chicos. Try try calling
them and asking them for that,
right? Um, so we're able to get
those into the institutions, um,
and our food service partners
are continuously singing the
praises of producers and
building lasting relationships
that impact the overall
institutional food system we
really see the approved supplier
program not only as an entry
point but as a sandbox if you
will, for people to try out new
innovative ways of purchasing
food and to see what works well
for their community.
So today, um, we are here to
make an ask and you'll continue
to see me and my colleagues
talking about the approved
supplier program. Honestly, we
believe that it's a very minimal
investment for an incredible
amount of impact coming right
back into our communities to the
constituents you serve to our
children and elders, uh, we're
asking for $430 of um
reoccurring funding. I do wanna
just take a moment to say, you
know, one of our challenges I
think you can appreciate is the
state fiscal year and our
farming years don't quite add
up. Um, and so we're constantly
met with this issue of being
able
to guarantee a reliable market
for our producers and so one of
our core strategies that the
NMFMA is really to diversify
market opportunity and that's
where we're working in grocery
stores, retail environments, um,
and also, you know, bolstering
sales through farmers' markets,
as well as the institutions
which was mentioned earlier, for
example, the Healthy universal
school meals program, um,
deciding to allegate allocate
consistent funding to this
program is essential for farmers
being actually put those plants
in the ground, um, and for us
to, you know, reap the benefits
of that come
har ve s t season when we're in
a new fiscal year. Uh, are, are
there other askings around
supporting and bolstering the
double Up Food Bucks program,
uh, realizing again that many of
our growers have come to depend
on that market and then it also
creates lasting impacts on, on
community health and on family
behavioral change around food,
um, and so we ask that you
consider these and thank you so
much for the opportunity.
Thank you very much. Uh, next
up, Erin.
I like this
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Aaron Ortigoza. I'm the
food, hunger, and agriculture
program manager for the New
Mexico Economic Development
Department. It's my pleasure
today to give you an update on
the program and some of the uh
ways the investments that you
all have supported have helped
grow our capacity in EDD to work
with a lot of the colleagues
that are present here speaking
on this panel.
So as many of you are aware, the
program mission really began to
support the intersection of
economic development in New
Mexico's food and agricultural
sector with increased food
security for New Mexicans. Um,
this is a pivotal part of the
governor's food initiative, and
we were one of several, um,
agencies to receive funding for
dedicated roles to focus on food
security, so EDD's, um,
developed the ability to focus
on um financial tools and
technical assistance that are
very tailored
Is this better
that are specifically tailored
for small and mid-scale food
processing and agricultural
enterprises.
Um, we work on, uh, the
workforce development challenges
um through creation and
retention of jobs and really
focusing on strengthening and
divers diversifying in-state
market channels for the um
producers and food businesses in
New Mexico. We, um, are also
very actively working with um uh
those producers employing
regenerative and traditional
agricultural practices and so
we'll look at a little bit of
the ways these projects have
evolved over the last couple of
years.
So coming up this fall, we have
the food, the Healthy food
financing fund's 4th grant
cycle. Um, this has been made
possible by the amazing
investment that you all have
allocated for us in this coming
fiscal year and we will be
providing um grants for
pre-production, production,
processing projects, aggregation
distribution, or food hub
projects and food retail
throughout the state and we'll
be providing grants between
$50,000 and $150,000 to the
awardee selected.
A couple of the other
initiatives that I'd like to
introduce to you all that have
evolved over the last couple of
years are include the New Mexico
food pathways. This program has
been made possible by a federal
allocation of funds through the
Healthy Food financing
initiative and in partnership
with Vitamehor Capital, New
Mexico State University, and
the um Vita uh and uh the loan
fund and the Santa Fe Farmers
Market Institute. We are opening
up a technical assistance um
track for no cost business
consulting and access to that
would lead them to access to
capital
uh, grants and low interest loan
loans, tailored toward these
businesses, and support for um
food retail businesses to access
Snap, uh, application support.
as was mentioned earlier, we're
also part of the resilient Food
System infrastructure program
where a sister agency
implementing with NMDA and
there's currently 18 projects
statewide, um, the, the projects
are, um, high touch. They're
getting a lot of um resources
and technical assistance for
their project imple
implementation really focusing
on the middle of the supply
chain, um, so post-production
all the way to back of the
retail store and really honing
in on um cold storage capacity,
aggregation, and transportation
and processing within that
chain.
So this year we're also gonna be
launching a feasibility study.
Um, we'll be doing a sustainable
local food transportation route
study for rural frontier
communities, tribal and urban
regions of the state in
conversations with a lot of our
partners and a lot of the
businesses we work with, um, we
see a huge need for a current um
assessment of the landscape of
food distribution systems to
really evaluate the economic
feasibility of establishing or
expanding transportation
options, um, piloting new
routes, working with what kinds
of um partnership or investment
recommendations and strategies
might support longer term route
viability.
and we'll also be launching a
community of practice before
food distribution and retailers
throughout the state. This is
really to hone in on um ongoing
conversations, uh, productive
space for, um, opportunities for
networking, mentorship and
collaboration, specialized topic
focuses, and, um, again, looking
at strategies that lift all
ships, right? Everybody's gonna
be learning from each other in
this program this year.
So the New Mexico Healthy Food
Financing Fund is our
cornerstone project that that
we've been running for now 4
years. This is a map of where
all of the projects are in the
state currently. Over 4141
grants over $1.7 million has
currently been successfully
implemented. There will be about
1.5 million more this year
invested into our food value
chain. So thank you so much for
that and some of the, you know,
outcomes we're seeing currently,
all of the, um, you know, there
has been expanded, um,
opportunities that a lot of the
beneficiaries have been working
now with like 12
or more local vendors on average
procurement wise and all our
reporting, um, increased growth
and sales and we've to date
served over 80,000 clients
through this program.
an example of one of our
projects is the B Street Market,
which is a woman-owned grocery
store in Mountainair, um,
they're their project was suppo
uh to expand the cold storage
and display capabilities, um,
which is really added their
capabilities to purchase from
more local farmers and ranchers,
and they're now selling over
£16,000 of local food and um
really helping them to maintain
their workforce and um increase
uh quality of jobs for their
current employees and it's
really kind of a, a
demonstration of what we're
seeking to support
our local retailers with
independent retailers.
OK, now is the end of my
presentation and I will pass it
along to my colleague.
So good afternoon, Madam Chair
and representatives of the
committee. My name is Veronica
Grego, and I am the program
manager for the senior and WIC
Farmers' Market nutrition
Program, the New Mexico
Department of Health.
Um, today I'm gonna, uh, go over
what our program is because I
know a lot of people do not
understand what our program is
and when it actually started. So
our program started in 1992, um,
when the farmers' Market
Nutrition Act, um, was
established for the WIC farmers'
market nutrition program that is
for the Wick families that are
active on the on the WIC
program. That is for our
pregnant breastfeeding
postpartum infants and
children's 6 months to 5 years
old.
Um,
New Mexico actually was the
first state to implement our
WWIC FMMP program, and that was
through the entire nation. In 20
2002, the senior farmers' market
program, what became permanent
under the farm bill. New Mexico
implemented it in 2002, right
after it was implemented under
the Farm Bill. That program is
for eligible seniors who are 60+
who are non-Native American. 55+
Native American.
This program is income based,
um, we have always been
federally funded and we do have
to go off of um the 185% um
income bracket as far as state
funds, we actually started
getting non-reoccurring state
funds for this program 2 years
ago and we based that off 200%
federal poverty guidelines. Um,
in 2021, New Mexico, we actually
led the nation in introducing
a modern technology system which
which included a proof of
concept for our mobile app,
which you see up here, and for
our shopper cart, which has a QR
code, which allows our
participants to go to farmers
and get away from paper
vouchers, um, and be able to go
to farmers' markets and purchase
their benefits. Prior to this,
when they had a paper vouchers,
they had to spend the entire
dollar amount that was on that
voucher. So now with this card
they're able to spend a pen
ny to up to the balance of what
they get. Um, we do only provide
a one-time benefit for the year,
that is because of the funding
that we do currently have. Um
in 2024, I actually implemented
a food box program for our WIC
participants for our children
and our mothers who are on WIC
in rural areas, and so what I do
there is I utilize federal money
to be able to take federal food
boxes or actually state food
boxes of state produce, which
you see here, and our farmers
actually are the ones who uh
fill these boxes. This is a
program I did with Edgar Katuda
and um I'm also doing it with
Frontier Food Hub and um these
are some programs that are out
there that are helping me
deliver these produce boxes to
the rural areas.
Um, as I mentioned, agricultural
support, we go out and we
partner with New Mexico grown
farmers and our food hubs to
help them um assemble our fresh
produce boxes. There are 2 of us
in that in this program that run
it for the state and we do go
out there and we do help create
these boxes. If our programs are
unable to deliver, we will go
out and deliver them ourselves.
um, these boxes, as you can see
here in the middle picture, it
does include beans, posole,
ho ney chili, fruits,
vegetables, herbs, anything that
is locally grown and made here
in New Mexico, um, we do deliver
directly to senior centers in
rural and tribal communities
that is some additional money
that I am utilizing with that
non-reoccurring funding from the
state. Um, the value for these
boxes are $50 to $100 all
depending on how much the
produce is. It is a way to
support the nutrition for our
seniors, um.
we wanted to really show you
these these pictures. Currently
right now I, my program does
work with 47 farmers' markets on
the program. We have 608 farmers
who are currently signed up to
accept our shopper card and
mobile app. We have 40 farm
stands and mobile markets that
are also on the program and
partnership with Ford Local food
hubs.
um, in state fiscal year 2026
with the funding that I
currently have, I can serve
2,385 participants with federal
funds. That has gone down.
Um, in New Mexico, I'm not sure
if my director actually
mentioned that, but our WIC
program actually serves 459,000
WI families yearly. So as you
can see, I'm not touching that
with the funds that I currently
have.
Um, state fiscal year 2026 for
our seniors, um, we have 15,352
participants that I can actually
serve with federal and state
funds. That is combined. Um,
aging and long term care
services, um, last year they
estimated amount was 50,680
seniors that they serve. As you
can see, there's a pretty large
gap there as well. Um, on the
map here, this, I just wanted to
show you the locations of where
our market
s are, which is the red, and
those are where our markets are.
Currently, I am focused this
year, um, as I mentioned, there
are 2 of us and
I have to focus my um self on
regions to be able to provide
these food boxes or services
such as a shopper cart
especially if there isn't
market, there's no markets in
this areas, um, so as you can
see we are focusing our um
program resources on the
Northeast region which is
towards the Clayton um area in
Ratone, um,
there's gonna be other several
different areas that I will be
touching in that area.
Um, I am gonna continue on the
support for our producers. We
approve our farmers to establish
farm stands in their own
communities to enhance those
local sales, um, such as
Columbus, Demming, Lordsburg,
Lemington, and Hatch. There are
several others out there as
well, but the one that I really
want to focus on and I really,
really enjoy, um, sharing is our
Columbus in Deminario. We have
one farmer out there.
who we met in Las Cruces, um, in
May, and he signed up on our
program out there to be a
farmer, and then he decided he
wanted to start a farmstead in
Demming in Columbus. So now he
goes out and he actually sells
every twice a month to our
participants on our program to
be able to purchase local fresh
produce directly from his farm
and so that is just something
that we we do as a program. How
can we get you to provide these
local uh local produce to these
seniors
that don't have access to
anything, whether it's seniors
even or WIC families. There's no
markets in those areas. The
seniors don't want to drive.
They can't drive. Um, so there's
the transportation issues that
we deal with. Um, the next is
the funding for our bulk
purchases. The money that I
utilize, um, I did get 1 million
this year of of the
non-recurring. I utilize that to
issue to our seniors. I also use
that for our bulk purchases. So
it's all combined in one
We, um, like I mentioned, I do
work with New Mexico Harvest
Frontier Food Hub, Agricatura,
Ogala Commons, um, local food
for all mobile market, Coastal
Farms is a local farmer in Santa
Fe or Espanola, who actually
decided he wanted to help me
with local produce boxes in the
rural areas, um, that don't have
access and so what he's been
delivering to tribal senior
centers and senior centers this
year, um, and so they've been
enjoying those, those boxes have
been getting delivered
every 2 weeks to our seniors so
that way the food does not
spoil, of course, um, same thing
with our Albuquerque rail yard
at Farmers' Market. They do the
same thing and our fruit basket
in velarte. We just got them on
um to do produce boxes for us
this year.
um, and the one thing I would
really like to share is um dis
our distribution and logistics
we are the first program in New
Mexico to receive a refrigerated
food truck. Um, this was all
part of the Governor's food
initiative. This is what the
truck does not look like this.
However, um, that is what our
wrap will look like. I will be
utilizing that to be able to
transport fresh local produce. I
will be doing a transport on
Wednesday of this week to Fort
Sumner
because our market actually has
shut down there, so we are
creating a 175 boxes in Santa Fe
tomorrow and delivering these on
Wednesday morning. Um, so those
are things that we do as a
program besides providing
benefits to our participants on
the shopper cart to actually go
purchase um produce.
and that's it for me
Thank you very much. You're
gonna want to turn off that mic
and our next speaker whenever
you're ready, uh, switching the
slides.
Good afternoon, chair Stephanics
and committee members. My name
is Liz Anakini, and I work with
the public education department
as the Healthy universal School
meals program manager and the
student success and wellness
bureau.
I'm grateful to have the
opportunity to talk to you today
about NMGrown program as it's
implemented across 3 state
agencies in our K-12 schools,
early childcare centers, and our
senior centers.
NM Grown has over a 10-year
history, uh, in this, the public
education department and we're
really proud of the agency's
role in being foundational and
establishing um the processes
for NM grown that enabled it to
expand to other agencies.
We're also proud that New Mexico
is seen as a leader in the
country when it comes to farm to
school, and we'll be hosting the
National Farm to cafeteria
conference in Albuquerque this
December.
In universal school meals, N I
Grown is a core strategy and
improving meal quality in our,
in our school cafeterias. We
know that not only when we get
more fresh, um, delicious
ingredients that improves meal
quality, but it's also really
having a, a strong impact on the
scratch cooking requirement. As
schools work with more raw meat,
uh, dried beans or fresh
vegetables. They're being caused
to innovate their uh scratch
cooking techniques and recipes
to accommodate those products.
We're really proud of the reach
across state agencies in the
NMGrown program. So in K-12
schools, we have almost a
quarter of a million students
impacted, uh, over 7500 of our
youngest children, ages 0 to 5,
and over 50,000 unduplicated
seniors in our senior centers
are benefiting from this
institutional procurement
annually.
We know that these award funds
are really a catalyst that help
build relationships and that
muscle memory, that practice of
local purchasing in our
institutions, and we're excited
to see that schools and
providers are choosing to
purchase beyond their NM Grown
award once those relationships
and processes are in place.
We know that this program is a
win for farmers, a win for kids,
and a win for communities. Our
farmers are able to set their
own price and approve supplier
program, ensuring, uh, the
ability to earn a living wage
for themselves and their
workers, um, our kids, our
seniors are eating nutri
nutrientally nutrient dense food
that is delicious, um, in their
cafeterias and our communities
are benefiting from, uh, small
farmers who are implementing
earth-friendly practice
practices
um, resulting in more intact
ecosystems, as well as economic
multiplier benefits that we know
are attached to investments in
local food.
Finally, E I Grown celebrates
New Mexico's agricultural
traditions, not only creating a
market for small farmers who use
traditional practices like
seass, but also with robust
agricultural education element
in schools where students are
learning about the local farms
in their community and farming
practices.
I want to provide a quick
snapshot of what participation
looks like in each of these
agencies. So in the public
education department, we're
proud to be working with over 66
school food authorities, um
in early childcare, uh, they've
increased to 43 centers this
year, and they are piloting a
new home-based daycare, um, uh,
accessibility is part of that,
and our senior centers, we have
over 62 providers, each of which
serve multiple centers, and that
includes uh 17 tribes, pueblos,
and nations. What I really want
to draw your attention to on
this slide is the
um, amount of, uh, that is
successfully being expended in
each of these programs. So each
of these programs has over 90%
of these funds that are warded
out all across the state,
successfully being spent and
reimbursed for, um, which is
really a testament to the strong
relationships that are being
established through the approved
supplier program between buyers
and suppliers that they're able
to fully use their rewards.
This is a quick snapshot at the
local food data portal portal.
So all three agencies use the
approved supplier program and
all of them use this data portal
to track. So this gives us a
real-time, um, view of how
expenses are being spent down
across the year. We can compare
rates year over year. We can see
what individual buyers are
purchasing and who they're
purchasing from. And um we can
pull this statewide by agency,
and we can also pull this at a
site level so
we can kind of give an update to
each buyer of how they're doing.
What's being served in K-12
schools and other agencies
through Unim Grown. Our biggest
expenditure is meat with about
34%, but we do see a healthy
mixture of fruits, vegetables,
and legumes. Um, this pattern
looks pretty similar across the
agencies in early childhood,
their biggest expenditure is
fresh and dried fruit for some
of those snacks. Um, but meat is
typically the largest
expenditure across the agencies.
What's next for Ira? Um, we are
a victim of our own success, as
we do outreach and increase
participation. A lot of these
that is resulting in smaller
awards for each awardee. Um
we also know that even with the,
the vast investment that the
state has made in local
purchasing institutions, local
purchasing power is still small
in relationship to their overall
budget.
Uh, echoing Elena, we always
need more farmers to join the
improved supplier program,
especially in some of the areas
that are more rural, so, um,
delivery will be possible to to
centers in those areas and as
always, we need uh consistent,
stable funding across all of the
agencies.
Um, as the Public Education
department has transitioned to
healthy universal school meals,
um, and, and I'm Grown has
become part of that funding. Um,
PE will honor the 10 cents per
meal in statute moving forward
to also address the problem of
the awards getting smaller as
more schools participate. And
PET is additionally encouraging
schools to use their healthy
universal school meal allocation
to increase NM grown purchasing.
Uh, lastly, PE is adding Bureau
of Indian Education and tribal
schools this year. They were
previously prevented from
participating due to an
administrative barrier, but
we're doing a creative, uh,
approach to work around that
this year.
I want to share a few stories of
what NM Grown looks like in
action across the state. So in
Roswell Independent Schools with
the leadership of Kimberly
Meeks, uh, Roswell is spending
more than a million dollars on
an ingrown annually. And this is
really a testament to what Elena
was saying of building these
relationships and simultaneously
with the, the capacity of
growers in that region. So this
has grown incrementally as the
beef providers in her community
have been able to grow and offer
more product.
Um, in Roswell, 100% of the beef
is New Mexico beef. And in
addition to beef, uh, if you
call Kimberly Meeks up, she can
tell you what's in season and
squash and lettuce and all of
the other producers in her
community and has a really
strong relationship with them.
Additionally, in Roswell, this
is a great example of how using
NMGrown increases scratch
cooking, uh, working with raw
beef requires new recipes,
training for staff, um, and, uh,
much higher higher quality and
better tasting food.
And Berna Leo Public Schools,
uh, under the leadership of
Debbie Debbie Trujillo. Um, we
see and I'm grown again paired
with an increase in scratch
cooking. This district has
committed to using 100% fresh
beans in their, uh, cafeteria
menus this year, many of which
will be sourced through the
approved supplier program.
Uh, a little mixture of a grower
spotlight with a school
spotlight. Um, this young man,
his name is Carson Stark. He
first learned about Nim Grown as
a student in Farmington
municipal schools, and he was
inspired to become a farmer and
sell the schools himself. So
he's now providing product to
Bloomfield School District as a
farmer.
And lastly, I want to um share
another grower spotlight and
just put in context what this
can mean for a local farmers.
This isn't Danny and Seas, and
he is with Trilogy Beef. He's a
6th generation farmer and a 13
generation New Mexican, and the
NM Grown program is really
provided, um, the opportunity to
have year-round market
stability, so complementing that
farmers' market cycle for not
only Trilogy beef but other
businesses in the community like
meat processors.
Um,
Manny says that him and his
daughters feel good knowing that
their foods are, they're highly
nutritious foods are going to
feed multiple generations in
their community, both in schools
and in senior centers. Um, and
he can speak about how N I Grown
has really created an
opportunity for him to pass his
farm and his agricultural
business on to his daughters
that he didn't see as as
possible three years ago.
Thank you so much for your
attention today. I want to thank
you all for the investments that
you've made in Nim grown, um,
and I, I'm grateful to be able
to shed a light on the impact
that they're having in our
communities.
Thank you very much for that and
uh next up we have Mario.
Well, good afternoon and thanks
for coming to Las Cruces.
Welcome. Uh, my name is Mario
Guin and, uh, I work for Laimia
Food Center, which is a food hub
located in Antony, New Mexico.
I'm also a farmer, uh.
of a Riovajo deer farming, which
is located also in Antony, New
Mexico, and I have been selling
to the immigrant program, uh,
since the beginning, so that was
like 11 or 12 years ago, um.
so in La Similia Food Center, we
have 6 different uh programs uh
which are community farm,
education, community education,
storytelling, policy, and the
program that I'm gonna be
talking uh a little bit more and
that is the one that I
co-manage. It's the Fundre
program, which is uh basically
uh food have, uh, and we
aggregate produce from uh 20 to
24, 25 farmers, uh, local
farmers, um, all of them grow
produce or most of them grow
produce in less than 1 acre
farms and all of them use
agricology practices, uh, water
conservation techniques, um,
and, uh, sustainable practices,
right?
Um
at the Fundish program, we also
uh do food safety training and
connect local producers to
institutional outlets, uh, sales
like Las Cruces book disco, um
got to independent school
districts, senior centers,
daycare centers, and um
at the same time, we partner
with uh our community education
program to make an average of 75
Baiji prescription or produce
prescription boxes per week, and
we take those boxes to clinics
in Anthony and Las Cruces, but
I'm gonna be very honest with
you. I don't know how, I don't
know what eggplant was until I
was like 30 years old. I don't
know about kale until I was like
30 years old. So it's, it's, uh,
the work is not just taking the
produce to the to the consumers,
to the public. It's also
teaching them how to use them.
That's why we uh
partnered with uh the community
education program, and they go
to different clinics and teach
the public about how to eat
healthy, you know how to eat
healthier and how to use
different products that uh
probably they're not very
familiar with.
Uh, and by the way, this
program, it's funded uh with
federal dollars, with gasnip.
and uh let me go to next one.
And I also have.
to uh spotlight farmers.
on the left. I have a full
circle mushrooms, which is a
farm that it's on La Mesa, New
Mexico, and they produce uh
around.
4000 pounds per month, and they
have taken off mushrooms and
they have the capacity to
uh produce 6000 pounds per
month.
and also they, they sell
directly to the immigrant
program and to programs like uh
pros prescription that we have.
And on the right we have uh
Yvonne Diaz. She's a farmer and
owner of the Collores farm, and
she grew all kinds of vegetables
like from lettuce, spinach,
kale, radishes to corn and um.
Sonora and wheat
broccoli, tuna, uh.
what else
And like you can imagine like a
small scale farmers, we were a
lot of different hats, where
growers, entrepreneurs,
accountants, marketers,
educators, or tailors,
packagers, delivery drivers,
ecologists, community advocates,
mechanics, electrician, plumber,
welder, and the list keeps,
keeps going, you know, and why I
have this list here is because I
want to talk briefly about the
importance of supporting food
hubs, uh, like Frontier, like
agricultural Network,
and Laila Food Center, uh,
because we can do some of this
work and help the farmers uh
keep growing food.
Uh, so the food hubs, we can do
the marketing for them, we can
be the educators, uh, retailers,
packageet shares, and we can
also do uh deliveries for them,
no, and that way they can
concentrate and focus more on
growing food.
No, um
what else, what else? OK, so all
these farmers, uh, have
infrastructure needs like cold
storage, transportation, proper
washing and packing station
supplies, uh, labeling, etc. and
some of these needs uh can be
funded through programs like the
Regional Food Business Center,
which was recently canceled and
it's important to, you know,
create and support more programs
like this that are supporting
small farmers, you know.
Um
I think that's it
Yeah, thank you
Thank you very much. Uh, next up
we have Johannes
When you're ready, you're gonna
need to turn on your mic.
Yeah, it's just waiting for the
presentation. Um, thank you,
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh, my name is
Johannes Lenzer. I'm the chief
operating officer at the
National Center for Frontier
Communities and I will be
presenting about our program,
the Frontier Food Hub, today. Um
and yeah, just very briefly, um,
the National Center for Frontier
Communities, um, we are uh
headquartered in Silver City,
New Mexico. 100% of our staff is
here in New Mexico and our
programming takes place here. We
do have a nationwide uh
mission when it comes to
advocating for frontier and
remote communities.
and
New Mexico is um
our, our home turf, um,
specifically because, yeah, this
is a um going by the USDA
definition of front-end remote
communities at level 1, almost
90% of New Mexico is considered
far and remote or frontier and
remote communities and at level
4, which is the highest level of
remoteness. We still have almost
half of the State considered
remote communities. So, um, as
our vision is thriving
communities.
We are developing model
programming
that we are developing in New
Mexico and hoping to inspire
other communities as well. One
of these programs is the
Frontier Footab that I'll be
talking about today
um, so again we're, we're
headquartered in Silver City.
This is where Fonte Foodab
is home bases as well, um, we
started out as the Southwest New
Mexico food hub, really focusing
on the 4
counties, uh, Catherine Hidalgo,
Luna, and Grand County, but um,
yeah, we've, we've expanded
since then and what our
program does, we're it's really
focused on providing food access
for remote communities, as well
as market access for producers
in these communities, similar to
how Mario has described the
program, so we, our, our program
basically has two tracks uh when
it comes to uh distribution and
marketing of food on the one
hand side, we offer marketing
and sales services where we
purchase food from producers and
then sell it into various
programs which have
Vienna grown family of programs
is
the largest part of, but we also
do some retail sales on top of
that. We are an am grown
approved supplier, um, so you
know that's, that's an important
part of our program. The other
thing that we do is, uh, we also
offer uh distribution services,
for example, we've a couple of
years ago we started maintaining
a route between El Paso, Las
Cruces, Silva City, in
Albuquerque to promote um
local food being sold between
the northern and southern parts
of the State. We're doing this
in collaboration with other
partners such as Desert Spoon,
Food Hub, La Montanita Co op
Distribution Center, a delicious
New Mexico.
um, and other food hubs as well.
So, um, yeah, those are sort of
the 22 things that we offer and
really our focus in this is
right, we're trying to get a
small, small-scale producers in
remote communities access to
these markets, um, offer stable
supply chains that they can rely
on and grow with, and as well as
getting that food into these
communities.
Um, and that therefore our
impact, um, yeah, it's
as I mentioned
um
food safety is um also, you
know, a huge part of this which
the approved supplier program is
really fundamental to where a
gap certified uh food hub with
the help of New Mexico Farmers
Marketing Association, coaching
us, and now we can coach our
producers, um, but we're also
very, you know, on the
operational side we
um represent a financial buffer
for producers when they sell
into
uh institutional markets. We
promptly pay our producers and
then we handle all the customer
invoicing and we invest in the
food system in New Mexico
through infrastructure
investments and various
partnerships as well as advocacy
efforts.
Um, here's a quick overview, um,
and sorry this presentation
probably doesn't show it very
well, but um
yeah.
as you, as you can see from the
markets that we have on the very
right, the bar shows our total
revenue over the last 3 years,
um, and you can see that.
um the NM Grown programs, which
are here um
the Department of Health, um,
the schools and the, the senior
centers specifically make up the
vast majority of our sales so we
are able to facilitate.
um
and overall over the last three
years through these programs,
we've been able to uh facilitate
sales of over $1 million of
which about 75 76% of those
sales is money that goes
directly to the producers. Over
the last 3 years, we have been
able to pay out $850,000 to our
producers just with the Nim
grown programs.
what does it look like on a day
to day basis, so we operate two
vans, uh, we are renting a box
truck right now. These are all
refrigerated. Um, we drive about
1800 miles a week currently, um,
part of this is because we, um,
operate this distribution route
between Las Cruces and
Albuquerque as well. And on that
route itself, um, when we offer
these distribution services,
these are not
those numbers are not included
in the sales I showed before,
but we are able to
distribute food, um, of about
$50,000 of gross sales a month
for New Mexico producers, um, on
that route, um, we work with 36
producers, about 117 buyers. We
offer 97 varieties of vegetables
and uh herbs that are grown in
New Mexico. 25 varieties of
fruits and nuts. We offer beef,
lamb, pork, eggs, honey, garlic
powder, and then any kind of
chili that you can imagine, um,
and this is just
the, you know, the variety of
what, yeah, New Mexico has to
offer on, and these are all
small to mid mid-sized
producers um that we're able to
work with, um, I wanna point out
real quick, uh, the healthy food
financing Fund, what it has been
able to do for us. We were able
to recently extend our walk-in
cooler, um, capacity by uh,
about, you know, doubling the
size, uh, it also has allowed us
to purchase pallets deer,
electric, uh, jacks
and um helping us replace a
vehicle
and uh here's a emergency food
delivery. We're able to do in
collaboration with Veronica and
the Governor's office last year,
and Riodoso Mescalero, where we
are able to bring out about
12,000 pounds of food with these
food boxes after the fires
there.
Um, briefly, um, a little bit
about cost of our operations,
um, I thought this might
interest you, so on the left
side you can see um what our
program costs are by category.
You see, you know, most of the
money goes into personnel,
equipment, which includes being
able to run the trucks, so a lot
of that is fuel as well, and the
cost of leasing or renting
vehicles and maintaining them as
well as our facilities and then
about 18% of that is
administrative fees.
and then on the other side you
can see our um these are roughly
our revenue sources per year for
this program and on the left
side, so the services and net
sales, that's program income, so
that's basically how we're able
to fund ourselves, which we're
getting to closer and closer to
the 50% mark. Our goal is to hit
90% by 2030 on the right side,
contracts and grants. These are
uh federal contracts, state
contracts, as well as grants
that were able to support our
operation
with.
Um, and that concludes my
presentation. Thank you very
much. I open for questions.
Great, thank you all very much
for your presentation. Um, we're
gonna go to the committee for
questions, uh, I have 4 people
on the list. Actually, before we
go to questions, um, I'd like to
do a couple introductions, uh,
Senator Thornton.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. um,
Senator Ant Thornton from the
East Mountains of Albuquerque,
um, Bernalillo Sandoval,
Torrance County, and Santa Fe
County. Sorry, I apologize for
being late. I was down at the
border this morning, um, with
the Customs and Border Patrol
and I'm so glad to be now in an
air conditioned building. So
thank you very much for allowing
me.
Thank you, Senator and Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you all, um, Joseph
Cervantes, I represent Senate
District 31, which is if you
look out that window at center
31 goes all the way down to El
Paso and the border with Mexico.
Thank you, Senator, and, um, uh,
just last, uh, before we go to
questions, last call on food,
uh, the lunch was delicious, uh,
so if you, uh, haven't had any
or would like a little more,
this is your last chance.
Uh, first up we have Senator
Steinborg.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Hey
everybody, good afternoon.
Thanks for being here today
So
I kind of asked the same
question every time I have folks
like you in front of me, I
represent my district goes, I'm
here in Las Cruces and I go all
the way up past Hatch
So I represent
an agricultural community in
part, but also a community that
has an incredible opportunity
for servicing these programs for
doing value-added
products, we're doing farmers'
markets, but I think a lot of
these ideas, I always wonder how
much we're connecting the dots
with districts like mine with
constituents like mine, so I
always ask that question
what are we doing in a community
like Hatch, I'll ask, can we
connect with those folks and I
think the intention's always
there. I'm not
sure how it, how much it
happens. So I guess one question
is
and obviously we've put a lot
more money into these programs
and we've really expanded their
reach and I'm sure with that
served a lot more people, but um
how are we communicating to
sorry, I know this is, this is
oversimplification because you
have a lot of different programs
here and
um
I guess I'm just kinda curious
how many
agricultural producers, farmers
were are participating in your
program for like
my area
in Donana County
You have some basic numbers on
that, particularly the northern
part of our county
because I don't know that La
Samia La Samia work in northern
Donana County or is it just
on a southern part of the county
It's mostly the south part of
the county but actually next
Thursday we're gonna start uh
delivering boxes to um
torture consequences, uh, weak
boxes, so.
but yeah, it's mostly uh the
south and we work with around 25
producers.
anyone else wanna take a stab
with that?
Yeah, um, I don't have the
number off the top of my head. I
know that we have a couple of
producers out in the hatch area.
that we're working with, sorry,
but I'm happy to follow up um on
specifically who.
Hi there. Um, thank you, Senator
for the question. Um, as my
colleague Liz mentioned, we do
have the local foods data portal
and so as soon as I'm not
sitting here, I can pull up my
laptop and tell you directly
that number, how many, how many
producers are serving your
community, uh, but we have seen
Southern New Mexico increase
participation in the New Mexico
grown program recently and that
has everything to do with the
partnerships of folks sitting
here at the table, the ability
to move product from farm to
market, um, as well as provide
kind of culturally aligned
bilingual, um, food
safety training and market
readiness training in
partnership with La Samia Food
Center, um, again I can give you
some large scale stats, but we
have 277 producers in the
program in 31 counties. Uh, we
do see Dona Ana County as well
as some of the neighboring
region that Johannes shared, um,
again as one of our priority
regions growing, and I would be
happy to give you that actual
number in just a few minutes. So
thank you, and we're really
excited that we can actually do
that for each and every one of
you, tell you what the impact it
is at home, um, and how many
producers and exactly who
those producers are that we're
working with.
Thank you.
Well, yeah, and I would love
some more information on just
how I can connect producers and
it's a little overwhelming
because there's so many of you.
It's like where, where's, where
do we, where's the direction we
point them in?
and it's, it shouldn't be that
overwhelming, but sometimes, you
know, we're given a lot of
information so um
and then another question is, do
any of you work to set up
farmers' markets?
like such an incredible
opportunity for farmers, but
also to grow
tourism actually into our
communities. Do any of you work
to do that that would want a
partner? and I'm sorry to be so
provincial, you know, like my
district, I generally don't go
that direction with these
questions, but I represent such
a great district. How can I not?
um
can any of you work with me on
doing that? I've been wanting to
do that for years.
in the Hatch Valley. Senator,
yes, absolutely. The New Mexico
Farmers Marketing Association,
that's where our roots come
from, is helping to establish
farmers' markets as direct to
consumer outlets, um, and so we
absolutely can support that part
of our consideration is always
how far do people have to
travel, right? If there's one
market that's quite robust, how
do we sort of stack those
functions for our, our rural
community members, uh, but we'd
be happy to talk to you about
what you're thinking, the
feasibility of it, and really
address, you know, how we can
expand that. I'll also offer um
the approved supplier program.
Me personally, I
' m happy to meet with you any
time to talk about outreach
strategies. We have tools for
outreach, um, each and every one
of you, we rely on you as
leaders in community and in the
state to help us get the word
out, and I would love to chat
with you more about that.
So absolutely love to chat with
you too. And finally for the
first time we've been able to
hire staff who work for us, work
for us here in the districts
which we haven't had until
recently, so I just literally in
the last few months have a staff
person.
who now can help connect some of
those dots, which is pretty
amazing and it's really helpful.
So anyway, if we could connect
offline and I think Hatch is a
great opportunity obviously for
us absolutely and I, I do just
want to mention we have a
community cultivator program in
which we work with farmers in
their offseason, um, to actually
kind of promote them and bolster
them as outreach partners and so
perhaps there's an opportunity
to connect our Southern
community cultivator as well,
directly and and partner in, you
know, the Chile Association and
others who are obviously good
conduits to those networks, so
so you'll reach out to me
afterwards you a little email
with some stats and whatnot.
Thank you all for your time.
Appreciate what you do. Thanks.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Our next up for questions is
chair Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um
thank you all for doing this
collaboration. I think that as
you collaborate the efforts have
just gotten stronger
and it's great to see that over
the years we are doing this all
over the state and really
distributing and providing an
economic boost in the food, uh,
arena while addressing hunger.
um, I'd like to ask, uh, I
appreciate also, Mr. Chair, the
very specific requests and what
they're for because it's not too
early to start thinking about
this.
but, um, Mr. Chair, in the
presentation from the frontier
and I think that's you,
Johannes. Uh, why is half of the
state
not
represented
Yeah, um,
I guess so, OK, let's try that
again. I think I can click back
maybe.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, members of
the committee, yeah, so this,
this map here, uh you see up on
the screen, this is currently
where we um are able to reach um
based on, uh, our staffing um we
have two full-time drivers, uh,
a program manager, and a
warehouse manager and there is a
limit to how much um we can just
be on the road and able to
spread out, so, um, there's
currently
very um few
programs that are able to really
connect out to the Southeast,
um, there's delicious New Mexico
that who can sometimes go out.
We have another partner up in
the north-eastern part of the
State, Oglala Commons, as well
as agriculturecultura Network,
who is able to serve some of
these, but this is just where
our program specifically is able
to connect to. So it's really a
collaboration of many of us food
hubs in different
operations that are trying to
cover this, but we are looking
to
really um see that we can fill
the gaps, especially our program
is um yeah, as, as
the frontier food hub right, we,
we, we look at, at these, um
areas between population centers
that have a hard time being
served, but it is quite a bit of
an investment in terms of
operations being able to pay,
pay the people to drive these
distances, often to serve areas
that at first are not um gonna
be profitable and not, not that
any of our programs are
profitable in that sense at this
point.
I said, we're striving for some
type of self-sustainability by
2030
with this program hopefully
being able to move the masses,
but yeah, we, we, we need
consistent support in um
creating the infrastructure,
creating the points where
different operations and
different locations that are
locally um tied in to their
producers, their markets, um,
their institutions that know
what is needed and then we need
to have drop points, we need to
coordination, and we need to
have funding to run these
routes, so, uh, produce
r s can start relying on the
system being something that they
can specifically grow for,
right? Like this is, this is one
of the major accomplishments we
have seen over the last 3 years
that um in in our program we now
have have growers that are
coming to us and they're like,
hey, we see that you've been
doing this for a few years. Like
it seems like this is a reliable
program. What, what do you guys
want, right? Instead of us
trying to go down and hunt down
folks who might be able to grow
for us like these, these
programs are getting a
lot more traction. So yeah,
it's, it's, it's a matter of
investment we're definitely
trying go go and trying to reach
collectively the entire state,
whether that's frontifo up or
a collaboration of many other
food hubs, which is much more
likely.
Thank you.
So I'm going to um
ask that you all discuss this a
little further.
when a few years back there were
members of the Senate who said
we don't have any food
distribution in our county.
and we had to prove to them that
we did.
and we spent a lot of time
talking about whether it was
food banks or whether it was
churches or whatever it was that
was distributing. Now it would
seem to me that on the east side
of the state, there would be a
lot of producers
and so I would really ask that
you
think about this and talk
to your counterparts about how
that could be built out.
Thank you. Uh, next we'll go to
Representative Montoya, and I'll
turn it back to the vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman
Um
I have a
a series of questions here and
it's kind of jump all over the
place. I think I'll start with,
um, Ms. Pizano.
um, the approved supplier
program.
um, this is a function of the
farmers' marketing association.
What is the Farmers' Marketing
Association is that a
is that a nonprofit is what
exactly is that? Yes, we are a
501c3 and we work to support the
approved supplier program on
contracts with the NMDA, so we
partner closely with the
Department of Agriculture to
ensure that we're training to
the proper food safety standards
and helping equip people for
market entry, um, earlier, uh,
deputy secretary did mention,
um, a loss of funding to support
uh the on the federal food
safety rule coming under the
produce safety rule. Uh, we
collaborate with them, for
example,
to be able to provide capacities
to support and outreach to
producers, um, so we work very
closely, but we are a 511C3 that
does this as a as a sort of
public investment
So, uh, thank you, um, Mr.
Chairman. Um, so
this, uh, approved supplier
program.
how do people
and by the way, I'm assuming
this is a statewide program.
OK, but how does someone
and this is probably gonna be a
question I'm gonna have for all
of you is how does someone end
up
being
how, how does a farmer
end up
working with you? Is there a bid
process? do they have to come in
and say we can provide this at
this price or are these no-bid
contracts? What, how is this
happening? Yeah, thank you for
the question, Representative. I
always like to get into the
nitty gritty. So I'm gonna try
to not go too deep on y'all, um,
but so the approved supplier
program is a farmer capacity and
market readiness programs. So we
don't actually manage the direct
purchasing. What we do is we,
uh, provide on farm food safety
and marketing readiness training
and then
ultimately a desk audit, each
and every year of all the farms
participating in our program to
ensure those standards are being
met. Um, we also help to connect
them with resources such as
grants from some of our partners
here, um, and federal resources
as well and so if a farmer is
looking to get involved,
honestly, our, our first step is
a referral. We love to come to
people through relationship
first, as was being articulated,
it's real hard to just go out
there and sell an opportunity no
one's interested in. Um, so if
someone refers them an
individual to us, a producer,
we'll meet with them,
understand what their business
goals are, um, and assess if the
approved supplier program is
right for them. In other words,
are they producing at a scale
that would match a wholesale
market, um, although we like to
say that no producer is too
small because collaboration is
how we serve most of our
markets, the aggregation of
products such as our food hub
partners here, taking small
amounts of product from multiple
farmers, um, and utilize the
improved supplier program to
standardize those products and
their food safety and quality
management, uh, so they'll work
with us and in the first year we
like to get out on the farm with
a producer, check out what
they're doing, um, and really
then build an individualized
plan for them to be able to
address any food safety risks
that may be present, um, and
talk to them about some of their
marketing goals. We also serve
as the backbone for the New
Mexico grown Interagency group
that does look at procurement
and so one of the really, really
important pieces of this system
is that each of the
administering agencies require
the same things of the
producers. So your question
about barrier to entry for
procurement. No, they're not
bidding in for contract, but
by being an approved supplier,
our buyers can know that the
product is safe and also that
they meet the other standards of
the program. And so we work
really hard to ensure um that if
you're a producer and you're
like, yep, I'm involved. I want
to get involved, that you can
sell to multiple outlets in your
very own community with the same
set of um standards so once
people are working with us, we
then work with them
continuously. We run by our
grower meetings in person and
community. We collaborate with
partners and food hubs to bring
that, uh, work so that people
can have food demonstrations, we
can recruit new farmers, new
buyers, change the attitude of
our buyers as well, um, and get
them wanting to do the scratch
cooking that Liz mentioned. And
then we provide ongoing support
our, our top goal is to never
lose the producer no matter what
happens. And so we work really
hard each and every year,
probably a little too hard, uh,
uh, calling, texting, reminding,
bumping into people at the
farmers' market and helping
them, um, to stay on the list.
If you go to the our website,
it's New Mexicogrown.org. You
can see the current list of all
of our producers
their counties, the products
they produce, uh, we also manage
that. So, uh, it's really a
comprehensive program and it is
an entry point, but we do not
oversee the procurement
contracts directly, uh, those
are administered the, the
funding is administered as
grants through the state agency
partners and then we help to
match those. Many of those
purchases are considered
informal, so, uh, kind of farm
gate to back door, um, and
sometimes there is a food hub
involved such as Johannes is
describing, um, but yeah, it's,
it's a really comprehensive
program
so there's lots of entry points
and currently, uh, we are
looking to expand some of our
product offerings to include
more value added products as we
look at, you know, how do we
address food supply and
year-round food supply.
And I'll stop there because I
could go on forever
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman.
So, um, the other partners that
are sitting at the table, um,
anyone who wants to
be on to work with any one of
these, uh, I would assume
I would assume farm the
farmFresh program.
uh, New Mexico grown.
and frontier Food Hub are all
nonprofit organizations.
so.
so for for someone for a farmer
to make an agreement with them?
Do they have to be on this, uh,
approved supplier program.
Another excellent question, um,
so we recognize the food hubs as
all being, you know, autonomous
businesses, and so we work with
the food hubs to ensure that
there are standard practices.
Some of our food hubs actually
adopt the approved supplier
program as an entry point, and
others have created their own
standards that align directly to
our minimum standards and
expected outcomes, so the short
answer is no. If you, um, not
every food hub will require
that. Now, if you want to sell
directly to any of the buyers,
you will be required to be on
the approved supplier list. It's
free. We
try to make it easy. We come to
folks, we can offer translation
when needed, um, but it is not,
you know, a consistent
requirement across every food
hub. I also do want to clarify
New Mexico grown is the program
name and it is an interagency
coalition. It's not a separate
nonprofit, so the NMFMA as a
nonprofit provides backbone
services in a public-private
partnership with the
administering agencies.
and perhaps Johannes or Mario,
you know, if you have more
questions about the vendor
requirements, um, they could
address those. I do want to just
mention one thing which is we
also um keep on contract and
stuff, food safety experts that
are keeping track of federal
requirements and for so for
example there's changes coming
to the good agricultural
practices standard, um, that
will be providing technical
assistance to our food hub
partners to be able to meet, um,
and that's rolling out as we
speak so we help, we help to
support NMDA's mission in that
as well.
So thank you, um, Mr. Chairman.
So, um,
uh, Ms. Pizano, uh, um, and
maybe I should redirect this
question, um, uh, Liz.
how do you pronounce your last
name? Ana Anakini, OK, I would
have gotten it wrong. Um, you
stated earlier, uh, that
this allows uh
producers to be able to set
their price.
and not have to worry about.
things like minimum wage and
other things like that. I in
your presentation. So my, my
concern, um, and maybe, and, and
back to the, the question I just
asked Ms. Pizano is
these appear that at least some
of them
there's no real procurement code
that they're going to have to go
through, potentially the folks
can work directly.
with a nonprofit, and yet the
state is funding this
and we don't have
doesn't sound like we have
consistent pricing
We may have some consistent
standards, but I, I go to my
our local uh farmers' market
if not every Saturday, every
other Saturday.
and the price of tomatoes at 5
different
uh stands is gonna be a
different price.
Uh, my wife recently at home, I
think, uh, grew to $500
tomatoes.
so
my concern is this
there doesn't seem to be
oversight on
price controls and if this is
things that we're asking
taxpayers to pay for.
how do we end up, uh, I mean, I,
I've heard criticisms in the
past of
uh
uh the military paying $500 for
a toilet seat.
How, how do we, how are we
making sure that that's not
happening.
I'm gonna also, um, turn this
back to Lena after I give my
response, um, but although
farmers set their prices, those
prices aren't, the schools are
still making the decision about
what price they want to
purchase. So if someone's
selling a $500 tomato, it's
unlikely that a school's going
to be, uh, going ahead and
purchasing that $500 tomato, um,
better be delicious. Um
but, um, yeah, so farmers are
allowed to set their prices
within this program, um, to, to
meet their needs, but schools
still have a, uh
schools still at their
discretion
select what what producer they
want to work with and what they
want to purchase, but Elena is
much more of a procurement
expert than I am, so I'm gonna
let her, um, follow up on that
if she'd like to clarify
anything.
Sure, thanks. Um, yeah, I think
I, you raise a really, a really
good point, and that is actually
why we created the local food
data portal to ensure complete
transparency. So every invoice
that is expended out using state
dollars is tracked in the data
portal. So what we can do is we
can go in and see average
pricing by product by region,
right? because depending where
you are, that tomato costs more
or less, um, and so that is one
of the measures that we've put
in place. We also work with our
administering agency buyers to
ensure that they are meeting
procurement code and give them
support around informal
procurement, um, and how to
split procurement and lots of
nitty gritty details, but we, we
are, um, one of our core
priorities is is ensuring equal
market access for producers.
That's why we have a public
facing list. We also have an
allowable products list, so
producers can understand where
they fit in. So, um, your
question's like a million dollar
question because not all
tomatoes are created equal
either, right? And so then we
work with farmers um to
understand product
specifications
and their value in the market
space so that they can
differentiate, um, and so those
are a few of the services we
provide, including buyer side
services, uh, but institutional
procurement has many checks and
balances and, and in the case of
the schools, um, as you're, as
you're aware, that does go down
to the local level and so our
goal is always um asking how we
can improve those procurement
decisions to ensure that, you
know, we are looking to
prioritize farmers that are
very, very close to the buyers.
That tends to uh do what
economies do, which is keep
prices lower, which is, um,
another kind of explanation for
this map, um, if you will,
because the further out that we
go, the more that there's
administrative costs and
distribution costs, uh, that get
associated so direct to
institution is is the model we
promote most, uh, but is an
excellent question and again
we'd be happy to share data from
the local food data portal. Um,
we're able to isolate what the
top products are in some of the
range of pricing for those as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, and
by the way, if my wife is
listening in, they were worth
every bit of the $1000 we paid
for the.
um
I, I am
wondering though
uh, we, most of our communities
have some form of organic
food available
Are we within how how do we know
that we're
in the range, uh, I, I mean,
still we're talking about in the
last several committees I've
been in are talking about
potential shortfalls of federal
funds
Um, that, that would, in my
mind, uh make it to where we
wanna make sure that that we're
not overpaying
and so I'm, I'm just concerned
and I'm for my farmer friends,
this is me being a, a legislator
to all of my other constituents
who are paying the bills, just
making sure that we're, that
we're first off
paying a fair price
not overpaying
and then also um
um
Ms. Pizano, the other, the other
question is how are we ensuring
that since we're dealing with
nonprofit organizations that are
overseeing much of the program.
How do we know that we're not
choosing this friend over that
friend. That's the whole reason
for the procurement code in the
first place.
Another excellent question,
Representative. Um, so, uh, just
to be clear, nonprofit partners
do not oversee any of the grant
administration that all goes
through the administering
agencies and through the
required fiscal systems in the
case of the public education
department, um, that goes
through a request for
reimbursement process that does
fall within, um, all of the
standard procurement regulations
and every invoice is checked and
overseen by a staffer there,
and, and that is true with all
the other administering
agencies. So we don't deal with
that side of the equation. It's
my, my answer to
that. Um, you mentioned
certified organic and federal
federal cuts, um, that's the
value of the approved supplier
program is that we're able to
offer this program for free,
which creates a level playing
field for producers coming in,
um, so that they don't have to
pursue other costly
certifications if it doesn't fit
for the scale of their business,
and that allows our products uh
to remain competitive because as
soon as you certify that $500
tomato, now it's an $800 tomato,
um, and the question is, does
that matter to the end buyer or
to the end consumer, um, and
and not always is the case.
Again, I think the relational
component of our local food
system here in New Mexico is
what we price, uh, first and
then we also look to support
farmers who see their role as
land stewards. So, um, you're
asking an excellent question and
what I can articulate is that,
you know, as a nonprofit
partner, we provide the capacity
supports for farmers. Uh, we do
not address directly the buyer
trends, but we are there to be
able to provide, if you will
kind of translation on some of
the nuances that you're speaking
to of procurement that most
people
don't want to engage around,
right? Um, or you'll just, you,
you can see them, you're in the
headlights when you start
mentioning, um, things like
procurement thresholds and so
our goal as the NMFMA in
partnership with the
administering agencies in the
entire New Mexico grown
Coalition is to humanize this
process as much as possible
while uplifting, um, and
remaining, you know, in
alignment with procurement
standards, um, but the, the, the
other thing I'll say is that
when we're working with local
farmers, as you all are aware,
our farming communities are
tight, and if one guy is sell
ing carrots for $4.01 guy is
selling carrots for $2 and the
$4 carrots are subpar. They're
also, um, that word travels, not
only among farmers but among
buyers and so, uh, there's the
community that's built here also
is a check and balance system,
but we are proud that we're able
to provide, uh, more equitable
pricing for products, then you
might get in a retail
environment or to a Broadline
distributor where the
distributors taking the majority
of the profits and so as
Johannes cited here, um, you
know, all of those profits are
staying
in New Mexico and we look
forward to the stability of this
market to be able to build out,
distributor relationships so
that we can um get more stable
pricing around the state and
increased distribution.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman, and
Ms. Francini, I wasn't talking
about the, the other end up with
the grants. I was talking about
the other way from the
nonprofit, uh, hubs down to
how, how are we guaranteeing
we're not just
picking a friend
who has a farm
over
someone else and, and you did
articulate very well what I
believe in as a free market. I,
I really appreciated that. I,
I'm not sure though that I hear
too much of that anymore, but I,
I appreciate that. I believe in
that. I'm
I'm just concerned
that we, uh, end up, uh
pricing ourselves out of even
being involved in this.
and uh um
and
and the sec, I guess the second
part is you also, you, you went
back to the approved supplier
program, but I believe you were
saying earlier
that not everyone has to be on
the improve supplier program
that that the hubs can
work directly with people. So
that's what I mean. I don't see
whereas, whereas we deal with
oversight, I, I don't see a lot
of oversight.
in this program. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
so we started this panel about a
half hour late we're, we're
keeping pace. We're still on
pace, but we do have 3 people
left, uh, on the list.
Uh, next step is Representative
Kates.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
very much for your presentation,
um, and, and full transparency
and I don't want to miss an
opportunity to brag about my
district. um, my district is
full of these farms that are 10
acres and smaller, um, the
village of Corrales has less
than 9000 individuals in it and
um literally hundreds of
historical generational farms,
uh, as well
as the unincorporated on uh area
of Alameda which is on the east
side of the river and so, uh,
these programs have been
essential in making sure that
they stay uh competitive in in
their way of life, and I very
much appreciate it of course I'm
saying this to brag about my
district, but I also wanna make
sure that um the listeners out
there, if they have questions
about these programs, how they
work and um and their benefit I
will be glad
to they can reach out to me and
connect them with individuals
who know more about them than
even I do, um, and so I wanted
to let you know that. So the
purpose of not setting prices
for farmers is that farmers are
allowed to be able to set their
own prices, um, based on, uh,
their product and that we can't
dictate that because that would
be a type of price fixing
because this is um a farmer's
market.
with direct to the public is
that a fair and accurate
statement of why we don't set
prices for farmers.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Representative, thank you. um,
yeah, so, uh, yeah, we, we
cannot set prices. That would be
price fixing, um, and to, um,
the point of um
the, the overall price of their
systems, so I, I thought maybe
I'd just share real quickly what
the process looks like for us to
get from actual procurement or
for from from um the product on
the farm to the institution.
What our program does.
is we
work very closely with our
producers. We're in close
relationship with them. We are
also 501c3 non-profit
organization and there are a few
types of organizations that are
under more scrutiny when it
comes to auditing requirements,
then 51c3 organizations. So you
know we have financial policies,
um.
that are, yeah, uh, make they're
being annually audited, our
books being annually audited. We
registered.
when we
when we put together our list
and we do this weekly, every
week we send out a list to the
to the buyers interest
institutions uh of our products
we list, we, we, we talked to
our producers, see what's
available in the coming week. We
put together a list, we send out
this list. We don't set the
prices on this list. The farmer
sets the price. We put it out
there, and then it's, it's an
open playing field of
selecting uh what
which farm, um, uh, a buyer
wants to buy from, right? And
that is also a relationship
piece that we help facilitate,
but we do not control it. We
don't decide who gets what. It
stays with you. Thank you and
thank you so much. I, I, I think
that what you had to say and I
understand it was very
important. It just for for time
elements I'm looking for um
a, a quicker uh thing but I do
think we have a lot to unpack
here and so I appreciate your
answer, um, I, I know that, uh,
many of my small farms, uh, they
are major producers for uh like
our Albuquerque public school
system, one of our farmers in
Corrali supplies all the lettuce
and just for my committee to
know a head of lettuce takes 7.5
gallons of water to grow one
head, and because they are
small farmers, they have to use
very innovative approaches on
being able to to produce and uh
silver leaf is able to grow the
most delicious lettuce you know
for the 1.5 gallons of water per
head of lettuce. So this serves
our committee's purpose as well
as water conservation, um, so
the price, uh, it is not price
fixing, but the prices for our
public institutions such as WIC
and our public school systems
and then also individuals I know
I was just at my local farmers'
market, and the, the farmers
were thrilled that our Rio Metro
bus came down into Corrales to
bring individuals with
disabilities that could use
their food benefits to be able
to purchase fresh food.
so those are set prices the
government's saying we'll spend
this amount of money for our
school lunches this amount of
money for WIC. This is, so those
are what is the controlling the
prices and I'm so sorry I'm
gonna ask you to answer yes or
no. Thanks.
Yes
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much.
I'm just, uh, New Mexico health
food, uh, financing fund. How do
I tell my farmers, where do you
where do I find you? What under
what agency are you listed
under?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative Kates, um, so
this the Healthy Food financing
Fund is part of the New Mexico
Economic Development
Department's Food, hunger and Ag
program.
So we are at um
uh I can provide the website
it's
blanking out of my head,
honestly right now. You said New
Mexico food and I, so thank you
very much, uh, chairs and, and
thank you presenters one last, I
very much appreciated how you're
showing that with so little
support and really the hard work
is always from our nonprofit
community, we are able to, we
are not, we are not, uh,
subsidizing we are supporting
our farming, our historical
farming community so that they
have that dignity of being able
to support their
families and uh the her stero
and their historical um
uh, employment, um, one of the
things that you have not caught,
uh, touched on, and I'd like you
to touch on it briefly is where
are your hubs that have cold and
uh storage and commercial
kitchens because that is the
advantage of this, correct? Is
that you're showing farmers how
the food safety so that they can
safely um sell directly to the
public and how to be able to
support themselves in their 1.5
acre or 10 acre farm and so
having a Department of Health
certified access of those
commercial kitchens and so that
they can serve all year round,
not
just when the crops come in, um,
it's so essential. I know that
you are doing that work, but we
haven't been able to touch base
on this for this presentation if
somebody could like like tell us
a little bit about that. Thank
you.
and thank you chairs
Mr. Chair, Representative Cates,
uh, yeah, that's uh
that sounds like an easy
question
but, um, so they're currently
and I'm, I hope I'm not gonna
miss anybody, but in addition to
us and we're located in Silver
City and La Semia who's located
in Las Cruces, um, desert spoon
also has a location in Las
Cruces as well as in El Paso,
agriculturera Network is
in uh the South Valley of
Albuquerque here
um, and then we have uh San Juan
College, Harvest Food Hub, um,
up at the college, um, and we
have Ogallala Commons in uh with
a location in Ratton, New
Mexico, and New Mexico harvest
also in Albuquerque with a cold
storage facility. Am I
forgetting anybody?
La Montanita Co op Distribution
Service, uh, sorry, co op
distribution center, which is a
big hub for all of the food
moving to the state also in
Albuquerque here.
who else
Mogro Santa Fe, I'm actually not
sure where Moku no, they also uh
Albuquerque, yes, yeah, so
there's, there's a lot of
concentration here in
Albuquerque, right? And then
they're, in addition to that,
there's other organizations as
uh chair Sefanix had mentioned
writers. We have our partners in
the food uh emergency world with
warehouses and distribution
capacity our different
communities have different
locations. um in Grant Coun
ty in Silver City, we have
another partner who's been
hosting us for a long time with
with their cold storage facility
so
we've been collectively trying
to work on a system to let
farmers across the State know
where to go, but yeah.
still working that out. Thank
you so much and thank you,
chair. So just to bring it home,
these are a group of
organizations, um, using some
state funding and some obviously
it's it's uh a a a
a free market, um, uh, being
able to allow farmers to find
economic revenue year-round,
whether it is with um WIC and
state agencies or or or food
banks, cold storage that it's
cleaning and dry so that you can
store um access to Department of
Health based kitchens so that
they can be able to uh do, uh,
and, and they, and they do it
with pennies and sweat, and
thank you very much. Thank you,
cheers.
Thank you, Representative Kates.
Uh, so we're now 45 minutes
behind schedule.
We still have two questioners.
Uh, next up, representing Rory
Ball Caballero.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for all of you, um, for
presenting. I
had the opportunity to hear some
of the presentations pre-COVID
and post-COVID. I think it's
important to mention that
because some of our strategies
and the things that we've had to
put in place have been affected
by the way we've been doing
business pre and post, so thank
you, um, I'm concerned with
access, opportunity,
sustainability, and return on
investment.
Uh, Mr. Chair, with those, um,
concerns in mind, I have just a
coup I narrowed down, by the
way, process of elimination. my
questions, so I narrowed them
down and whomever, whoever would
like to step up and answer these
questions appropriately. You
decide amongst yourselves.
so, um, I'm asking for for
feedback as well because I think
it's important for us as
legislators to know how what
direction we should be taking
with all things considered,
given the nature of this, uh,
committees, uh, attention so I
noticed that um many of your
programs have highlighted rural
and tribal communities.
for, for obvious reasons and so
I'd like to know what guard
rails are in place.
to ensure these communities are
prioritized.
in funding
and not left behind as programs
scale
based on what we're facing at
the federal level and what we
will be facing where we have to
step up as a state. So whoever
feels that they're in the best
position to answer that. I
appreciate it again, I'm looking
for guidance.
Thank you for the question,
Representative. Um, and so, uh,
I'm gonna try to be as brief as
I can with my response to your
very complex question, um, we
work really hard to ensure that
I, I think, um, Liz said it, you
know, we're we're trying to lift
our Erin, lift all boats at the
same time we realized that there
um are foundational things that
are barriers that are in place
that make it harder for some
communities to access rape and
our our national food system,
um, is a good example of that.
What happened with efficiency is
how
we get to the place we are
today, where many of our rural
communities lack fresh food
access. So as a coalition we do
focus and prioritize on rural
and tribal communities, um, as
an organization, the NMFMA, we
work really hard to direct
resources to the smallest
producers that can't access
federal resources and is a
straightforward of a way, um,
those that don't own the land
that they're operating on that
aren't personally liable for
those things that the structures
that are put in place by USDA do
not always serve, uh, so we feel
like that is our imperative to
be able to create equitable
market access
for those producers who would
simply be systematically blocked
out, um, so y'all should be very
proud that you've invested in a
program that that offers that
pathway, um, the other pieces
when it comes to the awards that
are administered through the
agencies for our buyers,
therefore impacting food access
and community, um, some of the
high considerations for that are
our food access for fresh and
healthy foods and looking at
meal improvement opportunities
and so that does tend to fall in
our rural and tribal areas where
it's hard to get fresh food too,
um
so those grants are creating an
opportunity for them to build
new relationships in some
circumstances with farms, uh,
just right down the road and so
it's a way of looking at uh
greater food security and um you
did bring up the pandemic so I
must say during the pandemic we
saw the resilience of our local
food system when the national
food system could not serve us,
um, and many of our food hubs,
that's, that's the opportunity
they used for expansion into
these markets and so, um, the
last thing I'll say is we are
collaborating with our agency
partners on a tribal pilot this
year to address the lack of
program
access in tribal communities,
um, in a way that really does
uplift food sovereignty and
political sovereignty of our
tribal nations and so we look
forward to reporting out on
that. We're just getting started
with that, uh, program in
partnership with the Indian
Public Cultural Center, um, and
working to see, you know, what
value chains could look like
that really focus on those
communities, uh, the Frontier
Food Hub is another wonderful
example as Johanna shared, you
know, that is their focus, um,
and we just realized that if
we're gonna impact opportunity
for producers again that are
sort of disenfranchised by these
systems.
recreating the same centralized
supply chains is not the answer,
and that's why we focus very
heavily on direct institution
while finding that foothold uh
for our distribution partners
like food hubs and even larger
uh distributors this year. We've
got 3 new distributors coming
into the pike to serve the
markets that are able to be
achieved there so I'll try to
sum it up with we service kind
of our main corridor, um, and
support those producers, that's
our foundation, but then we
spend as much dedicated energy
and resource in in our more
rural pockets.
uh, to get boots out there on
the ground to provide contracts
for members of that community to
really actualize these programs
in a way that does have the
sustainability because it's
being sort of seeded into the
DNA and into the culture of
those spaces.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um
you mentioned health and I
forget a few other things that I
think are very important. So how
do we measure whether the
investments were making in
double up fooduck Wick food
boxes, school scratch kitchens,
all of the things that you have
described aptly in all of the
programs.
how do we ensure that they are
actually lowering healthcare
costs and reducing poverty
because that's been the
correlation of the discussions
between
what we invest in and what we're
facing in terms of food
insecurity and we heard earlier
again.
however, I mean it doesn't have
to be uh a long detailed, but
just
pardon the punt, but food for
thought and how you present it
in terms of
how do, how do we, how do we
address that amongst ourselves
and across agencies and
organizations.
I'll give a couple words and
then hand it over, um, we look
at do they come back? Do the
buyers come back to the
producers come back? Was it
worth the few $1000 to put that
extra relationship in and 90% of
the time they come back, the
numbers actually probably higher
than that. I could get you a
solid number, um, but for us
that is the mark of an
investment well spent.
Madam Chair Representative
Caballero, um, for the Wiccan
Senior Farmers Market nutrition
program. This year is our first
year that we're going to
implement a survey to be able to
get information on our
participants. How is it helping
them, um, how are the food boxes
helping them? How are the
individual benefits helping
them, so, um, we will be
implementing that
probably around September
October we'll probably have our
results starting next year.
You the last question, Mr.
Chair, is, should New Mexico
prioritize building physical
infrastructure such as coal
storage trucks, food hubs, or
expanding, um
uh food benefit programs such as
what I just mentioned, Double Up
or Wick boxes, where should we
prioritize this question came up
again pre-COVID and post-COVID.
So with that in mind, what, what
would you recommend to us?
Madam Chair.
Very briefly,
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
yes, uh, New Mexico should
absolutely prioritize investing
in infrastructure and um not
only um brick and mortar but
also um refrigerated transport,
you know, as we've noticed,
there's a large state we're
working with here. We've got
some very clear foundational
nodes of transport that we're
aware of and there's a lot of
opportunity to leverage
partnerships like what you see
here at this panel table. um,
this is why the, um, economic
development department is going
to be doing a feasibility
study this fiscal year, uh,
regarding market opportunities
and looking at the landscape of
our current, you know, what's
out there, what are
underutilized, um, facilities
potentially routes that exist
that might be, um, you know,
potential back hauling routes
and different partnerships to
pilot, um, strategic nodes of
food, uh, storage and, um, you
know, programming.
Did someone else wanna answer?
Just go ahead, just briefly,
yes, sure, uh, I mean, the short
answer is yes, especially, uh,
since like, like I mentioned
before, the regional food
Business Center, uh, grant was
recently canceled and that grant
was destinated to help with
equipment and supplies for
post-harvest activities for
farmers, so that's called
storage, packing supplies, uh,
etc.
Thank you and then just for
something you can continue to
provide us, um, as a sort of as
a follow up as we develop uh
budgets and finance and all of
that is which
of your recommendations in terms
of priorities will give us the
most resilient food system if
we're looking 5 years down the
road.
That is really important because
it's gonna take in climate
uh factors and all of the things
that you discussed with us
earlier and thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Is that it, Representative
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
our last questioner is
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for your presentation.
My first question, is there one
place where someone can go to
find all of your information.
New MexicoGirn.org
website and all of us are listed
there because we're all partners
in the New Mexico Growing
program.
OK, thank you for that. Uh, my
second question is in the New
Mexico financing fund.
um, can you get us a list of
where all that money has gone
and a map.
and how successful they are on
getting opened.
I would really like to see that
because I, I'm, I'm really
afraid that we're setting people
up to fail because if we keep
giving more money out to more
entities and not making sure the
ones that we've started with.
start to finish, uh, it's, it's
gonna be an issue across New
Mexico. My next question is, um,
the National Center for Frontier
Communities. I was looking at
your website and I see, I think
8
employees are they employees
other than the board members are
they employees?
Yes, we have a staff of 10
currently.
OK, thank you for that. And, and
it looks like they all reside in
New Mexico, is that correct?
Yes, 100% of our staff resides
in uh Silver City, New Mexico,
in fact.
OK, thank you for that. Also,
um,
can't, I've never seen any of
your trucks in my district. I'm
represent Katherine Secorro
Valencia, Sierra County, uh, Mr.
Chairman, and I was curious to
know, can retailers buy from the
frontier Food Hub.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, yes, so we, uh, do
work in Katherine County. Um, we
work with the senior centers
specifically, Presbyterian
medical services up there, um,
we're also up in reserve, uh,
once a month, um, with our uh
mobile farm stand with our
little van. We work with um
couple of ranchers out of uh Pie
Town, um, yeah, so we, we are
in, in, in your area and yes, uh
we also work with retail stores,
so, um, cooperatives and um yeah
restaurants as well so I
presented today on the work with
agencies, but we also have a
retail arm of our operation. Uh,
thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, observative, uh, and
Representative Dow briefly.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative Armstrong's
question made me ask a question.
You have 8 employees. Do you
charge any fees for any of your
services? Who do you charge and
how do you charge?
OK, so, um, rep, um, Mr. Chair,
Representative Dao, the National
Center for Frontier Communities
is our 501c3 organization, the
Frontieroohu is one program,
right? So the 10 employees are
for the National Center for
Frontier Communities, not all of
them work for the frontier Food
Hub. It's one of our programs.
um
we, I'm sorry, the second part
of your question was how do we,
who do we charge? Yeah, so we um
as we uh as I described the
process of we um
uh
take the availability of our
producers, we market that
program, we do charge a market
fee on that like any you know
business that promotes food and
and distributes food. We do the
on-farm pick up to the uh
delivery on site so there is a
certain return on that as well,
as I mentioned earlier of the
money that comes from any of
these programs, 76% of that
funding goes directly to the
producers, the 24%
is what we help um fund our
program with an addition to
various grants and contracts.
Federal funds, state funds, um,
and, uh, yeah, private
foundation grants.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I said I'd
be brief.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you very much to the
panel. Uh, we appreciate you,
uh, coming down to Las Cruces
and providing an informational
presentation.
uh, and I'm gonna hand it back
over to Char Stephanics.
Thank you very much. We're now
on to the 4th panel.
So if you would come forward,
uh, Sarita Nair is gonna be on a
video.
uh John Taylor Montoya, Max
Henkel, Debbie Hughes, and
Monica Torres.
and we'll go in that order as
well.
Just sit wherever you want
Just to read on
Yes, yes. OK, Secretary Saria
Nair, would you like to, uh,
start off this topic is water
and natural resources workforce
Development Part one, because
we'll have different topics at
different meetings, and this was
requested at our meeting in Las
Vegas that we start talking
about the um
dearth of professionals in
certain, um, arenas, so we have
archaeological review training,
which is interesting to add into
A. Ag and water technology
programs.
So Secretary
Great uh hello,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, can you hear me? Yes.
Great. And can you see this
slides?
Yes, they can, and everybody has
5 to 7 minutes on this panel so
that we have time for questions.
Great. I'm gonna go fast, um,
but I, I think that, um, so
thank you for the opportunity to
present on the agricultural
sector strategy update. Um, you
know, for many years, uh, the
Workforce Innovation and
Opportunity Act has required the
department to prepare sector
strategies in uh, you know, that
coordinate with our Weowa state
plan, um, but that's always been
an unfunded mandate, uh, the
last year we were able to secure
some private foundation funding
to actually make sector
strategies
a real thing, and that's why
we're able to um do some real
work on the agricultural uh
sector strategy that we're
excited to share with you today.
Uh, moving on to the next slide,
uh, are we a state plan for the,
for last year and the years to
come. I did identify sustainable
and value-added agriculture as a
uh priority sector. Those were
actually the, the exact phrase
that was in the old economic
development plan, so that's why
we, we use those specific words,
but one of the things that
really drew us to this sector,
um, was this chart that you see
on the right. It's a little bit
hard to read, but the lines in
blue are uh the educational
attainment level for New
Mexicans um under the uh over
the age of 25, and the lines in
red are the educational
attainment level required for to
enter sustainable and value
added agriculture occupations,
and so you can see it's a really
good fit in the sense that there
are a lot of jobs for people who
have the educational level that
most New Mexicans have, and we
don't always see that in our
priority sectors. So that was a
great thing um to learn about
this sector.
Um
the way we put together a sector
strategy is first we compile
data and then we bring together
employers from the sector really
centered their voices and
understanding what their
workforce needs are, and then we
turn around and work with the
education and training providers
to make sure there's a good fit
between the demands of the
industry and the uh
uh training programs available
and then um we try to create
these pathways and we train up
our career consultants to guide
people through these um these
career pathways. So on the data
front, um, this slide shows you
the average weekly wages by area
for the agricultural forestry,
fishing, and hunting sector.
and I, I won't read them out,
but you'll notice that they tend
to be a little higher in the
eastern part of the state where
the agricultural sector is a
little more um into the animal
production and um value added,
and you can see that in most
counties here, um, the average
wage is lower than in all
industries, the all industry
average.
Um, I will note though that we
have a real challenge in the
agricultural sector, because
when you see all the other data
that you're used to seeing me
present, like, employment levels
and that's always for total
non-farm employment. That's just
the way that the feds have
always collected the data. So
one of the things that we've
really heard from the industry
is we need to figure out how to
better understand what's
actually going on in the
agricultural labor market, and
so our economists are working
with some other states to try to
to figure out some of those
answers, but that's the reason
we only have this sort of one
slide of data.
So the key strategies that we
identified at the outset of the
sector strategy was um exploring
options for JTI or other trading
program expansion. I'm, I'm sure
all of you are familiar with the
job training incentive program
that EDD administers, and that
is available for manufacturing
or um programs uh or companies
that export um their goods and
so not all agricultural um
sector employees, uh, employers
are eligible for JTIP, so that
was a a thought that came up in
our
planning process for Weowa
Um, we also wanted to work
closely with the Department of
Agriculture to develop trading
initiatives and to collaborate
with um the Economic Development
department to connect the uh
economic development initiatives
in addition to
of course, JTIP, they have the,
the food hunger and agricultural
program.
Uh, and I think you might have
just heard from some of those
folks that couldn't quite see.
So we had our first scepter
strategy meeting in Las Cruces a
couple of weeks ago, and the
initial findings were, were very
interesting, um, but I, I pulled
out some of the highlights. Um,
one of them is that most of the
employers are hiring um
more than 5 employees, which is
a lot, especially considering
that these tend to be smaller
businesses. Again, we don't have
the good data, but um this means
that there's, uh, you know, this
indicates to us that that
there's a real demand for
employees um in this sector. Uh,
shouldn't be surprising to
anybody there. Uh, and there's a
real need for experienced
workers. So when we asked um
what the primary challenge for
hiring an agriculture was a lot
of people said lack of qualified
applicants
and lack of experience and um a
lack of match with the geography
and the the workforce.
So that to us tells us that
there is a need for more things
like apprenticeship, um, the
workforce innovation Opportunity
Act training programs, um, and
then things like incubators that
would help scale up agricultural
businesses, so that those were
some of the ideas that we heard
from our employers.
And then we also heard, um,
interestingly, about a real
demand for workers who are at
that intersection of STEM and
especially science and
agriculture. So whether it is on
the pesticide side of the world
or product production techniques
or um value adding techniques.
Uh, there is a real demand for
um professionals who are in,
have 1 ft in both of those
worlds.
And uh so some of the in-demand
occupant uh occupations that
folks identified here were um
you'll see them on the slide.
It's maintenance and repair of
all different sorts, um, meat
cutters, trades, which is, you
know, HVAC, carpentry,
electricians, all those things
to keep the facilities um up to
par or to expand facilities. A
lot of demand for water, uh,
equipment.
professionals, whether that be
irrigation or wastewater
management. And then, um,
interestingly, a, a real need
for more educators who can train
in these areas and other areas
related to agriculture or who
have that background in
agriculture to connect whatever
program they're doing to that
world, and then uh managers and
production coordinators, so, um,
people who have those, uh,
management skills, but also
again, specific to or with
experience in the agricultural
sector.
So our next steps, uh, we need
to continue to try to
tackle these data challenges,
uh, and, and then as our process
continues, the next thing we do
is we sort of take all this
information and talk to our
education and training providers
and see where there might be
gaps where we might wanna look
at funding for expanding
programs.
um, and, uh, exploring
apprenticeship options. Right
now, the Rural Water Association
has one apprenticeship that is
sort of tangentially related,
but other than that, we really
don't have agricultural sector
apprenticeships, and as you
know, you've all invested a lot
of great money in supporting
apprenticeship programs. So, um,
as the state apprenticeship
agency, we have access to all of
the apprenticeship curricula
from every state and so we're in
the process of kind of sorting
through that and understanding
where
there might be opportunities to
build some agricultural
apprentices that could really
help with that need that
employers have identified for
skilled, inexperienced workers.
And then, of course, we train
our career consultants so that
they can talk with the folks who
come into the office about all
of this. And then the last thing
I wanted to mention um was we
started the Office of New
Americans again with some
private funding that we received
last year and there's been a
real demand by employers um to
talk to our folks about a
specifically, um, the visas, the
enforcement activities that are
occurring and um for employers
to understand their rights. And
so, uh, we've been, our, our
team
has been in the field, um,
training folks who, um, operate
and own these farms, and it's
been really successful. I think
people just feel relieved to
understand, you know, where the,
where the lines are and what
they can do to support their
employees, and of course we
administer the HTA and migrant
seasonal Farm worker programs,
those are both, you know, these,
um, programs that allow uh
agricultural
uh businesses to import workers
on a limited basis, and so we
just, um, been handling a lot of
questions and concerns from
those communities. So, um,
really excited to have the
opposite new Americans online to
be able to focus on those
concerns from the agricultural
sector. Um, thank you again for
letting me appear remotely. I'm
sorry I couldn't be there with
you today, and I'll turn it over
to the next presenter. Thanks.
Thank you, Secretary. You'll be
around for questions.
Yes, ma'am. Thank you. OK, so do
we have, um, John Taylor here?
OK.
are you related
to somebody in Mesa
OK.
please go ahead
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much
for, uh, providing us the
opportunity to speak about
uh our archaeological field
training program
uh
I'm here to discuss DCA's role
in the archaeological field
training program, um, this was
first introduced during the last
legislative session as HB 315,
uh, sponsored by Representative
Dao and other sponsors uh from
the legislature, um
it has since been uh
incorporated into HB2 as an
appropriation, and so we have,
uh, an appropriation to develop
and deliver an archaeological
field training program
statewide.
Uh, first I'd like to give you a
little bit of background about
who we are and the role that we
play.
um, in New Mexico Office of
Archaeological Studies has
operated as a an enterprise
state agency in New Mexico since
the 1990s.
Uh, prior to that, uh, we were,
uh, part of the research section
of the Laboratory of
Anthropology, um, and, uh, part
of their merger with the Museum
of New Mexico.
after World War II, um, we
provide public archaeological
services, uh, under state and
federal rules and regulations,
uh, such as the Cultural
Properties Act of New Mexico and
the National Historic
Preservation Act.
uh, we became the state's
centralized professional
archaeological uh unit under the
Department of Cultural Affairs
since 2004.
Our mission is to promote the
understanding and preservation
of New Mexico's rich
archaeological heritage through
our diverse programs of public
archaeological services,
research, outreach, and
education.
Some of the specific services
that we provide include cultural
resource permitting and
compliance services.
archaeological surveys and
excavations, uh, ethnographic
and historical research, as well
as education and community
engagement.
and to provide a little bit of
background, uh, for anybody
who's not been directly involved
in cultural resource permitting
and compliance. You may ask
yourself, what is that process
and why does it have to happen?
So federal, state, county, and
municipal regulations and codes
have been enacted that require
consideration of the project's
impact on the cultural resources
in a particular area.
I have triggered these
regulations and codes may
require that prior to any of
these projects which in federal
parlance are called
undertakings.
uh, that the, uh, their effect
on the historic and
archaeological resources in the
area are taken into
consideration, and that
consultation take place between
the regulatory agency that's
involved, a proponent of the
project, as well as review
agencies like the State Historic
Preservation Officer, um, if
it's a federal project, the
advisory Council on Historic
Preservation, tribal governments
and interested parties,
including the public.
Some examples of our clients
that we work with, uh, include
both public and private
organizations, uh, the
Department of Mexico, Department
of Transportation, uh, Private
Energy corporations, the oil
conservation division, uh,
tribes, Pueblos and nations,
municipalities, um, as well as
private landowners.
uh, the types of projects may
include municipal utility
infrastructure, water and sewer
lines, uh, fiber optic
uh, projects, uh, National
Energy infrastructure, uh,
mining, and other projects, uh,
related to that, uh, wildlife
refuge restoration, um,
construction development,
forestry and fire mitigation,
highway and road improvement,
and uh we have also uh done
projects in conjunction with,
uh, lessees of state, uh, trust
land, uh, wanting to, uh, to
improvements on their, uh, lease
holdings.
So the the need, uh, for a
program like this, um, stems
from a current
uh, situation with the workforce
uh in New Mexico and really
nationwide a uh study was
completed in 2022 that
identified some uh
patterns that are still relevant
today, um, and indeed I've been,
you know, perhaps exacerbated by
some current
uh developments. Uh, one of
those is that there's a general
decline in academic enrollment
in university programming and so
universities are turning out
fewer uh professional
archaeologists.
Um, and then as well
when you're a practitioner,
you'll also see on the ground uh
barriers to entry-level
employment, especially for rural
and underserved communities.
um, and then, and we also have
what is going on, um, you know,
with the current, uh
situation with the federal
government, including the
federal workforce reduction and
that of course has affected the
number of archaeologists that
are able to operate or are even
employed by the federal agencies
such as the Forest Service and
National Parks.
In an effort to
address some of these concerns,
uh, the program that we're
developing and plan to deliver
this fall. uh
is a combination of classroom
training as well as in-field
practice and then on the job
training uh for two tracks.
There's an entry level track as
well as an advanced, uh, level
track.
Uh, that will serve different
constituencies, um, it's a six
week program, uh, it involves a
hybrid online learning, um
uh, portion, uh, followed by an
infield, uh
hands-on practice, uh,
component
And then, uh, once, uh, the
trainees complete that, then we
would like to place them on
actual projects where they will
get on the job training in the
field, uh, where they can master
their skills, uh.
the online modules will involve
both asynchronous learning as
well as uh live sessions, uh,
check-ins, um, peer review, uh,
and then, of course, the infield
practice, they will be able to
actually uh apply what they have
learned on the online modules
They will be evaluated using a
concept uh that was uh proposed
by um one of our federal
partners, uh, which are, are
taskbooks, and that'll be a way
of tracking their mastery of of
the skills and, and the uh um
um
uh things that they learned in
the, the, the, uh, classroom
learning session, um.
the goal of this is that
building, uh, we will build the
workforce
um,
and, uh, especially we have
heard that there's a need, um,
there's a demand for this, uh,
in a few different areas, uh,
the advanced level is meant to
address the concerns that we
have heard from the State
Historic Preservation officer
and our federal partners about
mid-tier professionals
encouraging students, um, and
beginning professionals to enter
the cultural resource management
public archaeology fields, um,
and providing them with advanced
on, uh, hands-on applied
learning that will serve them uh
directly as they begin the
professional careers and also to
bolster uh entry level
workforce, uh, field
technicians, especially for, you
know, uh, underserved
communities or rural areas. uh,
there's particular interest in
this, um.
from some of the tribal
communities that I've talked to,
uh, we also have partners, uh,
in New Mexico State University,
um, and we have reached out to
San Juan College and some other
institutions of higher learning
here in New Mexico as well.
Thank you.
Thank you
OK, moving on, Max Hinkel.
Yeah, Fults, pick it up, put it
in front of you.
yep.
No, not until you push the
button to with the red light.
No.
there you go
Thank you, um, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, my name
is Max Hinkel, and I'm a, um,
division director for the New
Mexico Department of Ags, um,
agricultural programs and
resources division here in Las
Cruces. um
and I will be providing an
update on NMDA's agg workforce
development program.
OK
sit down, it's done. OK
So the agg Workforce development
or um AWD is the acronym for
that, um.
came from the agricultural
Workforce Development Act, um,
which the legislature passed in
2019, um, and a lot of elements
of the program design are um
prescribed actually in the
statute, and so I kind of have a
little list here just to give
you an overview, um, you know,
it's available for agricultural
businesses, um, which are
defined as businesses of a food
or agricultural nature,
including ag production or
processing.
um, and essentially how it works
is NMDA pays up to 50% of the
actual costs of an internship,
um, which includes wages, um,
workers' comp, and directly
related incidental costs.
Um, interns must be paid at
least minimum wage, um,
internships, um, I didn't put on
here, but also um need to last
for over 130 hours at minimum,
um
an ag business can have up to 3
interns per calendar year and
interns must be 18 years or
older and cannot be immediate
family members or previous
employees of the business.
Um, NMDA also, um, in order to
administer this, some of the
policies that we've done for
administration have been, um,
you know, collecting
applications on a first come,
first serve, um, rolling basis,
um, usually opens, um, late May
or early June once we um know
our funding for the program, um,
and we have currently set a
limit of $15,000 of NMDA match
per intern. That's the 50% that
NMDA contributes.
So just to kind of give an
overview to to the programs, you
know, um, a little over 5 years
old, um, so currently we have
recurring funding of $125,000 in
NMDA's budget, um, and kind of
below on the table you can um
see um
the funding that's been awarded
the number of interns and the
participating businesses, um, in
20 FY 25, um, annual funding was
fully allocated um within a
month, um, so we're seeing a big
uptick in um.
in the program um applications
from A Businesses, um, interns
um, are evaluated at the end of
the internship and um one real
positive outcome we've seen is
sometimes they're hired on as
full-time employees after the
program.
you know, and some common
challenges we always hear from
the businesses are are really
just finding the interns and
then if one falls through, um,
it's really hard to replace,
especially within the time frame
of the program, um, so we, we
certainly here, um, we don't do
matchmaking with interns up to
the business to find them, but
that's definitely a big um a big
thing that we hear, um
and yeah, and you can see on FY
23 we did receive a boost from
the governor's food initiative
funding, um, since then we've
generally been at 125,000.
So the next slide is just kind
of giving a sense of the
geographic spread of the
internships so far, um.
just with the number of interns
per county, and this is just for
fiscal years, um, 23 through 25.
Um, so pretty good spread
although definitely a
concentration in Bernalilo
County, Sandoval, Santa Fe, and
Dona Anna with the most, um, I
would just add that for FY 26,
um, we also have an intern, um,
new internships in Catron
County, Los Alamos, um, 3 in Rio
Riba and then internships in um
Torrance, Guadalupe, and
Lincoln Counties
So we have a pretty diverse
spread of agricultural
businesses that have um access
to our program, um, so I just
provided a few um examples, but
we really have everything from,
you know, small scale or small
scale local kind of vegetable
producers, um, to, um, bigger
commercial operations, for
example, a pecan farm in Donana
County. Um, we have, um, ranches
using this, you know, on cow
calf operations throughout the
state, um, some of the other
examples are, you know, custom
meat
processing in Otero and Colfax
Counties, um, and Santa Fe, we
have um a composting facility
that's utilized this, and then
in Valencia, you know, uh,
greenhouse and uh plant nursery,
um, some examples from um FY 26
that are new ones. Um, there's a
mushroom producer in Santa Fe
County, um, as well as a ranch,
um, infrastructure, um,
installation contractor um
located on the eastern part of
the state.
So currently our FY 26
application cycle is um still
open and we we really um keep it
open until the funding's fully
allocated, um, because we have a
little bit of rollover funds
from last year were um able to
award more than the 125,000, um,
and I have some updated numbers
so so far we've awarded actually
24 internships with over
$204,000 but still, um, if, if
you know of any businesses that
might be interested, please
direct them to our, um, website
for the
application and more information
And uh lastly, just wanted to
touch on um what the um
secretary referred to with the
um interagency partnership for
the targeted solutions for the
ag workforce um sector, um, they
hosted that discussion in Las
Cruces, um, on August 6th, and
they're still collecting
industry input, um, so there's a
link to the survey there.
And uh my last slide just has
contact information for myself,
um, and, um, other leadership
positions at NMDA. Thank you
very much for your time.
Thank you, uh, Debbie.
Debbie Hughes
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you very much
for uh bringing this together.
We're really excited to be here
and um I think as John
mentioned, um, this.
was a House Bill 315 that gave
us the uh ability to uh start
putting together this
archaeological field school and
um I know Representative Doo had
talked to folks at the Gila
National Forest and they would
say, oh yeah, we got part of the
Nipaan, but the big holdup is
archaeological clearances, so we
can't thin these areas, so, um,
this was a bipartisan bill, um,
our state association that is
the membership of the soil and
Water District, so it's called
the New Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts.
We've actually been working with
two federal agencies and helping
them get their um archaeological
clearances done for probably
about 20 years, um, NMACD has 11
contracts right now with private
firms, um, that are on that
Shippo approved list, um, but
then there is circumstances, for
example, two of those, uh, will
only work with, with certain
pueblos and then one of the
companies will only work in
Leonetti County. So, um
we,
uh, over the last 2021, um, our
state association is hired firms
to do 58 cultural survey
projects and uh this year so far
we've got 12 contracts we've
been working on 7 of them are
complete and um this this what
we're working on right now is
coming through USDA, the Natural
Resource Conservation Service.
We're actually helping them get
the arts, uh, surveys done and
so the way that works, the
private company does that, you
know, they let us know which
ranch or farm they want us to go
to and then that report is sent
to the state NRCS archaeologist
and then they have to review it
and either have it amended or um
they will approve it, so
um
for the past 30 years, we've
actually been working with USD
and the Bureau of Land
Management, and this, this
problem of not having enough
archaeologists has been a
problem for a long time. Um, and
we understand there's more of a
need now because of the federal
um shortage and staff shortages
and the hiring freeze. So since
this bill passed, you know, we
were really looking at it for
natural resource projects. Since
this bill passed, we've been
notified by utility companies,
home builders, federal and state
agen agencies and and tribal
communities saying oh we love
this, we wanna be a part of it,
we wanna do it too.
So, um, there is a huge need to
to do this. It's a critical
need.
The workforce solutions we've
been trying to figure out how we
can tie it into this, marry it
to this program, um, I do have
one soil and water district just
lately, Cuba, that um did get a
get a contract with Workforce
Solutions and um but there is a
huge need, um, one of the other
areas that we need to do
training and I'm not sure who's
gonna teach her how to figure
out, but
um, the Asaka rehabilitation
stuff because we're doing a lot
of that for the Caff Canyon
Hermit's Peak Fire, and the only
people trained to do that are
all like 70 year olds that
retired from NRCS, so they were
trained by the federal
government and now the feds
don't have anybody else to do
it. So while they're still
around, we need to figure out
how, how to train these folks.
Um, we are, we have invited uh,
Workforce Solutions to come to
our annual meeting to do
training so that more of the
soil and water districts can,
uh, do this and the soil and
water district's work
very closely and directly with
private landowners, so I think
that's gonna help to also, uh,
figure out how more people in Ag
can take advantage of the
workforce solutions. Um, we
really appreciate last year, um,
9 million was, um, appropriated
for the soil and water districts
over 3 years in House Bill 2 to
help build capacity and um help
us hire technical folks and you
know there's really a huge need.
The problem is we, we gotta hire
him, but now, um, we gotta find
training for all these folks.
And even our elected boards, our
47 elected boards, um, have a
lot of training needs, um, to
comply with all the state and
federal laws.
Um, NRCS New Mexico that handles
the farm bill programs here in
New Mexico lost 52 employees.
so they are down to 120
something employees. I think
there's 37 left in the southern
part of the state.
Um, so there is a, a huge demand
for technical, some kind of
technical providers, um
we've got a program that some of
you may remember, some of you
may not. It was actually started
20 years ago.
Um, it's called the Technical
Service Provider Program, and
this was exactly we were in the
same kind of thing where the
feds put a lot of money into the
farm bill, more than usual, and
then they cut back on the
federal staff, but they had this
one thing and they said, OK.
if you can find a match
we, the federal agency will
match it. So for 20 years,
there's been a program that the
legislature has funded at
$600,000 a year matched by USDA
funding and that money has been
gone through, it goes to New
Mexico State University,
Department of Ag. They let out
a, uh, bid.
for RFP. It's a four-year
contract and so
our state association helps, uh,
recruit and find these people
and we don't, if we're hiring in
Catering County, we don't
advertise in Albuquerque. We
advertise in Catron County. We
really try to hire locally,
create jobs in rural areas, and
since this um loss of the
fifty-something employees um
with this program we've been
able to find 30 more, 30 new
people to go into the USDA
offices and we're still hiring.
So if anybody knows of anybody,
but those folks that
work in the USDA offices are
actually trained by the NRCS.
They, they train them. They, um,
in a lot of cases those people
become federal employees, and
so, um, we'd love to see that
funding increased because it has
been the same for 20 years, um,
but it's been a, a great, uh,
recruiting and training program
and um
I just because you guys were
talking about federal dollars
earlier. I want to let you know
that so in December, we signed a
$15 million contract with USDA.
and it was this water
conservation program to work
with Assekias with about a
million dollars of the 15 going
into Colorado, 1.2 million, um,
that money is still sitting in
DC um, along with our signed
contract, but it's not dead.
We are, we, they keep telling us
they're reviewing it and um as
well as this $15 million for the
Aseass, there's another 30
million that's supposed to be
going to Elephant Butte
Irrigation District from the
same Paramari and some of the
commodity credit Corporation was
the funding and so there was
projects approved all over the
West, mostly with irrigation
districts. We're the only one
that did the Asaka piece, um,
but, um, they have assured us in
DC that they're still reviewing
it, so I don't know if we're
getting it or not. We've got a
5-year contract, so
I love to get started on that,
but thank you very much for your
time and we'd love to answer any
questions. Thank you.
Thank you very much and now
Monica Torres, the Chancellor
for Donana Community College.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
with you today. Uh, while I'm
the administrative lead of DACC.
This effort is really led by the
academic folks on campus. 3 are
with me today. Doctor Rigo
Rinconis, Vice President for
Academic Affairs, Doctor Laura
de la Cruz, the interim division
dean for Advanced Technologies,
and Mr. Travis Hawkins, the
interim department chair for
commercial technologies where,
where this program that I'm
talking about today, Water
Technology resides. I want to
talk a little bit to speak
previously briefly about the
water
technology program and um
one of the things that's really
important to to know is what
actually are the
responsibilities of people who
leave this program and go into
the workforce. There are a
number of places in the
workforce where students from
this program can actually go.
Uh, many of them go to water
utility operation and that's,
that's what I'll primarily talk
about, but we do see some
students go into high purity
water, uh, and we see, of
course, as we start to deal more
with brackish water and produced
water, we'll see more need for
water, water operators in in
that area, but I wanna talk
about water utility utility
operators, uh, you know,
these are positions that are
quite technical
but in reality they impact our
daily ordinary lives by
processing and treating our
water and and wastewater on page
two, what you'll, what you'll
actually see is, uh, and I'll
just point out a couple of the
things that they do that are
absolutely critical for the
lives we lead every day. They
manage the machines and
processes to transfer and treat
and process our water and
wastewater. They do chemical
dosing, adding substances like
ammonia and chlorine to
disinfect our water, um, uh,
and, and other liquids. Uh, they
do equipment
operation and cleaning where
they maintain cleanliness of the
purification and uh water
processing equipment. They, uh,
uh, they comply to engage in
regulatory compliance and safety
by following EPA standards and
ensuring the safety protocols
and really importantly, for some
reason, there are malfunctions
or outages, they actually know
how to manually operate the
equipment to ensure that that
we're prepared for any sort of
emergencies.
Thank you
One of the things that I think
is important to think about is,
is, OK, well, where does this
take people who get this degree?
What kinds of, what kind of
positions do they get? Where do
they work and, and also what
kind of salaries do they have?
If you look at these images on
slide 3, what you'll see on the
left side is just the number of
positions that are available in,
in 4 of the, the larger areas,
the metro areas in the state of
New Mexico, um, one of the
things that's super important to
know is that it's not just the
metro areas who need water
utilities operators.
The, the rural areas are
absolutely desperate for them
right now. In fact, we're in
conversations right now with
ENMU Riodoso to, to try and
develop some sort of agreement
so people from Lincoln County
can get this sort of training.
We're in conversations with
Demming to see how we can
arrange, uh, training for people
who are already employed and
can't take 2 years out to come
get a degree? How can we help
them move up, move up the, the
sort of scales and, and we're
also in an agreement with uh
working with Donana County to
get more operators into the
rural
parts of of the county. The goal
here is really to how do we
increase capacity. There are
simply not enough water utility
operators, wastewater utility
operators in the field to, to do
the work that we really need
done in for our daily lives. And
if you take a look at the
salaries, you'll see that that
actually they make pretty good
money. If they come out with a
certificate or a degree from
DACC, they're really prepared to
test at level 2, for, for
utility operators, and you'll
see that, that they're somewhere
in the neighborhood
of, of $50,000 and then if they
move up to level 3 and level 4,
you can see that that they move
into the 60 and 70 and
$80,000,000 range um, again, as
I noted, these are for water and
wastewall utility operators and
other parts in other sectors
like uh uh produced water,
brackish water, those, those
sorts of, of, um, parts of the
profession are are really
emerging. And if they work in
high purity, uh, in intel, for
example, the, the salaries are
also different but again, the
point I want to make today is
just the tremendous need for
water and wastewater utility
operators. What to talk a little
bit about what DACC does. Thank
you.
uh
oops
uh, so right now DACC offers a
certificate and associate degree
programs, um, and we really
prepare students when they come
out they should be able to take
that, uh, level 2 certification
and and be successful, um, some
of the other things is of course
we work very closely with local
municipalities and industry to
align the courses and make sure
that these technicians are
prepared to do the work that we
need them to do, um, I'll talk a
little bit about increasing
student recruitment. We're
working like crazy to try and
get recruitment.
Kids don't grow up saying I
wanna be a water utilities
operator, right? It's, it's a
degree, uh, a program they have
to find they have to discover
and so that's one of the things
we're having to work pretty hard
on. And then currently we're
seeking certification to become
a state certified water testing
lab, uh, to provi provide much
needed water quality and safety
testing for utility operators
were but also local citizens,
um, here are the things that
that we're looking that that the
industry really needs um 3 of
these are how do we get more
people into the field
more quickly. So, so in terms of
marketing, the water technician,
again, people don't think of
this as a career. How do we work
collectively to, to move and
incentivize people
into this major and into the
profession. In addition to that,
there are certification testing
fees. Some students are able to
afford them. It's an easy an
easy lift for them. Other,
others, it's, it's more
challenging. And the third, I'll
move to the third, is in, in is
the 4th uh bullet point is
incentives for internship
opportunities. We want to get
students in the field as quickly
as possible. Many of them can't
leave a job to, to go on an
internship. So the idea of paid
internships is an area that the
colleges is working pretty hard
on not just in this
field but in other fields as
well. And then finally we're
very grateful to the work that
the legislature has done to
support higher ed, um, in, in
not only in our ING budgets but
in our um in non-credit um
training programs we've gotten
quite a bit of money in the last
two years for that, but in
addition to that, ERR and BRNR
funds because it's always
important to to keep up with
with kind of the latest uh
equipment and facilities. In
fact, this program got a massive
overhaul 3 years ago to be as up
to date as as possible in the
field.
So those, those are some of the
things that we're working on
collectively and that as time
goes on we will work with our,
our, uh, local elected officials
as, as well as our elected
officials for the state to
pursue support for. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you very much. Uh, so far
I have Senator Steinborn,
others.
that have a question or comment?
Representative Samora, Kates,
uh, Thornton.
who else am I missing uh Scott
OK, we have a long list.
So Senator Steinborn, please,
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm glad
I got on the list before the
great debate society here
between the representative of
the senator, who I know are good
debaters. I mean that as a
compliment.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just have to, uh, real quick
questions actually. First of
all, for the archaeological
program, pretty fascinating,
didn't know y'all existed and uh
um
which.
makes sense, um, I guess my
question is, do, do you?
do you do contract
archaeological surveys for
private business, did you say
that?
Madam J members of the
committee, Senator, uh, yes, we
do, uh, contract work, um, at
OAS, um, as an enterprise state
agency, we have to earn our own
revenue. One of the ways that we
do that is we do client-based
projects, uh, sometimes for
private companies, sometimes for
public agencies.
So I mean, thank you ma'am
Chair. So I mean for like a
private developer that's
building uh.
developing land
you do archaeological surveys if
they wanna hire you.
That's what I'm asking
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, Senator, what would
need to happen is there would
need to be a trigger, um, and
so, uh, they would have to be
under some sort of regulatory
agency, whether it's federal or
state.
uh, that triggers a process for
an archaeological review, and
then they would be able to seek
out any kind of archaeological
contractor out there that would
perform those services and we
could be one of them.
Thank you. And then thank you,
ma'am Chair, and in spite of my
last famous last name, you know,
I.
I'm in the nonprofit world, so
I'm not asking you for any other
reason other than just curious
about the service that you
offer, but so, OK, so there has
to be a Nipah involved or some
sort of required governmental.
deal.
Interesting.
So if someone wants to just do
it to do it, that doesn't apply
and you won't give them
services.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, um, we often
work also with the general
public, um, but more on an
outreach and education, um, as
part of our mission to, to
educate the public on
stewardship and resources, um,
and that aspect of it, but, uh,
yeah, in terms of client-based
projects, it is based on
archaeological reviews that are
triggered by um
state, federal, municipal codes,
regulations.
OK. Thank you. Um, and your, how
many people do you employ right
now who do this?
Got you.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, senator,
are you asking how many people
are in my agency or, or how many
do we plan to train through the
program. Well, that's the second
part of my question, but, um,
but I'm asking how many you
employ and I guess as a second
part of it, how many do you
anticipate employing
through this a new program that
we funded.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, so we
currently in OAS have 12 staff,
um, and then the targeted uh
number of trainees for the
program. Uh, right now it's 30,
um, you know, this is in many
ways, a pilot program. Uh there
are a lot of variables still to
it, and, uh, but, uh, 30 was the
number that we arrived at, uh,
where we could provide the
services we thought and
logistically reasonable way, um,
that fit the budget
that we have and uh serves a
constituency and in an effective
way.
Thank you. Two other quick
questions, um, ma'amer, do you,
um,
do you have to have any
experience in order to be
accepted in this. I've got a.
constituent who actually I think
was an NMSU graduate and.
philosophy's looking for work,
but it's kind of a history
major, and this is kind of
interesting work, and he just
asked me if I know of any jobs,
and I see you're training people
for this new field. So do you
have to have hands-on
archaeological work, survey work
in order to
get hired and be accepted in the
program.
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, that's
an excellent question, and, um,
so for the two tracks there are
2 different requirements and for
the entry level, we're not
requiring that you have previous
experience in archaeology
professionally. Um, and that is
purposeful to try to reach as
broad a constituency as
possible, especially in rural
and tribal communities, uh, for
the advanced track that is meant
for, uh, folks who do already
possess a degree or, or a level
of experience in archaeology. So
for the entry level track medam
chair,
if someone were to be accepted
into your program for your
six-week hybrid course, could
they then have a job afterwards?
Do you have the work for them?
Would that get them a job
Madam Chair, Senator, that's an
excellent question. And so the
intention of this is that we are
providing them with professional
skills that would make them
marketable and, um, you know,
considering that there is a
demand out there that we're
anticipating that they would be
able to be employed as an
archaeological field technician,
um, on a crew, um, you know, for
projects for compliance
projects. Thank you. And, and
Anna Crew for you.
Would they end up with a job
with you all? Is there enough
demand? Is that?
reasonable expectation for them
Madam Chair, Senator, uh, not
necessarily for us, but, you
know, of course, you know, as a
prac you know, as a performing
uh organization, I do sometimes
hire archaeologists for our
projects. And so, of course,
anybody who I train on here, um,
who essentially
graduates from this training,
um, I would want them to of
course satisfy my requirements
for a field technician, right?
I'd, I'd want to hire them, you
know, that's one of the
uh, my own personal metric for
whether or not we're successful
is whether or not I would hire
them on as a crew, um, but yeah,
the, the, the intention is that
they would be able to serve that
role. Um, wherever they may be,
and again, you know, we, there's
a demand, especially in, uh, you
know, for particular agencies,
um, but also for particular
communities and you know, we
anticipate that, you know,
through that demand that they
would be able to um find
employment if they seek it.
So.
he's a conscientious kid,
so Senator, have you gone on
several questions? Yeah, I have,
but it's been, it's been, uh,
it's been one of those kinds of
deals. Um, but I'm moving on. I,
I think I, I, I.
gotten to the bottom of that
well, so to the uh
to the agricultural
gentleman, um, your internship
program, what are the parameters
of that? How long do you
how long can an internship last?
That's.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, um,
Senator, um,
internships can be, um, so the
minimum is 130 hours and um
they're happy within the fiscal
year, um, and so it just
probably kind of depends on what
the um hourly wages that those
sort of factors, but up to a
year, I suppose, you know.
up to a yearlong internship
OK, no longer than a year
though? No. OK. No, yeah. That's
all I have. Thank you, ma'am.
Thank you.
Thank you onto Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters.
Uh, a lot of important work for
the community is sitting right
at this table
and uh
I, I do have a question about,
about the
about the uh archaeologist.
who is that state law or federal
law that we're following when
we're, we're doing our our uh
arch sites
miniature
Man and representatives, uh,
thank you for the question. Uh,
potentially it, it would be, it
may be both, and so, uh, they're
both federal and state laws, as
well as municipal and county
codes that may apply whenever,
uh, an archaeological survey is
triggered.
and, uh, do you, Madam Chair,
and, and do you know if
we've ever revisited those
rules. I've actually, uh, in the
past on day ranch in Torrance
and Socorro Counties, and I
actually walked with the
archaeologists that were doing
the survey.
We were gonna put a fence in and
it was gonna be government
funded.
and they have to do an arc, uh,
survey before.
they allow us to put the fence
in for the funding and, and the
physical, actually the physical
work has to do with
the report that the archi
archaeologists turn in.
so
I was surprised that.
they could find a rock that was
chipped or broke in half, and
they'd call it a, a
a a chard
So, so then they would say,
well, this could have been.
you know, done by the natives
and they were trying to make a
narrowhead and you'd look at
this rock and you'd think.
how do you come to that
conclusion
And so
to me it was very interesting.
what could
keep you from building a fence
in a, in a particular area or
how you had to go about building
the fence on the upper part of
our property where the elevation
went up.
uh, apparently they found some.
evidence of uh.
natives living in that part of
the country or or having done
something there, and if you
looked at at our ranch
you knew natives had been all
over this ranch at a prior time.
so
to me
I understand the reasoning
behind it.
But at the same time, I wonder
if we shouldn't revisit.
the rules at some point in time.
And, and I wonder, do you feel
the same way in doing the work
or, or do you feel like?
the rules that you're following
and, and how you're told about
the procedure that you have to
do. Do you feel that, that, that
needs to update it or it's up to
date, Madam chair.
Madam Chair members of the
committee.
So I, I could only speak to, you
know, my experiences and, and I
do want to stay focused on this
particular program. I, I will
just say at the outset that, you
know, one of the goals of this
particular program is to, you
know, help, uh,
help the process along. This is
one of our efforts to make sure
that projects do get done.
um, and the intent of the laws
are meant to, uh, help protect
and preserve the resources, not
necessarily to, um
to be an impediment to, to any
kind of development, uh, but,
uh, but yeah, it's really a
question for the state historic
preservation officer, um, but I
do know that there's always, um
the, the laws and the rules of
regulations are always under
review and, um, discussion and,
um, I do know that there are
processes in place in various
ways to expedite or to
streamline the process, um, but
again that's, that's the, that's
the realm of the state of
irreservation officer in her
division and thank you for that
and
either even though we found
evidence of, of, uh, some
archaeological site being there.
we were still allowed to put the
fence in. We're still allowed to
graze the cattle all over that
place, so it really didn't
change anything.
And to me
we, we got held up for months
before we got an archaeologist
out there to proceed with our
work and everything, but
and there was a lot of
paperwork, a lot of discussion,
and, and but.
it didn't really change anything
at the end of the day, and it
just makes me wonder where we're
at with it and, and why we do
things the way we do. and Madam
Chair, that, that concludes my
questions for, for this section
of the presentation
uh
wastewater technicians.
and, and thank you for your
answers.
and, and wastewater technicians.
I see that in my district.
as a problem like, like having
uh
to take care of audits and
stuff. We don't, it's like you
said in your presentation,
madam, uh
who wants to grow up and, and be
a wastewater technician? How do
we attract those people and then
not only that, but who wants to
grow up and go to Von, New
Mexico and become a wastewater
technician or or some little
rural town that
that they don't have a Walmart
in or, or very many stores to
speak of of any kind.
so
that's, I think that's gonna be
a hard job for us to tackle and
how do, how do we
how do we come to that, to
solving those problems. And
thank you for working on it. Uh,
I think there's a, there's a lot
there
as to how we get young kids
involved. I believe in
I believe in Fort Sumner, they
turned around and hired right
back.
the technician that was doing it
that retired from the job, and
he'd been doing it for years.
And then he just, they just, the
city had just had to
hire him back and try to figure
things out and
and, and it's, it's like, well,
you know, they have another year
to figure it out, but how, how
do they get there? It's, it's a
big challenge, it's a big
challenge in rural New Mexico
and.
and how we get all that done.
Madam Chair, uh
members of the committee
representative, I do think
that's, I do think that's an
issue. I, I'm from one of the
branch campuses, one of 9 branch
campuses. We're the largest
branch campus of the of the
nine. All the rest of them are
in fairly rural areas, and that
is a question that, that we're
wrestling with is, is really how
can branch campuses, uh, serve
as part of the economic engine
in rural areas and I do think
that that part of what we're
gonna have to do is collaborate
in ways we have not historically
thought of, and we're we're
having, we're gonna have to
think about how do we think
flexibly about that? So for
example,
if we work with Demming, those
folks can't leave their jobs. So
how do we think about credit,
non-credit training, what kind
of opportunities can we create
to prepare those employees. I
was just in Riodoso, um, and,
and they were saying we have an
employee that we want to keep
here, but we need him trained
and so I think institutions are
gonna have to think flexibly and
and collaboratively to think,
how do we serve the economies of
rural New Mexico and, and I
think that the branch campuses
are really positioned to to
think about
that well
And, and Madam Chan.
presenter, maybe, maybe we as a
legislator can offer some kind
of incentives, uh
to get somebody to wanna go that
direction in in school and get
there and and how much, how much
schooling do they actually need
to become a, a, uh
technician
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative, it, it
actually depends. So we have an
associate degree, but we also
have a shorter term certificate.
San Juan is the only other
college in the state of New
Mexico that has a water program
and they do an 8 week
certificate. I, I, I'm not so
familiar with it that I don't
know what level of technician it
allows you to test for. Um, but,
um, I, I think we probably need
to look for that sort of and
develop that sort of network of,
of opportunities.
And, and thank you for being
here today in your presentation.
I think this is one of the big
challenges we have in the state
of New Mexico that
that's gonna be a tough one to
fill.
And, uh, Madam Chair, I also
want to thank the rest of the
presenters, Debbie Hughes, and,
and, uh
Max, uh, got, got to meet you
today. I think we'd met one time
before. I can't, not for sure,
but thank you for all the hard
work you guys do and.
thank you for your presentation,
Madam Chair, that concludes my
comments and questions.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
before we, um, have individuals
leaving. I just wanna remind you
all that 23 different groups are
putting on an event this evening
for us at 6 p.m. at the Rio
Grande Wineery and uh they'd
love to see you there, so if you
decide that you have to walk
around before then, I just want
to remind you. So next on the
list is Representative Cates
Uh, thank you, Chair. Thank you
very much.
I'd just like to say that
we do have any young people
listening, um, that I find.
nothing more honorable or more
mission-driven and serving your
community by ensuring that they
have access to clean, safe
water.
that this is a true um
position within your community
and in the future if you want to
have a rural life, this is a
great way to be able to provide
a professional, uh, income for
your family and live the life
that you wanna live and be
serving your community.
I just have one quick question.
I have been talking a lot with
the president at CNM as well as
Riotech. We have a a CTE trade
school in Sandoval County and I
want to be able to add water
controller operator, wastewater
management to those tech
services we're doing more
traditional trades right now.
We're going into electric car
mechanics and things like that.
I hope that if anyone on this
panels had those conversations
with CNM or
where the Rear ranch of public
schools. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Thornton
Thank you, Madam Chair
Um
I, I, two of my questions I
think were already answered. The
first one is with regards to uh
Senator Steinburnn already.
uh asked the question is uh how
was the site identified as
requiring a cultural survey, and
I think you responded to that
unless there's something else I
missed, but it sounds like it
needs a namipa or some other EPA
requirement before you guys will
come in and actually stu uh
determine whether or not it's a
cultural site or not, is that
correct?
The regulatory requirements are
what triggered the
archaeological study, um, and so
that's when a contractor or a,
you know, a service provider
like us would be called in to do
a study and then, you know,
getting out on the ground and
doing the inventory and seeing
what's out on the ground. That's
where you decide, or, or that's
where, um, it is determine
whether or not there are sites
out there and, uh, how to manage
those.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
so, so.
and I think Representative
Zamora was getting to this
point. If, if I want to build a
road, let's say through a
community, um, how long does it
take necessarily to require to
get the permitting, um, because
as you know in business world,
time is money, and if there's
delays that's actually costing
the business as well. So what's
the typical response time for a
particular cultural survey? Is
it 30 days, 60 days, 90?
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee
uh, representative, uh, Senator,
um, uh, excuse me, um
so each project is unique in
terms of the, the timeline, so
it depends on uh what is the
scope of work, uh, the level of
effort that's required, uh, from
us, uh, and then there are some
standard timelines, uh, review
agencies like the state of
Preservation Officer, um, are
allowed 30 days to review and
comment on any report that
they're given. Um, you know, but
it really is a case by case
basis on uh you know how long it
may take, um, boots
on the ground doing the survey
and then uh also the, the post
field reports, um.
and
anything else that may be
required.
Thank you for that. Uh, uh,
Madam Chair, I, I'm just
concerned a little bit because I
do know those things can take a
while and if you're, you're
waiting for a permit before you
could move forward, you have a
lot of people just there
waiting, you know, twiddling
their thumbs, and they still
have to be paid and so they're
not doing the work that they
were officially hired for. It
actually hurts the business, so
um,
I think the onus is upon us to
make sure that these kinds of
requirements and these sort of
uh compliance requirements are
handled in a sufficient manner
as possible so that we're not
impairing the businesses who are
trying to develop things, um, so
I appreciate your work there and
I, and I hope you will continue
to make it as efficient as
possible.
Uh, the last question I had was
with regards to the average
workforce, um, regarding the
interns, this is, I guess for
Mr. Hinkle, uh, what, what
percent of interns in the bus in
the
who go through the internship,
how many of them actually end up
in the business afterwards,
what's the follow through of the
what percentage actually end up
going into the ad business.
Um
Madam Chair, um, Senator, um, I,
I don't have that off the top of
my head, but I can get your
contact information and get back
to you. I, I don't think it's
the majority. I mean, you know,
usually people do this
experience, maybe move on to
somewhere else, but I know that
it has happened and so I can, I
can get follow up with you on
that.
Thank you for that. I, I was
just hoping that, you know, 90%
do because we obviously need
more farmers, so, uh, yeah, any
number you can give me, I'd
appreciate that. Just to
understand the efficiency of the
program. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott
Thank you, Madam Chair
And I guess this, uh
this question should be directed
to Doctor Montonio.
The
the entire
50 sections of Southeast New
Mexico.
I would speculate has been
surveyed at least once.
So to what extent
does our current public policy
regulation.
encourage or demand
resurveying these tracks with
every new project
when that data
may already be available.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, um, that's a
very interesting question. Um,
so in, in
in the Permian Basin area of the
southeastern part of the state,
uh, there actually is a
programmatic agreement with the
BLM and the Circuit preservation
Officer, uh, that takes into
consideration all of the
previous work that has been done
in, in that particular area and
uh.
it is a program where a
proponent can set money aside
for additional studies, not
necessarily survey, so that
they're not going over the same
ground over and over again. Um.
there is also a need, uh
within various regulatory
agencies, uh, that they
stipulate that
uh, in certain cases, um.
some areas are resurveyed, uh,
you know, usually that happens
when previous work has been
done, um, a certain period of
time has elapsed since the last
survey has been done. Um, and
the reasoning given for that is
primarily that a lot has changed
in terms of technology and
methodology over the years. Um,
also, there may be a need to go
back and look at the potential
impacts to existing sites, uh,
historic proper
t ies significant sites, uh,
that are out there in the
landscape as part of the
management.
And Madam Chair, Doctor, is
there a centralized database and
perhaps GIS format.
that outlines where all of these
previous surveys have occurred.
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, uh, yes,
there is a centralized uh
database uh administered by, um,
the Department of Cultural
Affairs Historic Preservation
division, um, and, uh, there are
archi archaeological records
management section, um, it's
called Demcris and it does have,
you know, both, uh,
records-based database as well
as a GIS interface, um, and it
does show where all of the
registered um projects in New
Mexico, uh, previous survey
s uh, known sites as well as
districts, um, uh, historic
properties, historic buildings,
state registered resources, etc.
And last question, Madam Chair,
how old does a
does a
an artifact
have to be to be considered
archaeologically.
significant
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Senator, that's a
very interesting question. Um,
and so there's, there's actually
a regulatory uh precedent for,
for that depending on, you know,
what law you're operating under
you're, you're trying to be in
accordance with, and so, uh,
under the National Historic
Preservation Act in general,
it's understood that 50 years or
older is what is considered
historic in age and uh uh merits
consideration
Um, significance is another
question. Significance is based
on the number of different cri
criteria, um, under the
archaeological Resource
Protection Act, um, it's usually
about 100 years that's
considered an archaeological
resource under that particular
law.
Thank you, sir, for your
answers. That's all I had, Madam
Chair.
Thank you very much. So I would
like to thank this panel very
much for your presentation and
um you've raised a lot of
questions. I think this
certificate, the Donana
Community College has a lot of
uh for credit courses for their
certificates, but we've had the
question posed to us through
other committee meetings whether
or not some of these
certificates could be
non-credit. So I think we need
to look into that. But thank you
very much for being here today.
And before we move on to our
next panel of the next panel
would come up number 5, in-state
meat processing. I'd like to
tell you about the tour
tomorrow.
We do have, um, after lunch
here, we do have transportation
provided to us to El Paso to see
the desal plant, but you do, you
are required to wear closed-toe
shoes. Now, if you only brought
sandals, you might run over to
Walmart and pick up a pair or to
a thrift store to pick up a
pair. So, um, that will happen
tomorrow after lunch. Uh, again,
6 p.m. this evening. Tomorrow,
the desal
tour, and on the way home from
the Dal tour, another planned
event. The events tonight and
tomorrow evening are between LFC
and our committee.
Rest of the clothes.
I guess you're gonna bump into
equipment.
OK, this topic is in-state meat
processing progress and
challenges.
And let's start with um is it
Kayla or Kayla?
Kayla
and uh then we'll go to
Nicholas, Michelle, John, and
Manny.
Manny's not here. Yeah, Mandy's
here. OK. You have to push the
one that has the people that
we're, we're good. Oh, here we
go.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for your
time and the ability, the
opportunity to present. My name
is Kayla Schoberg. I'm the
deputy director for the New
Mexico State Meat Inspection
Program.
um, I'm just gonna give a quick
background current updates and I
guess what I like to call the
future milestones for our
program.
um.
I just put it up here on the
first slide the members of our,
our team as of now.
as well as, you know, Linda
Garland, New Mexico.
Thank you, Nick
Mexico livestock board executive
director, Chris Matin, the legal
counsel, Eddie Barns, our
program director and myself.
I guess next slide please or
what
what is it? Down?
There we go. Thank you. So the
background, very brief. So our
state our state meat and poultry
program, um, must be at least
equal to the USDA FSIS program,
according to their standards, we
follow through with the FMI, the
Food meat inspection Act and
Poultry Products Inspection Act,
which are statutes.
We are cooperating currently
with FSIS, which is the Food
Safety Inspection Services
program that is guiding us along
developing our program and
through the passing of our
statute NMSA 25222 and our new
rule promulgation under the NMAC
2132 to maintain that status.
Our ultimate goal here, the
takeaway goal for our program
right now is to provide guidance
to current and future pro
processors throughout the state,
while our inspection program is
starting up. We're still in the
development stages, but as of
right now, we are here to help
them to get their applications
and licenses completed as that
milestone is achieved, and we
are, we're an open resource that
we're available whenever they
need us to reach out for
assistance,
guidance if they need help
developing.
their sanitation programs or
HaSA plans, you know, far in the
future we're here to help them.
Our current progress right now,
so our team is currently in the
final rule promulgation process
for the custom exempt slaughter
and process processing
establishments, both existing
and prospective for for future
means. So as of right now we are
incorporating licensing fees and
annual renewal fees for both of
the custom exempt and state
inspected establishments. A
current exi currently existing
in future prospects. We are also
developing the foundation for
our custom exemption
license applications and
establishment requirements for
the future of the program.
We are currently anticipating
these rules to be presented and
approved, fingers crossed, by
the board during the fall
meeting in September.
So our future milestones, which
we're excited for is our program
is anticipating to sign the
cooperative agreement with FSIS
in the very near future. So this
cooperative agreement is what
recognizes our state inspection
program as at least equal to
FSIS, so, um, currently being
one year ahead of schedule
regarding overall program
development, which consists of
creating and creating,
developing and maintaining a 9
comp
on ent program that encompasses
what our state inspection
program will will basically
cover and regulate um we can go
into details of those at another
time if anyone has any
questions, but for us being a
year ahead of schedule, it takes
2 to 4 years for a good state
program to actually get going,
average 3. So we're currently a
year ahead.
in January, the director, Eddie
Behrens and Deputy Director, I
will be attending an in-person
EIAO enforcement Investigations
Analysis Officer Training,
seminar in January. This is a
requirement for our program, um,
for upper supervisor management
inspectors and roles to be at
least equal to in the FSISIs to
perform establishment
assessments and enforcement when
compliance is a concern.
and there is our contact
information. If anybody would
like to take a picture, I also
have business cards if anybody
has any questions or any
anything else and
that's it. Thank you for your
time
Great, and we'll keep the
questions till the end for
everybody. OK, next, Nicholas.
OK
Hello, Madam Chair
Members of the committee, my
name is Nicholas Frazzini. I am
an agriculture marketing
specialist with the marketing
and Development division at the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture.
One of the things that I work on
is me value chain coordination,
um, here in New Mexico, so I
started this in 2021 thanks to
FY 22, one-time funding. Um, the
goal is to support and develop a
resilient meat value chain here
in New Mexico. Um, these are a
few milestones that I've done um
in this work, one of them, um,
is, um, Engage all Known meat
processing entities in our
state, um
develop grant program resources
and interactive.
uh and interactive map of all of
our processors. So folks could
find processors in their areas,
um.
provided uh travel cost shares
uh for processors to attend the
annual American Association of
Meat Processors, which is Amp,
uh, convention and trade show.
Supported development of meat
vendor requirements for the New
Mexico grown approved supplier
Program, uh, created the res
institutional Market summit,
which is a B2B meeting between
local meat suppliers and
institutional buyers.
and right now I'm currently
working on coordinating the New
Mexico local meat processing,
uh, grant funded through Lash
legislative session in House
Bill 2.
Just kind of paint the picture,
uh, thanks to the statistics
from the 2024 um Astats
bulletin. Um, this is an
industry snapshot.
So the livestock value in New
Mexico as of January 1, 2025 is
told at $2.39 billion cash
receipts, 3.09 billion.
Value of livestock production
and processing represented 2.7%
of total state GDP.
beef and dairy industry in 2024,
we had 1.28 million head of
cows, which is down 10,000 from
the previous year.
Dairy I decreased 4% to 240 head
and beef cows unchanged at
450,000 head. Those numbers are
within that 1.28.
Gross income, 1.9 billion, which
was up from the previous year.
commercial slaughter, 59,000
head.
Sheep and lambs, we have 75,000
head
in the state, which was
unchanged from the previous
year. Total value of 16.2
million, commercial slaughter
was 6200 head, uh, hogs and
pigs, uh, the last known, um,
stats was from 2023. Um, the
inventory was 1700 head
gross income, 447,000 commercial
slaughter 2900 head.
Also provided the rankings in
the US of our top commodities
and we're about milk and beef
standing there.
It's a hot topic right now, so I
wanted to provide a current beef
prices. This is just looking at
hamburger, the 80/20 blend, um,
but right now it's over 6
dollars a pound. Um, as you
could see, it's
rising significantly. Uh,
factors of this could be because
of supply constraints, high
demand, uh, rising feed costs,
and the new world screwworm.
This is our uh New Mexico meat
processing, um, map that we have
on the NMDA website, um, you can
click on it, provides contact
information so you can get a
hold of anybody, uh, they'd like
to work with.
uh
we've engaged with 30 total
slaughtering processors in the
state.
8 of them USDA, FSIS inspected,
uh, just now at two of those are
sheep, goat, and lamb only.
and this means that they're
retail ready. Uh, 22 of those is
custom exempt, and that means
that the animals for the
immediate consumption
consumption by that individual
or their family. These are some
of the common industry
challenges that I've found
through surveying
processing businesses.
So limited cold storage
capacity, right,
rail space, so beef typically
ages at 14 to 21 days hanging,
which takes up a lot of space in
the freezer
Skilled and unskilled labor
shortages.
regulatory compliance, byproduct
disposal, wastewater, um, and
the limited availability of
inspectors.
from USDA FSIS.
So right now on the federal
level, um, there are proposed
changes to the EPA affluent
rule.
Um, in January 2024, there were
new federal affluent limitation
guidelines, uh, presented for
meat and poultry processing,
which was the first major
overhaul since the 70s.
They're looking at three
different options to adopt
um, option one being more
stringent limits for nitrogen,
phosphorus, and E. coli, which
was previously unregulated.
Option two, pre pre-treatment
standards.
um, option 3, nutrient discharge
limits affecting 40% or more of
indirect dischargers, including
many rural processors.
What does this mean for the
effects on New Mexico. Um, this
could be potential significant
financial and operational
burdens for our small to
mid-size meat processors,
especially if the third option
is adopted.
Uh, the EPA estimates that up to
53 plants nationwide could be
closed. Um, 16, uh, closures
could eliminate 17,000 jobs.
um, almost 4000 facilities
affected nationwide and the
American Association Association
of Meat Processors estimates
$1.6 billion a year in
compliance costs.
Businesses discharging into city
sewers may need um special
pre-treatment systems,
wastewater monitoring upgrades,
infrastructure redesigned to
stay within this compliance. Uh,
the final, finalized rule change
is expected by the end of August
of 2025.
So the opportunities for growth.
within our industry is a broader
investment of in New Mexico meat
processing. Um,
so again, workforce development,
um, the grant for their
investment in to grant.
um, the value, value added.
product diversification and
again continued support within
an industry, um, we have a new
association in the state, uh,
that recently launched, which is
the New Mexico Association of
Meat Processors
and again continued support from
the New Mexico Cowtle Growers
Association.
just talk a little bit about the
grant, um, so the goal of this
grant was to address challenges
related to meat byproduct,
disposal and wastewater
compliance. Um, this funding was
accomplished through FY 25 $3
million one-time funding through
NMDA.
So we received 14 total
applications with the total
request of 5.5 million. Um, this
is currently under committee
review to make those awards. Uh,
the common funding needs that we
found were uh
either upgraded uh compliant
wastewater systems or septic
systems, uh, composting
equipment, value added byproduct
equipment, um, and as well as
logistics. Uh, so the expected
benefits from this grant um are
improved environmental
compliance, innovation, product
diversification, reduced
landfill waste, um, increased
processor sustainability and job
creation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. And next we
have
Michelle
Yeah
um
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, I'm Michelle from New Mexico
Association of Meat Processors.
We're also associated now with
the American Association of Meat
Processors, so we're now
nationwide. Um, I'm also a
co-owner or major owner of A&M
meat processing in Alamo Gorda,
New Mexico.
I can, sorry.
So,
New Mexico amps, um, which is
New Mexico, Association of Meat
processors, um, acts as a united
voice for small and mid-sized
processors, ranchers, butchers,
helping them share resources.
We're offering training and
support or lobbying for fair
regulations and market New
Mexico products. So we're
pushing really hard for New
Mexico beef, um, state
inspections role as far as, as
we're providing and helping um
is to give
processors the options to
operate under state inspection
instead of USDA allowing them to
sell meat within New Mexico
without the higher overhead of
federal inspection. Those
results of this is going to be
more local meat. It can be
processed and sold within the
state, shortening supply chains,
reducing dependency of out of
state slaughter and keeping more
dollars in rural New Mexico
economies. Most of our beef that
are going into retail, um,
several processing plants are
going um to Colorado to have
their beef process
ed and have the carcasses
shipped back. So if we can keep
that in-house.
State inspection could house all
meat-related inspections and
product to have one department
so that it's not spread between
different departments in the
state right now we have to go to
different departments. We have
to go to environmental, we have
to go to USDA. We have to go to
water resources just to figure
out what our regulations is and
what we need to do. So it's
spread so far out that we don't
know what the regulations are
anymore.
Um, under USDA
USDA takes a while to get
approved. The current supervisor
says that new plants coming on
are not priority, so plants
wanting to go USDA becomes a
very lengthy process, and most
give up because the fight to get
it to get the process done is
too much.
um
oh
Cool, thank you
Um, so the monsters in the
closet of meat processing in New
Mexico is like is what we like
to call it. Most New Mexico
plants were built between 1960
and 1990. Um, these are decades
ago. They're built for smaller
cattle, cattle back then were
700 pounds to 1000 pounds. Um,
our current cattle, we slaughter
1100 to 1600 pound cattle, so
they're pretty well in the Stone
Age. um, they can't handle the
cattle that we're, we're
producing right now that can
only handle smaller cattle. So
this
um stops with expansion blocking
by high cost, lack of skilled
labor, and limited equipment or
repair support, so why we need
state inspection. USD inspection
is a critical service, but the
process of bringing new plants
under federal inspection is slow
and burdensome, for small and
mid-sized processors, these
delays means lost business, lost
jobs, and fewer food options for
New Mexico families.
This delay is not just
inconvenient, it's devastating.
For example, my plant, um, we're
gonna lose over $50,000 next
month. Uh, we were told that we
could go under inspection within
3,
within 3 weeks, and now they've
changed that.
so we're gonna lose, it's been a
six-month process so far. We're
gonna lose that money in those
beef.
So most plants within that same
are ready to quit.
Under regulatory and zoning
barriers, there's a 1000 ft
residential buffer, which makes
new sites and new expansions
difficult. That law is NMSA
77178.
Um, we have disjointed
oversight. There's no unified
meat inspection department with
many different departments
handling the same thing or not
knowing the department that
handles that causing over
licensing or duplicated licenses
within different standards. For
example, USDA facilities
must also have a New Mexico
manufacturing license with New
Mexico Environmental Department,
and that was NMAC 762.
um with losing state inspection,
it has caused a wild west error
with inconsistent enforcement
after loss of state inspection.
Plants are not held to the same
standards anymore, retail exempt
is the wild west and allows us
to sneak custom meat into retail
spaces.
Wastewater, Nick kind of um
pointed on this and so I'll,
I'll briefly go over it. Um,
costly treatment requirements
with little technology to help
or knowledge of why those
numbers are and why it's
required or how to meet them.
Our system, we have to be at 30
BODs to discharge, um, a house,
and that's for commercial, a
household septic is at 300, and
we have no clue why we have to
meet 30. It's impossible, um,
disposal rules incon
s ist ent and impractical for
awful and waste. Every dump has
different disposal standards and
requirements. Um, we don't know
why we can't down whole animals
with carcass with opal carcass
and all, but we cannot dump all
F fuller parts in the same dump.
Um, we all know about decomp and
how that goes into the ground
just like um it does if it was
separated.
Building codes and
infrastructure mandates, these
are major, and I know you guys
are looking at building codes
with
all the flooding and fires that
have happened.
IBC and IECC codes not suitable
for agricultural builds. Um, we
need agricultural building
exemption codes for meat
processors. It's impossible to
build or expand a plant
currently. Um, expensive ADA and
EB charger requirements and
utility upgrade requirements,
for example,
EV charging requirements for
commercial parking lots increase
costs and cannot get up
occupancy without one, but most
are in rural areas. That coda
NMAC 1479. You have to have an
EV charger for 3 or more parking
spots.
um, contractors often avoid
slaughterhouses, projects, or
excessive fees due to no
guidance from the state with
building codes.
Um, it's hard to get utilities
like upgraded electrical or 3
phase natural gas, water, and
other utilities, and higher
costs being commercial based
instead of agricultural-based.
Um
yeah.
Market and distribution
limitations. So this is, I
think, every food industry is
lack of local meat distribution,
infrastructure, and freezer
capacity. There is no
distribution or incentive to go
state inspected and get rid of
the meat if we did expand. So if
we did expand, where are we
gonna put the rest of that meat?
Where are we gonna distribute it
to, um, we call it the beef
mafia, um, under the beef mafia,
which is your big 5, they won't
let us sell wholesale except
without
support from the state. I can
tell you guys a story about this
later. Um, high cattle prices,
droughts, etc. and livestocks to
large plants through cell barns,
which is what's happening
currently, um, causing local
slowdowns in New Mexico
processors. Plants are slow now
and fighting for work. June and
July was the hotest the the
hardest time, and there was
processors that closed down
during this time for at least 2
to 3 weeks.
The other problem is USDA and
AIS purchasing rules on cattle
create major financial barriers.
You have to have a $1.1 million
dollar bond with buying cattle
from the producers, first the
producer selling the meat. It
makes him pro processors not
wanting to purchase cattle, but
to let the ranchers sell the
meat instead of us.
Labor shortages, wage pressures,
and funding in New Mexico. Few
training programs for meat
processing skills and equipment.
We're, we have to go to short
courses to Iowa State or to
other places to get some
training, um, rural location
limits labor pool wages are not
competitive with other
industries. We can't pay our
employees $2150.21 dollars and
$50 an hour because that
increases your stake to $50 a
pound.
Um, the environments are cold
and harsh working conditions
with smaller pay that leaves a
high turnover rate that can go
somewhere else.
Again, when livestock prices are
high, producers are sending
animals to larger markets,
causing the slowdowns and
layoffs at local processing
plants. When prices then drop
and producers return to the
processors. Processors often
can't rehire their trained
staff, forcing them to train new
workers. This process can take
up to 6 months.
Um
uh, banks won't loan to meet
processors. We have a high cost
and low turn on investment and
most processors um have to
cash flow this um cost of meat
manufacturing in New Mexico.
This is a good breakdown for you
guys. Plants that are doing 10
to 15 animals a week. The income
is $5000 wages $2000 200,000,
utilities 32, insurance is 20.
If they're buying cattle, it's
179,000. This was off of last
year's numbers. Um, supplies and
others about 56,000. That means
if they're lucky they're
grossing $13,000 at the end of
the year. We're not making money
if they want to build a facility
the size of ours, which ours is
7000 square feet right now it's
$600 a square foot. That means
the facility just as shell is
gonna cost 4.2 million. The
equipment is 2.5 million. The
waste and water systems and
trash systems to disposal is
539,000. So that brings your
total up to 7.2 million. If you
want to get a loan on $7.2
million right now, a 15-year
loan is $72,500 a month
A 20-year loan is $65,000 a
month. That's what the prime
interest rate right now is
8.75%. Your interest, just
paying an interest is gonna be
$8.2 million.
These guys are only making 13
Um,
unregulated game processing
game's a big deal in New Mexico.
We are a game facility, we're a
game state, um, no standards for
facility sanitation, waste or
disposal, no food safety
Seasonal gaps taking work from
processors, meeting requirements
and pulling consumer consumers
at risk. Game and fish
enforcement allows meat seizures
without compensation to
processors or due process, and
new game meat donation to food
banks that's starting up this
year creates liability risks and
promotes more game meat
abandonment on processors
without compensation.
So I know laws are hard to
change, but what can you guys
help us do during this time is a
dedicated infrastructure, which
you are currently working on
with state meat inspection for
raw and ready to eat, have all
meat related activities and
licenses under New Mexico State
inspection, for example,
retelling exempt manufacturing
of meat all needs to be under
one roof so that we can figure
out what our laws are. Um, get
building codes exemptions for
meat processors. Put them under
an agriculture exemption. Most
of our
plants have live cattle go
through them and the rest is
just storage, um, and find
dedicated funding since we don't
have any funding and we have to
join with a rancher to get
funding, um, uh, expansion
projects and remodeling to come
into compliance. I call it New
Mexico Readiness Grant. More
funding for waste compliance.
New Mexico distribution funding
or incentives for these guys,
um, and more funding for the
agricultural workforce
Development Program. It's a
really good program and none of
us can take advantage of it and
then
if, if we can ask, is uh some
funding for New Mexico
Association of Meat Processors
to help with training.
I
Thank you. OK, so John, you're
next.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members for letting me
be here and talk. My name is
John Richardson.
My family owns and operates the
slash Ranch Historic slash Ranch
at Beaverhead.
Heila Forest, um.
about 70 miles west of TRC as a
crow flies
where a cow calf operator, we,
uh, raise rangu and Angus beef
and
3 little boys
um, who are come in pretty good
hands.
back in 19, excuse me
2019, 2020, we realized that
the Packers were making all the
money at least that's what we
think and thought and still
think and so we started looking
at our own meat processing
plant.
Uh, we bought a meat processing
trailer.
placed it at Elephant Butte
We didn't have state inspection
at the time. This is about 3
years ago we got our USDA
inspection.
um, which has opened up a lot of
doors for us
Um, we do custom exempt we also
do wild game processing. We have
another modular unit coming that
we will separate them out. We'll
do USDA and it.
and continued to custom exempt
and wild game in the other.
um
we appreciate
the, uh, representatives, the,
the members that.
really worked hard on the state
inspection program and got that
passed.
uh.
also appreciate
the, the, uh, meat grant, the
local meat grant.
I think that's gonna help us a
lot. What we need to do is
expand our capacity in New
Mexico. We need feedlots. We
need more processing.
uh so that we can keep
New Mexico grown beef here and
process it here.
Again, thank you
very much
Thank you and Manny, you're
next.
Good afternoon and thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
uh, for the opportunity to share
a few of my thoughts on the meat
processing in New Mexico. Just a
little bit about me. I'm a 13th
generation New Mexican. Um, I am
married to an amazing wife, and
she and I have 7 children
Uh, we ranch in Torrance County
and back in 2019, we had the
same realization as John.
The, the economics of running
the CalAP operation in New
Mexico were kind of out of
whack.
We're losing more money than
we're bringing in, and that had
been happening for like the last
5 years leading up to 2019.
So at that time, we jumped off
we jumped off the ledge, and we
started a small meat company
called Trilogy Beef that I now
partner with on my with two of
my daughters, uh, one that
thanks to the, the security of
this local meat business that
we've established. She's been
able to graduate from college
and come home.
She has a home that that didn't
exist when she left to to West
Texas A&M, uh, almost 4 years
ago. Um, but in addition to just
being a rancher, I've served in
the capacity of, I, I ran a few
miles around the state of New
Mexico. Uh, it was a state
cattle beef stock, a state beef
cattle specialist for New Mexico
State for 12 years. I've been a
private consultant. I've worked
at at a trade school in
Tucancurry, New Mexico called
Mesalands, and today I'm the
executive director of the Santa
Fe Farmers' Market Institute,
which
really represents the small
scale farms and ranches that are
locally involved with local food
systems in New Mexico. Truly
honored, always represent my
people the last 23 years.
You know, we don't own a meat
packing pro uh facility, but
since 2020, we've, uh, we've
made our rounds around the USDA
inspected and custom exempt uh
facilities in New Mexico,
Colorado, and Oklahoma.
Uh, we've, we've harvested in 4
in-state USDA USDA inspected
facilities, one custom kill
operation and 5 out of state
USDA inspected facilities.
We've witnessed a lot
and in that time we've seen a
lot of facilities ambitiously
open, and later closed for
various reasons
It's, it's a high risk as, as
they were mentioning before.
It's a high risk business. Um, I
was once told by a um a meek
processing owner told me, he
says, you can't own
you can't own the cattle. You
can't own the meatpacking
facility and you can't own the
meat. You can't own or you can't
own all three of them at at one
time. It's just, it takes too
much money to run them.
and we've seen that, again,
we've seen some ambitious
entrepreneur dreams just being
crushed. Um, you know, my
perspective that I want to share
with you is it's, it's really
grounded, uh, you know, today
we, we look across the landscape
and within 100 miles of me
there's two USDA facilities that
are vacant.
Uh they're not running ones in
Las Vegas, one's in Mountaineer.
I've harvested at both of those
places. And again, just do, just
due to the challenges that are
out there in the volatility of
so many fundamentals that make a
meat business profitable. Have
we made progress in New Mexico
in me processing? You, you've
heard the previous speakers talk
about the success stories and
the one that hasn't been talked
about on this panel
specifically, but was talked
about in two panels prior to
this one was a New Mexico grown
program.
That's the catalyst. You know,
how do you keep these, these
meat plants running, you know,
year round, 12 months out of the
year without having to take one
or 22 weeks off a year.
is by having a continuous
market, the New Mexico Grown
program has been that for these
meat plants. It's been that for
my business and other family
owned businesses like me. Um,
this, again, these, these
channels allow us to basically
take product into New Mexico
channels and markets virtually
every, every month out of the
year. Maybe, maybe June's a
little bit slower as the fiscal
year ends for most of these
accounts, but it truly has been
a stimulus for for up, up and
down the chain. And I think when
we think about New Mexico
growing, I think we, and we
think
about meat processing.
We're, we're ranchers sending
our product.
to local facilities
and we're circulating money in
our, these rural economies that
are drying up.
but nationally about 15 cents
out of every dollar comes back
to a US farmer or rancher, and
within these local beef systems,
we're bringing back almost 95
cents out of every dollar.
And then we're able to spend
that dollar locally with all the
other small, small businesses
that are in these communities
and it's real. And I feel like
that's the model that we want to
continue to demonstrate. Are
there challenges? Sure enough,
there's definitely some
challenges, and I think this is
the one that's really daunting
my, my 18 year old daughter
that's fixing to leave to West
Texas A&M on Thursday. She and I
are running some break-evs in
preparation for this, for this
presentation today.
Just comparing 2020, 2020 versus
2025.
In 2020, the value of the, of
our, of our cattle had a harvest
was $1.15 a pound. Today it's
$2.47 a pound.
OK, so that's over 100% increase
in 5 years. OK, so that's
driving the cost of the product
that we produce, uh, and it's
really allowing us to question,
should we be selling these
cattle on the live market or
should we continue to
sell beef into a system.
right? So we have the increased,
increased cost of raising or the
value of the cattle that are
there. And again, we've, we've
questioned, we've shipped some
cattle off that we normally
would have kept all the way
through harvest just because the
market's just too hot. On the
other side of that is the
processing cost. In 2020, I was
paying 70 cents a pound to
process my beef. Today I'm
paying $1 40s a pound.
right? So you basically take
100% increase on the value of
the cattle, the processing
costs, and now the consumer has
has a higher cost product
and the, the question is, is
what's the ceiling, and I think
that's the reality is, what is
the price ceiling? I mean, beef
is really is really hot right
now, but I think the fact of the
matter is, is we've
as we think about the New Mexico
grown program again, that's a
stimulus. It stimulates more
than just a rancher selling,
selling beef to to local
institutions. It's stimulating
the economy up and down the
chain, and if we lose that, I
think that's, that's, that's
gonna be hard for those of us
that have scaled our operations
up to meet this demand. We've
already talked about the the
workforce bottleneck. I'll just
won't, won't get into that too,
too deep, but to me, it's um
it's probably the biggest thing.
Most of these plants run on a
skeleton groom.
right? You have, you have one
person that's working, that's
basically uh harvesting the
animals.
If that person goes down, it's
the front, front line of the
chain. It shuts down things for
sometimes days, sometimes weeks,
and then you have a backlog, so
I think the workforce side of
things is definitely needs
something that I'm glad it's
being addressed. We're hearing
it in a few different audiences
and so I really appreciate that
we're, we're really looking at
that at that because that is
really important going forward.
The big question always is again
do we need more capacity in the
state of New Mexico.
I've been involved as a
consultant in various
feasibility studies, and we've
always said we can't really
handle one big processing plant
in the state of New Mexico and I
completely agree, but I still
feel like there's parts of
northern New Mexico that could
still use some capacity.
Uh, Indian country, I mean, I
have a lot of, a lot of good
friends in the Navajo Nation,
Laguna, Aama, you know, they,
those are big protein consuming
populations of New Mexico and we
still don't have any, any
capacity really in that part of
the of the state. And obviously
northeastern New Mexico,
northeastern New Mexico is, is,
I mean, it, it's the most
populous dense part of New
Mexico as far as cattle goes.
but uh, but it's all about
timing is, is the timing right
now to invest in increased
capacity. I think it's a little
risky from my perspective. We're
seeing even the major plants
that are losing almost $300 a
head right now starting to think
about closing the, the major,
you know, that these major
plants that are killing 5000
head outside of the state of New
Mexico. Um
again, if I could provide any
recommendations. It's just
really simply to, you know, you
know, continue to invest, maybe
invest at a higher level and the
programs that are working in New
Mexico that are not only
stimulate the economy for
ranchers that are actually
getting a lot, a lot more
nutritious, you know, um beef on
the plates of New Mexicans from
early childhood development
centers through the, through the
senior living centers. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, OK, we have
this is a rather provoc
provocative um presentation with
its issues, um, depending on how
many questions we have. We also
have one more presentation after
this.
So, um, the event is 15 minutes
from here.
So for those of you who are
planning to go to the event, we
could go until 5:45 if we have
that many questions so that we
can get our last presentation
done. So let's go to questions,
uh, Representative Doo, you're
first.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, presenters. I
just, I think this is an area,
food security.
whether it's
ending hunger or sustainable
healthy foods for families of
all income is something that has
bipartisan support. Pretty much
all the presentations today.
from the art school, which is to
prevent catastrophic events and
to help us recover after them.
And now we're talking about our
farmers and ranchers. We're
talking about our ranchers and I
think that when I think of a
rate of return and you take a
taxpayer dollar and you invest
it into a program and it's to
make sure that they have
high-quality food on their
table.
and that when their kids go to
school or they're at a senior
mill site or they're at a
childcare center that they're
going to know where the food
came from and it's going to be
healthy and it's gonna be safe
and it's re-rotating and
recycling into our communities.
It's something that I hope we
can all support. And unless
we're going to be vegetarians,
which I don't think any of us
are because I've seen some
committee dinners and when we
get to choose between, uh, fit
rubber chicken and beef.
Everybody picks beef, just wanna
remind everyone of that. This is
something
that we can invest in, um, but
when you look at a business
model
and we can't make it rain.
then it makes it hard to justify
these fixed costs. The, the, the
costs that you can't, you, you
have to process enough meat to
make these programs sustainable,
and the rancher's saying, I can
get a a a a little bit more
money for next year's operations
if I sell live on the hoof, so
it's such a dilemma, but this is
something worth investing in
because we do have a meat mafia,
and we learned it loud and clear
during COVID. We know what's at
risk
because we experienced it in
COVID. And that, that made a
believer out of me.
I mean, I was already getting uh
beef from the Richardsons when
we could, you know, as a family
and getting custom cuts with our
neighbors and our friends, but
during COVID
when meat skyrocketed, and now
again
and the four big packers that
control the industry.
This is almost an imperative
that we can't not invest in.
And if I have to choose between
tampons and boys' bathrooms and
more money in meat processing?
and food security for New Mexico
now and in the future. I, I, my,
my dollars, my vote's gonna go
for you guys. Thank you for what
you do.
Thank you.
Uh, Representative Zamora, then
Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and it's
kind of sad
to hear all the challenges we're
facing.
The amount of money that it
takes to put one of these plants
in all the way to
to the rancher growing the beef
and where do we go with it
because of the cost and, and,
and we think
because of the high cost of beef
that everybody's making money
and it's not true, you know,
I've, I've seen it in the
farming end of it. I've, I've
grown cattle myself and
and sometimes high cost brings
high cost on the other end, and
that's where we sit today.
Somehow, the state of New Mexico
has to still stand behind this
and still make it work somehow.
How do we get these places
started where where they can,
they can be cash flowing and be
in a place where there's solid
to stay in our communities and
in the state of New Mexico.
We still have a lot of work to
do, uh, as legislators.
We don't need to give up even
though it's a, it's a tough
challenge.
I look forward to going back not
only
with.
what we've passed in the in the
state because there was a man by
the name of Jack Chatfield that
sat solid on that stool and
didn't give up
And then now
what it does is it creates more
challenges for us, but let's
stand there. Let's, let's stand
our ground, keep moving, moving
forward, and
people like
you presenters sitting up here
You're the people that need to
come to us and make us
understand what you're seeing on
the ground at your level and the
challenges and how we need to
change it. We're, we're talking
about
if, if you take it and compare
it to something else to to the
windmills and clean energy. It's
because we supported those
things.
It's not that people could go
out there and put up a windmill
by themselves and make it work.
It it wouldn't, they didn't,
they didn't have enough money,
they didn't, they couldn't have
a way to hook it up to the grid,
but if we all come together and
we work on these things,
they're possible
And as a legislator here in the
state of New Mexico, I wanna
keep working with you guys and,
and
face.
take care of these challenges
that we face.
as, as we go forward with it and
where do we need to go from
here? Whether, whether it's,
it's farm exempt rules or
or financing or how do we make
this deal work for New Mexico.
It's not just important to the
individuals, but it's important
to the state.
And, and as we go forward, we,
we just keep working, we just.
our hands will get calloused,
but we, we keep working in the
the fruit will
will reward us later.
And uh thank you, Madam Chen,
and thank you presenters.
Thank you. I have Senator
Cervantes, then Representative
Armstrong.
Senator Cervantes, thank you.
Um, in 2024 we passed the meat
inspection Act, Madam Chair.
You're one sponsors and uh, I
just want to know from the
group, have you all had any
difficulties with that act as it
was passed? Do you anticipate
the need for any changes in the
state statute?
And if so, specifically, what,
what shortcomings are there in
the law we pass, Madam Chair,
Senator Cervantes, and members
of the committee, um
truly are challenges or hurdles
if, if you will, have been
really just working with FSIS
and USDA on legislation side and
state side. It's more of just
understanding how this this
state is built, how the program
is going to be built to help
benefit the state, but it's
truly been on it's, it's truly
been with USDA and FSIS just
ensuring that we're meeting
their criteria as well as um
just meeting their timelines.
Thank you. And the and the
chair's trying to move along and
I've chaired committees before,
so I know to do that. So I'm
just curious on the work that we
did, that bill, as you all may
remember, was years in the
making. I don't know many
versions. I see a lot of heads
nodding years and years and
years of debate and discussion
and infighting to get it passed.
Uh, uh, um, I just want to note,
uh, it came to our committee,
Senate Judiciary Committee, was
23 pages. He left, he left, it
was 2, and I just wanted to know
whether we missed anything. It
doesn't sound like we lost
anything in the 21 pages we cut
out. So that's what I
just wanted to check, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Thank
you. And as the chair of
judiciary had indicated, uh, he
thought most could be put into
the rules.
So Representative Armstrong,
thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
I do want to publicly thank
again Senator Cervantes for
working so hard to get that
passed. Also Belinda Garland.
um, who, who stood steadfast,
um, and so thank you again,
Senator Cervantes for what you
did with that bill, um, I just
wanted to thank you for bringing
this to our attention, the
issues that you're having,
because if we don't know,
uh we can't fix or try to fix
what we don't know. So we, I
thank you for that and I've
already texted a couple of
people to say, how can we fix
this? We, we weren't aware of
some of these issues that are
going on
and so, uh, mainly I just wanna
say thank you for bringing it to
our attention and we're gonna
work hard to make this work and
make it right and uh let's get
some New Mexicans feeding New
Mexicans. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. I appreciate all of
you coming today. Um, one of the
points that I picked up from
this is that there's a financial
strain in trying to do um
to run an industry such as this,
and you can't, I also heard you
can't do all three levels. So,
um, I just texted uh my beef
grower and said, you're not
charging enough for your beef.
He's sitting in the audience.
so, um, but thank you very much
and let's see what we can do
about it. If you have specific
proposals we're all happy to
hear those specific proposals
for the next session. Thank you
very much.
So we are gonna move to our very
last uh presentation for today
on Weather stations, water
resilience, and the impacts of
drought and extreme weather on
agriculture.
OK, so we're gonna go ahead and
get started. Um, we have Dave
Dubois, Sam Ferna, and Debbie
Hughes. So, um, Dave, why don't
you go ahead?
This button, OK. Well, thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. I'm, I'm pleased to
be here. Uh, this is, my name is
Dave Dubois. I'm state
climatologist for New Mexico and
my job right now is to give you
a briefing to set the stage for
drought for the rest of our um
panel here. So I'm gonna get
started.
So I first, um,
picture, I hope everybody can
catch up once we get the
handouts.
Um
this is a, a, a graph of the
area of New Mexico, covered by
each of the US drought monitor,
um, categories in the US dr
monitor goes from uh level 1 to
4, and, um, and it's kind of,
this is the whole, the whole US
drought monitoring since 2000,
so it's 25 years and um I just
want to point toward one thing
is um the D4, the worst, the,
uh, exceptional popped up 11
times in the last 25. Somewhere
in New Mexico. So this is the
percent area
of each of the different
categories.
It's just kind of gets you a
sense of kind of how we've been,
we've been in and in and out of
droughts. So we're, we're very
familiar with it. So here's the
latest drought monitor map that
comes out once a week on
Thursday mornings, and our, our,
our group, as well as National
Weather Service, we come up with
the suggestions for this map for
the US drought monitor. As you
can see, um
the areas that are white, we
call that dinara, and there's no
drought there according to the
US drought Monitor method. And
as you get into the worst
categories of drought, um, it
goes over on the far southwest
corner of New Mexico. That's
where we are experiencing them
the most long term impacts of
drought, the D4, as well as the
D3 going all the way up to Kain,
actually all the way to the
Cibola County and um going in
into um um um Sierra County. Um,
you can see where, where the
um, the, the latest, um, the
last few months we've had uh a
decent monsoon in a lot of parts
of the state, whereas, uh, you
can see where it's not colored
anything. It's the
And so I just wanted to paint a
picture of kind of the, the
longer term drought over the
last water year. So this shows
you a um a map of the snowwater
equivalent, the amount of liquid
water in the snowpack as um over
time, so this goes from October
of last year to pretty much
just last week, um, and, and you
can see the, the green line is
the, is the median um amount of
snowpack, and this is the
headwaters of the Rio Grande.
And so as you and the black line
is the actual amount that we had
this water year, and then the
top line and the bottom line are
the, the lowest, and then, so
you can see, we start off like
very uh encouraging, and then we
leveled out and from the end of
November, December, all the way
to to pretty much early
um early March actually. And
then we saw some storms in and
we popped up, um, but it really
didn't get us out much of, um,
into the, we, we were in this,
the, the, the first through 10th
percentile actually, really low.
Um, so this is a multiple, um,
snow, um, snow towel stations,
and you can see we, we melted
out early again, um.
So, and this is a, a graph um
that the Office of State
Engineer, um, puts it together
for us for drought monitor
monthly drought monitoring work
group. And it basically is the,
the large reservoirs in New
Mexico as part of the Rio Grande
Basin, and each one of the, the
bars are the total amount of
storage going all the way back
to the 80s, and you can see all
the way to the right is our, the
current year. And so we're,
we're down there with, um, the
2000
um, pretty low. I mean, we were
at, at like 3.8% of capacity and
it's currently in that picture
was taken by a friend on uh
August 2nd, um, on a plane, um,
just showing you how, how dry,
we, we all know if you've been
there and look at the data, how,
how low our reservoir storages
are. Um, and then then the
moving on to the spring of this
year, we've had an
exceptionally, uh, windy year,
as we all know. If you live
here, um, and, and actually
there are average winds, but
this is at the
Las Cruces airport just over
here on the West Mesa. Um, we
had the, the second highest
average wind speed, um, the
last, the highest was 2022. Just
so it gives you a sense of, yes,
it was dry, not only in the
headwaters in Rio Grande, as
well as the rest of New Mexico.
It was windy and as well as um
we've had um a record number of
uh wind erosion events, and I
think my colleague down in UTEP
who keeps track of every wind
demand. We've, I think we're
up to past 50 events this year.
And the, uh, the National
Weather Service office keeps
track of them and provides
warnings, and they had 199
warnings, uh, as of July 14th,
and usually there's only about
4.
So you can see it's pretty bad,
um, in terms of the, in, in the
air quality index for the the
Mexicanvi Department. There were
12 days there were dust storms,
the highest level of um uh air
quality index. And this shows
you the, uh, going back to
precipitation, this shows you
the, the June and July, not the,
not the, not the full, uh,
monsoon, but the, the first two
months, uh, going all the way
back to 1895. You can see the
very far right is our current
year 2025, and we're, we've
a statewide, um, we are just a
bit, we're a bit above average,
um, so, but it's not all, it's
not equal as we're gonna see in
a minute here. So here's our,
this is pretty much the um
beginning of the monsoon cause
this is the accumulated
precipitation over the last 60
days, which starts on June 17th
and goes to last, the end of
last week, and you can see that
the yellows, um, are in that 8
to 10 inches. So you can see a
lot of areas that gotten some
good decent rains. However, I
I wanna, what I want to point
out is the west side of the, of
the state.
Um, a lot of parts of the west
side of the state have missed
out on a lot of the monsoons,
especially the, the far
northwest. So that's the total
amounts in terms of amounts of
precipitation
And then this one here is the
same area, but it's the percent
of average or normal. As you can
see that, that deep, deep red in
the far northwest is really
shown kind of where, where we
haven't had any rain, very, very
little. We had just a, a just a
little bit in beginning of June
up in the four corners, but
that's about it. And it's also,
uh, oh, the last one I want to
point out, this is the maximum
one day amount of precipitation
we've seen so far this monsoon.
As you can see that area, um,
went all the way, um, um
kind of uh north northern um uh
Chavez into part little part
little bit of Roosevelt and the
Baca Counties where we had some
really good rains, but this is
uh just, just a kind of snapshot
to tell you where how extreme
our weather has been over the
monsoon, but the Northwest
hasn't seen hardly anything yet.
And this, um, oops, I'm going
backwards. Here we go. OK, I
just, since I make it a little
more relevant, here's the Las
Cruces, um, for the monsoon. And
so we're 125% of average, um,
that, that smooth line
is the normal and the, the green
line is the actual, and, and we
basically kicked off our monsoon
on the 25th with a with um 0.57
inches.
And so, um, and then talking
about precipitation, but the,
the whole story of drought is
not just a lack of
precipitation. It's the loss of,
of water vapor into the
evaporation and transpiration.
So that's driven a lot by
temperatures. So this is the
June June and July average
temperature
and it's ranked in terms of a
much above average or much
below. As you can see the kind
of right, sort of right down the
middle. It's pretty much near
normal to actually cooler than
normal and, and it's right down
the middle from I-25 going
north. The west side of the
state has been pretty warm, you
know, in, in areas much above
average to a few little spots or
record warmest. So that's our
story here. And then this is a
um a product that we use called
Eddy. Um, the evaporative demand
drought index, and it's a gauge
of how thirsty the atmosphere
is. The deeper the red, that the
thirstier the atmosphere is, and
that's that that's pretty much
gauges the loss of evaporation
going in the atmosphere. So
so if you were to apply water to
irrigation or rainfall, that
would quickly quickly go into
the atmosphere for those red
areas. So you can see it kind of
focuses on the, the northwest
part of the state.
We go to the next slide here.
Here we go. And then this is a,
a product that I've, we've been
looking at a lot. It uses soil
moisture, so it's the top meter
of soil and it basically it's,
it ranks them. So anywhere where
it's that brown color is uh,
it's, it's basically dry, pretty
dry, and you can see that kind
of the overlays if you were to
put the two maps together where
we had less precipitation, you
get dry soil. So it's kind of,
it's, it's indicative of the,
the drought continuing on, um,
until we get moisture and then
the west
East side of the state is not
looking too bad in terms of soil
moisture.
So, um, in terms of the, um,
outlooks and where we're looking
as remainder of my talk here,
um, the US drought monitor as
well as the, the climate
prediction Center is predicting
drought to persist in the
majority of New Mexico. There's
a few little areas in Southeast,
Southeast Arizona, southwest New
Mexico is basically, it's gonna,
it's gonna improve, but still
it's gonna be there. So we're
stuck with drought for a while.
Um, here's the 8 to 14 day, uh,
focusing on the right side of
the graph there, um, that green,
which
is good. We like to see green as
his chances for above average
precipitation for the next,
that's, this is through the 28th
of August. Um, so that's good.
And, and I think the last, the,
um, I just looked at the, the
forecast for today and it
actually that Green has moved
into Southeastern New Mexico
too. So going further out to the
um um into September, um, the
climate prediction Center, if
you look at the right side, the
precipitation outlook says equal
chance
s which is good in terms of
it's, it's not showing a dry
signal. So that's probably be
average likely average
precipitation going into
September. However, if you look
into the, the rest of the, the
rest of the, the summer into the
early um fall, there's a dry
signal looking coming up and
that's that on the right side of
this graph, um, showing this
brown, so that there's a little
bit of probability that we may
be drying out in the four
corners area, which is not good.
So this, so that's my
main bottom line story for us
now is the eastern side of the
state, not doing too bad. A few
little areas missed out, but our
main concern is the Northwest,
the western part of the state
into Arizona, um, in, in the, in
some of the drought monitor, if
you look in Arizona, they're,
they're also struggling. So
that's, that's our focus right
now area of concern, of warning.
Um, so last thing I want to talk
about real quickly is, um, the,
the status of the ZMet weather
station network. So this is our
current build out right now.
We've got all the stations, um
out there, there's hardware and
and collecting data at all of
this, all these these stations
here. Um, however, uh, and this
is, um, a picture of one of the
stations I was just out there at
the White Rock Chapter House,
um, getting it online, we, we
have it on sale and it's on
their website, and this is kind
of what it looks like. This is a
tier one tower. Those are
30-foot high tower. We, we
collect all the weather
parameters, temperature,
humidity, uh, rainfall, wind
speed, um, and then we also
collect soil moisture at
at 4 inches depth. And then this
gets sent out every 5 minutes
and goes on our website and then
we're, our goal is to get a, get
to all the stations on to Noah,
so we can get them into the
programs. So right now, um,
we've got all, uh, we've, I
counted this actually right
before we started here. I got
199 stations on our website
right now. And then uh we're
getting, um, uh, we're gonna go
moving to 136 right now, and
then I think we're adding
another 4 this week. Um, so
there'll be 140 online
for NOA to go into to programs
that everybody can see the
National Weather Service can see
for any of their programs. And
then we're gonna shoot for um
200 stations by the beginning of
November. So basically, it takes
some time to to kind of test the
data, make sure it goes out
before we, we send it to NOAA.
And then, um, um, and then we're
gonna have a uh big celebration
when we have them all up and
online. So,
OK, that's my contact and I
don't want to delay anymore, so
I'll hand it off to the, to, to
Doctor Fernand.
Great, thank you. Um, now we're
going to, uh, Sam
sorry.
OK, Chair, members of the
committee, thank you.
Alrighty,
I'm Sam Fernna, director of the
New Mexico Water Resources
Research Institute and I'll
paraphrase this description of
our mission. We are the Water
Research Institute of New Mexico
and we provide support for all
the universities and agencies in
New Mexico for research to solve
water problems, also providing
education outreach and technical
support.
I'm here today to talk about the
NMWRRI agricultural water
resilience Program, Agwerp, as I
fondly referred to it, um
the AgWor program implements
Action A2, which is one of the
11 priorities in the New Mexico
fifty-year water action plan.
and the goal is to maintain
resilience of New Mexico
agriculture and provide food
security in a future with less
available water, as stated in HB
2.5 315, the enabling
legislation for eggworp.
An overview of the program, the
legislature appropriated 5
million in fiscal 26 for this
program, 4.5 million will be
made available for individual on
the ground projects and 0.5
million for project
implementation and water impact
assessment.
The maximum award for each
project is 250K. Project funds
must be expended from September
1525 through June 30th, 26, we
had applications due on July
twenty-eighth, and eligible
applicants were soil and water
conservation districts,
irrigation and conservancy
districts, the Asseian community
ditch Associations, Watershed
districts, local governments,
and tribal governments. The
eligible applicants partner with
ranchers and farmers
to develop, propose, and conduct
on the ground projects that
improve the ability to manage,
conserve, and efficiently apply
limited water for agricultural
production.
So that's what the program is
about. Um
launch right into the exciting
status of application
submissions we received 61
applications.
Funds requested from NMWRI 8.57
million Matching funds offered
by the proposers.
voluntary matching funds, I
should point out, 1.73 million
So the total program activity
proposed 10.3 million for this
program.
So this is a map that shows the
spatial distribution of the
applications to the program, and
I think it's great, it shows
it's not lined up along the Rio
Grande corridor, we're reaching
out to the east and west, north
and south in New Mexico were
capturing.
rangelands, the rancher aspect
was very important for this
program and farmers, um,
throughout the state of New
Mexico.
The numbers you might notice
25.48 for example. That's just
uh the year 2025, and that's
number 48 in our stack of 61
applications.
And I might point out we just
reviewed those this morning and
we'll be conti conducting the
panels more tomorrow.
Here are the applications by
category.
um
so here I'll just name those
categories, 12345, and then give
some detail what it means.
Number one, gates distribution
and delivery systems, we
received 15 proposals, shade
balls and tanks, 12 proposals,
modern irrigation, 9 proposals.
Assacia and watershed
restoration 9 proposals. Solar
pumps and systems 7 proposals
and 9 other
So what do those things mean for
water resilience and
efficiency
gates and distribution, these
are essential for delivering
water. For example, typically
you have a head gate, you
manually open it and over could
be days you the water flows out
from your head gate to.
irrigate your field. If you use
gates and pipes, you can get
that water out rapidly. It's
more efficient and enhances
resilience of the irrigation
network.
Number 2, shade balls. These
are.
great because they just reduce
evaporation to the atmosphere
and save water, so you see in
this picture, the shade covered
drinking trough is reducing
evaporation, also improving
water quality and limiting algal
growth.
Modern irrigation, of course.
flood irrigation has the benefit
of recharging aquifers and
leaching salts.
but with less water, the same
yield can be reached with less
water using drip or efficient
irrigation that delivers water
directly to the plant roots,
saving water. Assean watershed
restoration. These projects
build resilience by helping
farms and communities adapt to
drought and climate challenges,
these just show some of the
receiving waters in Asakias and
rivers. These we're talking
about projects that maintain
storage on the landscape, reduce
erosion, um, increase forage.
and solar pumps and systems,
these provide a reliable,
cost-effective, environmentally
friendly way to pump water, um.
reducing carbon emissions.
helping mitigate effects of
climate change and drought, and
run by solar energies, so of
course.
saving energy
So finally, we'll use the
500k to run the entire program
and also provide a water impact
assessment. So this is the phase
two of the program that'll be
continued through June 30th, and
NMWI with researchers at New
Mexico State University.
um
we'll assess the projects in
terms of water efficiency
and resilience, maintaining the
water supply and making farms
and ranches able to function
through drought.
and some devices will be
installed at these project
locations, examples, 5 m,
pressure transducers, etc.
So we hope
by June 30th to have not a
network of great projects and.
an assessment of how much water
these have saved.
how many ranches and acres or
and watersheds are
participating, and the increase
in agricultural production
efficiency and economic water
use efficiency.
So
will be announcing the project
recipients August 29th and hope
to have some.
um.
great information for you as
this project goes along and
there's my contact information.
Thank you very much
Thank you.
OK, going on to Debbie Hughes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm going to
be really short, but I've got my
farmer and rancher hat on today.
So, um,
if um if you're a farmer or a
rancher, you watch the weather,
you check the weather, you worry
about the weather more than any
other occupation, and, uh, one
way you can tell if they're
farmer ranchers how many weather
apps they've actually got on
their phones because they're
following it all the time. See,
see if there's a storm.
Um, ranchers and farmers in, in
a desert state like New Mexico,
sometimes it's, it feels like
it's 1 or 2 years out that
you're gonna go broke because
there's just not enough, enough
water. Um, our ranch in the
Guadalupe Mountains last year
just didn't receive water. We
didn't catch water in our dirt
tanks. We didn't make grass, um,
my son had to sell most of the
cattle. Now, as you saw on Dr.
Du Bois's thing, we're in the 8
to 10 inch rainfall, but lots of
grass, all our tanks
are full of water and we have
just a few cows up there because
he had to sell the cows. And of
course now we worry about
whether or not we're gonna have
a fire danger because we've,
we're making so much uh fuel,
um, but the this weather
stations that he talked about
are really critical um to
ranchers being able to be
sustainable. Um, the USDA
drought Insurance Program is a
lifesaver, especially in really
dry years. And so these weather
stations give us the data that
we really need. I think before
they did this,
um, the closest to our ranch was
like a weather station in
Riodoso and maybe one in
Midland, like it was that far
away, so we didn't really
reflect what was going on in the
Guadalupe Mountains. Um, so, you
know, it's exciting to hear
we've got this all on the
ground, but the state
legislature needs to keep
funding the operation of them
because there's gonna be all
kinds of things to fix them and,
and keep running the program.
And then this new water
conservation program. I'm
really, really excited about it.
It was desperately needed in New
Mexico
um, installing tools like the
shade balls, which I'm very
familiar with because the soil
and water districts are very
involved, but even solar panels
on your wells and water tanks,
um, a lot of that stuff is
expensive and, and the, you
know, farmers and ranchers can't
afford some of this. So these
grants and working with WRI, um,
are really gonna help us with
practices that help the farmers
and ranchers be sustainable and
maybe, maybe they even might be
profitable in a year or so, but,
uh, we've also got
issues with our rivers being
choked with non-native species
are forests are just waiting for
the next catastrophic fire or
flood, and I guess one of the
thing I wanna say about
agriculture because people are
always saying, oh you use all
the water. Well, if you're a
rancher, you grow grass. That's
what you grow. If you're a
farmer, you have crops, and
really you're only using the
amount of water that your crop
takes. The rest of it is going
back into the system. So we're
really not using all the water.
We are growing the food that
needs the water, but I also
wanna give um Tom Patterson
who's the incoming um Callior's
president, um, kudos for this
because he actually is the one
that recommended to the governor
the desperate need for this
water conservation program and
um
this, I think this helps us to
be able to help the state with
our water issues if we're able
to monitor this and, and be more
conservative. We would like to
see this program, uh, funded at
10 million next year. As you can
see, he's already had that kind
of request and there was a super
short turnaround for the grant,
so I think we could have $20
million worth of requests pretty
easily, um.
but we also need these weather
stations so that we can continue
to operate and if we want our
locally grown food, we want our
farmers and ranchers to
participate in regenerative
agriculture, um, this is really
needed. Our, our farm is in Eddy
County, and we are totally
surrounded by either drilling
rigs or companies that are
supporting oil and gas, so
agriculture in Eddy County is um
really leaving, I guess I should
say. Um, so, you
know, that's the other thing
that farmers or ranchers are
having to deal with. It's great
that the state's getting all
this money, but um we're, we're
having to deal with, you know,
what happens when you, when you
turn a whole couple of counties
into oil and gas producing,
which I support, but there,
there's a lot of downside to it
too. So really appreciate the
time, just wanna make sure that
agriculture um does, you know,
support this it's important to
us and if you look at your
entire budget, there is not very
much money that goes towards
agriculture in the big picture,
so
I appreciate all that you can do
to support this. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. Go to questions we
have representative Zamora, then
Representative Cates. Anyone
else?
OK, Representative Samoa. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'll try to
make this quick. So, uh, Madam
Chair and Debbie, so the 10
million, is that for the water
conservancy projects or is that
for the weather stations also or
what kind of clear, clear that
up what it, what the Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Zamora, I was referring to the
water conservation program
through WRI. I don't know what
amount um Doctor Dubois needs um
to keep the or maybe he's got
enough
money anyways, but we'll
definitely uh ask for more if he
just lets us know what he needs,
so. Uh, OK, I just wanted to
clear that up cause, cause it's
because the wording right after
that, it talks about the weather
stations I wanted to clear that
up if, if it was an as for the
water, for the weather stations
and Doc Doctor Devois, Madam
Chair, and Doctor Devois, I'd
like to thank you
for dedicating the past, what,
5+ years of your life to this
weather station program.
Sometimes I think that people
that aren't in agriculture don't
understand how important this is
for the state of New Mexico and
the agricultural community.
It's a very important tool that
the ag community needs in the
state of New Mexico and, and
we hit rock bottom on this
thing.
and all of a sudden we had to
wake up and, and rejuvenate this
and put it, put it back to work.
Uh, one of the questions I have
for you, uh, Madam Chair and
Doctor Devois, is this
information getting all the way
to RMA in DC now.
Madam Chair
Yes, um, thank you, Madam Chair
and the rest of the committee
and Representative Zamora, um,
quickly answer that. So we are
working with um RMA. We've had
um several meetings with myself,
um, my, my director at AESJ
who's in the audience and uh
with RMA as well as theOAli
Prediction Center and other,
other folks, and we're we're
we're currently working towards
that. They're, they have
not agreed to put it in the, the
pasture range for forest PRF
yet. Um, I, I'm, we're not
giving up
So we're, we're collecting data
as, as if it's gonna go into
there and we've offered
suggestions to um RMA on, on
possible alternatives on how we,
how we can actually get the
weather data into their system,
um, I think it's, you know, they
had, we, we approached them on a
tough, tough time, right, right
around after a lot of cuts in
staff were let go. Uh, both
programs, um, so maybe after a
little while,
um, the dust settles with
the federal programs with
weather and climate that um
maybe we can make some more
headway. I, um, the my bottom
line is we're not giving up, um,
and, but currently the they it
it at best it could take more
than one year, maybe 2 years to
get it in. If, if we, um, that,
that was kind of the, the um the
last conference call we had with
them.
and, you know, in terms of where
they are with staffing and the
come up with a plan forward and,
and I, I just, I just want to
add one more thing is that uh um
the National Weather Service is,
is, is plan, they told me and
I've told others that they're
gonna be losing a lot of the
weather stations that are part
of the PRF, the, the rainfall
index and they're eliminating 50
weather stations in the
Albuquerque County warning area,
which is a big part of New
Mexico. So that
may be a motivation for them to
ramp up. I don't know. I can't,
I can't, um, it's a federal
agency, um, I, I can't make any
promises, but we're, we're,
we're heading that way and, and
I'm committed to keep on going.
thank you Madam Chair and
and Dave, uh
in the negotiations and then the
talk that you had with the RMA,
was any of the New Mexico
congressional delegation
involved in that?
Uh, that was mainly between us,
um, meaning, um, NMSU, myself,
and RMA and NOA. So, um, I, like
I said, we're not giving up and
we may, uh, it'd be probably
good to add other people. I,
and, and I would suggest to you
even, even if you want some of
the egg community here in the
New Mexico to testify to some of
the issues that are related with
our, with our forage programs
and everything we have here in
the state. I'm sure there's a
lot. I could put you a pretty
big number of ag people together
to testify onto something like
that. And as we know, Madam
Chair, and, and uh
and Dave is
we know that Martin Heinrich
and, and Ben Ray Lujan also
stood behind this, and we have
them up there in DC to work on
issues like this and, and
I think we ought to be staying
in touch with them and keeping
them updated as to what's going
on and, and what our challenges
are today with this program, and
Madam Chair, uh, Dave,
how
how are your cash flows in this
program and is the university
gonna ask
uh the legislature for some kind
of money to, to fund it.
and, and kind of give us a
little detail on what kind of
mons you're getting back from
NOA for the information that
they're receiving from you, uh,
Madam Chernde. Yes, um, thank
you, Madam Chair. Committee and
Representative Zamora, um, so
we, uh, I'm not gonna ask for
any money right now. Um, we're,
I'm gonna, um
we, we have a, a couple more
people to hire, and I want, I
wanna get assume I'm kind of
get, get to know like our, our
true operating expenses once we
get everybody on board and um
get things going, maybe a year,
maybe a year or two of um
getting her feet wet on how, how
expensive things are. I know the
cost is going up, everything is
going up, um, with
instrumentation, so, um, I'm
gonna assess that, um, in the
next year or two, and as, as we
go forward and um,
I'll, I'll work through um our
channels here at NMSU and um uh
the A experimentation if we need
any additional funding, um, and
Madam Chair, and I, I've
answered your other question
about the federal money. So we
get paid to, to, um, actually
Noah buys our data to for use in
forecasting um for the, for the
country. And so for every,
every, uh, month that we operate
weather stations, we do get some
money back, um, it, it's not
enough to run the entire
network. Um, so we rely heavily
on the state legislatures, uh,
funding, um, which is over 900K,
mainly, mainly pays for salaries
for, for folks, uh, technicians,
people to make, make sure cause,
um, the weather stations go down
all the time, batteries go out,
uh, we have lots of weather
problems, so that, that money is
well used. Um, and, um, so
we're, um
cautiously going forward with
our current amount and, and
we'll, I'll be assessing and
letting uh my director, my
management know if we needed
additional money, but right now
we're not going to ask for any
money right now.
And, and Madam Chair, and Dave,
I really appreciate that about
you, that you're being real
conservative with the money and,
and, and your running a tight
ship.
but I also would like
to give you some insight as to
how slow we can work at the
legislature, so, so I think, I
think that you, you need to plan
ahead of time, a year or two
ahead of time for those ask
because if, if we get it put
into
HB2 where it's a, it's a
reoccurring.
uh, money to you
I think, I think we'll be good
with it, but if you're gonna ask
an intermittent.
uh ask and, and
you see what we're facing from
the national level and then what
if we come up next year and we
don't have any money for you, I,
I don't want this program to go
downhill.
It's very important to that
community and, and, and the tool
that they use and their
insurance claims and everything
else they do.
I think
that we ought to, we ought to be
looking ahead of time
and, and if you don't do, if you
don't need that much money,
maybe not do that much of an
ask, but let's make this program
solid. It needs to be solid. It
needs to be available for the
state. We've all seen the
importance of it when we didn't
have it and people losing
hundreds of thousands of dollars
just
I, I believe one of the ranches
had lost something like 100,000
$100,000 plus dollars in, in
fees that they paid in insurance
and that's not, we can't, we
can't have any more of that. OK.
So
my advice to you and, and, and
you know the numbers that you
have on hand.
I don't, but, uh, my advice to
you is, is be cautious with how
slow we can be on our end.
Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
presenters, thank you for your
presentation and that concludes
my questions and comments, Madam
Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative Kates.
Thank you, Chair, and, and thank
you also for your presentation
and I wholeheartedly agree with
Representative Zamora. If you
need funding in 2 or 3 years,
you need to start asking now,
and I appreciate and I expect
good stewardship of all, um,
public funds, but, um, you need
to ask this is too important, it
will save lives and save
livelihoods, and so I, I I
wholeheartedly support it, um, I
wanted to ask
a couple of questions, uh, in
this report here
on slide 2 or slide 3 if we
don't do the, the title slide,
so, um, this is for uh
uh the the uh Dave Dubois is the
dark red up top. Is that
basically like from cochiity to
Socorro, the, the, the, the high
drought. Is it that following
the Rio Grande River?
Um
yes, um
it's my mind went, um,
yes, the, uh, D4, um,
man chair, um, the D4 in that,
in that map is the is the worst
case uh drought, and it's mainly
in the
um far southwest, right, I'm,
I'm talking about the second
worst case, the deep breath, and
you have one. I'm so sorry,
these slides are for people with
24 year old eyes and I have old
lady eyes. I can't read the
numbers on it. I'm sorry for
making it small. So, um, so, uh,
the, the red part of is that
basically following the Rio
Grande River. Yeah, there's,
there's two areas of D3, Man and
chair, um, there's one up in the
kind of
the north, Ria Riba, it kind of
goes down, um, into, I think, I
believe it goes, it goes through
Sandoval and Bernal Leo and then
there's another one on the far
southwest part of the state,
yeah, yeah, there's, there's,
there's an area there that, that
really is missed out on
precipitation that that
specifically that area and it
the coloring is, is basically
keyed on the precipitation, a
lot of it, not all of it, on the
sort of like percentiles. So you
basically recurrence. I
' m so sorry it's late. We want
short answers. I'm so sorry,
hon, but we gotta go. So it is,
that's what I'm just trying to
establish. It is following the
Rio Grande River, that this is
on precipitation, uh,
groundwater flow, melt off, and
it's really, uh, it's, although
the state is doing it, it's
really based on like federal
drought, um.
uh, nature. It is not man-made
drought because those are gonna
be my next questions. Right,
Madam Chair, it's, it's, it's a,
this is only uh precipitation
that doesn't consider, um
um groundwater. Correct. So,
this is no, no groundwater
consideration for this, for this
particular map. OK, that's,
that's good to know. Thank you.
So then, um, then on this
report, I am asking when you say
um qualifications for you had 61
applications, qualifications to
any of these, the new
qualifications, can they be
501c3s or do they have to be a
psych associations.
They need to be a public entity.
OK, so in a safely so a semi
quasi government. OK, um thank
you
And um and I would just say a
couple of things. One is, um,
why you're looking for funding
and you're looking for expansion
for um these
um minor or or mobile uh weather
stations and other
weather-related measurement
devices, I would seriously
consider obviously, uh, you are
at a university and um and then
New Mexico Tech, but CNM has a
whole entrepreneur
program that is looking for
things like this that I think
this programs to do maintenance
on the weather stations and also
how to make it more mobile.
They're looking for problem
solving and that technology and
I think this is right up their
alley and be a good partnership
with them as well, um
I would also respectfully ask
whether or not um
New Mexico State is interested
in measuring what I would call
man-made. It's not, I can't use
the word drought, it's a federal
word but manmade water scarcity,
as in
uh, infrastructure failure.
in watersheds, Zakia, siphons,
they've caused drought that is
not on precipitation, but it is
cause that is also affecting our
agricultural community. Thank
you, chairs, and thank you for
your presentation.
Thank you. Any other questions?
OK, uh thank you very much for
the final presentation of today.
I appreciate your waiting around
and uh
please do get ready any requests
that you have for us so that we
don't have it at the last
minute. Thank you.
Committee members, you are
invited to join all of our
sponsors, and I will read
through the sponsors tomorrow
morning. Um, at the Rio Grande
Winey, if you put it in your
GPS, it's about 15 minutes from
here, and the legislative
Finance Committee is also
joining us at that event this
evening. Thank you for being
