OK, so for our next panel, um,
We have 2 panelists with us and
we have 2 panelists on Zoom. Uh,
so again, we're going to go in
the order of
For having us here to talk about
Beaver restoration and
management.
I'm gonna start with a brief um
presentation about beaver
restoration and the work that
we're doing to expand beaver
Floodplain, um, and wood and
trees and shrubs are generally
absent from these headwater
streams. In New Mexico, only 7%
of our streams are perennial.
And this is based on data by the
New Mexico Environment
Department and 45% of our
assessed streams are impaired
with respect to water quality.
If we had more beavers on in our
watersheds in New Mexico, we
probably would have more
Perennial reaches of streams
because they would be storing
water that would slowly be
released to streams throughout
the year instead of rushing down
channels. Um, beavers could also
help with the water quality
impairments by sequestering
pollutants in the floodplains
and in beaver ponds and by
shading streams with trees and
other riparian vegetation that
would help cool the streams.
Next slide.
Um, our streams are in this
condition because of historic
land practices and a lot of
these Latin practices built and
maintained our societies.
But they also did damage to our
ecosystems and that damage is
something that we're having to
deal with and address now. Next
slide.
Equally as important as the fact
that beavers were eliminated
from many of our watersheds.
During the period, historic
records show that during the
period from 1824 to 1842, about
44,000 beaver pelts exited New
Mexico. They were trapped and
they were transported along the
old Santa Fe Trail and
eventually they went to Europe
to become hats, warm,
waterproof.
Fashionable hats that and this
practice went on for decades,
um, and the 44,000 number
Um, but this, this practice went
on and of course beavers weren't
just removed because they were a
commodity, beavers have been
trapped and removed from our
watersheds because they are
coexistence problems between
humans and beavers.
Next slide. So Rio Grande return
has been very active. We really
ramped up since 2020, and we've
been doing this restoration
process. It's called low tech
process-based restoration. And,
um, it involves building beaver
dam analogs, so on the screen is
a photo of a beaver dam analog.
It's a, it's a beaver dam that's
built by humans, by hand, out of
logs and branches and rocks and
sediment and its purpose is to
raise the water table and
locally flood the um flood the
floodplain and create wetlands
and create habitat for beaver to
come in and occupy the area. So
we build these beaver dam
analogs and we don't just build
a few of them, we build them,
um, multiple, um,
And within a stream. In fact,
since 2020 we've built 4000 of
these in-stream structures along
15 stream miles in New Mexico,
and this is in 15 contiguous
stream miles, but on different
streams generally it's short
segments of streams, although on
one stream we will have a 9 mile
reach on the Rio Saboya and in
the Hemaz River within
about 3 years, 3 to 5 years, we
have, we have reached 9 miles.
Um,
So
we build the beaver dam analogs,
um, and, and another kind of
structure called a post-assisted
log structure which I'll show
you in the next slide, and we
put a lot of wood in the streams
and sometimes that is whole
trees. Next slide please.
Uh, this is, these are photos of
our crew, um, building the
Beaverdam analogs just showing
them pounding in posts and some
of these beaverdam logs are
anchored by posts and some of
them are just, um, placed with
very tightly woven layers of
branches and rocks and sediment.
Next slide, please.
This is a post-assisted log
structure and it's really just a
tangle of wood that is um
emplaced into the stream with
posts, um, and it can be in
different orientations in the
stream in the middle of the bank
or on the side, and those serve
different purposes. Um, they
serve the purpose of providing
fish habitat. Um, they can serve
the purpose of moving the stream
to one bank or another to flood
the floodplain or
They can serve to move the
stream to harvest some sediment
that is then caught downstream
in a Beaverdam analog.
Um, in the back, whoops, in the
background you can see that
there are some whole trees
placed in the stream as well,
just to add wood and complexity
and fish and aquatic insect
habitat to that stream.
Next slide. So over this period
since 2020, um, our organization
has planted 600,000 willow,
aspen, and cottonwood stems,
mostly willows. Um, we've
constructed fences around 150
acres to prevent plants from
grazing while they're being
established. Um, we've completed
or have in progress 50 projects
we employ 3 crews, um,
to
are full time throughout the
year and one's a seasonal crew
of college students, um, to
perform this work and we engaged
200 volunteers annually in this
work.
Um, so this work, while some of
these numbers like 600,000
willows in 4 years are pretty
big numbers.
It's all there's a lot of
potential for this work to
increase beaver habitat
throughout New Mexico and these
areas where beaver have been um
extirpated and,
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Next
up we're going to go online. Uh,
do we have Doctor Emily Fairfax
with us.
I'm here. OK, great.
Um, could somebody turn on
screen sharing for me.
Oh.
Awesome, there it is.
All right, so, good afternoon,
chair, vice chair and committee.
My name is Doctor Emily Fairfax
and I'm an assistant professor
of geography at the University
of Minnesota, and an
ecohydrologist. I study how
beaver ecosystem engineering
changes the hydrology and the
ecology of riverscapes
throughout the American West.
So over the last two centuries,
about half of the waterways in
the American West have become
degraded, and that includes New
Mexico, which relatedly has lost
just over half of its historic
wetland area.
Rivers and streams out here are
incised. They're disconnected
from their floodplains, and in
doing so, they've lost their
ability to resist disturbances
like droughts and floods and
wildfires.
But beavers are actively
restoring both habitat and
hydrologic function. When Beaver
engineer riverscapes, they
rebuild a lot of that physical
ecological, and hydrological
complexity that these
waterscapes used to have in the
past, and they do it incredibly
quickly. A lot of the
restoration work that we do, uh,
will take decades to even
centuries to really see the
benefits from. It's not that
we're not doing the right
things, but a lot of the things
that we do are slow.
When Beaver engineer landscapes,
they have had 7.5 million years
to fine-tune their abilities and
to build up their plans and
their schematics, and oftentimes
we can see the results of their
engineering in just a few years.
They can rapidly accelerate the
pace and scale of Riverscape
restoration, if we let them do
their natural behaviors. Not to
mention building wetlands and
maintaining wetlands is quite
expensive when we do it
ourselves. I used to work as an
engineer actually in New Mexico,
and I can vouch that engineers
can be expensive to hire. Uh,
and there's a lot of things that
we need engineers to work on.
But sometimes we can outsource
some of that work to nature's
engineers, which is the beaver,
and they're doing it for free.
This is something that's
instinctual for them. All we
have to do is give them space
and a little bit of time. And
the common concern that I hear
is that if we allow beavers to
engineer the waterways, that's
going to get in the way of other
types of important land use,
things like agriculture, outdoor
recreation, cattle ranching,
timber, fishing, and more, and I
hear you, and I understand that,
but in many cases, beavers and
these other land type and land
uses are actually mutually
beneficial to one.
You squint really hard at this
photo on this slide. There's
actually a herd of cattle right
in the middle of this large
stretch of Beaverdam river
corridor, and adjacent to it is
a dirt road, that's incredibly
popular with hikers, bikers,
horse riders, and a TV
enthusiasts. And then to the
right we have more ranch land
and then to the left we have
National Forest, which is home
to a lot of uh skiing,
snowmobiling, and fishing. And
this is all working together,
and this all requires very
little management in place, just
a few thoughts ahead of time,
sometimes.
Protecting a cult, and you can
have all of these land use types
working together.
And that's important because
beaver ecosystem engineering is
there helping us mitigate some
of the biggest environmental
challenges we're facing this
century. And right now I want to
talk just briefly about drought
and wildfire.
The beavers buffered the drought
effects year after year after
year. This is the main thing
that they're doing that helps us
that we can see very readily
with our eyes. They slow water
down during the rainy season.
They keep it on the landscape
just a little water. They're not
stopping it, they're just
slowing it down, and then it's
available in the summer and the
fall when plants need it most,
but our precipitation is scarce
and there's not much rain or
snow.
These bright green strips, the
beavers have engineered provide
critical habitat for not just
terrestrial species but for
aquatic species as well. And I
have research from Nevada that
has found that this drought
buffering and this drought
resistance can persist for at
least 3 years of a continuous
and extremely intense drought.
It could have lasted longer, I
don't know. The drought ended in
my study, um, but we know 3
years is within their realm of
ability.
The durability of drought
resistance is very important
when you add in factors like
lightning, power lines, and
abandoned campfires into the
mix, cause that's how we get our
wildfires.
And beaver complexes are
uniquely resistant to wildfire.
This has been the core of my
research and my team has seen
images like the one I'm showing
you here from all over the west,
over and over and over again. In
our calculations, we found that
beaver engineered landscapes are
3 times more fire resistant than
the riverscapes without any
beavers present within them.
And importantly, this is true
even during megafires. Our fire
regime is changing, it's getting
more intense, more frequent,
more severe. But while studying
three large megafires in the
Rocky Mountains, we found that
89% of Beaverdam area is what we
consider fire refugia, meaning
that it didn't burn, or if it
did burn, it just very,
the adjacent landscapes. Only
37% of the area in these
megafires was fire refugia, and
that's nowhere near enough.
That's not the historical fire
regime. There's not enough
habitat being left behind.
There's not enough connectivity.
This is hard to recover from,
but these beaver engineered
patches are fire resistant, even
in these magafiers, and that
preserves habitat for mature
flora and fauna that during the
fire can be safe, and then after
the fire can help support
ecological recovery.
And then after the fire, the
risks and hazards don't stop. We
have a lot of issues with things
like suspended ash coming into
our riverways, and this can
smother fish by coating their
gills and depriving them of
oxygen. We also have
increasingly destructive debris
flows coming off of our hill
slopes in that very first heavy
rain post fire, clogging up the
waterway and sometimes damaging
our own infrastructure like
roads and trails.
Luckily, excess sediment is very
easily captured in beaver
wetlands, and there's quite a
bit of research now showing that
they are uniquely good at
keeping those.
Big flows of dirt and ash and
mud in place and not letting
them cascade downslope,
downstream, into our homes,
communities, and landscapes.
And so I bring all these things
up because many natural
resources are very carefully
managed and monitored, and
beavers are a natural resource
too. We used to think of them as
a resource for their fur, or
maybe for their castorum. But
today, when we think about
beavers as a resource, we really
need to think about what they're
doing to the landscape, the
climate resilience, the wildfire
resistance, the drought
buffering, and our flood
protection. We're keeping track
of these other resources. We're
monitoring them, and I think we
should be doing the same thing
for beavers. So thank you.
Thank you.
Still online, uh, Director
Sloan, have you rejoined us?
Mr. Chairman, let's see if my
camera will work this time.
Yep, there I am.
he should tighten this back up
now that I'm actually on camera.
Um,
Again, thank you for letting me
participate via via Zoom. I
appreciate it.
Um,
So I guess that those are both
great presentations. We too
recognize the importance of
beavers across our landscape,
and that's one of the reasons
that we've done significant
habits at work on our wildlife
management areas and uh, for
example, Willow Creek, um, down
in the healer on the vividal,
and we've also worked with the
Forest Service on the southwest
Ha programmatic EA which will
allow a great deal more work to
be done in the riparian zone
without um
Overly complicated and and time
consuming compliance work. So,
so I guess I I'd start there I'd
also say that um
You know, we have added beaver
to the species of greatest
conservation need recognizing
that there is work to be done to
improve the status of the
species across the state. That
work is gonna be driven largely,
almost completely by habitat
improvement as as has been
suggested by the other
presenters, um, and so that
that's been our primary focus.
We'll continue to be our focus,
obviously, we also have
Agree, we don't wanna move a
problem.
Um, so,
As was kind of the conversation
earlier this morning, we have
limited personnel, limited
dollars to spend in that realm
and, and so we have one
They call a BRA analysis, the
beaver restoration assessment
tool looking at where beaver are
across the state
Thank you, director.
Ali is Chris Smith.
Thank you, Chair McQueen, Vice
Chair Stefanix, members of the
committee, folks who made it
here today. I'm really grateful
to be here in Questa. Uh, it is
one of my favorite places in New
Mexico and has been since I was
a kid watching my dad, um.
Patiently untangle fishing line
repeatedly, though he had no
interest in fishing, so it's
always good to come back here.
Um, I'm not gonna go into a
whole lot of detail, uh, in part
because it's after lunch and I
could have included hydrographs
and vegetation density survey
results and cost benefit
analysis, um, but pictures, I
think tell a better story. I do
recognize um Senator Perle's
comment from this morning uh
requesting a little more
information and detail.
And I'm of course happy to pass
that along to any committee
members who want anything and my
contact info is on both this
slide and the last slide. Um,
all of the pictures in my slide
deck except for page 9 are from
New Mexico.
Uh, next slide, please.
So I'm here to tell you about
the many benefits of beavers and
how New Mexico can better
leverage those. You've obviously
heard about two of the big ones,
which is watershed restoration
and wildfire mitigation. I'm not
going to go into detail on
those, um, but there are a
number of other big beaver
benefits and as the New Mexico
Beaver Project says, uh, the
benefits are far too many to put
on a bumper sticker, and we have
those bumper stickers here with
us if you want them. Um, I
suspect there's nobody in this
room.
Who disagrees that these 8
things on this slide are
important and good for New
Mexico to invest in, so.
I'm gonna quickly go over them
and then talk about how we might
better leverage beavers to get
to some of these benefits. Next
slide, please.
Surface water. um, beavers do
not technically create water. We
leave that to um the clouds or
God or whomever else you might
ascribe to that. Um, but it
certainly seems like they create
water if you have the privilege
to study or live by a waterway
for long enough and see the
impacts of beavers. They slow
the flow of water, um, making
more water, more available later
into the summer and fall. Last
night we had an event in Taos,
um, representative Ortez was
Welcome there. She
eastern half of the state, those
are declining, um, beaver dams
and ponds allow water to seep
down through the water table and
recharge aquifers better than
waterways that do not have
beaver infrastructure. So
beavers are an investment in
water now, but also an
investment in a more water
secure New Mexico in the future.
Next slide, please.
Store sediments and pollutants
and particulate matter, um,
typically water coming out of
beaver complexes is cleaner than
before it enters the complex and
by promoting the health and
abundance of riparian vegetation
that is streamside plants, um,
beavers can actually help keep
waterways cooler in the hot
summer months as well, so cool,
clean water seems like a good
idea to me. Next slide, please.
Um, habitat and biodiversity. So
6% of the Earth's surface
roughly is wetlands, um, and
Doctor Fairfax mentioned that we
are losing that critical habitat
type. 40% of all plant and
animal species either live or
breed in wetland habitat, so
they are incredibly important
and chances are if you've been
to a wetlands in New Mexico that
was created by and is probably
still being maintained by
beavers. Um beavers are also
great at creating
And approving aquatic habitat
like the kind of habitat that
our Rio Grande cutthroat trout
rely on. Next slide please.
And along with helping to
mitigate and assuage all of
these symptoms from our ongoing
climate crisis, beavers can
actually help us get at the root
cause as well. Um.
Beavers store carbon in the
meadows that they create.
Meadows are basically able to
store large amounts of
greenhouse gasses, but when
beavers leave or are more likely
removed by humans, those
greenhouse gasses can actually
be released without the
maintenance that beavers
provide. So again, part of the
climate solution from a symptom
standpoint and also from a root
cause standpoint.
Uh, next slide, please. You all
heard about upscaling watershed
restoration. I'm going to skip
that, but I didn't want to skip
it entirely. Next slide, please.
And you heard about wildfire
mitigation. This image to me is
stunning as someone who grew up,
um.
Recreating in the the footprint
of what is now the, the hermit's
Caf Canyon fire, um, this is not
from that fire, this is from
Oregon, but those who have seen
that kind of fire devastation,
know what it looks like and know
that the resilience required on
the landscape to come back from
that kind of fire, um, is really
important in beavers provide
that as Dr. Fairfax was
referencing. Next slide, please.
So where are we in Bieber
history. Well, before Europeans
arrived in North America, they
were somewhere between 600
million and 400 million beavers
here. I think $200 million is a
pretty good number based on what
I've read. Um, and nearly every
creek, river, stream, and pond
held beavers, or rather was held
by beaver dams. Um, it's
possible that beavers once
submerged an area larger than
Nevada and Arizona put together,
which is
Incredible to think about. And
by 1900, there were
approximately 100,000 beavers
left. Again, that decimation is
driven by the fur trade which
Miss Meneche referenced. So
that's obviously an incredible
loss. New Mexico's timeline is
actually a little bit different.
Our beaver loss came about later
than this graph represents for
North America, but, but the
impacts are the same. So beavers
are coming back, uh, according
to Department of Game and Fish
website, we have 60,000 to
12,000 beavers in the.
State now, which is a far cry
from historical populations, and
folks have started to recognize
their importance. And in fact,
in 2014, the Senate passed a
memorial, according to that
recognition. Next slide, please.
Um, then Senator Tim Kelly,
sorry, Tim Keller, and then
Representative Bobby Gonzalez,
who you all know as the senator
from these parts now, um, passed
a memorial based on the
perceived benefits of beavers
requesting the development of a
statewide beaver management
plan. Again,
And we should recognize that
beavers are one of our best and
more importantly, maybe our most
cost effective partners for
climate resiliency for wildfire
mitigation and for water
security. They're not just
another species on the
landscape. There are species
that deserves our investment,
especially in the coming years.
Thanks.
Great,
thank you all for your
presentations. Uh we'll go to
the committee for a separateary
of Representative Ortez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you so
much for the presentation, and
Chris, thanks, special thanks
for helping to organize along
with Stephen Fry at Amigos
Bravos, this, uh, beavers and
beer event that was um at the
Rio Fernando Park in Taos
yesterday. I think you made lots
of beaver believers, uh, in that
audience, lots more anyway. I
hope.
With the, you know, this, this,
uh, committee will also sort of
see the um the glory of, of
nature's best engineer. Um, I, I
wanted to tell the story
yesterday, but I'm gonna tell it
today when I'm, I retired from
the Tos Land Trust, which owns
the Rio Fernando Park, just a
few um months ago, um, and in
that time, the 10 years I worked
there, we bought a property that
had the Rio Fernando that has
the Rio Fernando.
Rolling through it, um, and for
so long, for decades, um, the
river had been so channelized it
had been moved over so much that
it just, you know, the water
just came through, uh, along the
north side of the property is as
fast as it could to get to, you
know, other properties
downstream from the Rio
Fernando. And in the course of,
you know, the 10 years of, of
trying to sort of developing a
master plan and restoring that
property, we, um, we invested in
changing the
Meander of that river and
encouraging beaver habitat,
because what we were finding was
that the Aia Parciantes
downstream where, um, we're
grateful for the slower water,
right, for the water was being,
it was slowed down, you know,
the, the season, um,
The the growing season could
last a little bit more. You had
water for longer, so we really
encouraged, um, the, the
development of beaver habitat
and it it it was some it was
sometimes expensive in some
points, but most of it wasn't.
Um, you know, we were able to,
you know, work with our, our
partners at the state and other
organizations to to make that
happen. Um, and I, I want to
tell you how important that is,
right, not only for the
preciantes, but sort of for sort
of the history of Taos, you
know, um, lots of beaver were
Um, were trapped. It, it's what
made it was part of the Taos
economy as part of northern New
Mexico's economy and um in, in
the course of that restoration
process, we had lots and lots of
community input, especially with
farmers and ranchers and, you
know, folks who um were tied to
that, um, tied to that trade and
uh my sort of most
Oh, sweetest memory is of this
gentleman coming up to me,
Richard Gentett, whose family,
um, you know, he's a gente,
French, you know, trapper
family, and he, you know, he
said this is my, my ancestors
trap beaver, and I'm, I'm so
grateful that you are restoring
this river and bringing
reintroducing beaver to this
habitat because it's, you know,
it was part of their legacy, but
it was kind of a sad legacy that
so many had been trapped, so it
was, it's a really heartwarming
memory.
For me and I think it has, um, I
think it'll have lasting impacts
for farming and ranching. I
think we should invest in it as
a state, um, when we see the
possibilities of, um, you know,
wildlife, um, wildlife habitat
restoration, but preventing
wildfires or at least, you know,
aiding the restoration after a
big wildfire. I think it's
important that we do that. Um,
so I, I encourage folks to to
support those efforts, but I,
I'm a little, I guess a
concerned that we only
Have
one person in the entire state
who is working on this kind of,
you know, sort of restoration,
um, relocation, cohabitation
efforts, you know, because we
don't need beaver everywhere,
um, sometimes they're in the
wrong places. So we, we don't
have the resources that we need,
so I have a question for
Director Sloan, um, around that,
um, do we, Director Sloan, do
you, um, do you foresee, um, an
opportunity to increase your
budget so that you can hire more
people, knowing what we know
now, the science behind um sort
of supporting beaver
infrastructure, do we see that
in the cards?
The representative, um,
I guess it really depends on, on
the funding picture. Right now,
we haven't had a fee increase
since 2006.
We are running on fumes in our
bank account as an enterprise
agency, um, so we
and do the match for those.
For those potential federal or
even I don't know, philanthropic
grants.
care representative, yes, I
mean, I think we can that the
obviously the the matches.
What's important here, we have a
declining balance even with the
addition of legacy fund money,
so.
We just don't have enough, um,
perhaps there's philanthropic
money out there. I don't know,
but again, this is beaver
restoration, like all
conservation is a long term
undertaking, take years, and in
order to do that, you have to
hire people that are gonna be
around for years that are going
to be able to do that work.
They're going to be able to
monitor it, build out the next
section, plan, all those kinds
of things, and so that sort of
one-time grant, one-time funding
really is, is
It helps us do a project, but it
doesn't solve the long-term
problem.
Uh, thank you.
Mr. Chair, I think
There are lots and lots of
organizations in this room right
now who are working on this, who
have been collaborating for a
long time on this, um, and I, I
just, I have a hard time hearing
that it's, that we don't have
the funding for an additional
staff person to help manage, uh,
you know, relocation and
cohabitation program. That's,
that's the, I, I just think
that's, um, that's sort of hard
to swallow. I mean, can you work
with other agencies?
you know, to,
to do this kind of program. Must
it sit?
You know, in game and fish.
That was a question for Director
Sloan.
Well
Of
Regulatory authority over
Beaver, um, but certainly other
entities from the Forest Service
to state forestry, to other to
the Environment Department River
stewardship program working in
Um, watersheds and streams could
assist with this work. I think
that was potentially some of the
intent of the um
Memorial that was discussed
earlier.
What happened to that memorial
back in 2014, is, is unknown to
me, um, so I, I don't have a
good answer for you there, but
certainly there are other
agencies that should be
considering how their actions
could benefit um
Fever.
Uh
Thank you, Mr.
Uh, so one last question, is
there money in the budget right
now to, um, to support sort of
other infrastructure that could
promote.
Beaver relocation and
Is that what they're called?
other areas that will improve
habitat and attract beavers to
those locations, um, but we do
not have specific capital money
for some sort of holding pen or
transition location.
The variety of
Plan
The biggest bang for the buck at
the moment, and I
Thank you.
Uh, just a couple of things. I
was
Thinking and curious about the
census, the current number of
beavers, and I think we got the
answers 6 to 12,000, uh, 6000 to
12,000, following up on
Representative Ortez, we, of
course, banned trapping in New
Mexico a couple of years ago,
um.
Was there data kept as part of
the trapping program about
beavers? I assume they were part
of that. And now that it's
banned, are we seeing an
increase on the other side of
that? Do we have any information
on that?
The care representative, um,
Certainly there are fewer people
trapping on public lands, um,
harvest is declining. I don't
have specific numbers right
handy I can try and look them up
while we're here, but I, I don't
have them just right at right at
my fingertips.
on that point, yeah.
Trust me.
Just, just for the record, we,
we banned public lands trapping.
We didn't ban trapping. So
there's certainly still trapping
going on on private life.
Got it, thank you for the
clarification. And just the
thought on the funding, it seems
to me that getting director
Sloan, some additional staff,
uh, folks is the perfect use of
the grow money. It's exactly why
we created this for agencies and
each individual member has the
ability to allocate funds for
that, and I just think what I'm
hearing loud and clear from him
is
He's not going to prioritize
this given the funds that he
has, but to the extent that we
can get more funds, uh, then it
seems to me that that that's a
way to do it. And of course,
once you start in the grow,
it's, it's a 2 year current
program, but we're looking at
that to become recurring. So I
would just throw that out there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Whenever you in Fair water
movement on in the state of New
Mexico, you generally have to.
Some time or another deal with
the state engineer. Have you
given any thought to any of
that?
Mr. Chair,
Please.
Che
Woods, the state engineer's
office has not required permits
for building beaver dam analogs.
But in pairing water in the
state of New Mexico.
Requires permission from the
state engineer.
Have you talked to the state
engineer about it?
Chairman McQueen, Senator Woods,
we have not talked to the state
engineer's office lately. These,
these dams, though, although
they do hold back water. They
are not like concrete or um or
even
First up, just to sort of follow
on the center woods, um,
you know, years ago, I, I was
doing work on the Santa Fe River
and there were
on
load to drop out, so you're
building the river back up
rather than further incising it.
And none of those things are
under the sort of authority of
the office of the State
Engineer.
So I think there's a lot of
things we can do in terms of
habitat restoration, um, that,
that are just habitat
restoration. They're not, it's
not a new appropriation of
water, it's not a change of, uh,
place of purpose views. It's um
it's just, you know, land work.
and there there's a water
impact, um, but often that water
impacts can be beneficial
because
Sloan. So, Mr. Smith, at your,
your last page you have, um, New
Mexico should have a statewide
beaver plan.
And I guess my question is, um,
is this, does this require
legislative action? Or is this
something the it's certainly it
it sort of looks to me like it's
something the uh department
could do if, if the funding
issue was um not an issue.
So, Mr. Smith,
Uh, Mr. Chair, yeah, I agree
with that interpretation. I
don't think it requires
legislative action, but it does
require obviously funding and
will from the department to
carry out the drafting of that
plan. I would also add from an
earlier question, there are
planning grants available or
there at least were earlier this
year through the America the
Beautiful program at the federal
level, which I think the state
could apply for for this purpose
as well.
And Director Sloan, uh, any
comment on that?
Period.
Again, I think it's, it's both a
funding and a a resource issue.
I don't think legislative
Action is required for us to
draft a plan, um,
But I would have to pull
resources off of working on pine
martins and the variety of other
species that we work on, um, to
draft a plan.
Um, and as you probably know,
many
The greatest conservation need.
Um,
And we have in fact put in for
several of the America beautiful
grants we have not been
fortunate enough to be awarded,
and I think that um
A beaver management plan would
rank out quite low based on the
um
Grants we have seen go out.
Um, so, well, it's an
interesting idea. I don't think
that it's uh
Viable one.
That particular source anyway.
OK, thank you.
You know, I, I, Mr. Smith, I do
appreciate, uh, the story that
your pictures tell. Um, I, I
find it compelling. Um, I, you
know, over the years I've seen
uh photographs of restored
healthy ecosystems, especially,
you know, compared to, you know,
before and after shots and you
can, you can see a healthy
ecosystem that it's uh
functioning better, and um I'm
familiar with the history of
beavers in the United States.
Uh, and, you know, this seems to
me like um.
This is the kind of thing that
uh our department of Game and
Fish, um, should be funded to
pursue. So I appreciate,
appreciate the presentation, uh,
and we'll take it from here.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. So we do, we have a
little bit of time before our
next, uh, scheduled hearing and
we have some housekeeping to do.
Um, Representative Ream has been
appointed as a voting member. We
do a set of minutes in the, uh,
in your packet. I'd like to
approve those meds. Is there a
motion to approve the minutes?
Also we have a motion in a
second. Is there any objection
or any comments or any changes?
OK, so those men are approved.
And also I want to thank, uh, I
see Louis Rey in the back there,
uh, once again, thank you,
Carson Electric, uh, for lunch.
Uh, it was, uh, it was very good
and uh if if anyone out there in
the audience is still hungry, we
got a couple of extra sandwiches
back here. Um, so help yourself.
Uh, our next panel is, um, Land
of Enchantment Legacy Fund, and
we have quite a number of
panelists.
Uh, so if you're here, if you're
present, please come on up,
I think the only um I'm being
told the only person on Zoom is.
Uh, director Sloan again, uh,
and director Sloan, I think this
is your last panel for the day,
so thank you for being with us.
Uh, and Jonathan Heaton is also
via Zoom, um, we're a little bit
early, so he's online.
Oh
What
OK, I think we're all here. Um,
so what, what this panel was
intended as um was sort of a
follow up on the relatively new
land of enchantment Legacy Fund,
and, um, for, for those who may
not be familiar with it.
Uh, the fund was a sum of money
that we set aside, which I think
is a great idea because we have
lots of oil and gas money coming
in and we would like to make
sure that it works for us over
the long term.
And then this, this fund
generates income and the income
is distributed pursuant to a
fairly complex formula, uh, uh
breakdown, um, between different
uh agencies and different
programs and you know, one, you
know, agency gets 20% and
another gets 8.5%
Um, uh, people from multiple
agencies and also um, uh, at
least, uh, one NGO.
Maybe a couple, um, so what we
we generally do is we go in the
order as they appear on the
agenda. We are running about 10
minutes ahead of schedule, which
is great. Um, Jonathan Heaton,
are you with us?
We're checking
Just.
OK, so he
So let's uh
Let's come back to him, um,
Jacob Peterson.
Yeah, push the button on the
mic.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Implement the land of the
Chairman Legacy Funds. I do have
a couple of slides. This is an
overview, um, just to remind,
uh, everyone exactly how this
works.
So that there was, there were
two bills in 2023. SB 9, which
created both funds, the
expandable fund and the
permanent fund, um, HB 2 that
year put 500 million in both.
And the 50 million that went
into the uh expendable fund was
a down payment insuring 4 years
of, uh,
Distributions for the programs
identified in SB 9.
And then, uh, this year, of
course, in the 2024 regular
session, HB 2 put 300 million
in.
permanent.
So we can advance to the next
slide and one more.
Um, this slide just describes
what the chair was saying and
kind of displays the
distribution of fun, um, of the
fund or this is valid for the
next 4 years. So starting in
July, FY 25, um, these are the
amounts that were distributed to
the agencies and the percentages
that want to program within
agencies. Next slide. And so
with forestry divisions funds,
there are kind of, it's split
Between a
selection of programs are forest
conservation Act, our forests
and Watershed Restoration Acts,
um, and a few others that are
kind of, um, you know, get
recommendations for funding on
projects that really tend to be
larger projects, uh, landscape
scale. Um, it's very helpful,
stateside, so that, uh, partners
working at the local level to
develop um activities within
these sometimes very large
projects have some consistency
to carry those forward so
momentum stays up and we can
continue project work over time.
So since 2019, 25 projects have
been recommended by the board
and it's resulted, uh, again,
one of our more successful
programs in over 13,000 acres of
restoration, um, and worth
pointing out that over half the
money.
That has gone into those
projects have not been from the
forest and Watershed Restoration
Act. It's been from federal and
some also some other state
funding sources.
Um, and amongst those projects
again because they tend to be
longer term. There remain over
14,000 acres of work to do. And
so it's, it's been a very
successful process to get the
board recommending projects to
us that we can then keep, uh,
working on over a large period
of time. And this is, uh, right
now one of the areas where we
can expect a lot of that 50% of
the forestry division allocation
to go.
Next slide, please.
For the Natural Heritage
Conservation Act, um, for this
program, it was, uh, it's never
received, it's one of those that
never really had consistent
funding. And so at the division
level, we've never really been
able to staff it up or pay a lot
of attention to it. Luckily, the
natural lands Protection
Committee, which recommends
projects pursuant to this
authority, um, is active, um,
and we maintain, um, activity
there, uh, under the Land
Conservation Incentives Act Act
program.
So, but the Natural Heritage
Conservation Act program, uh, is
able to fund conservation
easements, agricultural
easements, also restoration
projects, um,
although what we really expect
because it's, this is again, uh,
there's demand for the easement
part of this, that that's where
the majority of money is likely
to go. Um, and, uh, we can
advance to the next slide.
Um, actually, apologies back one
more.
So under this program, um,
we've, we've really focused this
year on doing, um, getting RFPs
out quickly. So again, we can
get money on the ground quickly
and, and we had an RFP that went
out in March and again in
August. And so we've already
reviewed and the committee is
the Natural Lands Protection
Committee has already seen 3
projects, all of which have been
recommended for funding. Um, and
the intention of that was to get
our, uh, agencies some
experience administering this
program because it's been a
while, um, and also
get to to get the money out the
door quickly. Next slide. So
this is just some quick
overviews of those three
projects I mentioned where this
money is going. The first is in
Santa Fe County, Ranchos Las
Lagunas agricultural easement.
Uh, now, this project is uh
irrigated farmland, um, it is,
uh,
Uh, produces hay and beef, um,
and it's the larger, largest in
the dollar amount of the three
that I'm going to present on
that's been funded so far. Next
slide.
Um, the next project is, uh, one
that is, um, a partnership with
New Mexico Land Conservancy, as
is the next one I'll talk about,
um, the Franklin Coggins
Conservation easement.
Uh, so it's a critical water
source for wildlife and it's
also a wildlife corridor
connecting Coyote Creek with the
Mesa all the way up to the top
of the Mesa on the east side.
Um, and it, uh, it is more
pasture land.
And uh the next slide shows the
Bear Canyon Conservation
easement, which is in Sandoval
County and the Hemez Mountains,
um, this property has very high
quality watershed. It's near
other projects that have been
funded on Forest Service lands
to protect the watershed from
fire over the years. It drains
into the Finton Lake State Park,
um, an interesting note, it's
this property and the landowners
on the property have been
producing seedlings to assist
with reforestation on near
Projects. So it's one of those
that's really good example of um
a partnership with the landowner
that actually has public
benefits to public lands nearby.
And the next slide.
So, uh, lessons learned from
these projects we're planning,
a rule update, uh, right now
we're really working under the
existing rule that was written
when this authority was passed.
There are some lessons learned
here. We'd like to do simple
things like just uh allow email
to be a part of how we do
business. Um, that's kind of the
standard operating procedure
these days, um, we'd also like
to, uh, increase, uh, adjust the
transaction costs that are
written to the rule to kind of
more align
Um, the way these sorts of
projects, um, where the money
needs to go to, to get the
projects done, um.
And uh.
Yeah, so this program really
it's like, it's been helpful to
consistency in, in these
programs.
Thank you.
OK, thank you for that. Uh we're
gonna try going back
At presentation right.
2 years ago now. Um, so we just
wanted to kind of give an update
on, uh, what is going on and,
um, as importantly, what kind of
uh just refresh folks' memory
and what the the fun does, the
programs is
Going to and how it's making its
way to uh where it matters,
which is the ground into our
communities.
Like I said, this has been an
ongoing almost decade-long
effort amongst um conservation
advocates across the state,
across the political spectrum
includes all the kind of usual
suspects, the environmental
community like Sierra Club, uh,
New Mexico Wild, etc. Also more
traditional New Mexican
communities, um, oops, let's see
here.
Sorry, like the Asia commission,
um, natives Institute, and then
agricultural producers as well,
like the Mexico Association of
Conservation Districts, Rocky
Mountain Farmers Union. So this
is really the product of about
10 years' worth of work amongst
all these folks, and um as you
can imagine that that compromise
kind of bred a lot of um
complications uh over the years,
and uh kind of convoluted system
for dispersing the funds.
But basically we all realized
that the problem was that New
Mexico did not have a dedicated
source of conservation funding.
So our solution is Sherman
McQueen said, was to put a bunch
of money away into the Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund and did
so via Sho 9
passed in the 2023 session. I
thank you to, to Senator Worth
and uh Senator Bill sponsoring
that bill.
In creating the land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund.
Um, the fund works basically by
putting money away into both an
expendable fund and an
investment fund that produces
annual returns on a consistent
basis. Um, we had originally put
away $50 million into that funds
and uh thanks to all of you, we
upped that to 350 million, um,
Via the last session, that goes
to 6 different agencies. Jacob
Murray talked about Enerd and
kind of what they're working on
and the NHCA front and forest
watershed
districts and they're not just
weeds program.
cites Preservation Act.
Um,
He is kind of that complicated
dispersement formula that uh
the Queen had alluded to
2.8 million across the various
agencies.
And here's just a map of some of
the projects that have been
Um, some of these projects hire
seasonal staff to help do the
projects, as well as training
and workshops in their local
areas. The program also supports
small businesses, uh, directly
through these contracts and
providing the equipment and
goods and services needed, as
well as indirectly by increasing
tourism and recreational
opportunities. Um, by improving
fishing, floating, and wildlife
Uh, 24 projects in progress.
And 12 new projects starting in
2024.
Um, projects are awarded through
competitive RFP process.
Proposals are submitted that
identify current water quality
and habit or habitat issues, and
then goals and objectives to
address those, uh, to improve
those water bodies.
Um, our projects take anywhere
between 2 to 3 years to
complete.
So I, I think you guys are
looking, sorry, I'm with the
Environment department, so it's
the, you're not on my slides, I
don't think. No, it's not that
one, or.
Hm
Yes, those are it, yes. OK.
So I'm on slide 5.
Sorry.
OK, um, so our projects take
anywhere between 2 to 3 years to
complete. Um, some projects go a
total of 4 years, um.
And, and the reason for that is
there's multiple phases of each
project, um, you go through the
project, the designs and
permitting, um, which depending
on the complexity and the size
of the project can take anywhere
from a few months to a year. Um,
and then you have the
construction phase which you
either have a con a uh
contractor come in and do the
work or you're using volunteers
and so the time frame of how
long that construction can take,
um, varies, uh, and then also
you have the weather and other
conditions that can affect the
construction window and uh
Lastly, all of our projects
require a monitoring component
and so all of our contractors
are required to do some type of
monitoring whether that's
collect photo points, water
quality sampling, or habitat
assessments.
Um.
So for our 2024 projects, uh, we
received over 10.5 million in
request. Uh, we have
approximately 5.8 million
available to award over 12
contracts. Um, we are currently
going through that procurement
process and so I'm not able to
provide any information on on
the contracts that are being
issued. Um, we hope to have
those in place within the next
month.
Um, through those 12 contracts,
though, all of the Land of
Enchantment legacy funds for
this fiscal year will have been
allocated to those projects.
Uh, you can go to the next
slide. And so with our projects,
um, one of the challenges we
have is the funding mechanisms
and so Land of Enchantment
Legacy Fund, we have 2 years to
spend that funding where our
contracts are valid through 3 to
4 years. And so a lot of times
we're mixing funding to
term. And then just a note on
this slide as well, um, we did
receive American Rescue Plan
actor ARPA funding, uh, back in
mid 2022, we received 10 million
and after these 12 contracts are
um completed, we have allocated
all of those funds to to
projects on the ground.
Um, next. And then,
comes in, um, with the 1.7, that
would be Land of
And so, just to give you an idea
of projects, they range anywhere
from about 150,000 to over 10,
um, with the average project
being around 500 and so that's
kind of why we're waiting until
after the legislative session to
issue the new RFP just to know
how many projects we would be
able to fund before issuing
that. Um, another thing I wanted
to note is the department is
working on a price agreement
with contractors to assist with
river stewardship projects. Um,
what that'll do is give us
another procurement, uh, method
to get contract.
To get projects on the ground.
And so what we'll be able to do
is identify projects, ask our
get our contractors out there as
quickly as we possibly can, um,
a great example is getting
communities that are impacted by
that fire and flooding, um,
getting projects on the ground
quicker than having to go
through the RFP process, which
can take up to 6 to 8 months to
complete.
And then, um, just that last
slide I just wanted to show a
project that we've done. Sorry,
go ahead, you can go. So this
last slide is just a project,
one of the projects that have
been completed. This is a small
portion of the project, but I
think it's a great example of
how quickly these pro you know,
these systems can come back to
place. You know, we had an
eroded bank and within 4 months
after the work, after installing
some structures and plantings.
We've got that bank starting to
stabilize.
Thank you.
Thank you. Next up we have Katie
Goetz.
Yes, good afternoon, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for asking NMD to be part of
this presentation. Um, I'll be
speaking to you and I'll give
Tom a moment to queue up our
slides. There we are.
LOE Legacy Fund going toward the
New Mexico Department of
Agriculture's 3 program. So we
have the healthy soil program,
that's the one I'm the most
articulate about because I'm
co-lead of that program. I'll
try not to get too far out on my
skis, uh, in terms of speaking
about the soil and water
conservation district program,
and also our noxious weeds
program, but those comprise the
presentation today. Next slide
please, Tom. Thank you.
All right. So taking a look at
the pie chart, you'll see how we
uh dispersed or or rather um
separated out or 2 $2.8 million
allocation.
Uh, just under $750,000 of that
to the healthy soil program
because we already have state
moneys going to that program,
plus the match monies that we
get from USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service. It was our
first program to roll out this
year in terms of asking for
grant applications to come in.
We've been doing this since 2019
when the Healthy Soil Act was
passed, so, uh, the machine is
pretty well greased by this
point. Our next funding
opportunity, a first for us this
year.
So we treated it as a pilot, was
a funding opportunity for our
soil and water conservation
districts. We've long
implemented our piece of the
soil and water conservation
District Act, providing various
forms of support to the 47 soil
and Water Conservation districts
across the state. But you can
see that uh we allocated about
$1000 of our share of LOE funds
to that program area this year.
Last but not least, also treated
as a pilot because it was the
first time that we created a
funding opportunity around the.
Weeds program. So again, a
program and an act we have long
implemented in NMDA, uh, in
terms of providing support
across the state to cooperative
weed management areas, uh,
keeping current on the state's
noxious weeds list and that sort
of thing.
Next slide please.
So again, I'm a co-lead of the
Healthy Soil program, um, not
the technical person, but rather
the communications and outreach
side of the program. I'll just
remind you of the purpose of, of
that program. It's
We also uh bit off some good
projects this year in terms of
funding a compost study.
So just had a meeting about that
this morning and you might
recall Senate Bill 79 from this
past session that would have put
$65,000 towards such a study in
terms of the generation and use
of compost in New Mexico. So
NMDA has that project, um, off
and running. Uh, funds also
going to our ongoing soil health
research, especially with our
partners at partners at New
Mexico State University. And
last but not least, we held the
state's first ever soil health
conference earlier this year,
and we'll treat that as a
Once every 2 year type events.
So mark your calendars for 2026
when we bring that back for a
second installment.
Next slide please.
I mentioned our SWCDs that we
have long worked closely with
those 47 entities and for those
who are still working on
becoming familiar with those
parties, their political
subdivisions of the state, uh,
governed locally by boards of
locally elected supervisors,
landowners and residents alike,
uh, but their primary, primary
mission is to conserve and
develop the natural resources of
the state to provide for flood
control, preserve wildlife,
protect the tax base and promote
the health.
Safety and the general welfare
of the people of New Mexico. So
they, I, I look at them as the
hub of natural resource
activity. If there's good work,
conservation happening on the
ground, chances are your SWCD is
involved in some way working
with federal partners, state
partners, local partners, public
and private partners alike. Next
slide, please.
As I said, this year was our
first year to be able to offer a
competitive funding opportunity
to SWCDs as well as the
watershed districts that nest
inside those districts, the
SWCDs across the state. So we
received 57 project requests,
funding request, totaling about
$3.5 million. Again, we made
available about $1000 to this
slice of our LOE uh share of the
pie, uh, funding 31 projects in
total, and
You can see the 4 different
categories into which each of
those bucketed. So to speak just
a bit about those categories,
um, districts applying for
capacity building, uh, might be
working on an ICIP project, a
Projects we're talking about
there is getting out to
inventory your natural
resources. What are the soil
resources within your
jurisdiction, the water
resources, what is their current
state? What is their potential?
That's what we're talking about
To put in uh projects for fire
mitigation for post-fire
restoration for watershed
restoration. So again,
good conservation. We wanted to
put some funding toward
community outreach and
education.
period is our noxious weeds
program. So, uh, a bit to say
about that. We saw 15
applications come in the door
and we're able to fund 12 of
those, um, funding request.
$829,000 and $685,000 of that
funded and additional separate
$200,000 going toward a
contractor to help map the
noxious weeds areas in the
state. So what we're, uh, the
sorts of activities happening
here, surveying of noxious
weeds, um, early detection,
rapid response activities
happening across the state, as
well as actual treatment of
noxious weeds. One other thing
I'll say about uh our noxious
programming at NMDAs that we
recently hired the state's
Noxious weed coordinator, Dylan
Burris is his name, so he'll be
working with all the different
parties are, are typical
partners, our soil and water
conservation districts, tribal
governments, land grants,
sequias, all these different
parties to help them in their
To represent the outdoor
recreation division. Uh, I am
the deputy director of ORD.
Um, oh, and my slides are not of
those.
Uh, so the rest of our team all
carry on a little bit, give a
bit of background since we are a
young office, um, just
celebrating 5 years this year.
Uh, the rest of our team, a
small team of 4, but, uh,
passionate team, uh, consists of
our, uh, deputy or our director,
um, Karina Armijo, our outdoor
recreation planner Carl
Collonius, and then we also have
our marketing outreach
coordinator and that's.
Simon.
She like just keep going without
the slides, OK. Um, so I'm on
slide 3 now. So the outdoor
recreation division is a part of
the economic development
department. We were established
in 2019, uh, to increase
equitable outdoor access for all
New Mexicans promoting healthy
outcomes, environmental
stewardship and economic
prosperity.
Next slide.
Uh, ORD is one of 24 states, uh,
with a dedicated outdoor
recreation office. Uh, when we
are established, only 5 years
ago they were under 10 state
offices in the nation. Um, so
Bureau of Economic Analysis, uh,
New Mexico's outdoor recreation
industry generates $2.4 billion
and supports nearly 28,000 jobs.
So top activities in OR that
contribute
Next slide, please.
So two key initiatives of ORD,
um, that are supported by the
land of enchantment Legacy Fund
are the outdoor equity fund and
the outdoor recreation trails
plus grant. This year, ORD
became a recipient of that
recurring funding, uh,
supporting both of those, uh,
key programs in our office. Year
one distributions for those, uh,
look like nearly 470K for the
outdoor equity fund.
And about 1.4 million for the
outdoor recreation trails plus
grants. So we are extremely
grateful for that recurring
funding for these vital
programs.
Next slide, please.
So, uh, looking at these two
programs now, the Outdoor equity
fund was created to help
The organizations at the Outdoor
equity fund supports are often
taking youth outdoors for
educational and recreational
activities, um, with kids for
their very first time. Um, some
of them, you know, live a
quarter mile from an outdoor
recreation area and haven't
taken a walk in the woods
before, um, so these are really
pivotal experiences for those,
for that next generation of our
land and water ste
words, um, and these programs
also introduce kids to career
possibilities that he didn't
know existed, including, you
know, comfort.
Conservation careers.
So since 2019, the outdoor
equity fund, um, ORD has
supported 5.7 million um in
awards to these organizations
and small communities through
250 grants at this point, and
we've now introduced through
that program 72,000 young New
Mexicans to the outdoor. Next
slide please.
So, uh, in looking at the
outdoor equity fund each year
the demand for, uh, program
support, uh, continues to
increase as ORD reaches more
communities and uh this, this
year's application just closed
the last, this last month and we
received nearly 100 proposals,
uh, and the ask of that was $4.2
million this year, yet our
budget is only 850K.
So that means that we are going
to fall drastically short of
supporting a lot of these
wonderful communities and
organizations in the good work
that they do with our, our
future stewards of land and
water.
Uh, next slide, please.
Uh, the second key.
ORD program that the Lanham and
chantment Legacy Fund supports
is our outdoor recreation trails
plus grant. This grant program
supports outdoor infrastructure
projects across the state, um,
river parks, uh, to, uh,
accessible trails to outdoor
classrooms and um the good old,
uh, outdoor bathroom facilities
that everybody needs when they
want to go for a hike or uh take
their horses out, um, for a ride
at a trail.
had
And so since 2020, uh, ORD has
now awarded $18.4 million to 164
projects across 30 counties in
New Mexico, 11 tribal
communities and through this
program alone we've helped to
create an estimated 1600 jobs.
Uh, next slide.
And so when we look at trails
Plus, uh, thanks to the Land of
Enchantment Legacy Fund, pasted
federal funding through ARPA
and, uh, state funding such as
special appropriations, the
outdoor recreation trails plus
grant has been very well
supported, uh, ORD continues to
meet the growing needs of
outdoor infrastructure projects,
um, funding around the state.
And I wanted to talk a little
bit more about some challenges.
So with challenges, there's
always opportunities. ORD is
working to increase the funding
for the outdoor equity fund, um,
with that, you know, big, um,
Uh, shortfall of, of funding
compared to the need. It's a
really big gap. Uh, so this
program is a cornerstone, um, of
our office. It's the first of
its kind program, other states,
uh, we were the first to create
it and other states have
followed suit and created it, so
it's a point of pride for New
Mexico for all of us, uh, we
also are hoping to continue to
grow our team to meet those
increasing demands of our
initiatives and our programs.
Um, every year putting out more
and more funding and having
greater need um asked of our
small team, uh, ORD definitely
needs to have some more staff,
so that's um another opportunity
that we see in the future.
We also need to create a
dedicated funding source for our
outdoor marketing grant that's a
3rd program that we started last
year with ARPA funding, but we
don't have any funding for it
currently.
And then, uh, additionally, we
will be working to update the
outdoor recreation and New
Mexico economy report from 2020.
So we have uh stats that are
more recent for our state and
for especially for these two
programs that I've highlighted
today, we need to analyze
existing um grant programs using
multi-year data points. Um, so
we are seeking to provide a
report for long.
Term impacts of these outdoor
recreation investments in our
youth and our communities.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
members of the committee for
your time.
Thank you for that. Uh, going
back online, Director Sloan, are
you there?
I am, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
I guess I'd like to start off by
thanking senators uh Worth and
Neville for the delicate balance
they struck in getting the
legacy fund funded through and
funded. Um it was uh a Herculean
effort, I think, and um I think
that that that explains an
earlier question about why
Um, species of greatest
conservation.
Um, need we're not specifically
called out in the legislation
was because that was one of
those sticking points and
I believe that Senator Worth was
adamant about sticking to what
the the original bill was that
had been agreed upon by the
group, so.
I appreciate the, the difficulty
in getting that through and um
the results.
So, you know, I spoke earlier
about the general fund money we
got last year and the $200 that
we put towards SGCN. So we now
have a strong track record of
when we say we're gonna spend it
on SGCN we do. And so going
forward with this first year of
legacy fund money, the kinds of
projects that we have in mind
arelya Lakes restoration.
YY Bullfrog research project
where we're going to try and see
if we can make some bullfrogs
that will create an all-male
population and get rid of um
Cause the population to crash
and then we can allow native
species to flourish.
Arizona toad surveys, Hela
monster research, ribbon snake
surveys,
Parmigan monitoring those motor
stations, as I mentioned earlier
today, that network of stations
across the state that will
capture the movements of tagged
birds, um, songbirds primarily
across the state, helping us
understand migration patterns
and habitat uses.
Uh, narrowhead garter snake
surveys, chan leopard frogs,
surveys and management actions,
Mexican garter snake monitoring,
Martin surveys.
Prairie chicken, surveys and
then we're doing undertaking a
significant research project
looking at movement within
prairie chicken habitats, um,
where they are, what they're
doing, the impacts of
transmission and, and other um
Fragmentation
least re um surveys and
research, and then a whole slew
of um
Bird surveys, uh, trying to fill
those gaps we talked about
earlier where we have those 299
species that we just don't have
enough information about.
On the the fish side we'll be
looking more again at, at the YY
trout research again looking at
trying to change populations
without adding chemicals, um,
Hewlett trout genetic analysis,
environmental compliance and
planning for some heat trout
restoration, environmental DNA
for Rio Grande Chub, Rio Grande
sucker, Texas hornshell, Blue
sucker, and gray Redhorse.
Um, and then we'll also be doing
surveys on an array of species,
he a trouts, spike Day
slominnow, desert sucker,
Sonoran sucker, and the list
goes on. Colorado Pike mineral,
pepper chub, uh, White Sands,
puffish, Rio Grandecho,
Chirakawa, um.
Excuse me, Chihuahua. So I don't
wanna bore you with the, the
details, but we could go on for
quite a ways. We will be
dedicating that funding to SGCN,
um.
And we have a lot of projects
lined up and this funding will
will make a difference for those
species.
With that, Mr. Chair, I take any
questions.
OK, um, thank you all for your
presentations.
Um,
This panel was titled Progress
and Challenges, um,
I heard a lot of.
Uh, emphasis on progress, which
is great. Um, I think we might
discuss some of the challenges
in the Q&A. Uh, first up we have
Representative Ortez. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. This is a question
for Jacob. Um, I'm looking at
this chart says that Enard's
getting 2.81 million for, uh,
that's the agency distribution
for 2 for FY 25, 50% of which is
going to NHCA, um, are there
other projects that are planned
because the projects that are
here total about half of what
the distribution will be, or are
you waiting for projects until
you do a new rulemaking.
from the land trusts, we know
that the demand is there to to
use this money. Um, and we do
have a new RFP that's planning
on going out soon. Various
issues and questions from I
think that some land trusts are
also waiting for us to issue to
work on a rule amendment, um,
and, uh, the
Uh, and have known that we plan
on kind of having maybe multiple
a year, so it'll be several
opportunities to to submit for
the money. Um, so since, you
know, since we received the
money in July, we are, have
allocated half the money, so it
has been a very short period of
time. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Jacob. I appreciate
that. Um, but you'll get another
allocation in 20 for 2026,
correct? Yes,
Mr. Chair Representative, I
believe that um
The initial 50 million that was
put into the expendable fund
will last for 4 years, so that
would mean 1.4% each year, um,
FY 25 through 28.
Uh thank you for that, Mr.
Chair, um, and Jacob, um, can
you just very quickly run
through the list of the things
that that pays for. I used to
run a land trust, so the
transaction costs are so high
and, and I think the cost of
appraisal has increased by like
300% in the last 5 years or so.
So the rulemaking, I imagine,
will address that, but can you
just tell me now what, what you
can use these funds for.
I, I can't, I'm, I'm less
familiar.
With the specific numbers and we
look forward to getting feedback
during the rulemaking process,
but certainly the, the cost of
administrative overhead for um
doing these projects will be
something we'll look at changing
in the rule amendment.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and thank you all
for your presentations. Um, one
of my questions is, uh, to
Mnerd, can any of this money be
used for archaeological surveys
for watershed and forest
planning because I know that's a
big complaint that I hear we're
really backlogged in that and so
can any of those, the funding be
used for that?
Yes, Mr. Chair, a
representative, I'm certainly in
the forest and Watershed
Restoration Act, um, even before
Land of Enchantment Legacy Fund.
We have a recent record of
funding archaeological surveys
on multiple national forests and
the tension of that to be the
healer, um, the hirea, uh,
Apache Ranger District, um, on
the Carson and, um, uh, another
one on the sibila, and the, the
Puerco project. So each of those
are partnership.
We have with the Forest Service,
and, um, they're intended to,
um, accelerate the timeline
that, that, um, both the Forest
Service and potentially the
state can send funds to do
restoration work um in those
areas.
Thank you for that happy to hear
that. I know it's a big backlog.
So, um, the other question I
have is for. Oh gosh. Anyway,
the the outdoor recreation. Um,
That include hunting.
So those stats uh came directly
from the BEA report and how they
break down that activities. Um,
so hunting is not, uh, perfectly
captured, I believe, in their
activities I'd have to look at
their full long list of them,
um, but I'd be happy to get that
information and get that back to
you. There are a few other um
organizations that measure our
economy, our outdoor economy.
Um, and produce reports as well,
so, uh, headwaters Economics
would be another good resource,
and I can look at both of those
for you and get back to you.
Thank you for that. I, um, I
just know that in, in my little
small town during hunting
season.
Our little town is thriving.
And everyone looks forward to
September 1st and before when
they're out there, um, scouting.
Um, the other
If we could get contact
information for everyone that
receives legacy funds so that we
can, we can direct contact them
directly, uh, names and contact
information would be really
helpful. It's hard to navigate
all that. I know it is for
constituents that are saying,
how do I do this? How do I get
that? How do I apply for this or
that, and so it's confusing. So
if we could, we could get that
it'd be great. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, representative, uh,
Senator Woods.
Uh thank you, Mr. Chair, a
couple of questions.
Uh, one of them has to do with
the
Uh, so,
We have already started spending
the money. Um, what, when I say
allocated, we have those 12
projects that are currently
starting, um, that we're working
on the contracts now. Well,
which will, which will, uh,
Use up the rest of the ARPA
funding and those are all aware
of when their deadline is to
complete the projects and we
believe this will be completed
and we will spend the the funds.
I've thought quite a bit about
this federal funding, especially
this funding that we have like
AARPA and some of these funds
that came in and
start thinking about changing
that procurement code, see if we
can spend this stuff at at least
20 at a time, uh, without going
to the Purma code so that we
could get this money out faster.
I know that that time that you
take to accept bids and approved
bids and all of that adds up to
a lot of time.
So if you would like to comment
on that. Yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator, so one of the things I
had mentioned in my presentation
is we are working on a price
agreement, which basically
allows us to, it's another
procurement method but puts all
of our contractors
And so it'll, it won't, we won't
have to necessarily go through
an RFP process which takes 8
months. Um, once the price
agreements in place, which we
hope is within the next month,
we'll be able to start a project
within weeks.
So you can do that already. We
can, yes, we're we're working to
get there. Yes, the price
agreement allows us to put these
contractors on contract, um, to
do projects like not just a
single project, but any project
that comes up
is, uh, money.
Level that you can't go over and
do that, or is it wide open?
Um, my financial manager is here
and
there's no, there is no you can
get back to me on that. Yeah,
no, she, she said that there is
no, um, limit.
OK.
OK. And the other question I
have.
Mr. Chairman.
It's probably for you.
Well, actually it's on the, the,
uh.
Jacob
On the, uh,
National Heritage Conservation
Act.
And when we start talking about
the uh easement.
I've always wondered, and if
this is a long explanation. I
don't want to hear it right now,
but on, on one of those points
down there on page 61 of those
points.
Is that uh you talk about
conservation values and
agriculture, wildlife.
In scenic open space.
Do you actually put a value on
scenic open space.
I've had, I've had people tell
me on a conservation easement to
value the value of that
conservation easement, you have
to have an appraiser.
Describe what you're giving up
what particular values you're
giving up.
And so,
That and I'm just not familiar
with that. I do know that um
when uh to follow the rules, the
NHCA rules and to comply with
the, the statutes that back
these programs, um, identifying
how
And we worked very hard to kind
of keep it within the defined
statutory schemes that are part
of the, the, the distribution,
and there was huge push from
different factions on all sides
to open those up, and I think
the key was keeping it intact
and I just, uh, again, it's one
of those pieces of legislation
that, that I think having been
here 20 years and watched all
the failed efforts before to see
this.
Come to fruition and to hear how
it's working is super exciting.
And I just shout out to Senator
Neville, uh, who is leaving us.
He's been an incredibly valuable
member in our chamber, and he
took the lead on this and again,
the fact that it was a
bipartisan bill and really ended
up that way, I think was key to
the success. So just a couple of
things I've, uh, Ms. Ferguson,
you mentioned a two-year
funding.
Kind of limitation. Just explain
where that just how that works
and why, where does that
limitation come from? Is that
part of the rules? I just was
curious about that.
Uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, Senator,
um, we were told that by our, so
I'm not sure exactly where it
came from. Um, we were told that
from our upper management that
we had 2 years to spend the
funding.
So, Mr. Chair, again, because I,
I went back, it made me pause
because obviously it's, it's,
it's creating challenges for you
in implementing these programs
and I went back and kind of, I
didn't remember that in the
statute certainly, so again, to
the extent that's being done
internally, um, obviously these
kinds of things are the types of
discussions and flexibility that
needs need to occur so that
we're sure we can get the money
out and, and have it work.
The way it was intended to work.
So I don't know if anyone
anything else.
Mr. Chair, and um uh Senator,
uh,
I'm familiar with, we have the
same kind of maybe surprise when
um and what I was told was that,
um, DFA put a two-year budget
authority on those funds when
they were budgeted to our
departments. And for that
reason, we can't, uh, uh, we
have to think about that when
we're reviewing projects and um
obviously some of our projects
have longer timelines than that
easements and conservation
projects can extend that period
of time. So, um, that is
something.
having to work through.
Well, it just seems to me that
the, the beauty of this, the way
this is created is that it's
really designed to be a
recurring funding stream in
perpetuity.
And so
Uh, again, we, we should follow
up and I can follow up with DFA
and just figure out.
Kind of why that they came up
with a 2 year number if a 4 year
number would be better to really
make this work, uh, because I do
think that
The way this is structured and
it's I believe it's a rolling
5-year average of the fund, if
I'm correct, um, I mean, it's,
it's gonna be a steady funding
stream, which I think is only
going to increase. Uh, I'm very
curious actually, given what's
happened with the markets and
our permanent funds, this is now
being invested by state
investment council. I'm curious
what, what the 350 number, it's
actually 400 because we had the
other 50 as well, you know,
what, what kind of appreciation.
Has occurred just recently. So
are there other any of you have
other challenges that we should
be aware of, um.
That you want to highlight for
us.
And if not, that's a good thing.
I mean, again, I just think that
uh
You know, this is a statue we
probably would not want to
reopen.
Uh, but I do think as it's
rolled out in this two year
issue is a perfect example. We
just need to be made aware of
administrative decisions that
are being made at the executive
level that are impacting how the
funding is working. So again,
it's uh.
It's very exciting to see this
in place and I asked you to tell
a quick story. I was at a
historic preservation awards for
the city of Santa Fe, and they
stood up and announced that
there was this fantastic new
grant program, and there's $1000
that's available for, for
historic preservation grants. I
was like, wow, where did that
come from?
this bill. So it was very cool
to see that actually rolling
out. So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Ribsent
Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm not
sure who to direct this to, but
I mean in an earlier
presentation, um, it was
suggested that, um, with the 22%
that's supposed to go to the
Department of Game and Fish to
carry out projects that it be
added, um, or clarified that
they use it for the restoration
and protection of species of
greatest conservation need or
SGCNs. Um, can you tell me what
portion
Of that, um,
funding that goes to game and
fish.
would already be doing that.
Or if they're doing all of the
22% for that.
Director Sloan, are you with us?
I am, Mr. Chair, Representative,
we have committed to spend all
of that money on SGCN.
Terrific. Um, do you think
and recommended language would
help secure that from
one administration to the next.
Chair representative, I think
as, as I alluded to and then
Senator Worth said more clearly,
um,
Getting this bill through was a
challenge in that there were
many groups that felt strongly
about various of the statutes,
one of the contentious issues
was the SGCN issue and Senator
Worth and Senator Neville were
very clear that they didn't want
to wade off into those
controversies and sidetracked
the bill. So I'm afraid that if
we tried to open that back up,
we would face that same problem
and um
I, I'm not sure what the outcome
would be and
I mean, I, I think we can rely
on the my agency to be committed
to species of greatest
conservation need going forward.
And
Loan, I guess we could always
point to that, the history of,
you know, the funds being used
for SSGCNs.
I
representative, yes.
OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um.
So I had a couple of questions
and I'm looking at the chart in
uh Jonathan Hayden's
presentation, which is not, uh,
we don't have a handout of it.
It is available online and it
breaks down to the 6 different
agencies, uh, the, the
percentages and
You know, I have, I have no idea
why, you know, how we got to
numbers like 22.5, but that's
what's in there. Uh, and then
some of those have further
allocations between programs
within those agencies. Um, and
Am I understanding this
correctly? The, the fiscal year
25 distribution to the six
agencies was 12.5 million.
And that is one quarter of the
50 million expendable fund.
So we haven't even started with
the permanent fund yet. Is that
correct?
Hm.
OK.
Yeah, I
People are shaking.
Um,
Do we know, uh, so is the plan,
we do the expendable fund for 4
years and then the permanent
fund kicks in? Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair, if I may, um, so
the
SB 9 included distribution rules
for when and uh when the
permanent fund and how the
permanent fund is distributed to
the expendable fund.
So if the balance is above $150
million in the permanent fund,
um, and, uh, income in the that
fiscal year, uh, from interest
is over $50 then the excess
investment over $5 million is
distributed to the um expendable
fund and I, that's my
interpretation of the statute.
So I might be, I might be a
little off on that financially,
um, but that's the way it's, I
believe it's written.
OK, I, I haven't looked at that
in a couple of years, um.
But
so as long as the permanent
funds over 150
And then it's the income.
Over 5%.
Or is it 5% of income? Explain
that again.
If you would, uh, yeah, and I
can, I have a copy of SB 9 here
so I can be happy to show it to
you, um.
Uh, so excess investment income
over $50 is distributed to the
fund.
So does that mean the 1st 5
million stays in the fund?
That's my personal
interpretation of it.
I'm looking at Sander worth and
he's rubbing his brow.
Mhm. OK.
150 was the trigger, which we
got to when we put the
additional 300 in, that's never
going to be an issue anymore.
And so again, the idea was, uh,
and this clearly says any
investment income to the fund
from the previous fiscal year in
excess of $5 million shall be
distributed to the land of
In total, because there was an
additional 50 million that
5%.
Threshold was really so that we
could build the principle over a
number of years, and so they
could generate more returns in
the future. Um, we were not,
frankly anticipating that we
would get an additional 300
million appropriated in the
following session. Uh, now that
we did, I think it would be
worth revisiting that threshold
and maybe lowering that, that
cap, um, so that more money
could go directly to the
programs sooner.
Um, that it's obviously your
call. Um, I think.
That would benefit from some
input from the state investment
council as well. They had
provided us with a lot of
different kind of scenarios for
the growth of the funds over the
next decade or two, and I think
it'd be worth looking at that
again and seeing what would make
the most sense in terms of
balancing the short term needs
with the the long term viability
of the fund.
OK. Thank you.
Um,
Do we, do we have an estimate?
When we start distributing from
the permanent fund to the
expendable fund, how much money
that's gonna be.
and I
I don't know when it starts.
Does it start immediately or do
we wait until they expendable
fund is expended.
Is that yours as well, Director
Sloan?
My understanding was we were
gonna go through the first.
50 million and let the fund
grow.
And then I have seen some form
of projection that had the game
and fish department getting
somewhere around the $5 million
number sometime in the early
2030s. Um, so I, my
understanding of the original
intent was to spend out the $500
million well, whatever money we
got into the the fund.
Gre such that it could support
those larger numbers down the
road, but again,
That's what I remember.
The, the reason I'm, I'm getting
into the weeds here is I I'm
what I've heard about at least
some of the programs is, uh,
there's some growing pains, you
know, we're figuring things out,
like how it's gonna be operated
and, and how it's gonna be
administered and how people are
going to apply, um, and that,
you know, after you take the
money and you divide it by 6 and
then further divided and it ends
up being.
Good, but not great, you know,
not, not that much money in
terms of the number of projects.
I believe I heard the outdoor
recreation projects had, um, I
think you said 4 million in
requests and 800,000 to allocate
something like that? Uh.
Uh, Mr. Chair, that is correct,
yeah, for the outdoor equity
fund this year the request was
4.2 million and we have about
850K in budget.
OK, so that's, you know, good
news bad news, right, that, that
we have, we have interest. I, I
think there's been some, um, uh,
learning curve for the public
and the NGOs as well in terms
of, you know, or, you know,
recognizing that these funds are
out there and and how to apply
and where to apply and what the
process is, um, so I think
that's something uh we're
working on making better, um, it
sounds to me like the, the
funding might increase.
A little bit, uh, in the future,
um, but, uh, and it also sounds
to me like the the fund has a
built-in growth mechanism, uh,
which I think is good. Um, I do
think the idea of creating these
funds, and this isn't the only
one, and there I know there are
more coming we hear about a
proposal tomorrow. I think it's
an excellent way um to invest
money in the state of New Mexico
that uh we have um
Um, uh.
Lots of money coming in right
now from oil and gas. Uh, I
sincerely believe that will not
always be the case. Uh, and when
Close to say, uh, what we need
is an exception to the anti-
donation clause. And I, yeah,
I'm not sure I'm gonna go there
and I'm not sure it's feasible
anyway. Um, I, I do believe
that, um, as you know, my
discussion with Senator Woods,
Conservation easements are
tricky and uh having some
expertise in the public partner
that holds those easements. I
think that's a good long term
strategy. And so although any
political subdivision.
Can participate, um.
The committee. I mean, that that
was sort of, I was curious to
know not only were you getting
enough money to do what we want
you to do and um, as is often
the case, like what I'm hearing
is you could use more if you had
it.
But are there, are there other
structural impediments that
you're facing?
I, I'd be interested in hearing
from, um, the NMDA perspective
on working with the storm and
Water Conservation districts.
Um, that's, um,
I don't know how many soil and
water conservation districts
there are in New Mexico, but
there are quite a few.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. There are
47 of them.
And I'm, I'm uh thinking back to
the start of your question about
the anti-donation clause.
So that we don't run afoul of
that very clause, we require
that an individual farmer,
rancher, land manager, if they
want to access the funds through
NMD's Healthy Soil program
necessarily they have to get
project sponsorship from an SWCD
because they're not subject to
that clause in ways that we are
in ways that asses are in ways
that land grants are.
Alternatively, they can go
before their tribal government
if they happen to be a member of
such a community. So they have
those two avenues to pursue that
project sponsorship piece in
order to access our funds.
Does that answer your question?
Oh
Yes, uh, to an extent, and it
raises the question, my
understanding is that soil,
water, and conservation
districts weren't subject to the
anti-donation clause to the
extent they were using federal
funds. That's always been my
understanding of why they have
been able to spend money on
private land.
Is that not the case?
Because these are obviously not
federal funds.
Right. And I, I would hate to
pretend to be an attorney and uh
make that interpretation. So,
um, I have to circle back with
others at NMDA and.
Better understand the SWCD Act.
So I'd be, I'd be interested in
knowing the answer to that, um,
because I've heard, I, I've had
people in the past suggest that,
you know, explained the
anti-donation clause to them and
they say, oh we'll
been held, it has to be there
for a
125 and putting in 125, which
will keep it pretty steady.
But I think with the $350
million being invested that 5%
return, assuming that's the
return, and I think we should
get an answer to that from
investment council, exactly how
they're managing this, uh, but
that's gonna.
The corpus is gonna grow and
News is that we're not spending
125 without the money coming in,
which is what we thought was
going to happen until we got the
$300 million in there. OK, but
part of my question is, we have
the expendable fund, we have the
$50 million being spent out at
125 a year, you're suggesting an
additional 125 is gonna get
dumped into that expendable
fund. Does that mean there's
going to be a bump of 2 to 3
years where they spend 25?
Or does it, is there a cap that
stays at 125. Because I think
the way it's structured it's
going to be a year delay of the
125 coming out. So you've got 12
5 coming out and 125 going in,
so it's going to stay right at
that $50 million number in that,
in that corpus with a 12 5.
Required to come out unless you
know it's 25% or more. So 25 25%
of 50 million is 125, right? So
it's gonna be, it's gonna stay
at that $500 million until more
money, a bigger percentage comes
in and then it will start to
increase. That's going to take a
little while.
OK.
It would be good to, uh, maybe
I'll take another look at it,
but it'd be good to uh have a
better understanding of what
that, that income stream is
gonna look like over the years.
And Mr. Chair, I think it'd be
great to hear from the State
Investment council to get a
sense of kind of what they, what
they see this might look like
and.
Again, what their estimating the
return would be.
OK, so we're gonna, we're gonna
ask Sarah to follow up on that
and see if we can get that for
the committee.
OK. Any further questions of
this panel from the committee?
OK, thank you all very much.
once.
In particular to Director Sloan,
who has spent most of the day
online with us.
Uh, and with that, uh, it is
340. Our next panel is scheduled
to start at 4. we're going to
try to start that a little
early, but we're also going to
take a 10 minute break. OK, so
10, so please, please be back at
3:50.
OK, we're gonna get back started
back up. So if you could
So we have about an hour.
that we sort of squeezed
Um, those numbers likely
represent a half or even a third
of what actually occurs on most
long haul
Includes um property damage, um,
lost time at work, medical
bills, um, all different things
like that, um, and again, those
are very conservative estimates,
um, also important to remember
that some roads are too busy for
animals to cross, so while
wildlife vehicle collisions are
the most visible aspect of this
problem when we have roads like
I-25, um, I 10, um, and probably
some others as well.
Well, you don't see animals
trying to cross, which ends up
being a threat to large
landscape connectivity, um,
which is important for a number
of reasons, but especially as we
consider impacts of climate
change like drought, more and
more animals need to move.
Um, if we could go on to the
next slide.
Um, it's important to know that
uh wildlife crossings are
effective. Um, wildlife
crossings have the highest rate
of effectiveness of any solution
DOT um has in its tool bag. So
whether we're talking about
pedestrian safety or whatever it
might be. There's no solution.
There's no, um, tool that DOT
can implement that has as high
of success rate as wildlife
crossings, um, which you see the
number.
There reducing vehicle
collisions by over 90%.
Um, if you could go to the next
slide, um, New Mexico has a long
history of legislation related
to wildlife crossings, the first
uh joint memorial was in 2003,
um, all of these uh memorials
and resolutions or I guess just
memorials were sponsored by
Senator Stewart, um, the one in
2003 led to the construction of
the Tahar Canyon, wildlife
crossing, which is pictured
right there, um, as I'm sure.
of you know, um, a long, um,
I-40 there um into Harris
Canyon. There's an at-grade
crossing across the front edge
Road, New Mexico 333, um, and
then directing animals on west
um before crossing south into
the Monzanos. So that's a
long-term success project, um,
next slide.
In 2019, um, the legislature
approved um bipartisan bill, uh,
the wildlife Corridors Act and
directed New Mexico Game and
fish and New Mexico DOT to put
together the wildlife corridors
action plan. Um, so previously,
um, DOT and DOT had constructed
other wildlife crossings, um,
but always this was tied to
other uh road projects that they
had underway. And so it wasn't
the need for wildlife vehicle.
that was really dictating where
these were going, but it was
other construction projects that
could kind of pull in a wildlife
project too, if it was
applicable in this kind of, you
know, allowed them to be
proactive.
Um, next slide.
In
Hopefully, um, most of you will
be driving later this evening
for dinner,
Gorge here have a disease,
Um,
10 or 11 projects were estimated
at $388 million. Um, that number
has
at this committee, um, thinking
in kind of the natural resources
realm, you know, $388 million
is, you know, more than the
legacy fund that we just talked
about, and that was such a
historic investment. But when
you're talking about
transportation, it's just a
different world, you know, these
sort of, you know, I think La
Bajada cost $75 million and
while it's a really nice road,
I, I, you know, me being a
layman, I don't exactly know
what
Scale
Um, we'll go to next slide.
Um,
So
Uh, following the passage of the
2019 wildlife Corridors Act and
the Wildlife Corridors Action
Plan that the department
finalized in 2021. Um, the
legislature appropriated $20
million in 2022. Um, then in
2023, uh, SB 72 created a
dedicated wildlife corridors
fund, um, and $5 million was
appropriated that last year or
that year, and then last year,
um, going into the session, the
governor had
$30 million in her budget coming
out of the general fund. The
legislature's budget had $550
million but it came from the DOT
road fund. So essentially is
kind of, you know, robbing Peter
to pay Paul. It didn't
That, you know, higher number,
um, which, um, we are hoping for
um this
In the process, they've done,
um.
Feasibility studies, they're
doing the planning and design
work um for one of the projects
right now and having that uh
funding in place, uh, so that
the department could continue
with long-term planning is
really important, um, as you
might imagine, all these sort of
projects do take a long time,
um, from beginning to end. And
so having the funding there in
place so that the department
could, you know, really commit
to it the way it has is
essential. So long term
planning.
Scoping reports, engineering and
design is really important. Um,
I'll talk a little bit about
federal grants here in a second.
And it's much, much easier to
fund um a a shovel ready project
than it is one that has to go
through all the planning design.
So if we could get more and more
projects to that point where
they're on the shelf ready to
go, and we just need, you know,
some big federal grant or some
additional district funds or
whatever it might be, um, having
that, uh, that, that planning
becomes essential and then
finally.
Maintenance, um, you know.
So that, uh, money doesn't
always have to come um out of
district budgets, district
maintenance budgets having
additional dollars here and
there to help with maintenance
can be really significant. Um,
next slide.
Um, all right, uh, federal
funding opportunities, so we are
right now in the 2nd year of,
um, essentially a 5 year grant
that was created under the
bipartisan bipartisan
infrastructure bill, um, a
couple of years ago, the
wildlife crossings pilot
program. It is the only program
um in federal highways
specifically earmarked for
wildlife crossings. Um, I've
noted a couple other grants
below that have a lot more money
and for which wildlife.
Crossings are eligible, but it's
not their sole purpose.
So in 2023, um, out of the $3550
million available, FHWA made
$112.5 million available this
year, they made $145 million
available, um, and in this
application cycle, there are 56
applications from 34 states
requesting $550 million. So
that's a lot of money chasing
what, you know, appears like a
lot of money, but isn't a lot of
money. Um, but we are working to
Permanently reauthorize this
program with hopefully much more
significant funds. Um, and
again, I'll note that um the
department applied last year and
applied this year for their
number one priority project and
we are um.
You know, fairly hopeful that
that that this year we should
win that grant, which would be
hugely impactful. Um, and if we
could go to the next slide.
Um, so what's next? Um, so Jim
and Trent will give a much more
detailed breakdown of the
project and US 550 north of
Cuba, that they are moving
forward now, um, also US 70 at
Benton Mescalero, the Mescalero
tribe won one of those federal
grants last year to do a
feasibility study. Um, the
department has also is also
conducting a feasibility study
for kind of a similar stretch of
road.
Um, then I 25 at Wares, um, so
just kind of east of Las Vegas.
This wasn't a priority area, um,
but there have been some elk and
bear collisions along that
stretch of the highway, um, so.
Uh, the environmental staff
right here has been coordinating
with the district staff over
there on some solutions. Um, US
70 at Saint Augustine Pass,
which is, um, just north of the
Oregon Mountains. Um, that's an
area where you go north of Saint
Augustine Pass, and I don't
think there's another paved road
for about 120 miles. And so,
again, thinking about large
landscape connectivity, the
ability to reconnect that for
whether it's bighorn sheep or
mule deer or mountain lions or
whatever it might be again.
Um, hugely impactful. Um, I-25
at Glorietta Pass is another one
of the priority projects that
DOT has begun discussing um
starting to, to start with
feasibility and scoping. Um, so
some of that preliminary work.
And then finally, um, one of my
favorite projects, I-25 and US
50 at Bernna Leo, um, the pueblo
of Santa Ana also submitted a
grant this year to that pilot
program to do all the um
engineering and design work for
those projects, um, and.
would be a really cool project
because as you might imagine,
you know, back before all of our
roads, the Hamez Mountains and
the Saint um, the Sandia
operated as very much one
ecosystem, but with those roads
bisecting it, that's not really
how it functions anymore.
Um, and with that, I'll, I'll
wrap up and pass it over to Jim
Trent. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Michael. uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, Adam, Vice
Chairman, members of the
committee. Good afternoon and
thanks for your attention late
in the afternoon. Um, my name is
Jim Hirsch. I am the NMDOT's
wildlife coordinator, um, I'm
presenting alongside Trent
Bakken. He's our natural
resources section manager and uh
today I'm going to be discussing
in detail the US
50 wildlife crossing project and
our efforts to implement it.
Next slide please.
So as Michael mentioned earlier
in 2019 Senate Bill 228 was
passed and it directed NMDOT to
work with New Mexico game and
fish to develop the statewide
wildlife corridors action plan.
This plan was finalized in 2022
and had strong support from the
public, NGOs, tribal
governments, and other local,
state, and federal agencies.
This plan focuses on deer, elk,
bear, and other large mammals
because of the severity of
crashes caused by these species
and the impact roads can have on
their movements. The plan, as
Michael mentioned, plan
prioritized 5 wildlife vehicle
collision hotspots, and once
again this talk is going to
focus on one of the top priority
areas at US 550 north of Cuba.
Next slide please.
Thank you. The US 550 wildlife
crossing project presents an
unprecedented opportunity to
drastically reduce wildlife
vehicle collisions and restore
wildlife connectivity in the
vicinity of the continental
divide near Cuba, New Mexico.
This slide shows a one-page
summary of the project that we
hope is a useful reference for
you folks.
The wildlife corridor's action
plan designated this as the
number one priority project.
Phases 1 and 2 of the project
are currently in design and will
include two wildlife underpasses
and two wildlife overpasses.
Next slide please.
The 16 mile long corridor is
divided into 4 construction
phases which are displayed here
under different colored road
segments. The squares with used
delineate wildlife underpasses
and the squares with O's
represent wildlife overpass
locations.
These road segments are mostly
adjacent to land managed by the
US Forest Service Bureau of Land
Management and Hickory Apache
Nation.
Once again, we are currently
focusing our efforts on phases 1
and 2 represented by the orange
and dark blue segments on this
map.
Next slide please.
There were a number of factors
that made this area a priority.
The first factor is the sheer
number of reported wildlife
vehicle collisions.
Over 200 collisions have been
reported by police from 2009 to
2018. However, as Michael
mentioned earlier, uh, that may
only represent about 1/3 of the
actual collisions that occur in
that area. So it's likely this
number is probably closer to 600
crashes.
The cost of these collisions
within the overall corridor was
estimated between 6.8 and 10
million over a seven-year
period.
Another factor is that the
wildlife vehicle collisions per
mile per year was the 2nd
highest in the state.
His crossing project would
provide safe passage for big
game, which would likely
increase the number of animals
available for hunter harvest and
wildlife viewing.
But also this project would
benefit other wildlife species
that are susceptible to roadway
mortality. Most of the priority
area is, uh, as I alluded to
earlier, adjacent to public land
ownership with limited potential
for residential development, and
this will ensure the long term
effectiveness of constructed
crossings.
Next slide please. A number of
existing drainage structures as
shown in the top image do not
allow for big gay movement under
the roadway, which causes the
occurrence of wildlife vehicle
collisions. The bottom image is
a rendering of a precast
concrete underpass that would be
50 ft wide and would provide
safe wildlife passage.
The NMDOT is currently nearing
completion of a dedicated
wildlife underpass on I-25 near
Raton and even with ongoing
construction activities, it's
already being used by deer elk,
bear, and other wildlife, so
these structures are known to be
beneficial.
In other locations we plan to
build wildlife overpasses.
Next slide.
Oh, sorry about that.
Thanks, Michael.
and shown in the top image
overpass locations are ideally
planned where there are
escarpments on either side of
the roadway.
This limits the amount of fill
necessary to build an overpass
and therefore reduces costs.
The bottom image is a rendering
of one of the proposed
overpasses and when this is
built, it would be the first of
its kind in New Mexico.
Colorado, Arizona, Utah, Nevada
each have at least 5 wildlife
overpasses already constructed
and this project would elevate
New Mexico into the national
movement to protect driver
safety and provide safe wildlife
passage.
Next slide. All construction
phases will involve 8-foot high
wo woven wire game fencing,
which would exclude wildlife
from entering the roadway and
direct them to safely traverse
at crossing structures.
An attempt is made to end game
fence runs at cliffs or bluffs
or areas that have little or no
reported wildlife vehicle
collisions with excellent sight
distances to minimize end run
events.
To address a a high ranking
wildlife vehicle collision
hotspot on I-25 near Walters
where a motorists fatality did
occur recently. Safety funds
were acquired by District 4 and
will be used for the
construction of gain fencing to
root wildlife under two existing
bridges.
Next slide.
Game guards also called double
cada guards would be installed
at turnouts and driveways to
further prevent.
Um, large mammals from entering
the roadway. These are much more
effective than gates since gates
can be easily left open.
Because much of this project is
through For Service and BLM
Lands, it would also ensure that
the public continues to have
access to these specific lands.
Next slide.
I'm going to conclude the
presentation by discussing the
current and future funding.
Since 2022, the legislature has
appropriated a total of $12
million for the planning and
design of wildlife crossings.
3.5 million of these funds are
currently being used for the
design of phases 1 and 2 of the
US 550 wildlife crossing
project. The remaining balance
of these funds would be used as
state match for the FHWA
wildlife Crossings pilot program
grant application.
The NMDUT applied for 26 million
in construction funds just a
month ago, and we will find out
the result of our efforts in
this coming January.
Last year, our grant application
received a perfect rating score,
but other more shovel ready
projects were prioritized. So
now that we are in final design,
we're very optimistic about
receiving this grant.
A legislative appropriation of
36.5 million towards the US 550
project would allow us to build
phases 1 and 2 together.
A reminder that Senate Bill 72,
which was signed into law in
2023 and established the
Wildlife Corridor Fund has never
received any funding
appropriation. Instead, previous
legislation has placed wildlife
crossing dollars directly into
the NMDUT budget and not into
the wildlife corridor of fun.
Finally, uh, I'd like to tell
you a little bit about other
major wildlife crossing projects
in development.
We're working on getting ready
to develop a scoping report for
the I-25 Glorietta Wildlife
Crossing Project and also the
DOT is already underway
preparing a scoping report for
the US 70 wildlife Crossing
Project, Utua Rosa.
Thank you for your time allowing
us to speak with you today.
Thank you. OK, so thank you.
We're gonna hold questions.
We're going to do a brief touch
on solar. Is that back to you,
Michael?
Sure.
Yeah, turn on your mic. Yeah,
thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee. Um, so now for
something completely different,
um, but still kind of in this
world of connectivity in um
wildlife movement, you know, I
think we often think of um.
Residential development, maybe
we, we think of traditional
fossil fuel development, um,
things like that as being
impacts to connectivity, um, but
I would say one of the the
biggest conservation, um.
Issues for wildlife that I would
say most people probably haven't
thought about yet is development
of utility scale solar energy,
um, especially in a state like
ours where over the next 1020
years, we're expecting to see a
lot of renewable energy um
developed, especially in our
rural landscapes, um, and I'm
just going to keep talking here
to the um to my presentation
gets up there, um.
But we, um, my organization, um,
Wildlands Network, um, we are in
the just start or just about to
wrap up the first year of what
will be a 4 year study, um, that
is mostly centered in the
Farmington area just north of
the San Juan Generating Station.
Um, we have an additional study
area in eastern New Mexic
Eastern Arizona that directly
borders Zuniland on Navajo lands
owned by the Navajo Nation. I
mean we could go to the
Next slide there.
Um, and let's just keep on going
past that because I already got
there. Um, so, um, in the
Farmington area we are our main
study species are pronghorn, um,
pronghorn, like flat, big wide
open spaces, not unlike the Taos
Plateau above us or eastern New
Mexico, um, or other areas that
tend to overlap well with the
kind of lands that are suitable
for solar development. Um, so
one of the reasons why we're
studying this species is one we
expect.
A lot of solar development to
happen in Pronghorn habitat and
2, we have a question of how
well do pronghorn serve as an
umbrella species that would give
us answers about coyotes,
badgers, prairie dogs, other
species that occupy these
habitats, um, next slide.
Um, today, there is one peer
reviewed publication regarding
interactions between wildlife
and solar. Um, here are some
results from a study up in
southern Wyoming, conducted by
Research researcher named Hall
Sawyer, um, who's pretty
prominent in this field, um,
without going into too much
detailed, um, he showed that
there was displacement beyond um
the footprint of the solar
facility. So, um, stemming from
FERC regulations, all solar
facility.
have to be fenced with the 8 in
what is most preferable is the 8
ft high game fencing, um, that
we also use for for wildlife
crossings as well. So we don't
ever expect wildlife um to be
using um those areas within
solar facilities, that's not our
goal, but one of our questions
is beyond the footprint of the
solar facility itself, is there
any additional displacement that
is being demonstrated or um over
time we
Animals habituate and come right
up to the fence. Um, all right,
next slide. So yeah, there's one
study, um, which leaves a lot
left to learn. Um, so this is
our study area, um, and so
you'll notice, um, we have the
Navajo Nation, we have the Ute
Mountain Ute. We have private
lands, we have BLM lands, we
have state lands, and then we
also have neighboring states in
this area, especially. Um, so
beyond the impacts of any one
project.
Another concern that we have is
cumulative effects from multiple
projects, um, as I'm sure many
of you know, whether it's wind
or solar, one of the biggest
limiting factors for renewable
energy development at this
utility scale is access to
transmission lines so that you
could get that power to market,
um, because of the San Juan
generating station, there's a
lot of transmission capacity in
the northwest corner of the
state that's shipping that power
off to Arizona, Utah, um, as
well as New Mexico.
And you know, we'll see
something similar as the Sunzia
line is constructed we'll see
concentration of development
along those transmission
corridors, um, which creates
permitting challenges from the
standpoint of these different,
you know, permitting on Navajo
versus BLam versus state. They
don't talk to each other. So
while 1 2000 acre project might
not be a big deal when there's,
you know, 3 or 4 of them all
clustered together. What are the
implications of that, uh, next
slide. Oh man.
I can't read that, um, um, I
think pretty much, um, we can go
to the next slide.
Um, so the San Juan, um, solar
project broke ground in June of
2023 and we'll flip through some
slides somewhat quickly here so
we could go to the next one. So
that's June of 2023. Um, that's
what the project area looks
like. I think in the distance
you could, you could see the San
Juan Ging Station, um, alright,
next slide.
All right, July, you're starting
to see some land being cleared,
um, you're starting to see some
equipment, some staging
happening, um, you could go to
the next slide, um, more land
being cleared at this point, all
the exterior fencing, um, is up.
Um, so again, kind of hard to
see at least on the screen here,
um, but you know, at that point,
it's all fenced and then we'll
go to the next slide, um, and I
believe that was taken maybe in
March, so you know.
The point here is, you know,
June to March, we're talking 9
months and you know, a landscape
is transformed extremely
quickly. I, you know, I think
oftentimes what we think of when
we're thinking of, you know,
residential development and city
growth, that's happening over
decades. This happens over less
than a year. Um, and again, what
are the implications of that,
um, especially, you know, when
you have res like drought, you
could get the next slide.
All right. Um, so we colored a
60 pronghorn, um, this spring,
um, we had 30 other Southern
studies site, 30 here. You could
see the the path of the
helicopter, um, that, uh, um,
the maroon color in the center
of the map, that is the
footprint of the San Juan Solar
facility, and you could see um
private um BLM in state land all
mixed in there. All right, next
slide.
Um, yeah, we could just keep
going there. All right, so, uh,
that is a heat map of all of our
collar locations since the
collars were deployed in March,
um, so you could see some
general avoidance, um, of the
solar facility which right now
there is in blue and we could
keep going here.
So one thing that becomes um
increasingly common, um, is the
idea of um what's often referred
to as corridors or pathways that
exist within the facility. Um,
you know, more and more of their
discussions about building these
in for wildlife purposes, but
oftentimes they end up um built
into a project like you could
see here, um, because of land
ownership, um, geographical
features like Arroyos that
you're not going to build across
and stuff like that. Um, but as
it turns out, this
from a researcher's standpoint
became really interesting if you
have all these different lengths
and width between the solar
facility. So you have really
wide ones like we see in the
northwest where it's 550 m and
it's really wide open. Um, then
you see the two kind of running
the length of the facility on
kind of the right side, um, the,
the one to the left is an old
coal hall Road. There's also an
Arroyo that kind of runs around
there and then the one to the
right is where
That existing road cuts through
the facility. Um, and I will
say, um, right in that middle
section just to the left of
where it says 28 m. And we,
we've seen a fair number of
pronghorn hanging out there,
which is somewhat surprising,
um, but as our research goes on
and we continue to see what
areas they will occupy, um,
we'll kind of, you know, start
to get a better sense of what
might be, um.
Uh, make them more willing to
kind of, you know, enter certain
areas but not others. And we
could go to the next slide.
Um, so 25 of our animals, so
that's 83%, have come within 1
kilometer of the fencing since
March. Um, so we on that, that
right side um of the study there
area there that's kind of
badlands, um, and especially
during fawning season we saw a
lot of pronghorn kind of moving
up into those areas, which was
somewhat surprising, um, but
you'll notice, you know, that
center area, um, that's, you
know, more surrounded by panels
while
Had a couple pronghorn enter
those areas, um, largely they
have avoided it and you'll see
most of the clusters of those
dots on the outside of the
project area. um, next slide.
All right, um, so on this slide,
in addition to the San Juan
solar facility, there is um
another facility that is being
permitted right now. Um, you'll
see the kind of, you know, red
hashes. I'm just kind of to the
south or west southwest of the
current project. Um, so I
believe that is the.
Rock solar project that is
slated to begin construction
next year. And of course, you'll
see um a lot of um of our
pronghorn collars have been
using that area. And so that'll
give us some really good before
data to understand more how
they're interacting um once
that's built you go to the next
slide.
So this is a um this is one
colored animal, um, and again
that uh footprint of the
permitted project, the hiprock
so
project
and you'll see that um that uh
female, she, you know, kind of
spends most of her time up on
the hogback, um, you could kind
of see through that, that
imagery that, that big ridge
kind of running southwest,
but then she makes movements
down to that um area in white
where there's water. Um, and,
um, where that shiprock solar
project is um would cut off that
pathway. And so, you know, a
question again is
You know, will she just go
around it, or will that create
um some sort of, uh, you know,
issue for her. And so as we're
thinking about this.
Going forward, kind of big
picture, you know, our goal is
not to stop solar projects
because of wildlife, but learn
how to sight them as best as
possible and when you can't
avoid some resource, how do you
mitigate the effects and
especially when we're talking
about arid landscapes, the
biggest one is water. Um, water
really dictates, you know, not
only, you know, if an if animals
are able to occupy an area, but
if they're healthy enough to
have offspring, um, make it
through the winter things.
like that, the other mitigation
strategy that we're looking into
more and more is fencing, um,
there's increasing efforts,
including here on this on the
Tas Plateau to remove old
wildlife, um, old fence that is
not wildlife friendly and
replace it with fence that is
wildlife friendly. Um,
pronghornner, a great example
where even though there are
fastest land mammal in North
America. They tend not to jump
and so, um, barbed wire fences
were the bottom wire is too low,
becomes a huge barrier for
pronghorn.
And next slide. All right, and
that, that is it. Um, this is a
project that is in partnership
with the state land office with
BLM with the Ute Mount Uribe and
with Navajo Nation. Um, we'll
continue to, to have um more and
more results to share, um, but
that this is an issue that I
want, you know, to make sure
that's on the legislature's
radar, Colorado passed a study
bill last year to study this
issue over the next couple of
years, and there will likely be
um legis
in Colorado over the next couple
of years to create a more robust
process around permitting solar
with wildlife in mind. Um, also
in the meantime, the Mexico
State land office has been
developing a set of standards
and guidelines, um, that is
going through their internal
review processes, um, again,
regarding renewable energy
projects. So, um, more and more,
this is an issue that's getting
attention. I know from G and
Fisher's side, it it is a
concern, um, especially because
there is so little.
So as we, you know, create this
renewable, this transition to
renewable energy over the next
1020 years. For me, what's most
important is that we're not
simply trading climate impacts
for habitat impacts. We're a
state with big wide open spaces,
and that's, I know many people's
favorite aspects of of driving
through many parts of New
Mexico. And so we want to
maintain those values as we
transition and you know, being
able to do it, um,
Strategically as possible going
forward is essential. So thank
you so much for this time.
Great. Thank you and I never
thought about a lot of that
stuff. Questions from the
committee.
Represent Fri. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I was wondering why, um,
uh the San Augustine Pass was
not included in the 0.5
projects. It's real close to me
on 70.
Yeah, Mr. Chair Representative,
um,
the US 70
pass is um
it's identified as wildlife
corridor, um, but it wasn't
identified as a priority
Holdlife corridor, um, not
exactly sure why it wasn't, it
didn't, it didn't make the
priority list, and that was
after, um,
You know, many discussions with
game and fish and, and other
stakeholders regarding, you
know, regarding that wildlife
corridor
go ahead.
If I, if I get out of that, Mr.
Chair, Representative, this was
originally studied as a
priority
project. It would begin the
study, I think was in 2010, uh,
the primary issue was a deer
vehicle collisions, uh, due to
chronic wasting disease within
that area, the deer population
was decimated and drastically
reduced the number of deer,
which drastically reduced the
number of collisions. And so
that hotspot
This league fell out of the top
5, top 10. I'm I'm not sure
where it where it is. The other
issue uh within that area is
that, uh, one of the issues, one
of the possible focuses was
bringing bighorn sheep from the
northern San Andreas side, uh,
to be able to access the Oregon
mountainside. Unfortunately, the
Oregon Mountains are connected
into the Franklin Mountains in
Texas and Texas has a different
subspecies of bighorn sheep,
then is uh New Mexico.
Game and fish has reintroduced
into the San Andreas. And so
from our understanding, and this
is through the BLM that they
don't want those two species of
sheep to mix, which would.
At least from our standpoint,
because it's no longer a safety
issue, would put a, you know, a
hiatus on our plans to restore
an ecological corridor, at least
as far as an overpass, an
underpass or something like
that, uh which bighorn sheep do
not use, but deer, uh, do use
could potentially still be a
possibility.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you um for those great
explanations. Um, I just wanted
to make sure it wasn't because
of funding, but, um, if, um, you
know, they could reassess it,
even though the population has
gone down for, as you suggested
an underpass, um, would be
interesting to follow up, but
also, um, on the continental
divide trail and the overpass, I
believe it's an overpass for
that area.
Um,
because we have
The um divide trail, could
pedestrians use that too? It is
a long, is it along the trail
path?
Uh, it is not located along the
the trail path. It is located
along the actual continental or
very close to the physical
continental divide, but the
trail is well east of it, but it
will connect public lands to
public lands. So and that it
will not be restrictively
fenced. So.
Passage of humans would be a
possibility as well as wildlife.
Thank you. That's all I have,
Mr. Chair.
Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Can
you just explain, I want to make
sure I understand the
legislative funding ask. The
36,500, how do we get to that
number again? There's, there's a
$45 million number, but just to
ask is 36 and I want to
understand exactly what this is,
this is for.
Uh, sure, Mr. Chair. Senator, so
it's a little unclear. So under
phase one construction which
says 100 million, that's 10
million, but we already have 8.5
million existing funds. So that
number there would really be 1.5
million. Unfortunately, when you
submit these slides, you have to
submit them over a week in
advance and we didn't have a
chance to edit that. So it would
be the 1.5 uh to complete the
phase one that's assuming we get
the $26 million in federal fund.
We have the 8.5 million of
existing balance and then the
phase two construction would be
uh the 35, and we are, we did
already elevate these for
inflation. They, we did have
them at 33, but we're assuming
already at, at 35. So the
legislative support number,
assuming we get the 26.
Wait, 26.5 million in the
federal grant would be 36.5. Mr.
Chair, and this is for the 550.
Project. That's correct. The the
first two phases, so that's half
of the existing project and then
there are 22 additional phases,
one through additional federal
land and went through Hickory
Apache Nation.
Oh, Mr. Chair, I just again want
to
Oh, Mr. Chair, I just again
wanna
appreciate Mr. Dax and his
advocacy having watched this
evolve and certainly give a
shout out to the president pro
tem who has taken this on and it
does seem to me like these are
the types of things that when we
have this level of non-recurring
resource, now is the window to
make these investments, and I
know I've got my two, some
finance committee friends over
there, they're gonna get sort
through all of this and the
protem is a very good advocate.
And this is a very good cause,
so I just again appreciate the,
the work and I appreciate DOT,
you know, obviously taking this
on and, and making this happen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Um, I
have a couple of questions.
Uh, Mr. Dax, on the solar.
Um,
is
is a a possible future
suggestion that the
The solar fields are built in
smaller chunks, so that they,
um, there's passage through
them. And I was, I, I pulled up
the map of, uh,
Proposal in my district that uh
last I heard was like 800 acres.
Um, so, you know, square mile
fences, um, that, that's a
pretty big obstacle.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair, are you
talking about the Rancho Villejo
project
that, yeah, um, yeah, ideally we
would like to see, um, uh, more
work done on the front end to
identify wildlife values and
design projects with that in
mind, which would often mean
kind of breaking up those.
Chunks. Right now, we don't know
like how big does it have to be
like if you make it 100 yards
wide, but it's a mile long. Does
that just increase the footprint
of what animals won't use
because that feels too narrow. I
mean, for the same reason why
Bighorn sheep won't use an
underpass because they're, you
know, they hang out on big rocky
areas, you know, will certain
species see that and be like,
nope, not even thinking about
going through there. So that's
where the research, you know,
comes into to really understand,
but you know, in principle.
That that's the sort of strategy
that we're hoping um to be able
to implement with some
confidence that it'll it'll be
helpful.
OK, thank you for that. And is
there any, um, wildlife use
inside the fence, like smaller
wildlife or do they get
exterminated?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, every project
is different. Some projects are,
you know, they blade it and they
keep it mowed so that, you know,
there's really not much bringing
them in. Um, they're a handful
of studies taking place, one out
of the University of Arkansas
that is studying wildlife, um,
inside of solar facilities, so
often what will happen with that
with that fencing is either it's
erosion or a species like a
coyote or a badger will dig in
under it, um, and so from some
preliminary
Results from that researcher. It
actually sounds like there's a
fair amount of small wildlife
activity inside of solar
facilities, including birds as
well, um, but.
Yeah, certainly not larger
bodied species.
I guess I was thinking about
like prairie dogs and ground
squirrels, which would, you
know, draw in some of the
smaller predators. I might.
Get cooties going after him?
Yeah, I think we, we have heard
of, you know, some of that
happening, Mr. Chair. There's an
anecdote, um, from a solar
facility built out at the Denver
International Airport, where
prairie dogs are thriving under
the panels because aerial
predators, um, aren't able to to
see them as much.
Um, and the question for uh the
Department of Transportation
folks, I was looking at your,
uh, your game guard, your double
cattle guard, do, um.
Are Cguard's effective, uh,
controlling the movement of, uh,
free roaming horses.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, the double
cattle guards are probably
effective against, you know,
repelling uh horses.
Um.
Yeah, because of the wings. We
modified the uh oh gosh, a
number of years ago we modified
our standard drawing for those
double cattle guards to minimize
um.
You know, the possibility of
animals getting across those
double candle guards, uh,
there's a couple of things we
did is we made sure, you know,
we developed the wing walls, uh,
and then we also reduced the
size of the center support, uh,
deer will often jump into that
centersport and jump on, but we
You know, we modified the design
to increase repellents,
repelling rates.
OK, and the, the reason I ask,
um, I'm thinking of the place
this area in the presence of
horses on the road there, I
think it's 165. Um, you know,
it's, it's largely uh
residential areas on both sides.
Um, there's probably not a lot
of access points, at least as it
goes through the more developed
area. And uh you know, it's been
suggested to me in the past
that, um, one of the ways to
keep the horses off the roo.
would be to install some cattle
guards and that that's any, any
thoughts on that?
Uh, we did a fair bit of study
on that placetas area uh due to
frequent complaints. The problem
is the high number of private
parcels and kind of the ends,
where, where would you end the
fences? Where would you put the
cattle guards also getting all
of the residents to agree to
putting in 8 ft.
Steel fence across their, uh,
you know, their entire property
or property line.
So, uh, in the end it came down
to that it was an extremely
complicated project and not very
uh feasible as far as
construction goes, but we would
be happy to, to take another
look at it and see if there's a
possibility that we could come
up with another sort of design.
Uh, Mr. Chair, just to add to
that too is the, the sheer
expense of these uh double
cattle guards, you know,
they're, they've got a price tag
of maybe $40,000 to $50,000
apiece.
Maybe more now and and then also
to the maintenance of those
structures as well so that
complicates things a little bit.
So, but as Trent mentioned
constructability issues and,
and, you know, just buy in from
our stakeholders is a big
factor.
Thank you.
OK.
Center Woods.
The reason I didn't come in on
this presentation is because I
heard it yesterday.
Uh,
in the infrastructure something.
Highway infrastructure
subcommittee
and
When I have a hard time
justifying the cost of these
overpasses simply because we had
some studies yesterday about
some stretches 60 miles of
two-lane highways that would
cost about $100 million that to
convert those two lanes into a,
a super 2, which is passing
lanes.
And when I justify the number of
deaths on those particular
highways.
And the number of of collisions.
We're talking about here. It's
hard for me to, to balance that.
And so, yeah, everything's
important. I understand that and
special money can be got from
the federal government for this
particular thing. I have no
problem with that. But that's my
trouble. When you justify where
to spend the money in the state
of New Mexico, and even though
the highway department is only
2nd.
To, uh, the health department on
the amount of money they get to
spend, uh, it is still.
You have to justify because
there's so many studies and so
many permittings and all this
kind of stuff, uh, uh, that
particular highway I was talking
about the, the design and
construction.
Part of that study was $10,000.
So yeah, it's all good stuff,
but sooner or later we have to
justify.
Where to spend money. So just my
comments, sir, but I, I did hear
this presentation yesterday. Um,
I didn't hear the solar part of
it yesterday, but I heard the
rest of it.
And I was looking, was looking
up the amount of uh hunting
permits.
And uh in that unit too. And
there's not that many hunting
permits up there, but it may be
because there's a solar farm in
there too, so who knows? But
anyway, thank you. Rambling,
sorry, Mr. Chair.
Thank you as always, Switz, um,
any further questions from the
committee? OK, so thank you very
much, gentlemen. I appreciate
the uh appreciate the
presentations, um, for the
committee, uh, we do have a
dinner tonight at 5:30, the Red
River Brewing Company in Red
River, 217 West Main Street. Uh,
I, I understand that they are
aware that we might be there
early and that's fine. So, um, I
hope to see you all at dinner.
Uh, and with that we're in
recess till tomorrow at 9:00
