Committee members that if
somebody would
if everybody would review your
minutes from july and if I could
entertain a motion when somebody
is ready so i'm ready to make a
second okay there is a motion in
the second and we're missing her
stuff
so
i'll let her know that we did
this okay
is there any opposition
thank you very much and we're
moving on to the strategic water
reserve funding and proposed
changes we have hannah rosely
white we have martha schuman
cooper angely being
are we missing somebody
hannah was in the hallway
okay
let's wait a minute then.
Yeah.
Thank you and after you catch
your breath hannah you're first.
Wonderful thank you madam chair
members of the committee I to
pleasure to be with you today
this afternoon hannah risely
wait i'm the director of the new
mexico in receipt stream
commission and i'm here together
with martha assuming cooper and
auntily being to present and
update on the strategic water
reserve I think I would be
remissed to be here at new
mexico tack without just giving
a little showed out to their
water leaders education program
which many of you have
participated and maybe not all
of you and shout out also to to
madam protem stewart for her
support of that program it is a
really phenomenal opportunity
for decision makers across the
state to engage in and learn
about water issues
I encourage all of you to
participate if you haven't so
far and to continue to continue
to dedicate time and effort are
that you have to learning about
new mexico's water issues
alright so let's either I do
have some slides I don't know if
those can get up for us.
Oh perfect alright so you all
have copies in front of you very
good
so first of all we are here to
present on the strategic water
reserve which is distinct from
the strategic water subcly
and I want to start by thinking
many of you for your dedicated
support of the reserve over many
years including committing
effort and funding to the
reserve I also want to in
particular think the legislature
for the seven point five million
dollars special appropriation
there was granted to the reserve
and the twenty twenty three
legislative session that was the
single largest are funding for
the reserve that we've had since
the statute passed in two
thousand five and that funding
was extended and this year's
legislative session through the
end of my twenty eight which is
excellent to have that kind of a
chunk of money for this effort
over an extended period of time
alright so on your on slide to
there's a little bit of an
update or information about what
the statute actually is so many
of you know it well for those of
you who don't the statute was
passed in two thousand five um
it provided the ability for the
state of new mexico through the
new mexico interstate stream
commission so my agency to own
or lease water rates for stream
flows for two purposes for
compact compliance purposes and
also for our species purposes
both in programs are related to
endangered species act
requirements but also in
programs to prevent our future
additional listings of of
species
next
the next slide maybe
my colleagues from the
governor's office the office of
the state engineer and new
maximum environment department
have all mentioned this morning
the report from new mexico tack
that was the f.
Foundation of the governor's
fifty year water action plan the
the leap ahead report so you all
have heard us talk about this a
bunch of probably be mentioning
at more later in the day as well
but what an incredible effort
convened here at new mexico
attack with new mexico's top
leading scientist studying
climate change impacts to water
resources in new mexico that
report that which came out in
twenty twenty two as you all
know projects and estimated
twenty five percent reduction in
the stream flow and recharge to
our auction first by twenty
seventy that is significant
especially if you consider that
we live in a state where streams
currently dry so if you are
thinking about hot summers
looking into the future clearly
the strategic water reserve I
intended to protect a stream
flows is going to become
increasingly critical for new
mexico for the purposes laid out
in the statute
so just wanted to to emphasize
that on a oh grief thank you tom
perfect okay all right i'm now
advancing my own slides maybe.
Yeah.
Thank you for bearing with me
with my technical difficulties
so I already mentioned one of
the big updates related to the
reserve was that big bigs are
slog of funding we received in
two thousand three
obviously that significant and
particularly having it for the
extended time frame the other
important update that I have for
you all is that we are currently
poised to hold interviews for a
strategic water reserve
coordinator of full time
position at new mexico in
restaurant stream commission
this position will support
implementation of this tool i'm
very excited to have someone
come on board to focus on that
full time that a position will
support implementation of the
reserve across the new mexico so
in in every river about where
the commission has set out
priorities
there's a couple of updates in
terms of how this this program
has been implemented that that
warrant diving into and in part
i'm an allowed my fellow panel
is to do some of that but in
particular I want to highlight a
partnership between interstate
stream commission the state with
higoria patchination and the
nature's conservatives you
should martha is your
representing we signed a a ten
year lease with higrer
patchination a couple of years
ago
this is the second year that
we've received delivery of the
twenty thousand acre feet under
that lease for flows in the sand
one river this is an incredibly
unique partnership between two
sovereignts the nation her
career patch you nation and the
state of new mexico and would
not have been possible without
the support of the nature
conservancy I love this
initiative because it really
exemplifies the need to connect
the dots between the various
folks engaged in caring about
water new mexico to craft
creative solutions and and
martha will talk about that a
little bit more but we're really
pleased to be implementing that
and in the second year of that
lease.
We are also working to leverage
additional funding for that
lease the cost of that lease
could be about a million and a
half a year so it's a ten year
lease even though we have the
seven point five million we have
other things we want to do with
the reserve and other parts of
the state so I staff hose
secured a grant from the
national efficient wildlife
foundation america the beautiful
grant we're also working on some
funding with partners at office
of the natural resource trustee
so good opportunity to secure
some funding for that program we
have an ongoing program in the
real grand focused in the middle
real grand which is mostly
leases of water to support flows
for a compact and species
purposes are the strategic water
reserve has been an important
part of our work on the people's
river particularly related to
endangered species that
compliance arm for the cross bad
project and we also have work on
the canadian and so it's been a
use very useful tool for us
throughout the state it's also
been helpful that we've had some
flexibility and how we've been
able to implemented in different
river abasince based on what
kinds of water rates are
available
in in terms of the needs of the
reserve and again I can't
emphasize enough how much I see
this particular program is being
increasingly important as we
face increasing water scarcity
having sustained sufficient and
sustained funding it's gonna be
critical one of the challenges
we've had and implementing this
reserve it's sort of fits and
spurts of funding over time and
not having funding for long
enough periods of time to really
secure
water rates for the reserve
and let's see flexibility
already mentioned that last I
would say this statute passed in
two thousand five so we're
coming up on twenty years the
agency is very excited and
really taking a hard look at
where it's worked well where it
hasn't what have been the
obstacles doing that both
internally but then doing that
through our partners.
Ah and so I think the
partnerships that my fellow
panelists represent and other
partners across sustainable
implementing the reserve have
been critical and its success we
want to continue to learn from
that experience as well and
build on that to leverage
additional water rates for the
reserve and with that I war
passed to my fellow panelist and
stand for a questions thank you
so much madam chair
thank you very much martha
madame chairman members of the
committee thanks for the
opportunity to share an update
about the greater patchy nation
water sharing agreement and I
also have representation I don't
know if that can be
pulled the mike my closer to
thank you
is it possible to part my
present it my power point
does it roll into now
please.
Yeah.
Thanks for your pitch.
So i'm martha cooperate with the
nature consurance in the fresh
water program director and here
to share an update about how
we're using the strategic waters
are funding to help address
water scarcity and the colorado
river basin and improve the
health health of the sand one
and just to orient you
this is a project with the
create a patch nation it's
probably heard to see on the map
up in the northeast corner of
the state in the sand one basin
and we will are at least in
water that formally went to a
court hired power plan I think
it's also relevant just to look
at the smap at the other upper
base and states and know that
those states are looking to new
mexico and the strategic water
reserve as a model for thinking
about how they can also develop
some similar program to
meet tiny needs certain end
entered species and compact
complaints
so um
we site as and I said we signed
this agreement two years ago
and
this allows the issue to lease
up to twenty thousand acre feet
per year for ten years to meet
colorado river compact delivery
requirements and to benefit
threatened in danger and
increased water security for new
mexico
so water is released from
another resort another hood down
twenty thousand acre feet was
released a year ago and the
spring for a spring pulse flow
that's really important for
creating and maintaining fish
habitat and secondary channels
and backwater habitat and then
this year half the water is
released in the summer during
the irrigation season when
temperatures in the river higher
and the fisher a little stress
so it's an added boost for a
couple weeks and then the other
half the water is released on
the file after irrigation season
so this will allow us to better
understand how the water is
moving through the system during
irrigation system.
Season and after irritation
season.
And this decision is made
through that the interstate
stream commission makes the
final decision but has
conversations with the nation
the nature conservancy fishermy
life service and bureau
replimation
so there is a
great monitoring program that is
done in partnership with three
entities as well as the fisher
wildlife service and their
recovery program selling the
rate hand photo there is
monitoring equipment and stalled
and the left does an example of
backwater secondary channel how
the tat they were hoping is
inundated during these flow
releases for the fish habitat
and the monitoring will help us
understand how long how
frequently this habitat is
inundated with water which
supports the fish moving from
juvenile stages to adult stages
which is currently the
bottleneck
so I mostly wanted to talk a bit
about the integrated funding
plan for this project which is a
ten year project of
twenty nine dollars or more it
is a made possible through a
combination of state funding as
how to mentioned a strategic
water reserve funding one point
five million in the first year
one point six and the second
alter the office the natural
resource trusty funding
federal funding through the
national fish and wildlife
foundation american the
beautiful grant it's over four
million and then currently over
two million dollars of corporate
and private foundation sunday so
this is an an ongoing process
these projects take a long time
to develop through are the
different stages and it can be
hard to know when you're doing a
project whether the funding will
be there we didn't know that
there would be sunday to fill
the complete lease and our first
year and we've been very
fortunate to have the funding
including through the strategic
water reserve to support this
project
so just really important that
there b.
Sunday available
when projects come to provision
so that can actually
happen
finally just want to say or as
we've been talking about today
water is scarce in new mexico
and anything we can do with
funding to to find creative
solutions and work in
partnership is really great and
matching funding with innovation
or actually see solutions and
solutions that scale it can make
a difference
so thank you for allocating the
funding for the extension and I
just encouraged the legislature
to think about how we can create
the sustained funding over a
time to to support my projects
like this thank you
thank you angeli
being
great thank you and you can put
up out put together just a short
two page hand out but i'll
mostly just talk so feel free to
take a look at that at your
leader
and
my name is auntily being i'm a
senior policy advisor for a
healthy river is at western
resource advocates w a is a
reasonable non profit and we
work to sustain the environment
economy and communities of the
west throughout our seven state
region
w for the past year or so has
been working in partnership with
my colleagues on the this panel
as well as many others in this
room and outside of it thinking
about how we might expand and
improve the effectiveness of the
strategic water reserve
I always like to start these
presentations about the
strategic water reserve
reminding legislator is that
these legislation when it was
passed in two thousand five was
highly bipartisan and it really
grew out of this understanding
among yourselves in your
colleagues at the time that
spending money now is better
than spending more money later
and that the real outcome if we
don't address challenges i've
been dangerous business
challenges of compare compliance
is litigation and we don't have
to do anything other than read a
newspaper in the last few years
to unders.
Stand the consequences of of
litigation on our stream systems
the state spent tens of millions
of dollars on litigating the
take us and the real grande and
would in those come out great in
those last years and so it also
resulted in a lot of
implementation fees and and more
money used after that litigation
and so that's kind of the worst
case scenario and we don't want
to be constantly after the fact
spending a lot of money it's
better to be proactive in this
the statute really sets that up
to be a a possibility
but unfortunately as compared to
the you know hundred million
dollars that has been spent on
what occasion and implementation
this program like both of my
panelists have have mentioned
prior to this really great seven
and a half million dollar
appropriation of this program
was allocated to only a little
over eight million dollars over
seventeen years have existence
and half of that was clawed back
before it could even be spent so
this kind of system under
investment really under mines
that the purposes and success of
this program and it's a really
unique program like martha said
this is something that we both
have colleagues in other states
working on these issues in
different systems and i'm asked
regularly like this is a great
program should we start doing
this this could be a model for
how the colorado river allocates
finds this for other basins that
are critically important and I
want to be new mexico's
cheerleader I want to be able to
to go out there and brag about
how wonderful this program is
how forward thinking new mexico
was and we were like when this
program was was established in
two thousand five this was a
totally new way of of allocating
water but in his really struggle
to have the impact that it
deserves and i've been part of
that is this funding challenge
I think it's important we are
making it really significant
strides I think I want to echo
him as reflection that having a
full time staff member and the a
good.
Base of funding for the next few
years is really important but
it's also not two thousand five
anymore and it's time to think
about how we might update and
amend the statute to reflect the
times they were in
so our group has been working
with my penalism with others to
start thinking through what the
those types of updates might
look like and we will continue
to work where the asc is they do
their twenty year review to
think more creatively about ways
that that we could amend this
statute in the coming session
but we have come up with three
ideas that we'd like to talk
about the first is the creation
of a permanent fund for the
reserve and i'll go through each
one of these and more detail but
the second is working to reduce
the burden that the state has
and make them a little bit more
competitive with private water
so purchasers that it's they
have some struggles in in being
competitive in the water it's
market and thirdly we think that
adding an additional purpose to
the reservation explicitly allow
to the the state to acquire
water for recreational purposes
would expand and improve the the
success of the reserve
so I don't think I need to save
too much more about our funding
challenges I think my fellow
panels have have laid it out but
stable long term durable funding
is absolutely critical and you
know we've heard a lot about how
this this hiker patchy
nationally is unique and
fantastic and they're doing
wonderful work
but they had to take a lot of
risks both the t and c as well
as the courier patchy nation
really had to come to the table
and negotiate an entire lease go
through an entire permitting
process which took two years
more than two years without
understanding whether the
funding would be there when you
got to the end and that's a huge
huge investment but you know
your neighbor the farmer down
the road
can't do they certainly don't
have the time and they probably
can't take that risk because
water rates
are really important you know
that they.
And.
They can do a lot of things you
know for farmers and ranchers
and our traditional communities
they can be a nasty there are a
way to retire when you sell them
they made and send your children
to college they're really really
important and you know I might
not I probably wouldn't sell
anyone of you my car if I didn't
know that the financing was
there at the very beginning I
wouldn't just trust you to say
it would be there and let me
tell you water rights are a lot
more important than my two
thousand eight prius
and so I wouldn't expect anyone
else who who treats water it's
as soon as deeply deeply
important to them to go through
this process without a guarantee
so a second I want to talk about
a little bit about this
administrative burden it is
currently easier to sell to the
oil gas industry to a canaba's
forum to a golf course to any
other type of water use then it
is for the state to acquire
water for a benefit that that
protects the entire state and
our water system
and we're still working with it
with that I assume to figure out
how best to address those
administrative burdens obviously
working within the the current
permitting requirements and do
diligence that's required by
stay alive but anyway that we
can make them more competitive
and on an equal playing field
i'm certainly not to
make them preference but we look
forward to bringing you more
detail on that as we go forward.
The last thing I would really
like to talk about is this
concept of bringing recreation
into the strategic water reserve
regional benefits like the other
two purposes of the reserve are
in stream and they're not
consumptive and
our group that's been working on
this really believes that it's
important that every single drop
of water we have serve as many
benefits as possible and we
believe that adding recreation
could bring in new partners new
energy and new interest in this
program the national
conservative got involved with
the strategic water reserve
because they really believed in
the importance of environmental
benefit and stream protection
and we think that there's other
partners out there who might
have an interest in fishing
boating other instrument non
concept of recreational purposes
and similarly a water right
owner who might be interested in
selling their water might not be
swayed by delivering more water
to texas but might not be
sending that that they
particularly care that much
about but they may be really
interested in protecting their
rafting flows or they're fishing
hall downstream and so adding
those partnerships and abilities
to bring more folks to the table
can only strengthen this program
and there's a lot of possibility
that we might be able to do
multiple benefits of the same
time that water once in stream
flows downstream and so I wanted
their protects stream flows for
fish upstream can flow down and
and impact our our compact
compliance or recreational
benefit further down
so to summary we believe that
the strategic were water reserve
has great potential for our
state and it's something that we
can lead the nation on
if only we get past the hurdles
that we see and if we address
funding challenges lift
administrative burdens and
expand the purposes to maximise
every single drop of water and
stream we really think that this
can be a successful model for
the rest of the country.
And I look forward to continued
partnership where the everyone
at this table and with all of
you thanks so much
thank you all this committee has
been very supportive of the
strategic water reservation
we've had individuals introduced
bills for appropriations over
the last several years that i've
been here so
this is a general question
you have the interest here
do you have a different idea of
how we can get the steak money.
We are continuing to
work with our partners and work
with the governor's office in
prepping a budget request for a
next fiscal year and identifying
as I highlighted earlier all of
the potential sources of funding
not necessarily just federal
funding so that we can make this
as robust a program is possible
I do I think that having the
extension of time for example on
the twenty twenty three
appropriation is a game changer
for us as angely mentioned
historically sometimes we get a
chunk of money but it would be
only good for a year and it
takes quite a while to identify
prioritising that identify
potential purchases and then do
all of the necessary do
diligence to execute them so
having a larger chunk of money
over a longer period of time
will make a huge difference for
us and I i'd deferred to my
other panelists if they want to
wait in on your question as well
thank you.
Thank you very much committee
members who would like to
represent armstrong and then
keys and then luhan
matthews
let me just keep looking here I
don't want to ignore anyone
any of the gentleman
romero with somebody told me I
was ignoring the gentleman here
today
okay representative I am strong
think him out of chair and thank
you for your presentation
as I think everyone in this room
would
want to conserve water want to
take care of
the wildlife as a rancher
of a rant for the conservation
is being on it I want to take
care of the landscape I want to
take care of my cattle and I
want to take care of the wild
life.
But I just curious to ask what
would
when wait when this law was
passed I was not in the
legislature in two thousand and
five.
We're talking about amending
this as this is the problem with
passing really good legislation
you think it's really good and
it's great and now people want
to come in and amend and so then
we all have to take a second
look at it so tell me what would
the young lady on the end
miss being
amending this to.
To incorporate other entities to
be able to use I mean you are
you were saying stuff like the
three bullet points provoid
provide long term reduced the
administrative burden one salary
when sellers or lease or and
allow the reserve to benefit
outdoor recreation but then you
also talked about farmers and
ranchers and wildlife and so
how would you think that we
could amend this where it would
benefit all of all new mexicans
and how would you think we could
amend this to where it doesn't
get amended again you know when
people just keep get amended out
or amended it and and are there
other ways we can do that we
have the outdoor recreation fund
we have other things so can you
just elaborate
young manager representative arm
song thanks for the question I
think something that's really
changed in the last ten years
what i've been working on water
in new mexico as there's been a
real shift that everyone who
works on water whether you're an
environmental india or a farmer
rancher water manager really
understands that we need it to
be thinking about these things
holistically that if you're just
the outdoor rack division trying
to acquire water for a boating
flow you're really missing out
on opportunities to make sure
that you might not but you might
want to think about how those
flows are released so that if
there's a one day peak that's
required for a fish speaks you
might be able to use that water
for two purposes in similarly
there might be an overlap
between compact complaints and
fish pc is our contract
compliance and recreation and so
pulling these all into one
program instead of just funding
different parts of money that
all look at pin stream flows
different ways allows us to
really maximize the use of every
drop of water does it have to be
the strategic water reserve no.
In in hand and I have had a long
hundred seasons about where
where it's best pleased and if
there should be a a new statute
or some other program that that
pulls all of these things
together but where I personally
feel is that this is a statute
that exists it's a program that
exists using the infrastructure
that we have right now is the
quickest way that we can get
there but i'm certainly open to
other other discussions and ways
that we can do that
thank you for that I i'm just
bringing to light that amount of
chair that whenever we have
these funds and we put on to use
for a certain thing than special
older say at special interest
groups come in and they want to
be amended into the plan into
the plan into the plan everybody
starts fighting over the money
and so I have concerned with
that that's why their sort of
silod I would say because we
want this portion to go to
outdoor recreation we want this
portion to go to
clean water and new mexico
different different things for
different reasons
so i'm i'm very
i'm it's just a word of warning
when we start amending
this type of thing it opens the
box for a lot of people to come
and say I want that piece of the
pipe so think you manage her
thank you represent armstrong
representative case I think you
share and and thank you very
much for your presentation um
this
help help me and help all of us
understand
is the funds from the water
trust are they not eligible for
the
reserves funding you're talking
about stabilizing your funding
stream and I know that we are
trying to build trusts in the
lot of different areas to build
that steady streets never enough
but at least has a.
Of it is this project are you
benefiting from the water trust
at all.
Thank you madame chair and
representative kits that's a
great question
it is my understanding that even
though the water you're talking
about water trust fund fund like
through the water trust ford
interstate stream commission
receives funding through that
program for some habitat related
initiatives but not for the
strategic water reserve and he
think that
you know what's needed is both
funding for acquisition of real
property value so water rates
but also funding to support
implementation of the program in
an ongoing way including at
capacity but also
leases right so I it's a good
question I don't have the answer
for you about what what the
constraints might be related to
that funding but I certainly
will look into it and and follow
up with you thanks for that
thought thank you manager and
thank you and I don't know if
this is the correct answer but
from but superficially I would
look at new mexico finance
authority for the actual leases
and then the water trust for
like you were seeing the
operations of it so yeah thank
you.
Thank you very much before we go
to represent a loohone we have a
couple members who have joined
us I know they're going back and
forth we have center internet
city a lot person representative
of ferrari thank you very much
so representative look on your
next i'm in a pasmentary you can
book me to the next person my
question has been answered thank
you thank you representative
matthews.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you presenters
interesting
presentation about
it something I did not very much
about so I really appreciate it
for a period of time earlier in
the year there was a lot of news
stories about the colorado river
and the colorado river compared
I am always going to happen to
california and what was going to
happen to various other states
and my quote is just kind of a
generic one because reading all
of those I was reading those
stories trying to think how does
this impact us are we part of
these conversations and it ended
up with apparently some kind of
a resolution that was pretty
acceptable to everybody so kind
of two questions actually two
questions one is when we
involved in those conversations
and secondly
are we comfortable with the the
result that came out of all of
those negotiations because we're
kind of a small player I think
in terms of the colorado river
big school thank you.
Thank you madame chair and
representative of matthews on
the last panel of the day I will
be presenting together with his
stubborn locals who is new
mexico's commissioner for the
upper colorado river commission
so you'll hear quite a bit more
about that later today there are
discussions going on currently
related to the operations of
leaks power and lead post twenty
twenty six so the current
guidelines for those reservoirs
expire in twenty twenty six and
as you can imagine this is a
difficult and contentious issue
amongst the states that all
depend on the colorado in mexico
so he will have a little bit
that is ongoing and they'll be
more information later in the
day on that from him thank you
thank you
thank you and I just heard this
morning the new special master
is from pennsylvania
which doesn't necessarily
understand that west part of the
state i'm i'm sorry man i'm sure
it is what you said the new the
new special master that's been a
a signed by the supreme court on
this case is from pennsylvania
thank you
okay next is represented romero
thinking madam chair thank you
all so much for your
presentations just a couple
questions on
a few of these I think for
secretary
reasonably way on the real
grounds support for endangered
species and compact deliveries
do we do we speak to other
states with the hero grand
including
like mexico are we in
conversations mostly because
when we started asking these
questions over summer with csg
west and some other um
collaborative partners within
their legislatures none of us
knew about what was going on
with three or ground on whether
or not there was a convenience
sort of organization around that
can you just say more about.
The real grand specifically
thank you madam turn
representative of romero do you
mean specific to instrument flow
or other issues I think both
ends you know just a
thinking through strategies as
we're
hopefully preventing litigation
or doing
mitigation of of risks that we
already know about do we speak
to other states and is there a
planning mechanism for for the
for the real grand specifically
thank you manager so yes there's
also a panel later in the day on
compact issues but absolutely
new mexico is coordinating very
regularly with our states on the
real grand colorado and texas um
and in coordination with our
counterparts in mexico
that effort you know we you'll
hear more in terms of the new
special master that that chairs
to venice just mentioned is in
the taxes view new mexico number
one forty one litigation in the
lower real grand obviously that
issue has evolved over the last
number of years to the point
where the three states are very
much in coordination on that
specific issue
but in terms of instrument flow
specifically those of the three
states new mexico is the only
one that has significant are in
dangerous species act
challenges that we are working
closely with our partners and
confronting we enticibate those
challenges will continue and
increase given increasing water
scarcity and that but that's so
far is been a really new max ago
focus issue on the real grand so
hopefully that helps answer your
question and they'll be more on
that in the last panel of the
day
I think you managed her I guess
i'm just curious if there's
legislative participation in
that discussion or planning or
how you leave other than perhaps
like that's
just kind of get our heads right
around some of that yeah I think
you made him join representative
romaro I think some of you may
be familiar with the work that
congresswoman stands very has
lied related to a.
A federal act
supporting management of the the
real ground it that is in
process and getting they've been
collecting input from the other
states and the stakeholders and
looking at how to continue to
a revise and improve that
proposal from congresswoman
stansbury but certainly
something that's moving in
something I encourage you to to
stay stay at breast of really
helpful think you manage her one
quick question for angely
hopefully um or any I don't know
maybe
who else to direct it to when we
think about
other sort of water uses like
recreation like golf courses you
talk about oil and gas
is there a way when we're
looking at strategies for paying
for these programs that you know
we're seeing what's happening
around the globe with the sort
of high class problems of
tourism hitting
other places around the world
and thinking venice
where there is like a tax on
folks coming in rate for that
type of arm fee to be able to
enjoy something that may be um
scarce i'm just curious if
there's a model for
fee based collection for that
type of recreation
for if there were a hierarchy of
values and how we utilize our
water but away in which that we
might be able to sustain some of
these programs by collecting
like a fee you are being able to
sustain it and that sort of way
madam chair representative and
hand I might have other thoughts
on this as well but I can say
that as part of ways and
digitment thinking through the
the previous presentation that
you heard from tonya to hear and
rebecca roose about the need to
really class up the the amount
of assisting and funding we have
for water in general we have
discussed with them a lot of
different mechanisms for funding
this and some of them could be
tourism attached in your
colorado has.
A fee on rental cars say they
don't now remember if that goes
towards anything conservation
related or what it funds
specifically but there are
models out there for
taxing tourism biggest products
whether that makes sense for a
new mexico or how much money it
would generate I think that
still work that's being done
literally as we speak but I
think it is a a potential way
for it to thinking about kind of
alternative and and creative
ways to find these products
thinking about her would love
texts or that for their things
thank you very much next we have
man protect
thank you managed to
this isn't exactly a question as
it's going to be a car meant
that it's kind of directed at
direct derisely
as being a member of
administration
so i'm just sitting here
thinking about what we do in new
mexico we have some really great
ideas
and then we don't follow through
um I was talking with center
stephanie said thinking about
i've carried bills for this with
senator in the bill
to fund it she's carried bills
to fund it so he put it in place
almost twenty years ago and then
we just sort of forget and don't
fund it
I really believe that this has
to come from the administration
we're rich now we're rich date
we don't have to think about
where to grasp for money
especially the amount that you
wanting for this so why doesn't
it come from the administration
that this is where they would
like to spend money i'll give
you another example
if we had done every year
funding of aquifirm mapping we
would have the answers for the
previous issue on that strategic
water supply.
But because we have not we don't
have the data and it's going to
take a six to eight years to get
it we started awkward for
mapping twenty years ago a I was
trying to do it in the house I
was working with carlos
scenarios in this senate you
know we'd get a hundred thousand
one year and then nothing the
next year and two hundred
thousand and extra and then
three or four years we didn't
get it all any at all meant
there we have this incredible
university here with all the
talent they need and what and
knowing what they need to do and
yet we just say oh well you know
we just didn't put money into
that had we done that for twenty
years we would be looking at
data that we need now so I just
think that unless there's kind
of funding comes from the
governor's office he
administration we're gonna
continue to forget about it we
have so much on our plate
so we need help to get these
funded we should be funding this
thoroughly i'm i'm i'm i'm
really kind of upset about this
little example here on obviously
these hand out that we couldn't
do just because we didn't have
money in the reserve so they're
just really no excuse for us not
funding this uh so I just
employed you to have this beep
part of the administrations ask
otherwise it just feels like
it's all coming from us and
we're not working together and
we don't get it we forget about
it and the budgets being crafted
right now but somewhere else
around the state harry does so
last week
you know they get together in
their close doors course they
have a lot of legislators there
and they decide what they're
going to do and without hearing
from the governor from the
issue.
You know from the
administration that this is part
of what they want to find a we
are left her own devices and you
know we're soop to nats appear
and we'll do whatever we want so
you have got to help us by
pushing on the administration to
have it be part of their ask
that's my ask to you
thank you match
thank you before I make any
comments out of their only more
questions
okay back to a representative
ramerals questions about our
roles in the negotiations
it took me simply used to
understand that our only rule is
about the money
in appropriating the money for
the settlements and this
afternoon when we do have the
reports on this um
we will under you know we will
be told who represents our
states and coming to the table
to negotiate with others and
they are appointed to do so but
until you have the opportunity
to go to a meeting where they
discuss
the real grain compact or the
colorado or whatever
you don't get it you don't you
think we have a roadness and be
nice to think so
but we don't accept for the
funding
for the settlements
and i'd be happy to hear anybody
seniors comments
were madam chair you know i'll
i'm just connect i'm in a quote
since you're survanted which
brings us up every time he is in
this committee is that we should
have a role but we don't we're
being told what to do we're
being told oh well we've decided
this just give us the money
that's exactly what he says and
yeah we don't we don't have a
role in it we try to understand
what's h.
Happening and even that with the
executive sessions where we say
well can't this happen can't
that happen so yeah you're right
we don't have a with what one we
want more of a role but we don't
have.
Well thank you to the panel you
inspired us but hopefully we're
sending you back to the
executive for the **** to put it
in the budget so that we don't
have to you know
do a nicole time thing okay
thank you very much ladies
thank you very much moving on to
our next item is the indian
water rights litigation and
settlements we have not curious
we have tania to hear we have
larry philips and derial darrel
madrid if you'd please come
forward.
He said it might be.
Thank you madame chair i'll kick
us off
high again i'm time you to hear
the deputy state engineer for
the state and happy to be here
as part of this presentation to
provide an upbeat on our indian
water rates settlement
litigation and a settlement
status
I wanted to just kick out by
saying this there will be
another continuation in the
theme of of discussions that
we've had already this morning
relating to projects that will
involve additional funding from
the legislature for these types
of efforts and what sweeping
through all of our water issues
the need for additional funding
in ways to be creative about how
we do pull together those
funding those funding requests
and the funding demands that we
have across the state the
the first thing I wanted to say
and just kicking us off is that
we have made unprecedented
progress in this administration
as far as settling indian water
rates claims and those claims
are critical to the water
security status throughout the
state they involve a court
proceedings which are are often
very contentious but the goal of
having a reached settlements in
providing benefits to tribal and
non tribal communities
throughout the state is
something we've been certainly
committed to and we want to
continue to make more progress
so long along those lines uhm we
provide annual reports to the
legislature on the progress of
indian water settlements you're
going to be getting a sneak
preview of have some of those
issues and i'm and I quickly
just turn it over to netchasar
general council to provide some
details happy to be part of this
panel and laporder questions as
well thank you thank you nap
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Umm I hope that we have
distributed heard copies of the
presentation that I i'm going to
be working on
and I will be brief it sounds
from the uh from and i'm sure
your comments or will be some
questions you're gonna have so
we want to leave you plenty of
time with those and
I just wanted to start off with
a with with on slate to the the
steps to reaching a finally and
whatever a settlement these are
i'm not going to go through all
these blue by blow but this is
basically based on federal
processes and in federal
regulation that the federal
german has as well as what state
legislative state while
currently provides in terms of
of setting out the authorities
for for reaching these final
settlement agreements they
involve congressional action
involved you know legislative
action
and we you know as as if if I
there are questions about sort
of the process and whether the
legislature can be better
involved i'm happy to to talk to
you about about those questions
but I would
for now just jump to a quick
overview of
where we've come to date prior
to this administration there had
been seven public stripes and
nations that had reached final
settlements with four
congressional state and judicial
approval those are on
slide
and these are settlements that
you i've been around a while
have all heard about there's the
hikaria settlement that house
betas settlement the naba who
send one settlement in the
emmett settlement which involved
claims for number pocket to
suitcase and send all the funds
of public one try
litigated it's water its claims
to final judgment in an
adjudication that was the
miscale apache tribe in the
nineteen eighties
since this administration came
in to office we have
essentially doubled that output
we've settled the claims of
acamer.
Tweblo
the guna put low and the never
her nation on the reuse in hoses
system that that includes also
the communities of grants and
milan and some area a seek is
there that are part of that
settlement and then there's the
hames riverstream system where
we've settled the claims of zie
publo and hamas were blow which
also includes a number of sick
is there and then the real
charmer the claims of okay a
wingay have been settled there
and we have today and you'll be
able to speak to and here from
several participants I took that
do that settlement including a
governor larry phillips and
derrill madrid who were some key
players in those negotiations
and finally the zoony river
stream system we've settled the
water it's claims
on slides five six and seven and
eight I have some details about
the the funding involved these
are very very large settlements
in terms of the dollar figures
but one of the things that's
different about these
settlements from prior
settlements has been the
inclusivity of these settlements
and that's a theme that we're
going to be presenting with the
with our panel um we brought the
the uh neighbors of the public
and at a very early stage
including municipal neighbors
and a second neighbors so that
we could have a comprehensive
settlement that set forth and
shared water future for the
entire community and that's
I I think a really good roadmaps
and in one we want to carry
forward into the settlements
we're going to be working on in
the future
really quickly i'll just go
through some of the some of the
details of this elements on
slide
five we have in the rio san jose
area the parties are acamer in
the guna public the nobody and
then as they mention the city of
grants and the village of milan
and then a number of individual
seekers and community ditches
this is a very water scarce
region
and there is likely going to
need to be.
Uhm treatment of deep practice
water to support this to sport
the public's water each claims
here and we have a very large
federal amount that it's there
for that
there's there's large federal
amounts for all these and they
sort of have different reasons
the
total amount of federal funding
is nearly one billion dollars
between the public and another
honest the state funding the
commitment in the local
settlement agreement is for
about thirty nine million
dollars that amount will be
indexed to the date of the local
settlement so if there's future
inflation that that would that
would track with inflation and
that money goes towards needs
assessments for a ceak is as
well as water projects for a
second a mitigation funding case
folks wells are effected by new
uses under the settlement as
well as about twenty three and
half million dollars for needed
water projects for the means
bodies of grants and mine but
moving on to the real hames
settlement on slide six
as I mentioned the parties
include hamas and zia puddlers
as well as some area a secure in
the city of real rancho also
signed on to that settlement
they're not receiving any
funding but they have some
provisions in there that's going
to govern their future relations
between them and the published
with respect to water rates the
federal funding there is about
four hundred ninety million
dollars in the state funding is
about twenty million dollars and
that goes for for capital and
operating expenses for for a
various secure groups as well as
again and mitigation fund in
case folks
wells go dry i'm going to move
next okay a wing a settlement
which I think will probably
spend more time on with our with
other panelists
the federal funding here is is
also a large amount it's over
eight hundred million dollars
and i'm you know not speed for
for governor phillips in terms
of in terms of the or the needs
they're there for that but
there's a lot of need.
In terms of both infrastructure
and uh in the potential claims
that the okay winker had with
respect to the federal
government in terms of steep
funding this is the largest
settlement of the public
settlements today and the amount
you see there is a hundred and
thirty one million dollars
and that split amongst various
secure groups for for projects
and mister madrid can can talk
about some of the needs they
have as well as there's an
amount for the city of espinola
the settlement provides for
offsets between the city of
espinors wells and the pueblo
and so that's going to ensure
that there's not going to be
impairment between the two of
them but that means that the
city is going to have additional
infrastructure needs that
the state is is would be
committing to if the settlement
is finalised
and then finally we have a
settlement with the suny indian
tribe and there's no local
partners who've signed that
settlement although the raymour
land in irrigation company has
formally supported it
zoom has a number of
infrastructure needs they have a
couple of reserve orders that
need fixing and that uh
comprises the landshire of the
seven hundred million dollars
for what a projects because
there are no other local
partners the amount of state
funding is a lot lower but we
are hoping to put some money
towards ground water monitoring
monitoring and assessing impacts
decision zoony salt lake as well
as a uh mitigation fund for
folks whose wells make me
affected i'm slide nine and I
apologize to the quality of the
slide isn't great we'll make
sure the committee gets a clear
one but this is just or the
information on all the
settlements in one place
moving on to slide ten I just
wanted to let the committee know
of the ongoing negotiations we
currently have so these parties
we have here are also.
Well some the the problem okay
window is currently in
negotiations on the santa cruz
and treacherous stream systems
along with standard clara public
and a number of
seeking as they are in the city
of espinola to resolve those
water rates claims
next is probably the biggest we
will have in the state it's a
very large and complicated
settlement effort and that is
with the six middle real ground
public all six problems are
interested in moving forward
into negotiations as is the
state we all have submitted
letters to the federal
government urging the
appointment of the federal
negotiation team and we've
gotten verbal
assurances that that would be
uhm
that would be forthcoming this
fall so we're hoping for that
but this is going to be a very
large and complicated settlement
effort
there's there's a lot of
questions out there about
administration on the middle
real grand as well as as well as
ensuring the protection of all
of the public's rates and all of
their interests so we're getting
up and sort of staffing up for
that
we also are negotiating with the
ute mountain youtube in
northwestern new mexico they
have reservation land in new
mexico in the san one stream
system
right now there
there population live in
colorado but they do have some
some water claims in new mexico
and so we're negotiating with
them on that and then finally
I mentioned that we've settled
with the zoony indian tribe we
are also negotiating with
another honation with respect to
the water eight claims primarily
of the rema chapter of the other
nation for their water rates
claims in the suny river stream
system
so that is very quick overview
of the efforts that are
administration has undertaken
on slide eleven I want to say
we're also undertaking the very
important work of implementing
existing water settlements.
And we could probably spend a
whole other panel on these but
but there are implementation
challenges on on all of the
settlement and tows
in the beta settlement there
moving forward on
constructing mutual benefits
projects there is a funding
shortfall there and right now
the federal government in the
parties are somewhat in an
inpass over funding of that
shortfall but we're we're
working with our congressional
delegation and we hope you get
that resolved but this could
mean we may be meeting an
additional thirty two or so
million dollars and state
funding it's unfortunate that
that's come to that but that's
that's we we wanted you to sort
of see that with I was wide open
the next settlement that
has implementation challenges is
the emit settlement on the
construction on that water
supply project likewise is under
way in the federal government is
telling us we might not have
enough money but we're pushing
back in and telling them you
know we we were expecting them
to
you know the status is met its
obligations were expecting
reclamation to to honor its
its duties and and we're we're
gonna continue with with
discussions with them so we can
get a better handle on exactly
how much funding they think you
know still needs to be still
needs to be put forward with
that that project is ongoing
under construction and
a number of the folks have been
very involved in that
representative romero has
histored some community meetings
on that one that's when I
ongoing
on ongoing all hands on deck
effort and finally the nava
house in one settlement
that is the construction of the
never her gallop paperline uh
the cutter elatoral which is
another pipeline off that is
already operational which is
great news providing watered to
communities the
not who
said one pipeline the gallop
excuse me this
pipeline is.
Is still under construction
we're not looking like we need
additional funding there but
we're working with the city of
gallop on their groundwater well
need to bridge them until the
pipeline gets to them there's
also federal uh corrective
legislation that's going through
congress to help facilitate the
completion of that but that one
actually seems like it's it's
pretty on track in terms of in
terms of what has been
envisioned so that's my quick
overview and i'd like to to give
the other panelists and
opportunity to can assure their
uh their perspectives and and
anything else they like to
present thank you thank you
governor would you like to
connect
thank you madame committee
members it's an honor to sit
before you guys and acknowledge
the efforts that have been said
here i'm as you feel there's
been some discussions there with
all inclusive other party share
there is along these areas is
your worth the concerns of the
issues related to waters now and
into the future I really believe
that as we sad and negotiate it
error gone the real chamon water
system we are understood that we
had to work together to resolve
issues that we'd all have to
invest ourselves into it some of
the investments that came into
this was the ability for all of
us to come together with the
sort of
an agreement in which when we
start shortages in waters we
don't be able to sit at the
table and determine how those
impacts or felt but you
tornadoes but further more it
was also an ability for all
those to understand how each
system work then that's part of
where you'll see the the
benefits of requesting
infrastructure improvements
you'll have my brother here to
the right of me who will talk
about the impact ac daily the
impacts they're fighting because
of the the reins the issues of a
depleted.
System but what i'm here to have
a kid is i'm here to advocate on
behalf of all the parties and
non indian parties that you guys
continue to see the benefit of
putting money towards these
funds these finds they will help
facilitate and infrastructure
that has the ability for us to
deal with out the claim it
changes the changes in how water
is administrative this system
has always been a system of
administration but this water
rates settlement further
acknowledges that it is people
that use it the guard they
determine how we determine the
feedback settlement so i'd like
to also thank and congratulately
this administration along with
her office for the state in
general who sat and listen to
this so but i'm here for any
questions to further
develop and have a dialog on the
details manager thank you and
with me I have the lieutenant
governor how we we know thank
you committee members thank you
lieutenant governor did you want
to see anything before ok great
so mister madrid
good afternoon man insurer and
esteemed committee members my
name is daryl madrid I am the
president of the rio they
charmer set your association and
are area and compasses the area
from a below about reservoir two
my community of in watcher which
is at the end of the real
charmer before it runs into the
real grand
that particular area of great
live the the
have the oldest water right
second only two or native
brothers and sisters and these
go back to fifteen ninety eight
but more importantly the ditch
that I am a an irrigator from
the salaries ditch has been and
continual operation for over
twenty four hundred and twenty
years
my wife is from that community
originally.
And she's sitting in the
audience back only but her
father who was born in eighteen
ninety four was unwear the model
along their ditch for well over
sixty years so we have a rich
history of
of been active participants are
in the sharing of water and so
we know how valuable and how
precious every single truck for
water is for us now these
adjudications like for example
on our ditches in that are are
right away to a judiciating back
in the sixties man now it's it's
time the you know the okay wing
water
are adjudicated and it's just
long overdue
and
we recognize the importance of
limited resources in the value
of cooperation and water sherry
and water sharing is just
another nice we have saying
sharing the pain okay because
there's no new water coming out
anywhere so we have to
maximise the efficiency of what
we have remaining for us in that
means funding for our
infrastructure in if I could
have the gentleman put it back
to fight a slight number five
from the state please.
You know it sounds like a huge
dollar amount it really does but
it in reality
the the area that I encompass I
represent eighteen of secures in
five hundred land owners but i'm
here speaking on behalf of four
regional associations a well
over our two thousand landorders
and eighty seconds approximately
so these secures have been in
existence for a very long time
you know
the the youngest ones are
probably from the eighteen
fifties from the treaty of what
i'm looking at your
now
it's important that
that we recognize that back in
the all days you know and owner
our forefathers were there there
was not released such thing as a
drought there was always plenty
of water that was you know we
don't have to worry about that
pretty much in its only through
climate change since the
eighties and coming in for the
we're seeing scarces gersity
were in the middle of the method
so our system is antiquated in
meaning that it can no longer
accommodate these low flows so
what we're trying to do is
make our system and
infrastructure more efficient to
accommodate every drop of water
for the maximum use another
thing that that I would have
really emphasizes that along the
whole real grand and in the real
charmer you see these beautiful
ribbons of green.
Those are him danger right now
and there and we have proof of
it just in our community okay.
Where we have a section lose the
hill is a ditch which
is right just on the outskirts
of the city of this and you'll
know
because of
the circumstances involving
private business man who has had
a stand and gravel company he
messed up the river in that part
in basically shut down that
ditch
that hold i'm gonna say about a
quarter mile of that ditch it
has not been in used for the
last eight years or so all the
cotton was organic dad
completely it looks like a
desert a warson and there is no
new vegetation no new cotton was
that are that are growing to
replace those trees across the
river for me in okay winger for
my brother of governor philips
there their part will train to
restore their their bosk in that
region
because their fees in the same
situation there is this
beautiful cotton with trees or
this growth in there but there's
no new seals growing up to to to
take over from from these older
generation choose and so we
support the restoration project
on the app because in dealing
with this the suggestion and and
settlement agreement we
recognize that what benefits are
brothers and sisters in okay
window benefits the communities
in general okay because we've
had this symbianic relationship
for over four hundred years
where we've been able to share
water and it has been always
been pretty admitted outlook
we're working
to making it possible for all of
us to
revitalize our or
lands you know and and end out
in so it's really important for
us not only to continue four
hundred years of of water
sharing a tradition but into
extended for four hundred more
years on two hour grandchildren
and greek grandchildren.
So forth so my whole idea was
not in this pool process of your
adjudication since the
settlement agreement I wasn't
thinking of us for today i'm
thinking fifty one hundred years
into the future and and if we
need to support that
this adjudication process you
know it needs serious regular
funding because we can no longer
afford to keep kicking the can
down the road we can
we need to do action now and
there's a senator store
mentioned we're rich right now
we're rich right now and let's
not
let's spend the money we're
wisely in an investment of our
water and our land in our youth
okay let's invest in those and
pete keep those at the top of
priorities and not special
interest groups because we are
the ones in the ground we are
the ones that are dealing with
and we're trying to protect the
future of our children and
grandchildren and we need that
with your support and we have
some very good allies will be
here that I see that we're very
very grateful for and we want to
solicit even more of a
representative from different
parts of the state that don't
recognize what the northern new
mexico culture is about two
preserve that because this is
could automate end up in the
bread basket of new medicine we
want to protect there thank you
thank you very much now going to
committee for questions we'll
start with a senator suits the
deal offers.
Thank you thank you madame chair
and thank you for the
presentation
if I think it was
it's real important and real
important work has been doing I
just have some questions out of
curiosity um
in the
wind and when the settlement
described in the real sun has
said settlement
you mentioned that the you're
gonna have to use brian water to
to make sure that there was
enough water could you be a
little bit more detailed in what
that means is this going to be
some of the produced water from
the area and it doesn't brian
water have naturally acquiring
radiation so is that taken into
i'm just very curious if you
could tell me a little bit more
about how the contaminates
contaminates within the brian
water are going to be taken care
of
madam chair senator this is will
not be produced water
this there's much study to be
done by as as
currently conceptualized under
the settlement the the best
supply for water will be some
department for some you know
deeper than two thousand five
hundred for doctor for water
that is is is going to need to
be treated
but that's part of the reason I
had such a big dollar figure is
that the treatment process is
going to need to to occur in
order for to make that water
usable so once the world's some
wells are drilled and you know
we have some better
characterization there will be
or detail about what's needed by
this is not produced with and is
it relevant that it's not
regulated by the state engineer
that these deep
these deep brand wealth is just
curious about that I I made
insurer I don't think that's
really I mean it's we're just
trying to figure out the water
solution that works best for
this area
but it's not
that's that option was not
selected.
The.
With reference to whether
they're still regulation of them
okay cause I was just wondering
his we get into this climate
change and the brian water
becomes more and more valuable
if the cost of treating it on
goes down or we're gonna need to
regulate the bright water or we
get a need to care for it in the
same way we care the fricker for
the fresh water
and move regard to beneficial
use in everything else just and
madam chair senator state allows
for that if if we get to a point
where yes it is more
there's there's more folks
lining up to do that we we can
declare deep base and that would
enable the state engineer to
regulate it in terms of quantity
by senior ready for beneficial
use
great that that's really good to
know and then when you were
talking about um
the infrastructure that needs to
be
built and I think this is true
for most of the settlements how
what is the process of making
sure that infrastructure gets
built how involved are the
tribes in in designing the
infrastructure help couldn't
give me a sense of how how that
happens madam chair senator this
has been a shift in these water
settlements from sort of the
original ones that we that we
got past twenty or two years ago
where it's given the tribes a
lot more autonomy and in
respecting their sovereignty to
sort of select the projects that
work best for them in these are
called in sort of indian water
excellent persons fund beast
settlements as opposed to
project based settlements so we
price out these seventies
settlements b stime engineering
of the most likely projects that
are going to be needed but
ultimately that is going the
the funds for the tribes are
going to be placed in federal
accounts with the uh your of our
clamation that the tribes.
Will then be able to tap to to
construct the projects as they
see so they'll be they will be
in control of their projects
wants to add something to
thank you is very correct about
those in now fun based
settlements a lot of that has to
do with the project basin not
having those two numbers in
understanding that it's actual
funny allocated to it so it's
been driven by shortfalls in in
assessed class estimates versus
actualities
excellent the reason I asked is
because the projects are at
least briefly described um
advice you know they just as
project so it's curious who who
is behind those projects and
it's good to know it's that the
people most affected by the
projects will be will be out
guided by it thank you madam
chair
thank you i'd like to welcome
representative cadenas she has a
question
thank you madame tearing
committee and i've been in the
health and human services
committee for most of the day
when was going to pop over for
part of this
I first really want to
appreciate the as i've made my
way back to the house again
water committee add that i've
now been invited and been able
to participate an engage in the
new mexico water leaders
meetings that have been quite
informative for me and I I ran
over across campus today because
that a meaning that was hosted
at gostranch earlier this year I
heard a previous presentation
about the settlement about that
we get settlement and thank you
so much governor phillips for
being here and and the rest of
the office presentation
but they haven't been able to
shake
house done it was for me to
hear.
The tone and acceptance about
what the settlement was and and
specifically I believe it was.
An attorney from somewhere else
that had represented you all in
the settlements they're talked
about what a victory the
settlement was and that in the
times of scarcity when there's
not enough water to go around
that this average and the okay
winger had agreed to share water
differently in those crisis
times and that the wind out of
it was that the second has would
no longer be stealing their
water
and I see smiling and I ask I
mean I mean it it says with me
still
that sovereign nations that had
rates above all rates.
Had to give some of that away so
that a second wouldn't steal
their water and that in this day
and age and new mexico that was
considered a win and so it means
so much for me to appreciate the
incredible generosity and
thoughtfulness of your sovereign
nation of of of the ways so many
you have to engage with these
problematic states systems and
it makes me wonder as a policy
make your new mexico like how we
got to hear
and so I just a because I was a
member of the audience at that
meeting I did enough room to
to speak that out loud by seeing
you all and bringing your
expertise in your leadership
today means a lot and just
wanted to offer that comment
back and and see if you had any
remarks on that like we heard
from an attorney from somewhere
else celebrate that now it was
all good because the essentials
were going to still water and
the tribes had to give it away
madam chair I I think i'll
mister madrid speakers while I
would not call stealing water I
mean I was smiling because I
think that there's agreement now
between your sickests and the in
the public the public certainly
has given up
and I believe the costs of the
problem is mister general
accounts are I appreciate that I
would also would like to hear
first if the governor wanted to
offer any remarks before we went
to the other password if if you
are we're so inclined and
otherwise I totally get that too
many changes
that thank you for the for their
glad to hear you attend there
was a very good seminar that I
know I was planning to present
and understand there is a lot of
efforts including some touristy
sure you the the life that's
lived in that cord or there are
long the real charm on
its it's hard to to often call
neighbors out on one i'm
stealing are using.
Things that are unrecognized in
that but for for the efforts of
the plubble they stay sat there
and they had to recognize that
in order for all of us to
successfully set together at the
table that took all of us to
lean up to each others and
recognize what faults we are
have
and some of those faults are
recognizing that those lines of
our ancestorals are really
defined back then but more so
now they're not we all live
amongst each others and it
become family where those lines
are no longer hard drawn in so
someone else comments that were
may were based off or some
historical documents and which
agreements were held
agreed upon between men and in
those lies we live then
but in order for it to work
today we all have to recognize
that there was a need and the
need was for some certain tea in
all of us certainty that the
plubber recognized that there's
a need
and one of the things that was
recognized was to importance on
our culture
the aspect of these core doors
that we call the ball scare in
these areas outside of where
most people want can't
constitute an irradational right
all things are recognized in you
in our lives in our effort to go
beyond today but into the future
our people will still have the
rates to do certain things in
these areas that we've always
used for so thank you for
recognizing an
honoring me with those ears and
words you heard
case none of them do people like
to hear that but it's the very
foundation of what are
settlement was created on pan
was being ability to have
administrative oversight under
system
but to agree that one were all
noticing these things they're
structure now and a due to kid
it structure and that was hard
for the pluval has been a
judiciary on a right there.
So many years in
uses for it their judiciation
was the hardest thing for a
store thank you madame chair.
Thank you madame chair thank you
is are there any other questions
for comments
i'd like to thank the panel very
much oh yes sir
I would just like to add on to
what governor feel upset you
know and and
stealing is interrate where okay
so
the ditches the secures that
have been in existence for
hundreds of years.
Somebody else
we didn't we didn't have a seat
or voice at the table when our
water writes were adjudicated
somebody else did that for us so
you know you know see what i'm
getting out is that we recognize
the need to they need their
water applied and we want to
make sure that they get their
water and that's put the whole
agreement is about we have an
obligation to them and we were
committed to it.
Thank you very much and are
again I appreciate the entire
panel being here today and
sharing with us the information
in the outline was very good to
give us the overview thank you
so much.
Okay we're moving on to the low
flow convention channel.
Item seven on the agenda.
The.
We have hand of ricely white are
you living here today
jason cassuga I hope that three
jennifer failer gena della
roosevelt russo and daniel
timmons so hand are you starting
are madam chair we'd like to
adjust our order slightly to
start with the jennifer failer
from us bureau of recommendation
followed by general or adjacent
consumer and then myself if you
don't mind thank you very much
jennifer gold head please.
It pushed the low people button
the people but there it is it
turns red when it's on okay
looks like you are getting my
presentation as that correct
manager.
You're getting several
presentations handed out so what
is the
it has a bureau of
recommendation logo in the upper
left hand side
golden blue and its lovely
convenience channel beer
recommendation perspectives just
just confirming because some of
minor visuals i'm wanting to
know if I should need to explain
to more
or just keep rolling I don't
think we have that
that yep okay it will be coming
it took along it doesn't matter
no
no it may it might have been yet
so I will present as though you
don't have the slides
they will be up on the screen
though
i'm so jump into it I know we're
pressed for time today
I am getting this conversation
started because my presentation
provides kind of an overview of
the the reach that we're talking
about what what is this low flow
convenient to channel what's
happening throughout the reach
which we call the santa cash
and below the santa cash at a
virgin damn so i'll be giving
you the lay of the land and
um reclamations plans for this
area and that'll set up the rest
of the panel I think nicely so
next line
here you can see that we have a
lot going on in the area these
are all individual projects they
total probably north of three
hundred million dollars
have been in the works for quite
a while so i'll be hitting each
one of these projects in my
presentation next slide
starting with the the boske
delapati river realignments we
we started as a pillar with the
lower realignment that's the
white line it was about three
miles a real limit the green in
that slide is the busky delation
national wildlife refuge just to
orient you a little bit so it's
the the white part of the
project was all on refuge like.
And I do want to highlight that
these projects were in the works
and gena down there we weren't
able to talk before this
presentation but she could
probably vouch for over twenty
years this project had been an
in the planning stages and we
were able to move forward in
twenty nineteen largely because
there was a plug in the river
the agencies and partners that
we work with we're not all
aligned in a moving forward with
this project but when the river
plugged we were able to strike
and and get three miles of river
realigned just highlighting the
challenges with these reality
projects we're currently working
on realigning the five miles
above that and is this the
slight advance or do I get to
just say next load
up that worked
so the this is the project above
the pictures actually of the
lower real i'm in and all the
equipment reclamation does the
these projects with our in house
forces
but this is the project we're
working on were at about ninety
percent design need for work is
ongoing we did receive ten
million dollars and funding from
the bipartisan infrastructure
law for this project also to
highlight how expensive these
projects are um and the project
as you saw from the previous
slide or a good go back half of
it is on federal land and bosco
dela patchy and half of it is on
private land so we have some
work to do to to get the
clearances to work on private
lan for the upper realignment
project but these are both when
I was complete one of them under
way
moving into the low flow
convents channel
four i'll give you the history
where it today and what we're
looking at in the future the low
flow convents channel the
history was constructed in the
fifties to help new mexico meet
to make their compact deliveries
it was when new mexico was in a
significant debt.
To the downstairs state texas
colorado was also insignificant
death in the mexico during this
time and recommendation will
projects up in the colorado area
for the similar purposes to help
the state to get out of debt the
conventional starts at the santa
cash a diversion damn if anybody
knows where that is what's in
santa cash north of sakora where
we are here and it ended at the
narrows which was a distance of
about seventy miles and the
original purpose was to come
back about two thousand cfs and
maintain effective valley
drainage and it also have
dismanaged settlement through
the reach while the elephant be
reservoir was full in those good
old days of the eighties and
nineties about fifty miles of
the low floor conventional is in
the reservoir pool so it was
covered up with water and the
channel was compromised those
fifty miles there was settlement
deposited and channel and was no
longer a competent channel for a
conveying water in that area of
the low floor convinced channel
so we considered a fifty mile
fifty five mile
channel it serves as a drain it
can be a month sooner flows and
basically it's a as a drain in
the valley which you'll hear
more about from the mrgc
and
current operations
currently love local main
channel delivers drain and
return flows from the mrg
farmers and basketball patchy
national reference so it
delivers i'm sorry drain and
return flows to both emergency
farmers and bosco dela patchy my
life refuse that's one of their
delivery points for water it
lowers the groundwater table in
portions of mrg
there'd be far areas that can't
be farm because they'd be water
logged so the lfc serves a a
purpose there to lower general
table it does still collect
subsurface drainers water
irrigation return flows femeral
storm run o.
Um but it is not used as an
alternative to the rear grand
channel for compact deliveries
like it was in the fifties
and as of august first twenty
twenty one recommendation was
able to transfer one m of the
low flow convenience channel to
my gcd from santa casha to their
southern boundary.
Umm and as part of that i'll say
the part of that conveyance of
the local convention channel was
that the um the district any
changes to the operation or
maintenance of the channel
requires advance written
authorization and agreement from
the united states and compliance
with all the applicable federal
laws local last would need to be
complied with as well to change
any of the historical operations
so what are we gonna do in the
future
recommendation is currently and
i'll talk about this project
next conducting a feasibility
study as part of our lower
senate cash improvement project
that will identify for a new
permanent location for a new
permanent outfall and i'll get
into the temporary outfall next
we'll consider plans that both
analyze any benefits and impacts
for alternative low flow
convents channel operations so
anybody has plans to use it
that's great will analyze any
the the benefits but also any
impacts that need a potential
mitigation recommendation I just
mention this as constructed a
temporary outfile at rivermile
sixty
so let me get into that and is
and we're working through
experimental operations this is
the riverman sixty so this is at
the end of the fifty five mile
stretch and we're which it turns
into the compromise channel from
the good old days we constructed
this outfall last year the goal
was to improve water delivery
tell from reservoir and avoid
any negative impacts to
federally listed bird habitat
and wetlands
the expender mental operations
we've had a whole year under our
belt last year and we've got
together with our partners to
tweak that plan we're using a
adapted management process to
change the plans in the whole
goal there is to optimize water
deliveries and not have any
detrimental impacts up violating
any of the federal laws for
species or wetlands so we're.
Uh
through some challenging
territory there.
Actually was not gonna in the
weeds for a state legislature
the adapter management process
this is as well just wanted to
convey that
that we are using the the debt
amendment from processed
opplement optimized deliveries
without vital aiming the laws I
have received in my time as are
you manager which is about nine
years three notified violation
of the clean water act and don't
care to receive any more of
those so were again i'm working
with on our operations plan to
maximise deliveries
last project that i'll hit is
that lower santa cash are reach
improvement project do a goal
and prove water delivery create
a quoting in repairing habitats
and increase the benefits of our
maintenance activities and
actions you'll see a little more
detail about why those are the
goals um so this this
illustrates the challenges in
this reach the river and section
aa in section bb the river is
all the way to the for right of
those you can see the rear grand
that's the little blue blip
that's the mesa starting at the
very right you come across to
the left and there's a down down
blip that's the rear grand
channel you hit a levy as you
keep moving left so you can see
the rivers constrained between
the masa and a levy and rivers
don't like to be constrained
assessed especially when you're
one of the most settlement laden
rivers in the world
dropping below the the low flow
and the levies is the valley
floor over there that's where
the river wants to be so that it
can function as a natural river
system and repair itself when it
has settlement clubs it it'll
just move itself when it has
roomed around like that down in
section bb same idea masa river
channel levy that's the tiffany
basin the love low convents
happens to be over in the far
part of the valley and that.
In that channel so that's that's
what we're up against as you can
see from these cross sections of
rivers perched well above the
low point the valley to
constrain by those levies cannot
function that's causes an
increase in depletions as water
leaves a channel can't get back
in etc
recommendation attempted to
resolve these issues thirty
years ago we under took a
project we we did it eight and
work with all the partners to
try to move a project through
and the price tag was thirty
million dollars and
recommendation do that could not
come up with the thirty million
dollars to fix this area was it
twenty years ago thirty years
ago thirty thirty years ago we
couldn't come up with thirty
million dollars to fix this
problem so as I mention now it's
a three hundred million dollar
private problem that were hoping
to be able to tackle with the
funding levels that are out
there right now although the
that window is closing in a
couple years
so we should find out about next
spring we've put in a just
finalised a funding request for
about half the project we were
told if we went for at all we
probably would get it all so we
we cut the project in half and
will find out probably about
next spring if we're going to
resear funding for for this
project next one is the
alternatives the first action
the first alternative is a no
action should it be deemed not
feasible we're going through the
feasibility study if we don't
get the funding men we will have
to choose alternatively
alternative b and c they
essentially a very by where the
permanent outfall for the low
flow convenience channel will be
turns into one alternative kind
of a high flow convenience
channel to move water so we'd
still have a split channel
feature until they combine down
in a one channel one of them
does that sooner in the valley
the other one does it later
that's all being analyzed right
now
and
this is the current situation
you have the river over there on
the right the may certain the
levies and the the.
They'll point the valley and the
low flow convenience channel
essentially it's I won't go
through all the what's wrong
with this picture i'll just show
the next picture when they're
all consolidated you more likely
to have connectivity with the
ground water which is just a
better situation for both
improving convents and have a
chat.
And so that's a timeline for the
project that I was just the
slash project the lower senate
cash reach improvement project
the milestone schedule if we do
receive the funding where you
hope to start construction in
the couple of years twenty
twenty six
so putting this all together we
have seen and president funding
levels that's what gave us the
the goal to go big we call it or
go bigger go on reach so we're
swinging for the fences with
moving these projects through
planning
reclamation has since two
thousand when the endangered
species were listed by the
service largely focused on metal
rear grand project funding on
esay compliance and we're
looking to shift that back down
to this reach there's only we
only have so many resources to
go around with funding and
staffing that we can't do it all
and we think these convenience
projects are a a higher better
use of the reclamation resources
are construction cruise so if we
are able to successfully
implement all these projects
that i've just gone through we
think it will make a
significant improvements on a
water conveyance efficiencies
and habitat in this reach of the
river
offer recommendation
thank you
so we do have that hand out
available online
we have copies coming and then
it will be online as well
mancher members of the community
appreciate the opportunity to
talk to you today my name is
jason kasuga and I am the ceo
and chief engineer for the
middle ear grand conservative
district my my presentation is
very short
i'm very few words more photos
my hope is that that will be
educational
I thought it was interesting
whenever I was invited that I
was invited to a committee
hearing where.
There was a low floor convention
channel and then there was a
real brand compact discussion
and we just already heard from
jennifer that the purpose
original purpose of a low floor
convention channel was in the
context of the grand compact so
the my material will be used
twice over as I go into both of
these conversations and I do
apologize if I I believe in i'm
from one to the other so thanks
so as a reminder my cities
mission today river flood
control drainage ground water we
have significant drains running
through our system obviously we
deliver irrigation water and
then there is significant amount
of land that emerges in controls
of the public users for
recreation and we do that and
partnership with minister
parties and governmental
agencies up and down the river
so what i'm in a really talk
about today from the low floor
convenience channel standpoint
is that second one are a dream
dream age rate the
one of the things that jennifer
talked about was this historical
operation of where there would
be diversions and i'm say at
santa cash a diversion damn
directly from the river into the
low floor convenience channel
i'm jennifer i'm absolutely had
expired on that mrg city when we
agreed to take over own and we
agreed not to do that we agreed
to to do what was going on while
recommendation was managing it
which is it's valley drain
function and so what i'm gonna
talk about is basically how the
low floor convention channel for
a framework reference is no
different than the unperal to
riverside the a trisco feeder
which is an album write the is
letter of riverside drain one of
the things that i'm an end on is
all of those dreams I just
mentioned to you that terminos
is the river itself i'm
everything that in my city does
in terms of water salvage from a
great grabbing groundwater to
grabbing water that is seeping
from the river to grabbing
return flows from irrigation all
of that ins back in the means
them of the real branding and
that was the purpose of why
those trains were created I
believe that is also one of the
purposes for why the low float
convention channel was created.
So
pixer pictures I think are are
are really good and I appreciate
the photo that i'm jennifer
showed of the river more sixty
and our gcd partnered with
recommendation on that and we
think recommending for that we
think that was an important step
by reclamation to allow us to
have a conversation and preping
this before I show the next
photo of someone show a big
picture full of a lot of water
and so but what we disagree on
is is what should be happening
with this amount of water that's
ending up in recommendations
hands of the at the southern end
really above out really above
elephant so the next photo here
is i'm so these are photos as of
july tenth twenty twenty four
that shows significant amounts
of water i'm sitting to the west
where the low flow convenience
channel decisions being made of
water being put into this area
purposely so one of the things
that recommendation did and I
commend them for that is there
they constructed an outlet works
but now we have a decision to
make we can choose to send water
back to the river like every
other dream does in the middle
valley or we can choose to send
it out to another area and this
is what I didn't for was talking
about about this experimental
operations and my city is one
hundred percent a part of those
conversations but our our view
in and every one of these
conversations is the water
belongs back in the river at
this point
the this is that out for that
jennifer showed in her foot and
in her photos of the ability for
water to make it back to the
river but one of the things
again on remind i'm not talking
about diverting anything at
santa castia i'm not talking
about diverting any water out of
the river this is water that
naturally occurs here because
water flows into it it's the
lowest spot in the valley is
dinner for showed us it's this
is salvage water this is a dream
salvaging water with the
intention of ultimately I
believe this water should end up
in the river.
So it wouldn't be fair if I
showed you a photo in july this
is the hottest this is one of
the hottest parts of the season
I should show you right photos
during different times over the
year does this pondered area
change as it gets smaller as a
get larger
so this is march so this is a
cool part of the year and again
you can see the significant
amount of water that's out in
this area
when I can't show you is a big
enough drawn footage to show you
if you pan this camera to the
south or you pan this camera to
the north the degree of of
saturation you're seeing their
upon that much water I wish I
had time but I would have
brought photos of the middle
valley before the mrg city was
formed that showed this through
the albuquerque area and the
response that was to cut dreams
so that we could transport that
water back to the river and move
a downstream or have a choice to
use it for again at the time
the words in the back far enough
it's hard to see in this photo
but if you zoo man you can see
trucks sitting next to a
diversion point that was
constructed that allows the
federal government to divert
this water to the west.
So if you the top right corner
of all my photos is showing the
north arrow so this photo is
looking north again you can get
a different perspective of how
much water is sitting there as
we have this conversation I I
appreciate it earlier on I think
I heard representative lou hung
say hey we're in an error state
and how remanaging this water
right this is new mexico's water
this is water that would
otherwise be bound for elephant
view
to be to ring the bell for the
compact and I promise it will be
there I think the only time I
say compact in this presentation
i'll save it for my next one
but I think that the pictures
speak a whole lot to that but
there are there is significant
amounts of water there and the
question is is where does it
belong does it belong and I
believe this facility and that
is purpose was this at that when
it gets to the terminals of the
low flow it belongs in the river
in the main stem of the river
right and I think i've heard
lots of conversations are about
folks wanting water in the river
wanting water in the mainstream
of river wating water in the
river this is a spot where there
is a choice being made not to
put water in the mainstream of
the real grandy.
So the next couple of slides I
show you the attristical outfall
i'll crick you every side dream
the outfall for the is letter
interior dream one thing that
you will notice vastly different
is every one of those terminates
to the river everywhere else
north of santa casia where mrg
cd has a drain to maintain where
farmers return water goes back
where we we grab water that is
naturally seeping from the river
those strange terminate much
further downstream and transport
that salvage water back to the
real brandy
it's not going out to some other
place
in an arbitrary direction to do
something with that water not in
compliance with stay law and
state rules related to state
water.
This is the it would be fair if
I showed you drains all the way
up in bernalio but I should show
you something further south just
north of
santa cash at the version and
this is the sovereign all river
side drink so much for their
south again where the stream and
and I can go on and I can show
dreams and dreams and outfost
and it's a theme out forced to
the river out falls to the river
unless there are times now where
emergency is created other
outfalls for environmental
purposes but we go to farmers
and we say and we administer a
following program to come up
with water so there is a choice
to not do something with that
water and then use that water
somewhere else that is not
what's being happening at the
bottom end once the water
arrives there there is a choice
being made to put it out there
and I understand there there are
there's a tough conversation
that has to happen
and I know that there are
concerns about and dangerous
species act in those kinds of
things but my question to this
committee in my question to the
state is
I believe that's an
appropriation of water there's
no water right for it everywhere
else we would have to do there
would have to be a water right
for that this is in concert with
a letter that I that you guys
have in your possession I
believe where emergency sent a
letter back to the state the
state synthem our gcd a letter
about the need to look at
reduced depletions in the middle
valley which I understand as the
ceo and I think the large ballot
the middle valley understands
the police reduction is needed
but
if we're gonna have a
conversation about
depletion reduction then let's
have a conversation about
depletions were depletions
reduction up and down the river
by every user
so that that is my slide I have
more comments and i'll bring
those back up as I talk about
the implications the real grand
compact later on but my what i'm
hoping to challenge you and
challenge the state with is
there a tough conversations were
asking the the folks of our
state we're asking them to do
less rate to use less water I
were asking them to save but
right now.
Off all water saved by the
middle of your grand conservancy
district ultimately ends up in
this location
and so my my my challenge to the
state two reclamation is as we
want to have a conversation
about transformative change on
this river before we can have
that conversation about
transformative change we have to
then be able to go to the
constituents and show them that
it matters
my question is is how do I as
the ceo go to my constituents
and show them that it matters
while this is going on on the
bottom end because they can save
all they want but until this is
until this is fixed doesn't even
make it back to the river and
doesn't make a difference and we
have to show them it makes a
difference we have to project to
them a better future and as my
short lead into the real grand
compact will be is I don't think
anybody on this panel I will be
super interested to hear on this
power of the next does anybody
disagree with me that the best
way we can manage drought is
having every effective available
tool to us and if the act that
is true then I think we all know
the most effective tool to
managing drought is being able
to store water
and the real grand compact the
hammer that the real grand
compact brings is it limits our
ability to store water if we're
in violation of it so with that
madam chair I I appreciate the
opportunity to talk to you today
I look forward to questions
hopefully and I will yield the
floor
thank you so who's next now
manager that will be me okay
thank you very much madam chair
and committee members again
hannah riseley white director of
the new mexico interstate stream
commission I did not provide any
slides I just have a few brief
comments in port because I like
jason think of the low flow
within the broader context of
our compact compliance and so
you'll hear more about it and
there's a brief mention of the
low flow in the slide deck in
the following panel interstate
stream commission sees the low
flow as potentially.
One of the many tools in the
tool box to address the
challenges that were facing a
new mexico we appreciate the
effort that my city and
recommendation have put to
addressing issues on the low
flow specifically most
importantly though we feel it's
critical that we engage on the
broader efforts outlined in
jennifer failure's presentation
related to the santa cash a
reach as a whole we feel that
it's critical that we as a state
look very carefully at that
entire reach and thing
creatively about how that reach
including the low flow is
meeting all of its intended
purposes I guess what I would
say is there's that there's a
challenge for us as water and
managers and that that goes to
everyone at this table and and
others are about whether or not
we can manage a effectively and
do better both by convenience
purposes and by habitat and I
personally think that we can do
better in terms of convince and
we can do better in terms of
habitat whether or not we can do
better on both of those in every
single part of the river i'm not
sure but certainly there are
resources available as general
for outlined um from the federal
government and significant
commitment of state funding to
help us tackle that that
challenge I think it's important
to remember that every inch of
this river system is affected by
human behavior whether we like
it or not and so it's imperative
on us as managers to be thought
for about how shepherding not
water through the system for all
of the various needs and and
uses and again we see the low
flow as one of those one of
those potential tools in the
toolbox
I think I would also just say
you know our are goal like jason
just outlined is really to focus
on
supporting new mexico's compact
deliveries to elephant beautiful
figuring out with the partners
here how to do that more
effectively.
We are engaging with my gcd and
and the bureau of reclamation on
a study to look at the low flow
and how it's used when it could
be effective I think additional
data is needed in order to
inform that and we do that by
putting something into practice
and then collecting data
together and learning I also
wanted to highlight that we're
working with new mexico tack on
collecting that data we have a
number of transacts that
interstate stream commission had
put in a number of years ago
that collect data that help in
four months about the connection
between surface water and
groundwater and the work on the
low flow is another opportunity
for us to understand better that
relationship between surface and
groundwater in the sand of cash
reach and I think really with
that I would conclude my
comments for now though i'd be
happy to stand for any questions
on all past the mike on to jenna
dollar rouser.
Thank you tuna.
Madam chair the senator step
enough stuff and it's amazed as
heard as my
stuff and committee members
my name is jeana delaware so i'm
a federal retired federal
employee worked at the bear of
reclamation and the efficient
wildlife's service boscidela
patchy i'm a member and advocate
for the friends of busky deliver
to here today I am a right per
any colleges with forty years
experience on the real grant
i'd like to acknowledge my other
panel members with most of them
for not forty
for many years and I admire
their work and their efforts
towards a better solution on the
middle of
next side oh I have that.
Okay.
The santa case here reach of the
real grandy is a complex reach
of the river due to a multitude
of tributary inputs of water and
settlement into a narrow and
perched flood plane it's complex
infrastructure and diverse land
ownership on the flood plane and
past and current dynamic has
passed in current dynamic
ecosystem processes it is also
this ancestoral home of the
pirate lows home too many
generations of hispanic and
other settlers home to many
generations of farmers and many
generations of scientists it is
a diverse place and i'm the
result of a farming family and a
scientists about my here I love
i'm to sacra
bosca delapatri was established
in
I need to do that.
Yes basketilla patchy was
established in nineteen thirty
nine is managed for the bent
benefit of wildlife twelve
thousand acres of riperiod
wetland's pons meadows
grasslands it's part of the real
grandday wildlife core door over
four hundred species of birds
use this area and it has four
federally listed species on
present it's also managed for
people for recreation solace and
education and it was recently
ranked to out of ten of the top
best places to bird watch in the
country and ranked fourth in
five hundred and seventy
national wildlife refugees for
beauty
best best refugees
and my bag time is it working
here there so the lowfold
convents channels relationship
with the refuge
you can see the refuge in the
lower parts of the right hand
figure and it's in the lower
section of the santa castia
reach
jennifer and jason talked about
some of the historical parts of
the local but i'll mention that
I have come to understand some
of some degree it's benefits and
its impacts on my community and
are state and on the plans in
wildlife of this real grand
valley the local convention
channel delivered much needed
water downstream during the
drought of the nineteen fifties
into the nineteen sixties and
contributed to new mexico
meeting its debt to texas after
those low water years I say
contributed because without the
wet years that followed drought
and the river itself which
provided safe convents of the
resulting higher flows.
We wouldn't have met that
requirements in other words the
lovely convention channel did
not replace the river it
complemented it during that time
both must function well in order
to meet its this purpose for the
past forty years the low flow
has been a large drain much
larger than the other dreams
mentioned
by adjacent but it captures
river water and agricultural
return flows and delivers those
waters to farms bosky delapation
and then elephant reserve or
the siffage rates
are on the right hand column
there of that figure of research
done by a interstate stream
commission and mexico tech
established those separate rates
in dryers the refuge also
receives limited water from the
middle real grand conservancy
district when farmers upstream
have limited water though so
does the reform the the lowflow
combans channel is the refugees
only surface water source during
the winter so again they must
use wells the refuge has a
senior water rate in the state
but it's last on the landscape
of diverted water deliveries
before elephant reserve for this
makes water and land management
for the refuge extremely
difficult
so
one of my requests for you all
is a please direct state
agencies to work with the
reviews to develop and commit to
strategies to better manage
surface water deliveries to all
water users in the sacro valley
including the refuge and I think
that's just a um
I i'm hoping that the
collaboration that jason spoke
about that don't have a spoke
about i'm hoping that continues
and.
Improves so that this shared
shortage idea that's very
important
includes the refugees well.
So the love low convinced
channels relationship to the
real brand ecosystem the
refugees apart of that larger
middle real grand ecosystem the
loflow acting as a drain and the
lowest point in the valley makes
it difficult to provide low
water flows to the perched real
grand through the valley and
maintain shall ground water
table both things that are
needed for a healthy right
period system extended river
drying periods will stress
native plants and will most
likely impact many wildlife
species that depend on the
currently diverse and viable
river corridor habitats
but this is the important point
I think is that more research is
really needed to understand the
thresholds where negative
impacts to riperiod habitats and
species are air riversible the
refugees working with new mexico
tech and others to better
understand the present and
potential future water budget
for the refuge however we need a
better understanding of the
entire system to protect the
river and the bosky and manage
water and settlement
this will take a long standing
commitment for all parties to
determine how the natural system
can conserve water
remove invasive plans and
restart restored diverse more
fire resistant to have a tap
tape and how infrastructure can
be altered to benefit the
ecosystem if the lovely
convenience channel continues to
operate in some capacity we must
better understand and limit its
negativity impacts to the basket
and the river.
We've come a long way in our
understanding of this river
system I applied all the
scientists advocates and
agencies and I believe we all
stand ready to address complex
river issues more
comprehensively stakeholders
acknowledge the importance of
addressing wider issues for out
of five people in new mexico
survey believe that we should
address the health of our states
rivers.
So my second ask her for you and
i'm hoping that this makes
sansure is to please appoint a
diverse task force and I I don't
know how this works for the
legislature so
you all can help me understand
that better but to work with
state and federal agencies to
develop research to better
understand that santa cost
ecosystem water needs into the
future and design projects to
meet those water needs while
addressing our shared water
obligations understate and
federal law and why a task force
for just this reach of the
middle real grand I believe the
santa customer reach can
contribute to addressing
multiple issues water delivery
being one of them but it could
system health sensitive and
evasive species flood control
wildfire risk and economic
benefits for this rural region
are important as well I believe
we can move to a sustainable
river ecosystem different from
the historic real grand
different from our present real
grand but hopefully a river that
benefits humans and rsbcs that
have come to depend on it for
like thank you
thank you very much our next
panel is daniel's times is on
the.
Good afternoon
are you able to hear me.
Yes afternoon manager.
Members of the committee do you
have my presentation.
The.
We have your presentation in
hard copy
okay
and it's on these screen.
Okay great I will.
Answered as a bill I can't see
what's on the screen that that's
okay.
Good afternoon at a chair in the
present committee.
My name is january ten minutes
and I am the real grand water
keeper and wilder program
director.
Thank you for the invitation to
present today regarding the
world's job
which I would do as the welfare.
So I appreciated hearing mister
castuber say that he is not
talking about diversions into
the world well.
But i'm here today because over
the past couple of years mr city
and the issue you have been
doing that voting the idea of
restarting diversions of rio
back into the local to help
address new mexico's company to
texas next tribe please.
These entities were initially
pushing for what they deemed a
study proposal that would have
restarted diversions into the
world summer just a few months
after this proposal in a bare
boons framework was first and
they also the end of an
alchemist.
That fast track approach was not
tenable given the need for
federal environmental review
that we heard mistailer
described particularly in weight
of the potential impact on
species listed under the federal
endangered species out.
But while the effort appears to
have slowed the push to restart
diversions into the world as not
stopped.
It is still considered a
potential tool and the toolbox
as we just hurt.
The.
Well everyone recognizes the
importance of compare compliance
i'm here to tell today to tell
you that reoperating the world
is not easy or obvious
solutions.
There are significant big
questions that we need to be
answered for any such proposal
and ultimately they are likely
much more cost effective
sustainable and durable
solutions to addressing new
mexico's compact debt and
balancing the states water
supply and demand for the long
term.
Next slide.
So i'll start with a fundamental
question.
Will we operating the work low
actually provide a significant
boost to water delivery step.
While we of course don't have
exact numbers all indications at
this point is that the world
flow is not a silver bullet
solution to the problem of new
mexico's compact.
Estimates of water salvage
during the nineteen fifties to
nineteen seventies range quite
widely.
Generally black scientific
credibility.
And are not readily transferable
to today's much different
conditions.
But reclamation did recently run
some statistical analysis and
found no correlation between
historic amounts of water that
was reverted to the well flow
and new mexico's ability to meet
its compact obligations.
Further no quantitative
estimates of water savings from
the monsoon diverse and proposal
that margc mrgcd and I see have
been clothing have been provided
to the public excuse me
mr children's.
You're reading from the
statement that we already have
could you just paraphrase in let
us know what it is you'd like to
tell us.
The.
I think it's critical to
understand that they're is that.
You know that there will be
modest delivery benefits as far
as we know mrgc and the states
have
apparently continued to work
behind the scenes on this
scientific proposal which which
we certainly would love to see
additional hydrologic analysis
that under
better understands the
relationship between the river
and the low flow but at this
point that that analysis has
been conducted behind closed
doors.
And the transparency that was
initiated at the initial part of
this process has not continued
over the past year and a half.
Were you know again happy for
this to be study.
Um.
But the fact that the initial
quote studied proposal was a
proposal to studied by doing to
study by diverting the river
into low flow is very concerning
about the potential poor that
type of courier includes
studying to continue into the
future.
So.
The environmental impact of
diverting river flows and shoot
a low for could be devastated.
No this is not.
That's environmental sacrifice
you know there is incredible
bird had a chat there is the
last bastion of the endangered
real grand silvery meno where
the largest populations of the
fish are failed.
And so you know the proposal in
essence treats.
Any water that makes it doesn't
make it tell of him beautiful
wasted.
The.
And as I say in my statement
reality is more complicated.
The.
Below flow mister casuba was
indicating that the world flow
provides drainage for
agricultural lands and it lowers
the watertape
that is true unfortunately that
lowering the watertable also
causes the river to dry
contributes significantly to
the ecological.
Apparel that this reach of river
has.
Experience for the past several
decades.
The.
We can go to the next slide.
The well that the region is you
know in period it is a living
earth.
You know the possible was
through this week to the river
during the month here
are critical to maintaining
riperiod vegetation critical to
maintaining a bird habitat
including critical hebited
designated threatening in the
nature birthday since and
maintaining the truth by for
those birds
it's important to maintain you
the ground water levels it if
those groundwater levels
continue to drop will just steep
more water out of the bottom of
the river wind returned.
So.
There's got to be a better way
to do this and as we heard from
his failure I think that the
lower santa cracy reach
improvements project has a
potential to be a major wind
when for both the ecology as
well as the convenience benefits
of this stretch of river and
this is probably the first time
that wilder guardians.
Or any of its step is ever
looked at a recommendation
project and said huh.
That looks pretty cool.
And that's where we're actually
at with this project you know
the details the doubles in the
details as they say.
And so we're certainly following
closely where this goes but I
think that the overall framework
of trying to use the river
itself to deliver more water and
to keep that stretch of river
actually flowing is something
that I think that all of us
should be able to get back.
And we can boost contact
deliveries we can keep water in
the river for fish
no end weekend you know hope
hopefully get back to wear
mister casugan and emergency can
start storing water again for
their harms and so again and
absolute potential for this to
be a wind when solution
depending on where.
Where the
project actually goes.
So for what we would ask for the
legislature I mean I think we we
asked the legislature check.
Continue supporting more broad
efforts and to bring water
demands into balance with the
reality of reduced water
supplies due to climate change
and recognizing that we are not
simply in a drought condition
this is long term ratification
and so tools like the strategic
water reserve that we heard
about earlier our really
important start and a foundation
of an environmental program but
we need major long term
investments to permanently
produce our water use.
The.
Or what are the man for
municipal agricultural and
industrial uses and we need to
put that water and stream.
We need incentives to shift crop
patterns to higher value lower
water you scrops policy is to
encourage efficiency
improvements throughout our
water new system.
Shorted sharing or enforcement
of water rates as we've also
heard about and then again
adequate staffing for regional
border planning and other major
initiatives.
We can't continue to rely on old
ideas like ditches like the low
float convenience standard to
address the new reality of
climate german reductions in
water supply we need to look
forward not backwards to find
solutions that are durable and
sustainable for the long term.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you.
Thank you very much questions
comments from the committee
representative armstrong and
senator accomplished the due for
question
thank you represent ramson
thank you madame chairman and
thank you for your presentation
clear concise and to the point
exactly what we like so
appreciate that and pictures
well of pictures because being
able to to **** it in reality
but to see it in photos and and
have it
it just makes it our job a
little easier my question is for
daniel timmons I believe his own
i'm pulping his still on soon
yes i'm simple here.
Mr chip.
Yes i'm still here okay good I
think you for that.
If you were start we're still
there anyway i'm curious to know
if um
if you think that storage of
water is good or beneficial
practice for endangered species.
I mean I think storage in
general there that's it's a
broad question i'm sorry
madam chairman members of the
committee storage and in general
is is complicated but in this
particular system that we have
now in the middle of your grand
storage end general is a good
thing or and interspecials
because we do have that multi
benefit use of keeping water in
the river with parliament's
we need to
get that to back and we need to
actually have more designated
conservation storage where there
is water that is held in storage
particularly for environmental
purposes
and so it's not relying just on
the agricultural stored waters
but in general yes I think that
that stored water and has
environmental benefits in this
system.
The.
Terror and thank you for that
answer
I once again here we are sitting
here in a committee talking
about water and
thinking about all the different
aspects of of water in new
mexico and what it needs to be
used for and
you know kind of arguing about
what's best and where we go from
here we spend a lot of money on
the low floor convents
channel there's a lot of
river restoration that still
needs to happen and
waters for fighting whiskeys for
drinking thank you madame
chairman.
Thank you and senator compass
did you have a comment thank you
center thank you very much
madame chair and course of
several issues and several
questions that that we have but
I want to talk a little bit
about the economy and one of the
things that I continuously hear
is particularly in this area as
we continue to deal either with
the low floor convents channels
or if you will trying to go
here to make the shift to some
of the more
high value low water use crops
maybe members of the panel can
explain to me a little bit more
in terms of a how we're gonna
best use if you will
the water before we do complete
if you will the low flow
convenient convenience channels
and then secondly what some of
those crops would be and I think
mister timmons you're one of the
individuals who ties into this
but
i'm trying to get a better
handle in terms of
the use of the water that is
coming through and how
effectively we can use that
water today so I don't I don't
know who would like to start but
maybe we can go from there.
Miss.
The.
That i'll take a shot at your
question at least related to how
about your craps I think the
that's a that is a question I
continually get as the ceo of
the memory of conservative
district but
on a next panel we're going to
have some folks here from the
irrigation district and and they
definitely know high value crop
too for sure but one of the
things that I often answer this
question back for is to to grow
a high grow you how about your
crop of farmers going to come to
me and say jason
how much what am I going to have
and how long we're gonna have it
for and the greatest tool
that a water manager can use to
be able to answer that question
for any farmer in storage
rate and so if we if right now
we're experiencing the middle
valley without need of storage
that the middle value as a as it
as it sits right now is being
propped up by the middle of your
grand conservative district when
channel water which will run out
in about a week and then we're
gonna if it doesn't rain we're
going to get a real big view of
what the real brand it turns
into without need of storage so
please preferain
but if we want to have the
serious conversation about
crapping patterns and we've got
to have a serious conversation
on being able to answer a
farmer's question about how much
waterment can have
entered do that most reliably
and even then it's hard but to
do it most reliably we need
storage and so or there's the
other option surface water
rights gets transferred into the
ground a surface water right
user becomes a groundwater
pumper
and that's how they and that
shifts from our g cities
responsibility to management and
shifts over to the office of the
state engineer to manage their
ground was and so
that
that's a that's that's the best
answer I can provide at least in
the middle valley I think there
is a desire to do so
but how do you take the risk on
that crop because i'm for
instance if you're planning corn
you need to you need to hit that
corn way more often than you hit
our falcon.
I'm in an assistant like in my g
cd's without storage the ability
to reliably tell that corn
grower you're going to have your
water when you need it is is
more difficult than some
identity and part of the
question that I refer to then is
the consistency in terms of what
water would be available in
order for us to continue to
emphasize the
the low water high quality crops
that we we want to have so with
your current system if we were
to continue with out if you will
resources to continue to go in
create if you
water convenience system
but what do we see there because
new mexico is highly dependant
as we all know on its
agriculture but the concern
again becomes if we don't have
the water or if it's erratic or
as you indicate we may not have
the water available in the next
few weeks what happens then to
our crops and and is it a season
last those of the concerns that
I have
will madame chair I say mr
chairman
senator compose I think again
that's why in the middle alley
you see a cropping pattern
the the length of time it can go
between between you're getting a
significantly longer
the if that if you put our
falcon in in it and it's healthy
in it in its roots are strong
it'll weather drought on pretty
well and so I think that's been
this turn I think you've even
the mrg city right now has also
seen a downturn in the amount of
chile that's grown in in the
middle valley right now because
of that same reason
I know of it a prominent chile
farmer who stopped doing chilly
i'm just this year he did chilly
last year and didn't do chile
the sharon shifted it over to
our falcon because of the
reliability issue and so farmers
are making business decisions
and they're making business
decisions about what they can
put in the ground in will be
generally dropped doing it and
can go.
Maybe twice double triple of the
link to time with an irrigation
once you get it once you get it
established so
i'm mr mister chair and senator
accomplished if I could add as
well
there's a lot of conversation in
our shop and at the office of
the state engineer on how we
best support ad communities
across the state and the face of
increasing scarcity it's one of
the recommendations in the
governor's fifty or water action
plan and it's something that
we've thought a lot about in our
work implementing the water
security planning act the new
regional water planning work
that will be presenting on
tomorrow morning clearly what
your highlighting is that that
uncertainty is is a problem
especially for families who
depend on on fault farms for
their you know income so we we'd
welcome your and others
suggestions on how to best do
that at something that we're
spending as they said quite a
lot of time thinking about and
trying to see how the state best
supports are agricultural
communities with these
challenges thank you
thank you very much in madam
chair mr chairman as we go
forward the other issue then
becomes how are we going to get
the water resource to elephant
but I know that continues to go
ahead and be a significant issue
as we
we deal with the water situation
here and again that definitely
is another contributor if you
well to a successful
agricultural season
in that given today's current
situation as we talk about if
you will the megadrought
how do you foresee if you will
buy continuing with the low
convenience water system either
that's definitely going to help
us there at all from build.
Thank you mister sharing senator
combos
were as as we've also commented
here were we're looking at
evaluating all of the options
including the low flowers as one
of the tools I would like to
just make it very explicit I
don't think anyone sees it as a
silver bullet it will not be a
solution in and of itself and
there is absolutely no
discussion under a way to
reoperate it in the way that it
was operated in the late fifty
sixty seventies but how do we
learn from it is it a part of
the portfolio i'm into the point
that jason was making in order
to
ensure storage of water for my
gcdn and other users having been
in compliance with the compact
so that were were able to store
need of water upstream is a
critical component potentially
also to store water for flows
for species purposes at some
point so I would just say that's
the context in which we're
looking at and working on it and
I feel grateful to have this
group of of partners are hoping
I think three how to do that
best so mister chairman chaires
interrupt chairman and senator I
was just going to add some
perspective you know i'm here
talking about resources as the
federal government with you know
potentially more resources than
others that's that's where we
think the low flow could be a
channel could be a tool we're
talking about investing hundreds
of millions of dollars in a in a
very discrete reach we're
talking about all my
presentations were about twenty
five miles worth the river
there's a lot more of river
channel issues so that's where
whether the waters better off in
the river or in the low floor
convenience channel is where the
tools could come in and what
we're doing is we're going all
in on fixing the lower reaches
everybody said that's a good
thing we can keep the river with
the fish emberds can all have a
good time down there with the
santa casual reach I can tell
you i'll never have the
resources to fix the reach above
where we're working it's.
Just as broken we're not
planning any projects there I
don't believe we're ever will
plan any projects there because
there's just not going to be
enough funding even if the state
and the district and we all came
together to try to fix some of
these long term there's just not
a lot of there's not enough
resources there so that's where
we have to have other tools so
mister chairman insurers would
go forward to brings up another
another good point how about a
we going to really work on their
prioritization of where our
water is going to be coming from
how we're gonna store that water
and then how we're going to best
can be and to use that water and
and that brings up the issue
when we talk about the resources
that are available as we go
forward how you all collectively
within this area figured out
what those priorities are going
to go ahead and be is it going
to be the low water convey
answers are going to go ahead
and be some additional storage
or is it going to be working
with area farmers and ranchers
to figure out how we can best
utilize the scarce water that we
have available
mr chair intended to accomplish
our yes we need all of those
folks if the table and a and I
would just say you know I really
like the suggestion from this is
delays so about a sort of a task
force that could help us in four
months related to the ecology we
need the farmers at the table
absolutely and hoping us make
these decisions we have
significant challenges ahead in
new mexico in the middle valley
as a whole and i'm the new
be speaking to that in the next
panel I am very optimistic and
hopefully committed that our new
planning process through the
water security planning act can
play a role in bringing all of
those voices to the table to
make the decisions and do the
priorities that you're talking
about and that something that
were committed to advancing and
are efforts that in receipts
dream commission so mister
chairman church just one final
question and turns off the
conversation that we had.
What what kind of time frame are
we gonna be talking about to
insure that as we do go forward
were able to maximum the things
that were getting two when it
comes to the collaboration and
then secondly as we go into the
next session
what are those priorities going
to be and will they be ready
thank you very much manager
thank you senator and thank you
to the entire panel for this
presentation at this time I like
to welcome our chair who's gone
through a heroine time today
thank you you're welcome to
leave
and he'll finish up the meaning
for us thank you.
Thank you senator safanics I
imagine a queen
has to strict fifty southern
half of san francounty and the
place this area at the end of
all counting
I could tell you about my day
but the language involved would
not be appropriate for this
forum
I understand we've had some
really good presentations and
we're actually running a head of
schedule which is a near miracle
but thank you
since the fantastic for that
and you're send here there with
okay so we're gonna move on to
the next panel so come on that
well I guess half a your are you
there aren't you.
Yeah.
Sir next panel is compact
complaints real grandday in
colorado river
we decide to combine these two
in the one panel because we
thought you know there's
obviously related topics combat
compliance they both have issues
but we're hopeful that neither
of them needed a sentimental on
panel I with uh I would like to
get an update as part of the
presentation perhaps uh from
racially wait about the status
of the texas speed new mexico
and the
supreme court's rejection that
the providers sell
so typically we go in order as
you hear on the agenda so first
up we have a misratic way
thank you and welcome mr chair
i'll look forward to hearing
more about your harrowing and
adventure maybe later
a lot of appreciation to you on
the panel for sticking through a
long day again my name is hannah
riseley white i'm the director
of the new mexico in a receipt
stream commission I will be
kicking off this last panel
related to compact compliance
including updates both from the
real grandday and colorado river
I have a slide duck which is up
I will be covering the slides on
the real ground
and then as part of my
presentation i'll be sharing my
time with new mexico
commissioner to the upper
colorado river commission a
stuff on locals who is joining
us via zoom
and before I jump in maybe based
on some of the conversation in
the earlier panel just a brief
comment as to rules so I work
for the new mexico interstate
stream commission I also want to
acknowledge as a couple of
commissioners so it's a nine
member commission who are here
in attendance today commissioner
aaron ballock from roswell and
commissioner paul garcia from
mora and really pleased to have
them here
those commissioners are distinct
from new mexico's commissioners
that are part of the.
Compact commissions so those
compact commissions like upper
colorado river commission that a
stuff on low beds is the new
mexico rap on those interstate
combats or where the
negotiations happen between the
states the interstate stream
commissioners tasks with
supporting new mexico and
complying with those compacts
and so my group of commissioners
that I work for a governor
appointed commissioners really
hope guide the activities within
the state of new mexico related
to those compacts I would also
say to the extent that we are
involved in interstate
litigation that effort is lead
by the new mexico department of
justice and the internet
general's office and we work
very closely with them as well
and and yes mister chair there
will be an update related to to
those activities as part of my
presentation um
alright so why is this important
this year's like a critically
important topic to me and i'm
not sure that everyone fully
understands why it's so
important often they get
questions about why do we care
like we'll just let's who cares
if the water goes developed a
texas okay new max at number one
new max ago state law is
subordinate to interstate
compacts so arm number one
priority in the state of new
mexico's to make our deliveries
to our other states are to the
extent that there is conflict
between the states that's
resolved at the at the us
supreme court and to the extent
the court makes a decision
there's no appealing that
decision that means that it is
imperative that new mexico the
state all of our partners work
to insure that we are meeting
our compact obligations the
second point that's on this
slide and this is sort of more
specific including to their
comments that jason case you got
made earlier
ours ability to store need of
water on the real grandy in
particular arm is contingent on
our compact status and so it.
A how we are doing under the
compact has significant
ability to impact our our
ability within new max ago to
manage water so another reason
that these compacts are really
important.
Alright and I have a lot of
slides here some of these are
managing a little more time with
others i'm going to move through
pretty quickly but I certainly
encourage you all given what I
just said about how important
this issue is if you have
questions at any time please
feel free to reach out to me and
my stuff
this next slide which I think
many of you have seen before
shows
real grand a compact allocation
and so on the ex access you have
the flow at auto so that flow is
what determines what what
happens what new mexico's
obligation is
on the why access you have the
apportionment between what can
be used or depleted and the
middle real grandday that's in
blue versus what needs to be
delivered to elephant viewed
roser for and I think the most
important thing that I want to
flag here is that once you reach
around a thousand.
Ugh a million acre feet at auto
re there middle valley
deplations are capped at just
over four hundred thousand ecre
feet so you'll notice that blue
line sort of flat loans out that
means that no matter what the
conditions are even if there's a
lot of water new mexico the
middle valley is limited the
middle valley is limited to that
level of depletions and that can
be increasingly challenging as
we face increasing at apple
transparations or increasing
loss from the landscape due to
increasing temperatures.
This next slide shows are
accumulative compact departures
from nineteen forty to twenty
twenty four so i'm not an annual
over under but the cumulative of
what how we're doing over time
I think what I want highlight of
courses our current status so as
of twenty twenty four new mexico
houses debit and our deliveries
to elephant viewed of a hundred
and twenty one thousand five
hundred
one of the things that you'll
notice on this plot is there's a
zero line that's the black line
and then there's a negative two
hundred thousand acre feetnew
max ago is in compliance in our
deliveries to elephant viewed as
long as we are above that
negative two hundred thousand
acre feet line so we are still
in compliance however and i've
added this is an
statistic as is an accurate
replotted but i've added a red
dotted line on the for right
hand side of this chart
to just call attention to the
fact that from about twenty ten
three today
we have under delivered to
eleven reservoir by around
twenty five thousand acre feet a
year this trend is something
that should catch everyone's
attention and that we all need
to be paying very careful
attention to
this next chart shows the same
thing but it's an annual over or
under so you can see there's a
zero line in the middle
and then each year it shows
whether we over to delivered we
exceeded our delivery
requirement or we underdelivered
again i'd like to focus on the
years from twenty ten until now
and you'll see that there are
many more years of under
delivery so same point that I
was highlighting on the previous
side but just with a different
way of showing the data.
As I see it we have sort of two
choices of front in front of us
as new mexicans one
we can see this played out
and we can wait until we land in
costly and contentious and
pertracted litigation
or we can be proactive and we
can get out in front of this
trajectory and we can actively
manage depletions we appreciate
the partnership worth a middle
real brand new conservancy
district we can use the planning
effort that all be reporting on
together with my staff tomorrow
morning under water security
planning act we can do the
things that we spoke about in
the previous panel to really be
thoughtful about how we're
managing water for all of the
purposes and ensuring that we
are getting sufficient water to
elephant beautiful and so I just
want to say
the state needs to take a lead
and this effort and I am
committed in my shop to do that
and this will also be all hands
on deck moment to address the
challenges that we're seeing in
the middle valley
and we are already doing this so
this slide emphasises the
significant funding that we've
received from the legislature
thank you all very much
particularly in the twenty
twenty three and twenty twenty
four legislative sessions to
support the effort that i'm i'm
calling for
that money in particular is
going to advance channel
management projects both
supporting some of the
initiatives that the general for
a failure just
a presented on in the previous
panel but also we have a new it
was signed by our commission and
the middle real running
conservative district co
operative agreement between the
state and middle real rounda
conservative district signed in
march to address some of the
issues in some of the other
reaches.
Beyond the ones that we were
just focused on are in the
previous panel I also want to
just highlight again I think are
objective the challenge for us
is to manage in a way that both
is considerate of convenience
and habitat and I really believe
that we can do that well we are
going to need the absolutely
critical partnerships with our
federal agencies both us bureau
of reclamation and the us on
before of engineers and
achieving these calls there's
ongoing delta channel management
so that's the area just above
elephant beauty reserve or that
in receipt stream commission
engages in every year we also do
a fair amount of settlement plug
mitigation efforts are
importantly were very committed
to data collection and
development of various
management tools and here's
where the low flow comes into
play but I think we're
collecting data associated with
a number of different solutions
so we're significant effort
under way to address this
challenge but and more is needed
I would also say that this
effort and this funding is being
used to leverage significant
federal funding you all should
have heard in the news recently
there were a number of
announcements of federal funding
iora money for the for the
middle valley were very excited
about that there's also a need
to prepare for and this was on
an earlier panel as well the
negotiations of the settlement
of the six middle real round
problems water rates that will
be a critical piece of this
management effort in the middle
real grand and we need to more
actively managed to please and
do that with our partners
okay so lots to say in the
middle valley what happens in
the middle valley impacts the
lower rio grandday of course
those efforts in the in the
middle regular day are critical
to get more water to elephant
beauti both for texas and for
water users in new mexico so
here is the update under texas
view new mexico number one forty
one original ac.
Action in the lower real grand
the three compacting states as I
think you all know are reached
agreement a settlement on a
proposed consent degree that
proposed consent decree contains
a an index obligation that
quantifies the volume of water
to be delivered to texas as a
proportion of releases from
cabinet reservoir that
settlement that was reached
between the three states was a
posed by the US as on the
grounds that it would dispose
the us is claims without its
consent
oral argument was heard at the
supreme court and late april
and then inch on june twenty
first the court issued of five
four decision against the state
so in the in the favor of the US
I want to be really clear
because I think some people have
been confused about this the the
proposed consent agreed did not
propose to move new mexico's
delivery point under the compact
it's simply further a clarified
the compact by adding an
additional delivery point um
that case is now pending next
steps from the special master
and is vice jerus defense
mentioned earlier there is a
newly appointed special master
in the case do you broke smith
from pennsylvania
he will be in charge of
determining next steps related
to that case most importantly I
would say new max ago and my
stuff i'm is continuing to and
committed to work with stake
holders in the lower real brand
to implement solutions and to
work with our partners at us
bureau of reclamation we have
also new mexico received a large
trunk of federal funding
specifically to address the
challenges in the lower real
grant we have lots of work ahead
of us and and we are very
actively continuing to engage
despite and these these recent
events that you are supreme
court in that effort
this next slide.
Highlights both the funding from
the state legislaturing the
efforts under way so in the
twenty twenty three and twenty
twenty four legislative session
more than sixty million dollars
has been appropriated again
thank you so much legislature
for your support for programs to
address the challenges in the
lower real grand the the big
thing we have moving in our shop
is a groundwater conservation
program this is a continuation
of the pilot program that was
funded beginning and
twenty nineteen we've
transitioned bad into a longer
term program
in last year's enrollment so end
of twenty twenty three we had
around three thousand acres in
road so this is voluntary
enrollment of farmers in the
lower real granda at a cost of
around four point six million
dollars
we will be opening another
enrollment period
for farmers in the lower real
grand and we're continuing to
gather input about the potential
for a longer term purchase
program but we really want that
to be something that's informed
by local state holders we see
the groundwater conservation
program and the following
through that program is a
bridging strategy though so that
we can reduce depletions soon
while we work with stakeholders
on developing the longer term
solutions and I we are committed
to that those longer term
solutions being really informed
by stay quarter input look local
communities no best their
systems and will be best able to
contribute to it to what works
and what's most viable
again another instance in which
there is no silver bullet the
solution is going to be
everything from depletions
management through reducing use
to improving infrastructure
improving efficiencies of better
managing storm water identifying
potential brackish water sources
we see this as an all of the
above.
A effort with the whole sweet of
solutions needed I should also
highlight in the same way that
in receipt stream commission has
worked with middle real brown a
conservancy district or nob
cooperative agreement we are in
process working with the
elephant view derrigation
district on a similar agreement
with them the state really
seized these irrigation
districts as critical partners
for us in the work ahead we're
also working significantly to
build our team in our state
stream commission went from
having one and a half after he's
working on lower real grand
issues to now five a working out
of lost cruises so that they're
there on the ground and hoping
to engage with our partners and
also a leveraging federal
funding ok and i'm taking a lot
of time here i'm almost i'm
almost wrapping up to hand off
to a stubborn
so again
if this is in the context of
anticipating twenty five percent
less
flow in our river and recharge
to our acrifice so critical need
to engage in these efforts and
particularly critical need to
manage the entire real rounding
system holistically i'm all of
these various components of the
system affect each other it's
critical that we look at them as
a whole i'm in developed tools
with that haul in mind we also
think there's a need for
planning and capacity
development at all levels and a
need to build on the winds from
the twenty twenty three and
twenty twenty four legislative
sessions those were big dollar
amounts I just showed eight I
think they really are sort of
down payments but it's a it's
going to be a sustained effort
over a decade or more in both
the middle and the lower real
branding and this is a really
good time to be working to
leverage federal funding were
committed to continuing to do
that with our partners
we are in in a good position
given our regulatory framework
to tackle these challenges.
Just want to highlight briefly
new mexico was one of the first
states to manage surface and
groundwater conjunctively so we
have that ability through the
office of the student
we also have active water
resources management that are
provisioned which allows us to
administer priority or to work
with communities to develop
alternative management plans
that provide for better win
winds or committed and wanting
to do that we also have the
strategic water reserve which I
presented on earlier today a
critical component in insuring
stream flows for compact and
species purposes
and we have things do you are
and thank you very sure
stephanie for carrying the water
security planning acts and at
bill three thirty seven and the
twenty twenty three legislative
session I knew new mexico
interstate stream commission is
currently gathering all this
input to implement sort of the
new future of regional water
planning for new mexico and I am
very optimistic and hopeful that
that future water planning
effort will position as well to
deal with these challenges and I
just said we're taking time to
collect public input we fully
recognize the urgent need so
we're moving in parallel to the
rule making under the act were
working very actively with
stakeholders in the lower and
middle real grandday on planning
initiatives we can't wait so
we've got to move
and with that i'm going to hand
it off to a step on the best who
should be on the zoom.
The.
Good afternoon mister chairman
members of the committee can you
hear me.
The.
The.
I'll proceed in.
New mexico is an upper base in
opera division state in the
colorado river compact along
with colorado you don't wyoming
the lower division states are
arizona california and never
either and the nineteen twenty
two compact basically a portions
seven and a half million acre
feet to the upper division
states or or to the upper basin
and seven and a half million on
the mainstand over the colorado
river to the lower and to the
lower basin of arizona
california and nobody that the
difference here between the
upper division and upper basin
is arizona has a small portion
of the upper basin and has an as
an allocation in the upper
of the upper division water
upper basin water for its uses
but it is not one of the upper
division states.
The compact
besides giving several and I
have known into each of the
basins gave an additional one
million to the lower division
lower division states for
tribute to users and it requires
that the upper division shall
not deplete the floor
to the lord lower basin to less
than seventy five million over
ten years.
Glen kang and damn is basically
at the separation point between
the upper base in the lorb the
lower basin and its operations
are incredibly important to the
upper division states
it degenerates hydropower
generation that of many of our
communities and particularly are
tribes are depending on it
influence and influences the
release of close passing leave
which is an indicator of compact
compliance in twenty twenty two
lake power dropped to about
thirty five twenty five which
had been identified as a
critical elevation and I
actually went a little bit below
thirty five twenty five that
elevation was selected because
that's the an elevation a bit
above which we can still
continue to generate had a power
and and get the necessary flows
through the down today they're
powerless higher than that it's
a thirty five eighty three or
forty one percent for and we
expect that in the next year
will continue to operate under
the two thousand seven operating
guidelines and release after
seven point four four million
acre feet from their power
according to those guidelines
those guidelines were designed
to issue certainty of supplied
with lower basin and those
guidelines were also designed to
balance storage in the light
likes powell and need to day we
are at a current running ten
year running average for the
very flows of about eighty six
million agriculture which is
well above the seventy five
million agree mentioned in the
compact.
We are currently engaged in a
post twenty twenty six process
that will that two thousand and
seven inner guidelines were for
a term of twenty years and will
expire in twenty twenty six so
recommendation has initiated a
neighbor process a related to
our developing some operational
guidelines for the river for the
next period and these are being
informed by the changing
ideology and the the critically
low levels that we breached
recently
ideally all seven states would
come together and submit a
single consensus alternative for
reclamation to consider however
we were unable to do to uh reach
a consensus just given the
magnitude of the issues that we
were facing so the upper
division states and the lower
division states each submitted
separate alternatives to
reclamation back in march of
this year reclamation is
currently working with the upper
division and the lower division
to better understand the
assumptions that went into those
alternatives such that they can
model them and.
But even as they're doing this
we continue to meet with our
lower base and colleagues and
are working to try and develop a
consensus plan and reclamation
is helping us to that i'm not
certain that we'll be able to
get there but that's that would
be the optimal outcome.
Reclamation intends to publish a
draft environmental impact
statement for the public comment
by the end of twenty twenty four
and to have a final record of
decisions such that we can
buy august of twenty twenty six
so we've got two years left to
do this and there's an enormous
amount of work to get done.
At the same time
for the first time ever uh the
tribes have increasingly been.
Very adamant that they need a
place at the table and and these
are management discussions the
client that the tribe
collectively there are thirty
tribes in the colorado river
basin and depending on who you
ask about the uh trouble the
water that's been a portion to
tribes in the various states
amounts to probably somewhere in
the range of twenty five to
thirty three percent of of their
own closing the river so they
they have one in a day they
demand the place of the table
and we've been.
Working really closely with our
upper division tribes the follow
on this in the slide shows a
meeting of the upper division
states and tribes that we've
entered into a memorandum of
understanding with those upper
days and tribes in charmer
earlier this year that
memorializes that dialog and
and.
We will continue to work on
shared goals and procedures at
the same time reclamation as has
been has initiated a thirty
basin or thirty tribes
a dialog with a we referred to
it as a thirty eight sovereignty
because of the thirty tribes the
seven states and the us
making thirty eight sovereigns
and those meetings have also
been gaining promise and
prominence and done we are
having a lot of serious and
dollar more and more
significant discussions about
the
post twenty twenty six
operations process that will be
developing
that concludes my statement
about the colorado river issues
it's very short but if i'd be
happy to try and answer
questions if there are any.
And mr chair
thank you mr lopez just want to
conclude by saying a couple of
things first of all we are
incredibly well served in new
max ago by a step on lopez as or
representative in the upper
colorado river commission and
our team support team for her
motorci thought very grateful to
have him in his role even though
new mexico is one of the
smallest apportionments on the
colorado it please a critical
role for new mexico including
through the sand one charmer
project providing water for
water users and albuquerque
santa fe in the middle valley
including a more gcd so what
happens in these discussions is
of utmost importance to us I
also want a highlight that
tribal engagement that mister
lopez just mentioned and say
that before he left a former of
state and junior him and
initiated a similar conversation
with tribes in the real grandday
peace and that we intended carry
forward and looking forward to
that that discussion um and then
last just you know time to work
together this these challenges
are significant umm the ask of
you all thank you all to this
committee for your interest and
commitment many of you over many
many years to water resources
issues please continue to stay
involved again love to provide
any further information that you
might like thank you so much and
i'll hand off to mr casual.
Some share a chairman I mean the
committee again appreciate the
opportunity if we can just bring
the slame slide show back up all
reference back to that as I
begin my conversation about the
real grand compact so again my
name is jason kasuga and the ceo
and chief engineer for the
middle real grand conservancy
district and and I feel like i'm
the unofficial spokesman for the
middle valley on the need to
comply with the compact one of
the things that I I really want
to make it clear because I get
into very passionate
conversations with irrigators
about the need to comply with
the
compact if you talk to a middle
value a lot of them may tell you
well why are we sending this
water to texas and I think
it did a good job of explaining
why that's important but I I
want to change the picture a
little bit I think people often
treat the real grand compact
like
I don't know I think of I think
of tools or anything and I try
to visuals right I think
people treat the real grand
compact at times like it's a
butter knife
but we actually probably need to
treat it like it's a chain saw
and so what I mean by that is I
I offer that as a backdrop
because my dc was issued a
letter given given a letter by
the state that was asking for
and and advocating for reducing
completions within the middle
valley something that my gc has
been partnering with your state
in mexico and with
the recommendation on on trying
to do a to a point right in the
reason behind that is that if we
violate the compact right we get
into article four and there is a
true violation in what I mean by
that is that new mexico hits
that two hundred thousand acre
feet mark right though what the
state put in their letter is is
is very thought to curtail
my dc diversions and what I mean
by that is tell him or getting
to stop diverting
and so you can imagine for us as
the m r g c d were thinking oh.
We entered the situation and I
and as a ceo and I think there's
a lot of people within the
middle eye that understand that
but it's different and it hits
different when you get a letter
from the state telling you it's
possible
and so the one of the things
that I think is important is
there are many discussions in
the state right now in the
middle valley about the compact
and I think one of the things
that what I hope that we come
out of this from this panel in
this discussion is that we unite
and say it is in new mexico's
best interest who comply with
the compact we need to treat it
like the chain saw that it is
and what it can do
to them to at least in my
constituents into everybody
above elephant view and when it
comes definitely do to those
below elephant as well when
we're not in compliance with it
the the you can imagine it will
happen to agriculture if you had
sustained curtailment diversions
for a violation
it is it is significant and I I
appreciate i'll representative
arms from your question to
daniel timmons with wallet
gardens you asked him you know
is storage of native water a
good thing for the environment
and he said under most
conditions yes or something to
that standpoint III continued
storage of water is always in
the best interest of every
mission along the middle valley
that's the one thing I think we
should all unite on in an agree
that the best one of the
absolute best tools we have to
manage out in the stated in
mexico is to be able to store
water and if that is the
absolute best tool that we have
then what decisions are we
making i'm in all of our veins
and who and holding folks
accountable because that's what
I have to do in the middle east
is hold my constituents
accountable
to making sure that we get back
to being able to do that if it
is one of the best tools that we
can have then it seems like we
should all be counting to cost
to get that tool back so i've
i've kind of laid out my
explanation and again I I will
ring up.
I'm gonna bring up some photos
again and I told you I would
reference this again
my my question to you as the
committee if you were to go back
to your constituents and say you
are one of mine and I were to
show you
you know it when the river
drives and sanakasia every bit
of water you can serve when it
transports its way down through
the irrigation system if I keep
it from you and and I grab it
back in every bit of water
you're conserved once the river
naturally right because that's
something that always happens in
the sun across your each the
santa carci reaching naturally
drives every year best but it
has and it's going to continue
to do that but if I were to tell
you upstream that all water you
can serve lands right here what
is your motivation to consurf
right if we look at these photos
of standing water and this is
upstream of elephant
this is at the outfall of river
mile sixty
if I am if there's some total
gamers to project a future for
new mexicans to be an acc and we
want them to suffering the short
term to be able to see a
sustained future and does that
sustained future mean less water
absolutely it does i'm not
sitting here telling you that
there is going that there is a
hidden part of water I believe
in the projections I believe
that we're looking at a state
that is going to have to do with
substantially less water but if
we want to begin to transfer
transition are constituents in
that direction then we have to
show on that transition leads to
the brightest future it can with
less water than what they grew
up doing who they are with right
and so I look at this and if i'm
trying to sell to conservative
middle valley i'm trying to sell
pick the states money for the
following program so that we can
pay down the compact debt how do
I realistically sell to you if
you are one of my constituents
when these are out there and
this is where the water ends up.
And it ends up depleting so I
think it's fair again i'm
showing you march but I can tell
you we've done the we've done
the surface areas the march two
twenty twenty four
is not smaller than the july ten
twenty twenty four
the areas are substantially the
same and you can imagine the
amount of surface depletion
happening from just heat and son
from july to march we all know
how hot it is out there right
now
so
much my question is is this to
you i'm asked the committee my
question is this to office of
the state engineer and to the
initiative commission
I spoke first things first
you're asking me to do it in the
middle valley you're asking me
to approach million middle
valley irrigators and say the
compact is important to compact
his important compact is
important
my challenge to you is due to
the same thing mrg cd does not
control this area this area is a
completely federalized managed
section of the river I contend
that this is an again like I
said before an appropriation of
the state's water right that
this water is salvage water that
should go directly back into the
river and the federal government
has the opportunity to put it
back in the river
here is the outfall for them to
do it but they are choosing to
push it out into this shoe
pondered area they're they are
making that decision and my
question again to the state is
you're asking me in your sending
me letters to ask my
constituents to reduce the place
is the state holding everybody
else accountable in this bar
game be at other state agencies
or other federal agencies
because the federal agencies
still have to comply with stay
law related to worries in the
state
and I will yield right now for
my real grandcompact discussion.
Good afternoon mister chair
members of the committee my name
is samantha born castle solid
peck I am general council for
the elephant beautification
district and thank you for the
opportunity to present today
it's certainly difficult this
lately afternoon to follow the
visual of operating at chains
are while drinking whiskey but
you mean shot i'd like to skip
really quickly through some of
this initial stuff so that we
can get to the good news because
there actually is good news so
to start out and you will have
seen some of this before and for
the members of the committee I
want you to know that your copy
in front of you is not going to
look like the copy you can get
online which will have all of my
speaker notes and the speaker
notes are key because I will
start by saying as much as we're
going to get into the litigation
and where ebid and the federal
government differ from the state
of new mexico and one should
understand that I worked with
the state to put this
presentation together earlier
this year and last year and
peace things together working
together continuing the theme of
collaboration and cooperation
towards the end goal of solving
problems on the ground rather
than endlessly litigating them
but to start out this slide
shows the hydrologic history of
the project and we're talking
about the real grand project in
southern new mexico below
elephant built
the blue line is storage in the
reservoir and the red line is
annual release the early years
of the projects off full supply
in surface water provided
essentially all of the
irrigation farmers needed
starting in nineteen fifty one
reservoir storage got low enough
that farmers did not have enough
surface water so they drilled
wells and supplemented short
surface supply with ground water
the shortage due to the first
strout period persisted from
nineteen fifty one to nineteen
seventy eight in nineteen
seventy nine a full supply was
again available and farmers had
a three foot allotment for
twenty four consecutive years
until twenty two thousand three.
After that there have been a few
wet years but nothing close to
breaking the drought
everybody is aware that our
surface water system sits on a
robust groundwater system in the
lower real grand dish slide
shows the change in october
storage conditions over the
period of twelve two thousand
ten to twenty twenty two
relative to conditions that
exist in in two thousand nine in
the meca valley
now we have multiple operators
to this is specific to the
message from in addition to
being able to see a change in
storage that correlates directly
to surface water deliveries via
the real grand project over time
our groundwater analysis has
showed the storm water has also
had a similar effect on more on
storm water and many of you have
heard me talk about storm water
before but we know how to
recharge our aquifer is the
point
it is long been recognized that
pumping groundwater negatively
affects impacts negatively
impacts the available surface
water supply because the two
resources of water or
hydrologically connected however
pumping ground water has been
the only viable option available
for the region to survive drow
in addition municipalities and
other economic sectors continue
to grow relying solely on
groundwater for their necessary
water supply at the same time
ambitious development plans are
being implemented in the
sanitary sense and her animal
land court of entry area along
the us mexican border farmers
too have become more reliant on
groundwater as surface water
available
has decreased over a time to a
combination of due to a
combination of drought changes
of timing and availability of
surface water as a result of
changing snow pack in months
soon events and the depletion of
surface water by groundwater use
reliance on groundwater by all
sectors continues to grow and
appears to be an impossible
habit to break
this slide shows project
diversions as a function of
release from cabinet essentially
this is where the baseline state
line delivery obligation.
From the settlement in texas
versus new mexico came from the
period from nineteen fifty one
to seventy eight saw releases
ranging from two hundred and six
thousand agreed to seven hundred
and thirty seven thousand acre
feet and the resulting
relationship determined by
linear regression for the
period's data set is what we
call d two or the detail period
what would have happened during
the detail period is what would
have dictated what is to be
delivered under the state
settlement and again this may
still be what is ultimately
agreed to once it's fully
fleshed out after the supreme
court opinion
the settlement based on agreed
to by the states called the
index uses a regression analysis
to determine how much water must
reach the state line based upon
how much was released from
project storage details aside in
the settlement the states
resolved the issue of when and
how much water must be delivered
to the state line so this is not
delivery into elephant you this
is delivery to texas at the
state line
failure to deliver those index
requirements with lead to a
compact violation but that
didn't in the conversation
because the current drought from
two thousand three to present
shows another clear relationship
between release and project
diversions and is systematically
lower than the detail
relationship largely due to
increased groundwater depletions
in new mexico
this glade is included to scare
everyone that speaks for itself
this is what would be going on
if we were operating under the
index going back to two thousand
six
you can see most importantly
that we are not making it
in abid that the consent decree
recently rejected by the supreme
court would have allowed the
state of new mexico to pay texas
using ebid's real grand project
water that's an exceptionally
boiled down way of saying that
so please don't hold us to that
that is not intended as an
attack on the states.
That is simply how the mechanism
would have worked it would have
been an allocation transfer from
ebay d to the other irrigation
district when the state's
determined they needed to do
that for compact purposes that
would happen when index
deliveries were not made by the
state at the state line as
required by the index and the
adjustment would make sure that
texas was compensated completely
under the compact problem is the
current drought a seamless
recovery in the ocfa system then
the drop period of the fifties
through the seventies this is
due to many factors including
increased pumping by domestic
commercial municipal and
industrial groundwater users
resulting from population growth
and deeper more persistent
drought it's very important for
this committee to understand
however that ebid farmers are
using the exact same amount of
water now that they did during
the fifty one to seventy eight
baseline and we know that from
the litigation that's agreed to
so while non agriculture use has
increased by two hundred and
fifty percent ebid has not
increased it off so in our view
the failed consent decree tried
to take away our senior
irrigation moderate and relegate
it to junior status to allow
junior pumpers to continue to
expand their water rates even
where agriculture has maintained
a constant volume of water use
we do that by expanding and
contracting english naturally
the farmers pushed back
id was of course pleased with
the decision of the court the
supreme court having argued
against the settlement on behalf
of the district I briefed on
behalf of the united states
government against the state of
new mexico in the state of texas
and the state of colorado and we
pushed against the settlement
because of the impact it would
have had on ebay senior farmers
the state settlement effective
effectively placed to target on
ebid farmers too as one of my
experts who sitting in the room
puts it allow a quote double
where against us as a technical
term by the way and he has
testified using that term in
mult.
Court cases it means we already
seeing return flows diverted
before they hit our drains for
reuse within the surface water
system and then if we come up
short in surface water
deliveries the state again would
require ebid to give up more
surface water to deliver to the
state line for compact purposes
so being shorted twice double
wammy in any case we remain
uncertain as to the future of
the litigation we have lots of
more questions probably than we
have answers to rate now
especially after the supreme
court
will be litigate will be subtle
will all the parties realign
will we have a judge who
understands will it take years
to educate this new judge how is
all of this going to play
outside ebid were staying
settlement focus to and our work
on the ground you've heard a lot
about before and i'm not going
to go over it in too much detail
now you'll hear more about some
of the more recent stuff
tomorrow but we've said for a
number of years that court
orders don't solve these kinds
of problems we will continue to
breach for additional litigation
but we are continuing also to go
on a different direction and
that is the direction of
cooperation so again just a
quick recap we've proposed a
number of projects in and along
the river system including
within our network of
infrastructure that would amount
to a multi objective project
overview that could achieve a
number of goals including
keeping farmers in production
and feeding america ensuring
community continued commodity
production increasing surface
water supplied by more
effectively harnessing storm
water creating dedicated
recharge to ensure resilient
officer system restoring and
improving flood plane
connections to river and
district facilities creating
enhancing and creating an
enhancing existing flood control
measures and structures creating
safer communities and under
privileged areas creating
community park in recreation
areas and restoring habitat both
upland and right period
you'll recall that I have
testified before you before on
this public law called the
inflation reduction.
Act out of the federal
government I was one of the
people who assisted in drafting
this particular portion that
allows money to come to others
similarly situated drought
stricken business outside of the
colorado river and that is
specifically us on the real
grand
we capitalized on that most
recently earlier this year and
we were able to through our
collaborative process and
working with the real grand
project area dropped residency
team and working separately
we were able to bring home first
a sixty million dollars grant
announcement from the department
of interior that will be used in
the lower real grand through
cooperative agreements with the
bureau of reclamation and hannah
start luckily
that many is going to go on the
ground for improved
infrastructure
we also have a separate and I
will talk to you more about this
tomorrow separate grant that we
recently received from usda and
so the first one is essentially
infrastructure how do we get the
water where it should go or keep
it from going somewhere where we
don't want it to go on the
second one will be the
programmatic site of things
working with the state working
with the federal government and
we don't typically like to say
the word following but we know
that it is one of the many
pieces to this puzzle so hannah
talks about there is no silver
bullet i'm a hundred that's
because they tell her this is
going to take silver buckshot
rate we've got to get every
solution out on the table and
talk about everything possible
sort it all out and figure out
what's going to work in each
region the best
and we've been able to do that
in the lower real brand through
this specific team that dropped
resiliency team we've talked to
you about this for a number of
years at this point in fact i'm
senator compos hosted me and a
number of others at one point at
the legislature and thank you
very much for that because that
was what got us in front of the
federal government fare and
square made them look at us and
say wow they really have it
together.
So it's places like this where
we can really make an impact in
a change
so the last two decades have
produced no coordinated water
management in the low real grand
and litigation has a way of
doing that
what is needed is a reduction in
depletion of groundwater and I
dynamic management scheme where
groundwater use can be managed
and response to cyclical web
android cycles to maximise water
supply resilience in the base
ebad supports the state engineer
in the interseat stream
commission and their efforts to
common gate rules to effectively
manage groundwater to protect
surface water users and their
senior water rates well farmland
is often at risk of flooding
which can cause property damage
including crub loss the areas
subject to flooding in the lower
real grand are most often the
underserved lower income
communities of inadequate flood
control capacity and these
communities are subject to a
measurable risk going forward if
we do not begin to address
hydrologic changes we're seeing
in our system so too does the
risk of compact by allisions
increase if we ignore reality
ebid envisions the system that
incorporates watershed and wild
a royal management into the
existing network of flood
control and water convenience
infrastructure and new
infrastructure is needed the
goal would be to capture or slow
down as much water high up in
the water sheds as possible to
make it usable as irrigation
water facilitate managed and
targeted awkward for recharge in
simultaneously addressed related
flooding issues along the way
and with that naturally will
come the right period and upload
habitat that we're all looking
for and so sitting next to me is
one of our other partners and
now it's a good time to pass for
the month
thank you very much.
Good afternoon mr chair members
of the committee you get the
pleasure of hearing for me twice
today I have to say the last
time I was invited last year to
present from this committee I
also was delayed due to car
trouble on a flat tire structure
giving your issues this morning
I don't know if i'm jinxed if
you want to invite me back next
time I hope everyone has good
good car like
but I know the last thing i'm
the last thing between you guys
and your dinner so i'll also try
to keep it short
scanned my name is angely being
a senior policy adviser in the
healthy rhetoric program at
western resource applicates.
I was asked to provide a
conservation perspective on
compact compliance in new mexico
and the west and given that I
first wanted to start by
commending everyone else on this
panel because these guys are are
the ones on the ground as water
managers thinking about this day
in and day out and trying to
find a solutions to these really
hard problems
as the sort of token outside
observer i'd like to just end
with some high level comments on
the importance of considering
rivers as themselves in the
context of meeting our compact
obligations.
I have been working in the water
space in new mexico her almost a
decade but I was also born and
raised in the heart of the south
alley and albert
the basket and the interwaving
ditches in irrigation
infrastructure in the south
valley was the green space that
I grew up in and so I deeply
understand the complexity and in
a movement values that we all
have around water
and what it represent represents
in our communities.
And what I see today and I think
I said this uh my previous panel
as well
location is I I see it growing
understanding of it healthy
river is really under pin the
success of all of our work
and that further degree dating
over rivers is not anyone's call
you're not on this panel really
feels that that further further
harm to our rivers is the end
point that we want to be at
because not only are our flowing
rivers part of our connected
history or community our values
but they also pride pretty
provide pretty direct benefits
to compare compliance and our
water delivery infrastructure
some of these benefits are are
physical these rivers are are
physical convanced channels and
when they degrade you see what
happens you get settlement plugs
you get decreased channel
capacity flooding evaporation
many other issues and we've
heard about some of them today
and the entire panel on the low
flow convenience channel you
heard about the
costly temporary infrastructure
that went in many years ago and
the
really difficult decisions are
end conversations that are
happening right now about what
to do about it and and how to
come to your agreement today
you also have probably heard in
the news this summer about a
settlement plug that occurred on
the real challenge many years
meant to go through these
many years of artificially low
flows on the rio channel
resulted in that river filling
with silt
it lacked the high flows and the
end spring paul swells that
traditionally would flash out
that and over time a grew and
grew and grew until this summer
the the river jumped its banks
and it caused a lot of damage to
it flooded fields if what it
homes it caused immense pain and
suffering in that community need
not to mention a tremendous
amount of money that it took to
fix.
The problem
and while that was being fixed
we could not release water
downstream and that impacts not
only diversions but contact
compliance
finally a dry river is also the
least efficient we've talked
about already you know you can
see how much water it takes to
fill dry sand before water will
run out of it and so we have a
common interest in keeping our
river as wet.
And
i'm sure I don't have to
tell anyone on this panel that
impacts that the indiana speaks
he's act have on our water
operations the possibility of
additional listing of species in
the real brand a and other
rivers in new mexico
it's possible it's not far fact
there are species that are being
considered for listing today and
any future listings are speaking
dramatically complicate any
efforts that we're doing to
improve our water management so
again healthy rivers and flowing
rivers prevent those future
designations
these are just for a few
examples of the ways that river
is themselves impact our future
I know success and our ability
to deliver water
our companies when they were
negotiated were developed among
water users in a time when
environmental benefits ecosystem
services these are not terms
that were discussed and not only
where they now discuss but they
weren't fully understood the
physical benefits the cultural
benefits are ribbers are not
included in those compacts.
But
they are things that are
important to our communities and
the challenge is related to
these two compared compliance in
new mexico are real and sobering
but there is some truth that we
should never let a good crisis
go to waste and we are in a
craces right now I am heartened
to hear from my fellow panelist
and agree with his growing
understanding that our healthy
river is in health economy
healthy economies must go ahead
and as we start to re imagine
what this new world of water
management looks like in this
increasingly errored future we
have the opportunity to
prioritize multi benefit tools
that provide benefits to our
ecology our economies our
communities are farmers our
water users and our community
who values water and rivers for
their own sake
you've heard examples from from
this panel and from other panels
today to was including the
strategic water reserve programs
from irrigation district state
federal funding
and I hope you as legislators
continue to ask more of us to
provide for those multi benefit
towards and programs into really
insurer that we maximise every
single drop of water that goes
down stream that we can no
longer think about them in
silence that it must be a
holistic view of our water
future and that that new type of
of work and new type of
understanding really can't wait
and we're bad
I will be done thanks very much.
Thank you all very much for your
presentations going to the
committee represent
the chair wasn't reading through
such a quick thank you again for
other presentation I really do
want to thank you
member of the panel I have the
utmost respect and i've been
able to speak with all of you
what just to recap what i'm
getting is that irrigation users
are getting the same amount of
water that they were getting
several decades ago
is what I heard
and that
are compact to obligations or a
chain sold modern butter knife I
got that part and.
And that we have to balance all
of the irrigation needs are
compact legal and and i've been
AAA privilege around for in the
health care field with
understanding the costs of
large lawsuit siga for decades
so I understand I think that's a
very good metaphor
the bouncing are our
environmental needs are
irrigation user needs and our
compact needs am I correct when
I said that use of the gators
are getting the same amount of
water right now
mr chair members of the
committee I can't see
representative cates the
texas versus new mexico experts
fought it out nine I mean
tremendously and one of the
things they ultimately came down
in agreement on on the technical
side of things was that ebay is
water use expands and contracts
the acridge to insure we
maintain a constant water use we
also are operating under court
orders in the lower real grand
in the adjudication so
essentially yes okay so I
misunderstood what I thought I
heard you say was during the
first drought one
irrigators are getting access
despite the campaign they're
getting access to the same
amount of water as they had
during drought one is that not
what you said
I miser chairman members of the
committee representative cates
the what we are talking about in
terms of the same quantity of
use is that we are using the
same amount now as we were
during that d two period of
fifty one seventy eight drought
one yes
so the the this is my question I
I represent a agricultural
community and crowds and they
have a special issue in the fact
that they're sightened doesn't
work in the other irrigators
down the mid region.
Or real ground day there they
have concrete savings and they
are working
the agricultural community is
doing a lot they probably do
more water conservation but
they're doing the water shed
they're still there improving
their soil they are seating
their orchards III know i'm not
really sure how i'm your
appreciate the the the panel but
I what do I tell them
why
and and I heard I heard jason I
really appreciate it you know we
we have to look at our federal
government maybe not always
understanding what's going on
locally but I don't see anyone
on that panel who is from the
agricultural community
who is balancing were bound seen
environment or in balance seen
our animal life for a balancing
are legal obligations and I
really appreciate that but I
have not heard that we have made
too much food
and that we don't need to
continue to farm and so I would
like and I respectfully ask our
our chair in else and is that I
just to give us some sort of
guidance
on how to be able to address
that now mines are very specific
need because I think that our
system is different in the south
cause there are safe and is
broken by
I would need some direction on
how to be able to balance out
rather than
following I understand that
should be on the table but I
will tell you i'm hearing from
the ad community it not just
seven hundred dollars an acre is
not enough but let's say a
couple hundred is enough but
they're saying to get the land
back to be farmable in two years
and five years when we may have
different water needs it's going
to cost thousands of dollars to
get that land back.
Into condition so as a
legislator you need to tell me
where the funding needs to go
and how the policy should be
addressed so that we can serve
that need as well and I know
that's a long question that you
can't answer right now and I do
very much respect all of you and
so I do want an answer from you
if you could give it to me an
email and you can think about it
for a couple weeks thanks
mr chair members of the
committee we have answers to
that question if you
representative case would you
like an answer right now
absolutely let me start and then
i'll pass the make to mr casua
so to begin we are not creating
too much food quote the opposite
we are dependent on other
countries to feed america we
definitely participate in the
important export process for
food security but we are food
insecure as a nation
one of the problems we have
within the elephant beautiful
district is this idea that you
might follow some large
for some small farmer at
one portion of the digit and we
have to deliver to a large
farmer somewhere and we're going
to now do that far more
inefficiently than we would have
before if both of them were
still in production it is not
accurate to say that a farmer
going out of production means
that his neighbor is better off
without him and is totally
different than the scenario
where you have wall greens on
one corner and cbs on the other
if one goes out the other does
better farmers and agroducers
typically will not do it do
better because they lose their
age support businesses they lose
their labor they lose a lot of
things that come with having
that stability of a region
involved in agriculture so are
solution has been two pronged
focus and that is first to say
before you follow a farmer
ensure that the infrastructure
is going to get the water where
you want it to actually go and
second and so that's the fund
infrastructure side of things.
That's where we got a sixty
million dollar grant from the
department of interior we have
money through the issue the
second prang is the following
piece and we don't like the idea
of buying dry because you can't
bring that
production ground back into
production as easily I have a
whole presentation on the
following piece tomorrow
afternoon in so stay tuned
mr chairman representative cats
the first related to
your first question about our
farmers you getting the same
amount of water in the middle
valley the question is
unequivocally no they're not
they're doing less we can show
you based on our diversions that
are diversions are are reduced
by percentages upwards of twenty
to twenty five percent we're
diverting less water than we
ever have and we started doing
that years ago as we started
seeing this coming and we saw in
the interspecies on those kinds
of things so our farmers being
forced to use less water now
absolutely unequivocally true
and we believe we have the data
to show that the
now the question about what
my speech specifically was on I
think the best thing
irrigators from elephant be
north right because i'm hannah
talked about there is a there is
a different index that was
looked at originally with the
consider but for middle valley
users and everybody north of
elephant view the in delivery
point for us regardless of what
happened down at eleven view
below from you was elephant view
is get get the water to elephant
view and then our business
related to the compact is done
at least for users north
developing view so
my car was the best thing for ag
long term
is that we get the water that
we're supposed to get to
elephant beauty on an annual
basis and begin to reduce the
compact at one
and then I completely agree.
Worth what samantha said about
before we before we start
unilaterally telling people they
can't have water and curtailing
them and saying this is for the
benefit of the state before we
do that we should make sure if
you could tell them the water
shows up where it's supposed to
and I think i've shown you i'm
photos of where the water goes
and there is significantly
increased to presents where that
water actually goes so I don't
think we can fundamentally do
that in the middle of alliance
are we willing to cut diversions
and farmers off and tell him
this is where your water ends up
and all by the way this is not
also view and this is upstream
about them so that is that III
am I face this conversation with
farmers and I tell them the
farmers the compact important
you know this you've seen in the
meetings having to make that
argument to farmers and then the
but I think that same argument
has been made to the decision
make this who said above from
the state standpoint
accountability right cuts in all
directions from the state
standpoint if you're gonna if
you're going to put out letters
like that and let's make sure
everybody who touches water is
held to the same level of
accountability and then on your
last question I think related to
the cross safe and the.
One thank you to the water trust
board because mrg city has the
money to fix it
unfortunately I am the i'm still
working through issues related
to working with bia on whether
or not i'm allowed to fix it
and I I wish he had gone to more
detail now but i'm i'm working
through that but thank you for
the money the design is there
we're going to get ready to go
out to bid here soon to get it
fixed
but representative case I the
the truth is that until the
siphones fixed koralis faces and
even more difficult water future
than everybody else in the
middle
and because everybody else gets
their water primarily by gravity
and right now the in right now
cross doesn't they get it by a
pump and so that's a the in that
instance I don't I don't know
how to
make that better other than get
the safe and fixed and then put
them back on par with other
think you so much thinking thank
you for your involvement I very
much appreciate your part you're
you're on it and you are
communicating about the line I
just like to see that you know I
we have a historical
agricultural land of generations
and hundreds of years of an
agricultural community that is
really at risk and crowdless
rate now and I am looking for
innovative solutions and I
understand
we do have cloud seating
tomorrow so we'll look at that
thank you
thank you representative or
absent cadena.
Thank you mister chair and
representative of latica than I
looking around think today that
I am the only one in committee
that represents it district
below ebid and even with an
identity and a delegation I
believe it's just myself and
senators have on this uh have
water
certainly not at the same scale
that's quite different I want to
first shout out the means to new
mexico project that the united
states team commission and oscar
believe in partnership brought
to so many of our communities
around the state including to
last cusis I was able to show up
in participating person and some
of what I saw are community way
in with and provide their own
inside an expertise of course
they're still sitting with me
even in a conversation like
today while I appreciate the
death and expansiveness and
collaboration of this panel
we're talking about irrigators
were talking about complex
obligations
and we're talking about the
water for the river
we're not talking about what it
means for our people to have
enough water to survive in new
mexico incoming years.
And that to me is terrifying
as for those of your they didn't
have a chance to check out means
to new mexico it was a very
engaging
facilitated community
conversation where are
constituents that people we show
up in represent every day could
go and answer questions for
themselves so there are
questions about how we see our
water future what are why we
water worries where what kind of
decision makers should be
involved in water planning and
as I read through some of other
folks responses I kept seeing
that again and again like we
need water to drink.
We need water to exist and as
someone who lives and does my
best to imagine these elements
and southern new mexico I still
feel that whether we're talking
about the legal situation we're
in and waiting for settlements
and consent decrease to come
down or we're talking about
innovative message methods to
water conservation I don't feel
like yet we're saying despite
all the projections and the ask
them across her mapping to come
like we are going to have a
whole different conversation
when there's it's not water
left.
And what is that mean like we
can't still be in face about
whose priority water rates and I
have been to believe the saver
nations come first and after
that the rest of us need to be
in a different conversation
altogether but moving from there
I just wanted to touch on a
couple of points
as a water user and southern new
mexico and to get to the
question that my colleague
representative kids asked and
some of you have reference.
At least an ebid we are using
water differently so while my
family and and even colleagues
in the legislature in the
midreal brand still get to use
real water that comes from the
river in irrigation digits that
have water throughout the
growing season where I live our
irrigation ditches have now
basically become
channels for storage and
movement of water that big big
farmers are pumping from twelve
inch wells that don't turn off
for an entire season so we're
using water but we as named very
clearly are pumping ground water
I remember what's sitting with
my colleague representative
price here who turned to myself
and charity and said can you
believe it
the water has become so limited
we only get to water every three
weeks how would we ever grow
anything and I said him your
rights and my rights are the
same you get to water every
three weeks and that season I
was allowed in ebid because of
how we move around our acrid per
egg foot we had two irrigations
for a whole season so they in
metro grand were still watering
every three weeks and I had two
irritation
so of course we're pumping
ground water because we've
decided to invest in
agriculture.
And moving on would love to talk
more about following tomorrow
because for me the big question
and setting your mexican how do
you fell up accounts will get to
that tomorrow.
Moving to
a piece about a little bit back
to the the.
Question of food security and
what we use our water to its
greatest purpose.
It would not be honest to see in
southern new mexico that we are
using our water to grow food
that feeds new mexicans
we've said it as a point at
pride that in in the county
represent now donate county we
grow more becomes than any other
county in america does they're
not becomes if you don't
families they were becomes that
went to china before trump
tariffs moved them out of china
and basically now gets all to
the rest of the world when I
think about what water means for
a future I would love that we
could imagine how to grow food
to feed our families I would
love that could turn might
become into a possibility of
feeding families that are my
neighbors and my friends people
that are hungry but I do think
differently than these smaller
communities that good is this or
other place that have very
different historical context
when we talk about agriculture
we need to be more pointed that
agriculture is a major industry
and economy and new mexico
second to oil and gas what that
means for us is relevant but it
doesn't mean refeeding new
antenna wrap mr chair
I do just want to look finally
at the finals like ten of the
ebad presentation I agree with
so much of this data I
appreciate you for bringing it
for it I always try to make sure
my colleagues in the legislature
understand why ebid has had to
take a different position than
new mexico in these big federal
fates
but I also have to say eight I
live in home that or I have a
home that my great grandfather
built in message in the valley
and I still think it's important
to see out loud that when we
step into the snarrative about
reclaiming the rest or
reclaiming the west are talking
about what maybe my grandfather
did an argument for others did
those were not seated lands like
we we put up a few slides about
tribal engagement we say that
we're working to honor that.
But when I think about who has
big roddo rights in the valley I
represent those were the people
who came and settled the valley
and had money in resources to
buy the land and eventually
legally to those water rates but
that doesn't mean that that
conversation fully represents
the people who work to the land
the people who came from the
land the people who lived that
land before many of us got here
and i'll wrap with this example
I happen to represent new mexico
state university shadow to
tiffany better on the back who
tap me a lot about ag and and
miss you we were a celebrating
access that day I know you have
enjoyed it and two different
groups for minimise you were
asking for my energy and time we
had the again **** who were part
of the official act first and
then we had students from the
cap program who come from
migrant families and are
typically first general college
students attending an amazing
and I said everybody like the
days or we're running I need to
be in committee beyond the floor
can we are me and it turns out
that the camp students came down
and the again **** came down and
they did not know about each
other's programs and it's struck
me that these counts students
were working the land
and these again came from
families who owned the land
and at our institution and
certainly committees like this
we're not having conversations
about the intersections of what
that means so ebid I ask that we
consider their cultural
implications of using narratives
like this and that we honor some
people may say they have some
priority rates but there's a lot
of other people that need the
swatter to exist as well thank
you mister chair.
Thank you representative anyone
else from the county
so the other core questions
and again I I feel earned cause
I missed a good part of the day
i'm sort of uh
still getting my mind up to
speed by the few questions one
for the sponsor on the the
follow up my recent kids
question of are you using are
you getting the same amount and
I wonder or are your farmers
supplement with groundwater so
the point being to me getting
the same amount and using the
same amount or two different
measures.
I wonder if you could clarify
that
miserator yes we so if if you go
back to the very beginning where
I started I talked about the big
robust groundwater system in
hell when our surface water
stopped showing up in the
reservoir
water weight hundred and twenty
something thousand agreement and
deficit not counting whatever we
could get out of low flow that
could be a couple more months of
irrigation with an ebay but when
we don't have that water we are
pumping it yes
in
are your
what are people's dropping
mister chairman members of the
committee if you go back to that
slide you will see that yes they
do drop and yes they do come
back up with the surface water
system so the more surface water
we have the more of an increase
we see in our groundwater system
so that's why one of the reasons
were here is to ask for more
money to continue to put money
into storm water capture
which then recharges the
occupier and we actually have a
an amazed in place with the city
of loss cruises to start
actually on the ground paying
programs that will help us study
the rate at which we see that
that recharge in certain wells
primarily wells that serve
municipal water supply to the
residents of the city of os
crucials right now okay well
that's that's good and I
appreciate that
I I guess the point I was
getting tourist first that we
say
that the storm water management
for.
Urban areas I think it'd be a
lot better in terms of capturing
that water and getting it to
infiltrate
you know we have a lot of areas
where the recharge doesn't
affect the water table in a mean
full time frame
so that's a concern in other
areas I generally think we are
you we we seem to be largely
acknowledging we're facing a
future with uh twenty five
percent less surface low but we
also have areas where we've
already depleted the ground so
we're we're losing a were
depleting our water supplies
when we are another surface in
groundwater and since we have
used the ground water to
supplement the surface flows
that's going to be a problem
some concern about that
a couple comments on the
unfollowing programs
I I think following programs are
coming
I think they're effectively
already here in a way
since we have misparties going
out and buying farm to get the
water right I mean that's it the
fact that following program
and my concern about the
following programs there are
several
one is that
this broad cancel is you sort of
alluded to the idea of your if
we have
you have a cbs someone quarter
in a uh
what's the other one or greens
wall green syria on the other
and.
That happens in planet places
that one going out business
might actually help the other
not the case with farmers we
need intact agricultural systems
we need ditches to say where we
need uh greens food you know see
the green stores we need we need
all that to remain.
But our history and following
largely in the pickups yeah
wasn't as good as it could be
yeah we have uh we need to find
the way to do it and
thoughtfully and that I think
that the limit we face is that
we want to do it voluntarily
in voluntarily so far has
acquired it to happen
and that's the real deliver
because we you know we're
americans we respect private
property we don't
you know no one's talking about
emission to me
but we need to find a way to do
following programs where we
provide incentives to
communities that you know maybe
you have one ditch follows
another digit and that's just a
really delicate political thing
I also think you know we have
these programs that are
temporary
and we're spending a lot of
and I personally don't think
that money is always gonna be
there
so I I mean I I want to look at
permanent solutions
I i've always had buyers towards
permanent solutions
I think it's better for long
term planning
but that that's a concern for me
that we're we're spending a lot
money and it's just anything in
your expenditure and then the
other thing to consider I I
think is
you know I
i've never been in the ag
industry I have a lot of respect
for people who are and I think
it's a really tough industry
it's a real it's a lot of hard
work
and I think we have to ask the
question of whether it's really
better for you know the tough
industry
to cut everyone back by twenty
five percent
or would it be better to.
Have some people follow and some
people go with hundred percent
your in terms of production in
terms of profit margin things
like that
so that's that's a concern as
well and it's it's
I wish we as the legislature
were spending more time focusing
on this
but where part time legislature
and so I have this conversation
like once a year you know and
air committee
and then it goes away and we
come back next year and we have
the same conversation
I heard the couple of questions
on the texas feed the mexico
settlement i'm
I can remember
encrusing so so texas sued us
they start delegation
early reports were
potentially devastating losses
for the same new mexico
financial or in terms of money
in our water
and then
there was a lot of obligation
there is a lot of discovery that
was a lot of
expert testimony and expert
analysis and data and
it seems to turn the time and
and suddenly the seller made
seem to be not only
a reach of all of the night
maybe not that bad from the
mexico maybe even the positive
thing
and I can remember encroaching
a train general balderis to
get the cross to finish line
before you left because I was
concerned that the change of
administration and the change of
staff
there would be a lot of a
minimum and I would I guess I
was pleased that we did
he did quite get across the fish
line we have the change of
administration they kept up them
a minute
but then the proposed settlement
was rejected
and we
mean it was.
Firmed up enough that we were
having conversations with the
officers here about how they
were the implement this plan
and
my question is
you know I I think all the
expert testimony is still around
I think all that data is still
right on all the studies
but in terms of ending this
litigation which is really
expensive
are we really back to square one
yeah I mean not only do we not
have a proper settlement on the
table but we have a new special
master
and a special master can
significant employment
on the direction of a seller so
I I kinda like to hear from both
of us banking our side as they
wait about whether the prospects
now for resolving the location
thank you mister chair all go
first and then him to sam
first I would say we're not at
square one
I think a lot all of the work
that's been invested as you just
said it will help inform and
shape next steps
and then second you know I would
say that the the day that that
opinion came out certainly felt
to me and a lot of ways like a
gut pounds and it felt like a
got punched cos I felt like we
were poised to work with a
partners including stake holders
in the lorio grand on
implementing solutions it took
me a couple of days to realize
and really you know could use to
evide and sam on her board that
we could continue to implement
the solutions that we see all
sea as no brainers um and so
that's where we may have
different opinions on some
specifics related to the
litigation but I think there are
a sleet of things that we all
know we're going to be needed
regardless of the outcome there
and there's real commitment
across our shops to keep those
things moving as we are as we
work with the new special master
on the next steps there.
And then I would also just say I
think there's certainly an
interest amongst all the parties
to reach a resolution quickly I
am cautiously optimistic that
there won't be like ten more
years of litigation but most
importantly i'm glad that we
have partners and commitment
including from our colleagues
that the spirit of reclamation
to invest and move solutions in
in peril well to the ongoing
litigation and not without all
see if sam wants to add
mr chair members of the
committee i'm so the only thing
I would add is that this
litigation is exceptionally
costly for ebay farmers rate
repairer taxes to the state and
then we pay ebay ditafite to
we're paying twice for this
litigation we do not want to see
it continue it's not in
anybody's interest for it to
continue that's money we could
use to do other things like one
firm efficiency improvements
marry up are following program
with their infrastructure we are
running behind in terms of our
budget we can afford it either
but often times it's not within
our control what happens and so
let me take off the
collaborative hat and put on the
lawyer had the straight answer
to your question as we are
waiting for a hearing once we
get a hearing setting the judge
is likely going to ask us where
do you want to start each of the
parties is going to take a
position on that the meeking are
likely going and take positions
and then we likely begin
litigation the question is can
we control that conversation
with the conversation we'd
rather have which is the one
happening here
okay thank you for that I I do
here love claboration like
communication
just you know amongst the panel
and I think that's a really good
thing um
i'm a lawyer but i'd like to say
i'm not that kind of lawyer and
I think litigation benefits
lawyers I i'd rather save that
money.
Both for the state and for the
farmers
that's it for this panel and
thank you all very much
for your presentations so there
also brings us to the end of our
day we do the committee does
have a dinner
at
its la positive cafe although it
still has the sacrospring sign
up front so you might have
passed that on your way in
and there's you probably a flyer
and we have probably a few more
so that's tonight that's being
held a bit by the friends at
bosco delapatry national while I
for a few in only if this has
now that's earlier but there's
also a dinner tomorrow
so there is we have overlapping
committees this week and that's
actually why route new mexico
tact was it so some of our
committee members could go back
and forth
the
president of the new mexico tech
has invited the committees to a
committee social tomorrow it six
o'clock if you're still in town
so I think that was emailed out
as well any questions comments
announcements from the committee
okay we are them for they are
