Panel after lunch is uh
representativearana.
On oil and gas setbacks.
Representative whenever you're
ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All right, um,
So Mr. Chairman and members of
the committee, I'm here with
Colin Cox from Center of
Biological Diversity to present
the oil and gas Children's
Health Protection Zone bill.
You need the 202 number or any
of that stuff?
Uh, we did pass it out, uh, it's
228-818.1. It is available
online uh for anyone watching,
and then let's just like the
website.
Oh, it's, so it's under the
committee. Look for that.
OK, this bill modifies the Oil
and Gas Act to add 1 mile set
back from schools. The bill
restricts any new oil and gas
operations in the Children's
Health protection zone. The bill
will not shut down the existing
wells that are within the zone,
though this may not, this won't
completely eliminate the risk of
health problems. It will reduce
them significantly. So I'm gonna
take it by section, OK?
Right, section one is page 1 to
6. All it does is reorder
definitions and adds 3 new
definitions to the act. The
setback area is officially
called the Children's Health
Protection zone, which is an
area extending 1 mile or 5280 ft
away from the property line of a
school.
School is the second definition,
and it means an elementary,
middle, junior high, high
school, um, public charter,
private school, that a student
tends in person. Um, it includes
daycare centers, parks,
playgrounds or sport and
recreation facilities. Yes.
Closer? OK. OK. Thank you.
Um
OK, schools means elementary,
middle, junior high, high
school, public charter, private
school that students attend in
person, including daycare
centers, parks, playgrounds, or
sports and recreation facilities
associated with the school.
And the other definition is
operator, a person with a legal
right to conduct oil and gas
operations. So that is section
one, that's the only thing we've
added in section one.
Section 2, the division will
adopt rules to implement and set
performance standards for the
operators emission detection
system and other provisions of
the Oil and Gas Act that concern
in oil and gas operation located
in the Children's Health
protection zone. Um, so the big
thing here is operator missions
detection system. Yesterday in
this committee,
Kenny said that only 30% of the
fossil fuel industry was in
compliance with
emissions. That means 70%
weren't, and that's why we need
this bill to protect our kids
against, against that. All
right, Section 3, is penalties.
Penalties assessed by the court,
division or commission for a
violation by an operator in the
Children's Health Protection
zone may not exceed 30,000 per
day of non-compliance for each
violation.
Penalty assessed by the court's
division or commissions after a
hearing pursuant to the section
may not exceed $200,000 a day.
Let me know if I'm going too
fast.
I going OK?
Alright, Section 4. This is a
new section of the Oil and Gas
Act, drilling setbacks from
schools, permits to drill
variances in administrative
proceedings, um, beginning on
August 1st of 2025, the division
shall not approve a permit to
drill in an oil and gas well.
In the Children's Health
protection zone, except.
If an operator applies with
division for variants from the
provision, and if the variance
is necessary to plug and abandon
or re abandon a will.
Or if the commission determines
added administrative proceeding
that based on the preponderance
of evidence, the denial of a
permit to drill after August 1st
of 2025 would result in a loss
of all economic value.
Um, of the applicant's property
or result in severe adverse
economic impact and deprive the
applicant of of objectively
reasonable investment backed
exceptions. So there is an
administrative proceeding that
will go through.
Um, the division shall not grant
a variance if the commission
determines based on a
preponderance of evidence,
granting the variance would harm
public health.
Um,
and again, um, yesterday
Secretary Kenny talked about
ozone and how bad it was, um,
because of the noncompliance by
the industry, and that's why we
need this. Um,
Remember ground level ozone can
be harmful to human health,
cause respiratory problems,
aggravate asthma, and reduce
lung functions. All right,
Section 5, a new section of the
Oil and Gas Act protection zone
inventory and maps.
An operator playing to the
division for a permit to drill
she submit to the division of
protection zone inventory and
map. We just need to know where
the wha heads and production
facility is compared to the
within the children protection
zone. Need a list of the
operators, production
facilities, wellheads and
identifiers.
And if the operators well headed
production facility is in the
totally in the protection zone,
we needed the list of the
schools, the type of schools,
the distance from the operators
wellhead within the zone from a
school.
You need a map that shows the
location of each school in the
relation to the operators well
head and production facility.
And each December, um, all this
will be submitted to the um
agency's website.
I,
in section 6, restrictions, um,
operators shall post contact
info for addressing compliance
about noise, odor, and other
concerns, um, employee measures
to prevent dust and particles
from migrating beyond operators
property, limiting vehicle speed
on unpaved road. We'd heard a
lot about complaints about this
particularly to be added into
the bill. In section 7, a new
section of the Oil and Gas Act
leak detection and response.
plan, alarm response protocol,
chemical analysis of produced
water rec records, public
technical workshops. Um,
We're really trying to hold.
People accountable and we need
to have specific things on leak
detection. Um, and the division
will hold public technical
workshops on best practices for
the development, review and
update of a leak detection and
response plan.
Section 8, a new section of the
oil and gas, suspension of oil
and gas operations.
And again, if we think about 70%
of gas and oil is not complying
with the Clean Air Act and 70%
when we have 70,000 wells out
there, 70% is 49,000 wells not
in compliance. So, um, if a leak
of chemicals is detected and
continues for more than 48
hours. Operation shall be
suspended until the leak has
been corrected and the division
has approved the resumption of
operations.
Operations shall be suspended
until the production facility
attains.
clients with the air quality
Control Act, and other
ordinances adopted pursuant to
the act and the division has
approved the resumption of
operation.
Again, 70,000 not in compliance.
Um, section 9, a new section of
the Oil and Gas Act, water
quality sampling and testing.
Um,
If someone wants uh their water
um checked before drilling
starts, the operators will have
to check it and um
They have 10 days within receipt
of the operator operators notice
they are going to drill there to
make sure they they ask for this
sampling and um Doherty will pay
for the cost of sampling and
testing required for this
section.
I understand
A new section of the oil and gas
Act, um, reporting before August
or December 31st of 2026 in
December, the operator located
in the child protection.
Um, child health protection
zones shall.
Report the number of times and
length of time the emission
detection system was not
operating.
The number of val validated
alarms and reasons for alarm,
the number of leaks that have
occurred, the impact on air
quality and exposure to the
surrounding community.
The number of times the
surrounding community was
notified of a leak that
persisted for more than 48
hours. The number of time and
length of time that production
and injection operations and
other use of the facilities were
suspended due to leaks.
Results of any baseline and post
drilling groundwater testing
performed by location.
And the operator before it um
October 1st we'll report to the
appropriate interim committee.
In the last section, a new
section of the air quality
control Act.
Um, oil and gas production
facilities, suspension of
operation. In operation of an
oil and gas production facility
shall immediately suspend
operation of a production
facility if the production
facility or or permanent or
temporary equipment within um
5280 ft from property lines of a
school is not in compliance with
the Air Quality Act, or city or
county ordins.
Um, operations shall be
suspended until the production
facility attains compliance with
the air quality, um, Control Act
or the city ordinance or county
ordinance adopts pursuant to the
act, and the oil conservation
division of Emner has it proved
the resumption of operations.
And again, 70% are not in
compliance. We have to protect
our kids. So Colin is gonna tell
us exactly why.
Thank you, Representative, um,
and thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
committee members. My name is
Colin Cox with the Center for
Biological Diversity, and I'm
here to just talk briefly about
the need for health protection
zones around schools, um, I'll
try to be brief cause many of
you have heard from me recently
in Ruidoso, and maybe in other
settings as well, um.
But essentially, right now,
34,000 schoolchildren are in
danger, um, from exposure to oil
and gas pollution because they
attend school within 1 mile of
an oil and gas well, um, they're
right now 848 wells, uh, within
1 mile of public schools in New
Mexico, affecting those 34,000
students. So to put that in
perspective, uh, just over 1% of
the active oil and gas oils in
the state are um exposing 11% of
New Mexico.
Because school children to
potentially dangerous amounts of
pollution. Um, oil and gas
production releases a lot of
pollution, that's no surprise,
even when the wells are
operating in compliance with the
rules, they release a lot of
pollution, um, it doesn't help
when 70% of them aren't even
following the rules that we do
have, um.
And, and research has shown that
living and spending a lot of
time near oil and gas
development is associated with a
range of health problems. Um,
they're more than 70 peer
reviewed epidemiologic studies
of living next and living and
spending time next to oil and
gas operations.
And those studies find, you
know, I'll just list a few like
an increase, increased adverse
pregnancy outcomes, increased
cancer rates, increased
childhood cancer rates,
increased hospitalizations,
respiratory issues, cardiac
issues, asthma exacerbations and
mental and behavioral health
issues. All of these things are
worse when you live next to oil
and gas. Um, I believe about a
month ago I provided the
committee with a science summary
that we had compiled of many of
these studies.
Um, since then, the center has
updated this to include a little
bit of more information and I'll
be sending that in to your
inboxes this afternoon. Um, but
a lot of the information is here
in the science summary.
Um, and what these studies show
is that the risk of health harms
increases with the greater
proximity and density of oil and
gas production.
So the closer you are, the more
wells there are, the more
production there is.
The greater the risk of harm.
Um,
and these results are
consistent, um, from studies in
New Mexico, Pennsylvania,
Colorado, California, Texas,
Oklahoma, and Ohio, almost
everywhere where there's oil and
gas in the in the United States
that's been studied, they find
problems, these problems. Um,
there are even studies from
Canada are included in this list
of the 72 that I'm talking
about, um.
We're getting the same results
with different methodologies,
looking for different things,
different diseases in different
locations during different time
periods and among diverse
populations, and so that it's an
overwhelming body of science
that shows the health risks of
spending too much time next to
oil and gas wells. Um,
And it, it isn't, it isn't
helped when the company when an
oil and gas operators in New
Mexico are 70% of them aren't
even in compliance with the
rules that we do have, um, you
know, New Mexico recently
adopted the ozone precursor
rule, um, to try to reduce ozone
pollution, um, since then, ozone
levels have gone up. Ozone
levels in the Permian Basin are
out of compliance with federal
health standards. The air there
is unhealthy to breathe by
federal standards. Many days out
of the year, um, and it's
getting worse.
Um, those levels have gone up,
and and MED doesn't know if or
when their ozone precursor rule
will be effective. They don't
know when ozone levels are going
to peak, and they don't know
when they're going to start
coming down. Right now they're,
they're unhealthy and they're
getting more unhealthy by the
year. Um,
So, this is why health
protection zones are so
necessary. Currently there are
no statewide rules for health
buffers or setbacks, um, from
oil and gas development,
counties and municipalities
regulate this on their own. Many
of them don't, but some of them
do, um, for example, Hobbs has
a, has a 300 ft buffer, um, I
didn't, I should have mentioned
this just a minute ago while I
was describing the science, but
these effects I'm talking about,
the respiratory issues, cardiac
issues, um, childhood lymphoma.
Uh, many of these are found 1
mile
2 miles, 3 miles, 4 miles away
from oil and gas wells. They've
studied some large areas, um,
and definitely up to 0.5 mile to
1 mile is where the greatest
effects are observed. Um, so a
300 ft buffer in Hobbs is just
plainly inadequate, um, and many
of those buffers are from the
structure. So in Hobbs there are
wells right adjacent to um
playgrounds that are connected
to the schools that are, but
that's still 300 ft from the
school building, but kids are
playing 50 ft from the wellhead.
Um
And you know, the the state is
responsible here. You have the,
the power and the duty to put in
place protections for these
children while they're in your
care, while they're in public
schools. Um, they shouldn't be
exposed to dangerous levels of
pollutants and faced increased
cancer and asthma risks because
of the 848 wells that currently
surround them.
Oil and gas production exploded
in the state. It's more than
doubled under the current
administration and the pollution
numbers show that the
pollution's gone up in that time
as well, dramatically. Um,
So you can protect these
students by pushing oil and gas
development just a little
further away from the schools,
and we're talking about 81
public schools that are
currently affected by this, and,
and a handful of private schools
and daycares, really just in um
three counties with, I think one
school in Rio Reba County, but
otherwise we're looking at San
Juan um Eddie and Lee Counties,
um, as, as Representative
Saraone described, this bill
would protect schoolchildren by
creating health protection zone
around schools. It would reduce
pollution by forbidding new oil
and gas development within that.
zone. Um, the bill includes a
variance process to protect
property rights for
leaseholders, which I know has
been a concern um with this
committee in the past, um,
existing wells will be allowed
to continue producing, but, you
know, following the normal
decline curves for wells and
pollution levels would go down
after a few years, you know, or
within a year even of some of
these wells as their production
naturally declines. Um.
And existing wealth to be
subject to some additional air
quality and water quality
monitoring that representative
Sara just described, um, again,
to reduce impacts and risks um
to school children.
And with that, uh, that, that's
why we need this bill, um, and I
think I came here today to ask
for the committee's
endorsements, but.
Understand. That's not what
we're doing.
Thank you.
Anything else, representative? I
think that's it.
Stanford Members of the
committee.
Represent it rare.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, um, Representative
Signer, and I, I did visit with
her when we went on a site visit
uh down in Leonette County
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, um, Representative
Signer, and I, I did visit with
her when we went on a site visit
uh down in Leonette Counties
of the kind of the air pollution
and what was happening and it
was um pretty startling. Uh, I
think it's important for people
to understand though, this bill
will not affect.
Current wells. This is for
whales that are drilled in the
future. Is that correct?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Representative Pereira. Yeah,
this bill will
Prevent new wells from coming
in. It, it will, in a sense,
like affect current wells and
that there will be some
additional um air monitoring and
water monitoring associated with
them, but it won't stop their
production or affect their
production, but it will, it will
apply to existing wells, and
that they'll have to um install
like a leak detection system,
um, to have a continuous
monitoring for leaks. That'll be
the real requirement on on the
existing.
Wells and Mr. Chair and
presenter, can you tell me uh
what, what is the cost of that
per well?
Um, I don't, I don't know the, I
don't have that information um
today, Mr. Chair and
Representative Herrera.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair I do
have one answer, um, um, Ismael
Torres our our uh economist from
LFC. He did a, he, he checked on
that. I asked him a percentage,
he said it's less than 10 of 1%
of the big cost to do this. So
it's the cost is minimal.
Um, compared to our our um.
For our uh budget.
Um, one person, uh, uh, would
you give me that number again?
What less than 1/10 to 1%, less
than 1/10.1%, Mr. Chair, and of
what, you know, like what the
cost to the that it would have
the cost of the general fund.
To the overall, yeah.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you.
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, thank you,
Representative for bringing this
forward. Um.
Oh
We talk about the health of our
children, um, it also includes
the community, right? The
families, and Mr. Chair, you
know, we've had in the health
committee, Health human services
um interim committee over the
years, information that's been
shared with us about um you
know, the incidence of asthma, I
mean, and the list goes on as to
the effects of air quality, um,
PFAS, Mr. Chair, um, you know,
that's a big issue in our
communities and in Albuquerque I
can talk.
what's going on there, um.
You know, and it's, it hits so
many different parts of New
Mexico, but when we talk about
the importance of communities
that are located next to, right
next to um places that produce
energy.
Um, there, there are some after
effects and it's our communities
and the children, and Mr. Chair,
um,
And we all know this, we've
heard it, but I just wanted to
say this here because we talk uh
about children going to school
if they have health issues, um,
they're not ready to learn.
And it, it has, I mean, there
there's, I call it the snowball
effect or whatever you want to
use for imagery, um, there there
definitely is an effect on a
child's ability to learn. And of
course, it starts from, you
know.
In utero too. I mean, all of the
different um issues. So I
appreciate you bringing this
forward and it's an important
discussion we need to have.
And to pass the bill. Thank you.
And Mr. Chairman, um, Senator
Lopez, uh,
Director Seli is working, has an
MOU with um Department of Health
because they have a database
from all the, the hospitals and
clinics that um around the
state, so they know what's
happening in this area, so we
should have
Verifiable facts on what's
happening to the kids in the
area, San Juan and Perme Basin.
Thank you, Senator Woods. I'm
sorry, uh, Representative
Ferrari, did you already go?
OK. So Senator Woods, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, there's an LFC study
that said 99.9% of New Mexico.
Of New Mexicans breathe air that
made the federal environmental
standards.
And that kind of conflicts with
what
You're telling us during
Your briefing here.
Describing the health hazards.
Senator, could you repeat the
very first part of what she
said, I didn't quite the the
there was an LFC, um,
presentation.
That said that
In New Mexico, 99.9%.
Of the New Mexican population.
Or breathing air that meet the
federal environmental standards.
And yet that kind of conflicts
with what you're telling us
today.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, I, I,
I, that information is
incorrect.
Um, 99.9% of New Mexicans are
not breathing air that means
health quality standards, um,
the ozone levels, and this is
from NMED's own own information
that was on levels in Lee County
and Eddy County, um, are not in
compliance with federal health
standards for ozone, uh, the
ozone in, um, ozone levels in
Las Cruces and Donana County are
also elevated, and that's that,
that's due to um, you know,
traffic and Juarez and El Paso
being enormous, um, cities
relative, um,
But the ozone levels in Permian
and Eddie Lee County and San
Juan County are due to almost
entirely to oil and gas, you
know, oil and gas pollution. Um,
but yeah, 99.9% of New Mexicans
are not breathing air, that's
that meets the federal health
standards for Rozen. OK. Then,
then I'll check with what facts
I've got.
See to see uh which one is, is
right.
How about the private property
rights issue.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods,
yeah, the property rights are,
are, you know, definitely an
issue and, and this bill, um
section, I believe 4C provides a
variance process and
administrative process, so that
for existing leaseholders in,
you know, if they have a lease
in the protection zone, um, they
can apply to the vision, um,
For, for a variance from this
law if and and if the division
finds that this law would, and I
mean we can, we can read the
specific representative Sarana
read this specific language, but
if, you know, it tracks property
rights language in in state case
law, um, so that's a
determination that the division
would make to protect property
rights, um, and the other, only
other thing I'll say about that
is that the state has, you know,
has broad police powers to
protect public health. Um, and
can use those here.
And
And that's been upheld time and
time again in the state, even if
you have the rights to protect
public health, it's also a
taking if you take someone's
rights.
Um, you know, Mr. Chair,
Representative Woods, it's,
it's, it's a little more
complicated than that. Um, it's
not always taking, um, depending
on the nature of the public
health problem, the state does a
lot of restricts a lot of
different types of use of
property, um, based on public
health, and so that there there
is that power, and this rule
provides um a variance process
to avoid that.
I was checking with my attorney
friend next door.
OK.
So,
can you kinda give me how much
uh
The estimate that LFC estimated
would be the loss to the state
if, if we imposesed setbacks of
one mile.
Specifically, it would be less
than 1/10 of 1% of the general
fund.
So the 6.
Less than 0.01%. So Senator,
when we, when they presented,
um, when is he presented in
front of us in LFC. He was
looking, we're looking
specifically at schools and what
it would cost, the the the
setback. He was covering
everything in the state that
would have anything to do with
gas and oil, what it would cost
if we, if we did this. So that's
why I had to break it down to to
specifically the schools.
So it's all it it's it's
minimal. He said it's minimal,
it shouldn't be a problem in
less than 1/10 of 1%. And we
have, when we have a $10.3
billion dollar budget.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Chair.
Senator Woods, I believe I
called you Representative Woods,
so fair is fair.
Uh, in May.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Oh
A representative, um,
Recently, we passed some of the
most stringent.
Um, emission control standards
in the country.
Um
By the numbers, it appears as if
we're
Doing well.
With implementing those.
We are capturing.
Uh, more and more emissions.
Due to rule that's been
implemented.
And
The vast majority
Of where the real problem has
been, has been.
These marginal wells.
Um
But they have been
Uh, the, the numbers we have
from NMED.
Is that, um, we're realizing
Capture
And the wells where these
Uh, uh, the new methane emission
standards have been put in place
in the new capture process has
been put in place that we have
98%.
Capture of emissions.
And that we are about 88%
compliant.
And that, and I know in my
Home County, where we have a lot
of these
Specifically natural gas wells
where we have more emissions
than specifically from the oil
wells which are more down south.
And, uh, and, and natural gas is
a, is a byproduct down south
where
In, in my corner of the world,
it's the product. It's the, it's
the main product.
But uh,
In talking with industry,
Um, we'll be on in, we'll be on
target to meet
The mission capture standards
with the new
Uh, emission capture.
Um
products
On time, within what the rule
had required. So I'm, I'm just
wondering what the need for this
is.
Uh
Sure, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman and, and Senator, I
mean, Representative Montoya,
well, like I said before, when
Senator Secretary Kenny was
here, he said 70% of the
industry is not complying, so
I'm not sure how those numbers
could be corrected. 70% of about
70,000 wells, oil wells, gas
wells, even, um, anyway, 70% of
those wells are not complying.
How, uh, you think that's good.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
there's a time frame to be able
to be in compliance.
There it wasn't all.
You know, the media, it was
enough time for people to do it.
So, uh, in San Juan County,
Um
Uh, Hill court.
is way ahead of schedule to be
compliant enduring.
Which is, is for, I think I, I
don't believe that, and, and I
wasn't here to question.
Uh, Mr. Kinney, but I believe
it's
There are a lot more independent
small little guys than there
are.
Uh, majors or large
independence, but the vast
majority of the wells are owned
by the large independents. So I,
I, I'd have to question.
What specific number he was
giving, I don't believe that's
70% of welds, and I don't
believe that's correct. Um, but
the reality is when those
Uh, and that is when those uh
capturing.
Um, mandates.
are in place for any new one.
And where we're having a hard
time is the marginal oils. You,
you're not going to create a new
marginal well.
You couldn't drill a marginal
well today.
So any new well that is drilled
will have all of the capture
technology by mandate.
So I don't understand that the
reason for a setback.
And, and frankly,
Um
In in San Juan County,
Regardless of what has been
presented over the years.
San Juan County for a for a
statistical metropolitan area.
Has been on the American Lung
Society's.
cleanest metropolitan
statistical metropolitan areas.
For 50 years.
So
I, I don't understand if we're
talking about any new well
that's going to be drilled. It
has to have carbon capture, it
has to have methane capture.
I don't understand why we put
the need for this is, except for
To stop industry from producing
even if they can capture all the
All of the um
anything that's escaping.
Uh, Mr. Chair, resent in
Montoya, um, I'll talk about a
couple of responses to that. Um,
so even with the, with the
methane rule, total vented
methane has gone up, so 24, 2024
is going to be the most methane
ever vented in New Mexico, even
even with that rule. Um, even
with the ozone precursor rule,
ozone levels in the Permian have
continued to go up. Um,
And when we ask NMED when are
they gonna come down? When is
this compliance schedule going
to get the results that we want?
They don't know. They, they
have, they have no idea. They
don't even know if it's gonna
work. Um, so the rules aren't
enough to protect schoolchildren
from oil and gas pollution, um,
you know, the American Lung
Association has rated um San
Juan, the Farmington area, a D
on their air quality report card
for the last few years, it's no
longer the historical good.
quality that you're that that
did exist, that you're talking
about for decades, as you say,
now it's much, much, much worse,
even according to the American
Lung Association. Um, and, and
you're, you know, talking about
methane capture, um,
The thing is, like, part of one
of the, one of the capture
methods of the methane rule is
flaring, right? It's better to
flare the methane than to vent
it for the climate. That's very
true. Um, and when you flare it,
you make all these other
chemicals, right? Like VOCs, you
make benzene, you make the
chemicals that we're talking
about that are causing the
health effects. Um, those
chemicals are coming out of
wells even that are in
compliance with these rules, um,
and so that's why we're
proposing just to move those
wells a little further away,
right? This is, this is
It's not a huge zone, and it's
not around very many structures,
81 public schools. I don't have
an exact number of private
schools, but again, it's not a
large number. It's less than 20
I believe, in the, in the
Permian Basin. Um, so we're just
moving that a little further
away with horizontal drilling,
they could still get that oil,
and they can still get a
variance if it's gonna be a
property right issue, um, this
isn't designed to tank
production or, or stop oil and
gas in New Mexico, it's just
designed to protect kids, it's a
small.
Small effort we can do to do
that, um, cause even when these
companies are in compliance with
New Mexico's rules. They're
releasing dangerous carcinogenic
pollution.
So, I thank you, Mr. Chair, and,
and, and Representative and uh
and what is your, I'm sorry.
Colin Cox.
Um
So I know that around the
schools there in San Juan
County, those are monitored
regularly.
And we are not having
Drastic emissions. As a matter
of fact, the worst emissions we
have at our schools is during
pickup and drop-off of children
when all the vehicles are going
through there. Uh, but at the
wells, and we have virtually
every
Public open space in San Juan
County has a natural gas well on
it, whether it's a school or a
park.
Uh, they're just throughout all
over San Juan County and all of
our cities.
Um, but the capture there.
is working and they're
monitored, cause obviously none
of the none of these uh oil and
gas companies want to make
themselves a target.
By having a a bunch of emissions
near a school.
To be honest, the probably the
bigger
Uh, um, issue, Mr. Chair, uh,
with potentially having that
there is would be the same issue
as to having an underground
pipeline, which is potentially
some sort of discharge that
could cause a spark in a in a
fire.
But uh I know in San Juan
County, those are monitored.
And I just see that this is a
piece of legislation, Mr. Chair,
that is in search of a problem
that doesn't exist. So, thank
you.
I think he ribs in Montoya, um,
so we have a.
Um, about 7 minutes left on
this, we have 2 more speakers.
Senator Pope.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you representative for
bringing this uh bill back.
Just, just a few questions. I
just want to confirm, so this
bill only relates to
Distancing from schools,
correct? Yeah, Mr. Chair,
Senator Pope, yeah, that's
correct. This is around public
schools, private schools, and
the parks and playgrounds that
are part of the school grounds,
OK.
And just from the, just the
previous discussion, even with a
lot of the rules in place.
There still are.
Dangerous chemicals and
emissions that are still
Being put in our environment,
correct? Uh, yes, Mr. Chair,
Senator Pope, that's what the
science shows and a lot of signs
or 72 period studies with more,
you know, currently in the
works, um, but even with
At the at the current levels of
production, you know, I think
it's, it's worth noting that the
Permian Basin, especially is one
of the most dense, um, you know,
it's, it's a relatively new
experiment, right? It's, it's
only recently that humans have
been surrounded by this many
wells producing this much oil in
a small space. This is, this is
it's unprecedented and so the
science is relatively recent.
Most of the studies you'll see
in the summary I sent you are
less than 10 years old, right?
They've been for the last 10
years and and many of them are
from 2
23 and 2024, um, and so most
likely we don't even and and
production has gone up and, you
know, times 2 in the last 5
years. Um, so we don't even, I
think it's gonna get worse. The
science is, is gonna get worse.
It's already bad. It, it's
already showing that we need to
do something and recommending
that we push development further
away from sensitive people and
and children are more sensitive
than adults, I'm, I'm sorry, I
know we have time no problem,
yeah, don't mean to cut you off
and
Those are some of my concerns
just kind of working in this
area, um.
And the environment just for the
DOD, um.
And so
You know, there's discussions
right now about
You know, rights and, and I get
all that, but I, I just think
You know, there should be a
right to.
Clean air in a healthy
environment, I mean, even in
Albuquerque.
folks struggle with, you know,
Getting clean air and we don't
have
A big footprint in the oil and
gas industry.
Um, and I didn't, and, and just
one more confirmation, this
would not
Impact current wells or oil and
gas operations, correct, just a
short answer, yes or no. Yes,
that is correct. OK.
So, um, thank you once again. I,
I just think this is, you know,
uh, I don't understand the, the
controversy we, we got to take
care of people, take care of our
kids. This isn't shutting down
the industry. I, I don't think
this is really a radical idea of
what we're talking about here.
So, um, that's all I have Mr.
Sure. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Gates.
Thank you, Chair and thank you
for your presentation. Uh, we're
gonna, I'm gonna ask the same
questions. I, I just because we
went off into the weeds
someplace. I wanna make sure
that everybody's hearing this
bill is not about carbon
capture, correct?
Correct. OK. Thank you. And this
uh bill is not about the uh
noncompliance of uh properly
sealing wells abandoned wells.
But
Mr. Chair Representative Kates,
it's not specifically about
wells being inactive, it's
really preventing new, yeah, the
inactive wells are a problem in
unplugged inactive balls are a
problem. This bill is not about
about that. But this bill is not
about that, correct. So, um,
then in your previous
presentation, you said there was
an existing of 1000 wells in the
state of New Mexico that do not
meet this proposed criteria. Is
that an accurate memory?
Uh, Mr. Chairer's Kate, I'm
sorry, I'm not sure.
I, I, and I may be uh.
Wrong, uh, but it, it is my
memory in your presentation in
Riodoso that there were that you
were saying there is a 1000
existing wells that are within
this mile setback currently in
place. Is that is my, am I
remembering that statistic
correctly it's 848 wells by our
calculations that are within 1
mile of public schools.
Thank you so much. And so this
bill will not affect the 848
wells. Is that correct? It's
only for new wells. Correct, but
they will have monitoring
different things they have to do
because they are in the
children's protection zone.
And thank you for that
clarification, representative,
and when, um, and during the
monitoring is there
Uh, trigger in this bill.
Um, as we commonly say teeth, if
they do not meet the monitoring
criteria of the current of the
proposed standard.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
Gates, um, yeah, the monitoring,
it's like it's a leak detection
system and they'll propose to
OCD how they want to do that and
and they'll come to, you know,
come to an agreement there and
and um if it, if they're out of
compliance with the Clean Air
Act, this would require them to
stop operation until they come
into compliance. Um, and this
also um raises the penalty
ceilings that are currently in
OCD for, for compliance issues,
so they could be subject to
higher penalties than they
currently would be.
if, if by virtue of being in the
health protection zone, but
those are the ways that it,
those are the, those are the
teeth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for your answer. I just one
last question. So,
Um, this bill is only for future
drilling. It's uh the 848, as
long as they are uh having
continuous monitoring, and they
meet compliance, then they will
still be in operation with less
than 1 mile from a public or
private school setting, correct,
correct.
OK. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair.
Mr. Chair, just
22 very quick points. I just
need some more information. The
70%, I was shocked by that
yesterday as well. So I just, we
gotta get some clarification.
We're getting different numbers
up here and I'm confused. Second
thing, I would be interested in.
Kind of understanding the
horizontal drilling for a new
well, what's the cost?
Benefit. Is that an option if
you own within the 1 mile to
just put the, well, a mile away
and drill horizontally. What's
the cost of that? So, don't need
those answers now, but those are
things I would certainly be
interested in.
Learning, thanks, Mr. Chair.
So just uh to remind the
committee, um,
We heard this topic in Rhodoso.
Um,
Uh, not to spill, but the topic
of setbacks, um, I asked.
Uh, LFC.
To be present at that meeting
and present their study.
Uh, I was told they were too
busy.
Uh, I called the chair, I called
uh this chair of House
Appropriations.
And asked him to make sure that
they would be at that meeting
and that didn't happen.
Um, so, I mean, I
I'm, I think this is a
significant issue.
But I also absolutely believe
it's not just the finance issue,
that the, the decision making
doesn't begin and end with the
physical impact.
And I'd like to better
understand the fiscal impact,
but.
LLC was too busy.
And I'm really frustrated by
that. Um.
And don't want to single out
anyone in particular on LLC, but
to me, it's part of the pattern
of LLC making decisions, um,
without the input from policy
committees like this one.
So, just wanted to mention that.
Um, Serenada, uh, in the closing
thoughts on this bill?
Um, Mr. Chairman, committee,
when yesterday when Secretary
Kenny said 70% we're out of
compliance. There's also 387
super emitters out there,
methane that the satellites are
looking at. This industry is, is
not complying to anything, and
this is our state. We have to
take it back and say if you're
gonna lease lands, if you're
gonna do extractions, you have
to
Follow our standards and
especially for our kids,
especially in this children's
health protection zone.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, so, next bill up is actually
also represent sara.
Energy storage system tax
credit, uh.
They were passing out that bill
and
Once again for the members of
the public, the bill is
available online.
Resume sorry, whenever you're
ready.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
this is the bill that's been
modified over 7 years. This is
my very first bill, um, and
hopefully soon we'll get it
passed, but um
uh Jimeorian
Dejardin is here. He has been
working in making modifications,
and he will be handling the
bill. Presentation. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Yeah, you can turn on your mic.
Good afternoon, um, Chairman
McQueen, uh, members of the
committee. My name is Jim
Dehordin. I'm the executive
director of the renewable Energy
Industries Association of New
Mexico with about 65 members
have been around since 2004. My
plan here is, is to kind of do
this in two segments. So the
first segment will be based on a
one pager that hopefully you've
been provided. And I'm gonna go
through that and basically talk
about the, the why we need this.
Uh, legislation to pass. And
then the second part, the plan
is, is to go through the bill
itself, highlight some of the
key features and answer any
questions.
So to tee it off uh presently
New Mexico has 50,000 solar
systems what we call behind the
meter. So essentially solar
systems that are cited at homes
and businesses.
However, only 1% of these
systems have energy stored. So
essentially what we have is an
asset that's
Being underutilized, it'd be
sort of like having a laptop
computer without a hard drive or
without having access to the
Internet.
And I just wanna um say that
national attachment rates, and
that's what I'm referring to, so
energy stored with solar is much
higher and in fact, in
California, the majority of
solar systems sold have energy
storage in Hawaii, they've been
doing that for many years.
And the importance of energy
storage is.
Basically that we can take
energy and then use it at a at a
different time. So right now, in
the middle of the day, we're
having times when solar systems
are generating actually, in some
cases too much energy, so we
have to curtail that production,
but the ability to store the
energy and use it at a later
time would be very powerful.
And just to kind of
Stay on that point as we
transition to more and more
renewable energy. This is only
going to become more and more
important.
And right now, as I mentioned,
these solar systems are
underutilized because they are
missing a critical component,
and that component is energy
storage. And so the value of
energy stores includes many
things and in fact, we're in the
early stages of really figuring
out exactly what those are, sort
of like when the, we first had
the internet, we were like, OK,
well, this is really cool, but
how do we use it? Well, we've
learned a lot in the, in the
last 20 something years.
On doing that. So, um, but some
of the, um, things that we can
do right now is it does provide
us resiliency. So if the power
goes down, if you have energy
storage, you can keep power
going, and that could be
obviously very important if you
have a family member on a
medical device or something that
needs energy. Another way that
it's used is something called
peak shaving, and what peak
shaving is, is that most
commercial buildings.
Or on some kind of rate schedule
that has demand charges, and
what they do is, once a month,
They, they look at how much
you've used at maximum periods
during a given billing period,
and then there's a amount that's
multiplied against that. So, for
example, if you were using,
let's just say for sake of
discussion, 50 kilowatt hours at
your highest point of usage and
be charged for that was $10 or
we would go 10 times 50, that'd
be $500 in demand charge. So by
having peak saving, we can have
the storage kick in and reduce
their consumption.
But it's also valuable for the
grid because now the utilities
don't have to have all this
infrastructure in place for the
one segment of time during a
given billing period where you
are using a lot of energy.
But the other, um, thing that
we're looking at, and I'm in
Hopefully there'll be some
legislation that'll include
something, a concept, and we're
still working on the right name,
whether it's distributed power
plant or virtual power plant,
but what this does.
This is a really big deal, and I
think this is going to be the
future of energy on homes and
businesses is that it basically
networks all of these systems
together. So imagine if we had
these 50,000 solar systems in
New Mexico. And by the way, just
to put that in perspective, 5
million in the United States. So
we're doing pretty good there.
Um, but let's say all 50,000 of
those did have energy storage,
and they were networked
together.
They're, they're doing pilot
projects already, and in fact
P&M has just received a grant
from the DOE to explore this. If
you through networking, you
could then dispatch energy from
all those systems at a given
point in time, think on a real
hot day about 6 o'clock p and um
in June, when everyone's coming
home and turning on the air
conditioning, you could use
this, and it, so it works kind
of similar to a gas peaker
plant, but there's studies that
say that this is much more cost.
effective.
The problem we have here though,
is that
Only 1% of solar systems in New
Mexico currently have energy
storage. So what
We are proposing doing here and
doing what many other states are
doing is to provide incentives
so that to make those energy
storage systems, less expensive,
more attractive, and then make
it so we can participate in a
virtual power plant.
Legislation.
So that's kind of the, I'm
teeing up there, the reason why
we would need this legislation,
and then what I'm going to
suggest is that
Um, I move on and go through the
bill itself.
So I'm hoping that everyone has
the bill and, and I'm just gonna
go through here page by page,
and I'm, I'm not gonna obviously
go through the whole bill, just
some of the key points in the
bill. So on page one, you go
through it section by section,
please. OK, section by section.
Thank you.
OK, I appreciate you. Thank you,
Senator Stefanik. So section
one, it does basically start out
for a taxable year prior to
January 1, 2030. So that's our
sunset.
Moving through section one in
section 1B, it basically says
the amount of the credit. So the
credit um maxes out at 5000 for
residential system and to just
kind of put that in perspective,
think of a cost of probably
around 120 to $15,000 for a
typical residents to add an
energy storage system. 150,000
for commercial property and the
prices for commercial
properties.
Obviously, could vary
significantly depending upon the
size of that operation.
Moving down to section 1C.
The uh the, the annual
allocation would be $6 million.
Section 1D.
Uh, basically says that if a
taxpayer meets these
requirements, energy, minerals,
and natural resources department
will process this application,
the applications. And so this is
similar to what is being done
with the solar market
development tax credit and other
tax credits.
Section one.
E
Um
That basically says that you
can't double dip. So in other
words, if you are receiving a
tax credit for an energy source
system through the solar market
development tax credit, which
you currently can, you can't
also get this. So essentially
what would happen is they would
separate this out, and then you
would get a tax credit, a
separate tax credit for that
portion.
Um
Last year when we had when this
bill was presented, we did have
it so that it was
You could get a refund if you
didn't have the tax liability,
but that um there was some
concerns about that, so we've
addressed that by removing that
particular criteria and making
it so you could carry it forward
for a maximum of 5 consecutive
taxable years.
Section 18, basically,
To find some of the other
entities that could qualify for
the tax credit, including
partnership, limited liability
companies as corporations.
And then
We're gonna be talking about
that a little bit more in
section 2.
And that's the end of the
highlights in section one. So
Section 2, a lot of section 2 is
a redundancy of section one,
except that basically says that
other types of corporations
could take advantage of the tax
credit. And that was another
concern that was expressed last
year was, you know, what if you
have a C corporation, um, we
would want that entity to take
advantage of that tax credit.
And one thing that was pointed
out in discussions I've had
about this.
Legislation with some of the
members of our association is
that there are companies who are
looking to do, uh, large scale
residential um apartment
complexes and stuff, and as we
know, there's a shortage of
affordable housing in in New
Mexico. So this would help to
make that qualify as well.
Um, as I mentioned, the Rex
Rusta section 2 is essentially a
redundancy. It was just what we
did was we added that section to
the bill. That is the end of, of
my presentation, um, we're open
to questions.
And
Thank you. Um, Representative
Sarana, any other remarks before
we go to questions. No, thank
you. Thank you. Committee
members.
Yes, Senator Pope.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, um.
You know, I really like this
idea and this tax credit.
And it's not specific to this
bill.
Since no one had any questions I
wanted to ask this.
is
That number and that tax credit,
um,
How did that come about with
that number is and the reason
why I'm asking is
How do we make it to where?
Lower income folks actually
still have an opportunity
because it still looks like it's
still gonna be cost prohibitive.
Um, and we may have to look at
other ideas like we did
community solar, right? And then
is there something that we could
do similar to storage in
communities, but, um, just kind,
kind of how you came up with
that number and it has there
been any thoughts of how
Lower income folks can get this
type of technology because I
just think we all should have an
opportunity to get clean
renewable energy, and this would
be an option that could do that.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
A man of chair and Senator Pope,
thank you for that question. So,
well, quite frankly, one of the
ways we addressed making it more
available to lower income people
was to uh have that
refundability.
criteria to it. So it's
You know, there was a, we were
kind of conflicted because there
was, we wanted to do that, and
that was one thing we could do,
and that's been done. I know in
other tax credits, um, but it,
like I said, that met with some
resistance, and then you said,
how do we come up with that
number and if you could just
Um, which number are we
referring to? just the amount of
the credit, just the 40%, yeah,
because, yeah, yeah, so we
looked at Bill's, uh, other
bills in the country, other
legislation in the country and I
forget which one it was, but it
had the 40% in it, and then we
looked at
Yeah, I think it was the same
bill that we looked at how to
determine how much a residential
credit would be and how much a
commercial credit would be. So
that's how we came up with those
numbers, right.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you, Senator Worth. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation, um.
So we've had solar on our house
for about 15 years. Um, used to
get paid a lot of money by P&M
that ended after 12 years. We
put a battery system in a couple
of years ago, and it's just game
changing.
Um, basically, I can run the
whole house.
If it's sunny with the battery
and the solar fills up the
battery during the, during the
day. We run the house all night
off the battery.
Uh, the thing that I just want
to stress that I think we're all
going to be dealing with is the
blackouts. I mean, this big
snowstorm came through.
We didn't even notice, uh, the
system is connected to the
internet, so it actually gets it
when a severe weather alert
triggers, it switches off the
The uh feed out of the battery
and the battery starts charging
to get all the way filled up so
that when the power goes off,
you got a couple of days.
Um, and it's, you're right, it's
medical, you got a freezer, if
you go elk hunting, you've got
all your meat. I mean, these
are, you're getting out with a
generator, and I think the
reason it's so high in
California is because of the
fire situation. We're we're in
the middle of that as well. So I
just think this is gonna become
something that becomes more and
more normalized, and I agree
completely with Senator Pope
though, it's got to be doable.
And how do you put a system on
that, that's affordable and
makes sense.
Uh, so that it's accessible and
we had that conversation this
morning, so I think this is a
great idea and I was amazing,
it's only 1%.
Folks are doing it and I like
the idea of having it all pooled
together, uh, that's the kind of
creativity that can
Address the other bill we talked
about this morning, which was
again the need for more, more
power for all the electrical
cars and connections and all the
electricity we need. Well, guess
what? This is a way to, it's
being generated and if we could
feed that back in, so.
What, now, last year, what
happened? It went to the tax
committee. It just didn't get
put into the tax package, what
happened to it?
So, uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Worth, um, well, actually, to
answer the question, if I can go
back 2 years, it was in the
omnibus tax package. And then as
a lot of people know a lot of
that.
Tax package uh was line item
vetoed including our bill. Um,
last year there were 2 energy
storage bills in the
legislature, and I'm just
guessing that
They didn't want to, there
wasn't room for two. And so we
were the one that wasn't.
In on that, and then also in
that same uh legislation, the
solar market development tax
credit was expanded
significantly, and so, um,
Thinking we
There just wasn't enough room
for this.
Thank you. So no, I appreciate
that, Madam Chair, and it does
give me some uh post-traumatic
stress to think of 2023 tax
package just uh I did vice chair
Kadena and me and the rest of us
involved in that in, um, so one
thing I'll just point out, I, I
understand that there's not
going to be
Capacity.
Or a tax package that's just tax
cuts.
And what that means is we're
gonna need to find some revenue
generators.
To make up the $6 million and I
think we can still do a tax
package and I really hope we do,
uh, but we're gonna need to have
a balanced approach. It's not
going to be a situation where
there's 10 millions of dollars
sitting aside to do that. So
just a heads up, be thinking
about.
Where can you find a little
revenue to
justify the cost. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Cadena.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, leader. I just wanted to
offer some additional, um,
Insight onto the decisions
around the tax package last year
as it came out of the house, and
as you all know over
conversations we've had many
years and, and we were grateful
to find the room to put you in
into the the big package with
the big veto, um, as we've
become more judicious in those
conversations, including the,
the massive environmental
package that moved out of the
Senate last year with the
governor's support is that we
want to see these income tests
and we continue to hear from um
the execu
of agencies that it's hard to
implement or they can't figure
it out and we keep pushing you
all like let's find the way,
let's model the way, let's
innovate through this together.
Um, I appreciated our
colleague's question about what
it means for low-income users.
The credits that exist today
don't have an income test, and
that means overwhelmingly that
those folks that have had the
means to move towards these
technologies are people that
have more in New Mexico. And so
for me, um,
I want to keep interrupting
that. I want to figure out how
to make something else possible.
I appreciated that your feedback
was part of the ways you were
going for low-income people is
making the credit refundable. I
think what we shared in the
House Tax Committee is
refundable credits are quite
rare, like the, like they're the
the credits connected to um it's
like liter and low income child
tax credits like it is, it's
pretty rare to have tax credits
in New Mexico where money
comes back like we pay actual
dollars to New Mexican families,
and they're mostly designed to
interrupt cycles of poverty. Um,
so for me, that's not the fix.
Directly, maybe it would be
something to consider again if
there was an income test, if you
could afford that system, if you
could afford that battery no
matter what, then I don't want
our state dollars going towards
a refundable credit when you
didn't need it, and we're gonna
be able to make those economic
decisions no matter what. So I
think you all your bill has
gotten better over time, um, for
at least me as a member of the
House Tax Committee.
Don't let that question die,
like, is there any way to focus
this so that it would go.
To Mexicans who otherwise may
not have access to this kind of
technology and storage.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Kate.
Uh thank you, Chair. um, thank
you very much for your
presentation.
And uh I would like to thank my
fellow colleagues as well. I
believe that we're all um
concerned about the same thing,
which is um how usable for
working families is this. Um,
one suggestion, and I don't
know, this is not my bill. I'm
not sponsoring, so I haven't
worked on it, is, uh, but leader
worth touched upon it, is the,
the solar storage is so
important for um individual
s with medical needs, and I know
that during the snowstorm
recently, I had constituents and
heavy wheelchairs that could not
be manually moved must be
charged, and they were out of
electricity for 50, 60 hours at
a time.
I feel like there may be um a
potential of partially funding
that $6 million with Medicaid
dollars, if it was somebody with
medical necessities. Um, it
doesn't have to be somebody on a
respiratory machine. It could be
anybody who's relying upon
energy, um, that in that kind of
um situation would make them
vulnerable. Uh, and, and, and is
also uh
drain on other resources like
our firefighters and our
paramedics and transporting them
someplace safe if they could
stay safely at home when we're
under an an environmental um
issue that would be better for
all our resources. So I would
ask you to look into that. It's,
it's doesn't resolve all the
income, but it most certainly
will take a chunk out of it,
just so that you are addressing
somebody with medical needs to
be able to get.
This, um, as a, as a refund, um,
these tax credits only work if
you're paying over $5000 in
taxes, right? And so if you're
making certain income, that's
not what you're paying. So, uh,
thank you very much for
For me throwing out that idea,
thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
No further questions from the
committee. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
I
And I don't see the guy.
So we're gonna round
OK, so we are webcasting. We're
ready to go if you could take
your seats.
Uh, I don't know.
So our next panel is um
Strategic water supply.
And um,
Uh
Madam state engineer, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Shelton, um, as
you, as I think you know, today
is our bill day.
Um, so I, I see my hand out.
Um
What I'm interested in hearing
about is the mechanics of how
this would work, more so than
Wouldn't it be great to have a
larger waters surprise supply.
So I, I'm curious about the
funding. I'm curious about.
How the money flows. I'd love to
know more about the
Uh, the 68 million and the
source of that.
Uh, and like in use of the
water.
Stuff like that.
Um, so I know you don't have a
bill ready.
Um, but if you could focus on
That aspect of it, I would
appreciate.
Mr. Chair, um, we can
accommodate that if you just
give me a second to pull up our
draft bills so I can
Be more responsive to a
discussion.
And Mr. Jas, I'm doing that,
maybe one thing to note, um, is
that we
Anticipate next week being able
to share a draft bill.
So, um,
We're pretty far along.
But we have a few more changes
that were still making and so
Uh, we're working with LCS on
that right now.
OK, I would, uh, I would
appreciate that. Yeah.
that
sorry.
I just have to wait for this.
OK.
Mr. Chair, um,
Understanding that we're going
to keep any remarks that we make
to about 15 minutes, so it's
2:10 now, and then also
understanding what you just said
about knowing what the, what's
in the bill.
I'd like to just maybe at a
record pace, get you to that
point like.
Uh, not going slide by slide,
but just sort of taking you to a
key slide that I think is a good
jumping off point.
So, um,
If you look at slide.
OK. Look at
Slide that says proposed
legislation, that the one that's
up on the screen, that would be
a great place for us to start.
Um,
So, in terms of the strategic
water supply, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, um, recall
that yesterday, Rebecca as part
as our infrastructure advisor
put, laid out sort of just a, a
construct that the strategic
water supply is part of the 50
year water plan, and the 50 year
water plan has about 11 action
items in it.
And those 11 action items, uh,
you know, the, the number we're
talking about is about $200
million at the moment.
Of which strategic water supply,
we're talking about a, um,
roughly a $75 million general
fund appropriation for the
purposes of
Uh, incentivizing the reuse of
brackish water, or I should say
the, the, the use of brackish
water and the reuse of uh
produced water.
So that's $75 million would be
for that purpose.
In years in the year prior when
we brought the strategic water
supply forward, we had a $500
million allocation that was uh
through state severance tax
bonds, notes, uh, that is no
longer part of this.
So the source of the $75 million
is general fund.
And that $75 million again would
be for the purposes of brackish
and produced water.
Let me also expand on how that
$75 million would be utilized.
That, so,
In the prior version of the
strategic water supply, I, I
apologize for interrupting you,
but, um, just let me clarify
because yesterday when we were
talking about budgets, it said
75 million for brackish.
Is the 75 million for both
brackish and produced water?
Mr. Chair, yesterday on the
slide, it said $75 million for
BRCA, you are correct.
But the $75 million would be for
both brackish and produced
water. We didn't get a chance to
update that slide before we
shared it yesterday. OK, thank
you. You're welcome.
So that's, so let me go back to
the slide that's on the screen,
that's $75 million for water
projects related to the
strategic water supply is the
first bullet there under that
first uh dollar sign block. One
of the things that we took a lot
of time to listen to
stakeholders on and meet with
NMS Yuan and Academia, etc.
industry, just stakeholders all
around was
Whether we should fund.
The strategic water supply.
For the purposes of just
securing water.
Remember last year or this past
session we talked uh last year
we talked about the strategic
water supply, um, the state
would enter into contracts to
procure water.
So, we've now expanded that one
mechanism to focus on the
procurement of water to now look
at a broader range. So that's
$75 million would be for things
like aquifer mapping, it could
be for things like engineering
studies, it could be to build a
plant, a plant for brackishhi
produced water. It's not solely
focused on the finished product
any longer. It's focused on the
a litany or a continuum of
funding opportunities,
everything from studies through
bricks and mortar, uh.
the, the final water product,
whether that be brackishhi
produced water.
So we've expanded, we've
essentially we've expanded the
scope of how the money could be
used, so that's $75 million
could be used for a range of
options under the strategic
water supply.
Specifically, second bullet
here, the 29 million is separate
and apart from the 75 million.
So there's a $29 million
Allocation for aquifer mapping
to New Mexico Tech that's in the
strategic water supply draft
bill.
And uh $4 million for brackish
and produced water research at
NMSU is also in the draft bill.
So effectively when you see a
copy of this draft bill, which
we again hope to share with you
next week.
Um, what you'll see is $75
million for strategic water
supply. Well if you available
for use for brackish and
produced water.
Available for the studies as
well as the um
Plants themselves.
And then the 291 to New Mexico
tech and 4 million to NMSU.
So that kind of captures the,
the general fund portion of the
bill.
We'll go back to some of the
allowable uses as we continue
this discussion, but I'm going
to turn to my colleague, the
deputy at Mner to talk a little
bit about the 2nd, um, block on
the slide that's the
establishing the new fee on
produced water generated in New
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What we
proposed and modeled here was a
5 cents a barrel fee on
basically any water that was
produced and not recycled or
reused.
Um, recycled and reused means uh
used for completions inside the
oil field or used for it we call
EOR enhanced oil recovery
projects, sometimes referred to
as water floods. Um, or
alternating water gas treatments
basically that get used to.
Direct oil underground to
producing wells. So those are
the types of things where you
would, um,
We would not assess the fee on
water used for those purposes.
Um, we based the numbers and
sort of the projections on the
revenue estimates for this based
on 2023 production numbers,
which is about 2.1 billion
barrels of water produced in the
state, um, minus what was reused
in 2021, we estimated that it
had come up with about $67.5
million for that year. Um.
I think that
It's fair to assume that the
assessment of this fee would
have a market driving effect to
a certain extent, but that
market driving effect would be
something I think that is within
the policy boundaries of what
we'd like to see as a state as
well. Right now, industry-wide,
we see about 60% reuse, um, of,
of produced.
Sorry, I'm getting my numbers
flipped up here.
About 60% of the water used is
being reduced and recycled or
reused and recycled. We'd like
to see that number move up and
we see this fee as a tool to get
that done.
So far, the 2024 numbers from
physically to 2024 are roughly
in line with that, about 2.3
billion barrels of produced
water, uh, so about a 6%
increase, so fair to assume that
an attended projection for
revenue from this would be about
6% as well, and we're seeing
candidly numbers, um, for fiscal
year 25, uh, continuing to grow.
So, um, even with a market
correcting effect of assessing
this fee, we think that they're,
this would be a fairly reliable
revenue source for this fund
for, um, certainly the
foreseeable future.
So, Mr. Jarrett, members of the
committee, you know, as we think
about the general fund
appropriation of 75 million for
the for the brackish and
produced water projects, uh, has
been indicated, there'd be
another, you know, let's assume
65 million-ish coming in, uh,
with that 55 cents per barrel
fee based on model uh prior
years' numbers. So that's, you
know, we're roughly at $140
million you know, give or take
in terms of dollars that could
be.
on projects in the state of New
Mexico, be it bra as you
produced water.
In order for us to
Administer those dollars, we
need to establish a fund.
Um, or use an existing fund, we,
we're electing to establish a
strategic water supply fund, um,
that is the 3rd.
Uh
box on the slide in front of
you, uh, that fund, as I said
earlier, and foreshadowed that
you would be able to use that
fund for the purposes of um
grants, contracts, or
administration of those uh
brackish water or produced water
projects. So let me be really
clear though when I said grants
this time, um, that the grants
would really be for the brackish
water studies.
They wouldn't be grants to build
a produced water treatment
facility.
Just, just when I say grants, I
really wanna make sure you
understand that the the grants
would be for purposes like that.
Um
But again, that the dollars that
we're bringing in in general
fund and the dollars that Mner
would be bringing in on that per
barrel fee would go into the
strategic water supply fund, it
would have broader uses than
you've heard in the past,
grants, contracts, and the
administration of the fund, um,
across our three agencies, so
we'd all be involved in, in the,
uh,
pursuing of these projects, um,
as I said previously, this would
be for both studies, pilot scale
projects, industrial scale
projects, uh, and, and we have a
number of projects that we've
somewhat inventoried around the
state. I know the, the state
engineer could speak to some of
these projects, but whether
you're talking about, um, desal
projects related to brackish
water or treat it, you know,
treatment of produced water.
There's, there's a range of, of
projects around the state in
various.
ages that would benefit from
this, this funding. Uh, so we
have those interested parties
waiting in the wings.
Um,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, we could
Let, let me pause there to see
what other, um, that, that's the
broad scale mechanics of the
bill.
Um, appropriation, generate a
fee, fun brackish, fun produced
water projects, uh, and expand
the scope that it's not just
about advanced market
commitments, but it is about
studies.
Uh, it is about engineering
design, it is about bricks and
mortar. It is about getting the
money out to these projects that
are both in the state already
that could use the funding as
well as attracting
New projects to the state. All
of that to say that
The more we're promoting the use
of brackish water and treated
produced water, treated
brackets, treated produced
water, uh, the more that we're
offsetting the freshwater or
conserving fresh water
throughout the state of New
Mexico. Um, we put out a press
release yesterday explaining our
feasibility study was finished.
Um
And we can go over some of those
numbers, but they're pretty
impressive numbers in terms of
what fresh water could be saved
in the state of New Mexico by
effectively using one of those
water sources once treated for
the purposes of
Plugging and cementing wells for
the purposes of building
foundations for wind turbines
for the use of solar panel
manufacturing it like Maxion or
any of the other facilities that
are eyeing up New Mexico for
geothermal wells, which actually
would save a ton of water, uh,
fresh water, if we use this
treated water in those purposes.
Everything I just explained to
you is like to be very clear, is
non-consumptive, non-discharge,
non-agricultural. These are all
things that we could conserve
our freshwater resources by by
doing something like this
without
Um, going any further than we've
proposed in our water reuse
rules and going any further than
we proposed last year. And are
those use?
Us use restrictions gonna be
spelled out in your bill.
Um, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, those use
restrictions are already spelled
out in the water Quality Act and
it's implementing rules.
So we, you, you
So they're ref that those rules
or tho those requirements are
referenced in the bill, but the
bill, the strategic water supply
bill doesn't expand beyond the
scope of the Water Quality Act.
That is happening.
That's already in place.
and our water reuse rules.
Before the WQCC.
are part and parcel to that.
OK, I, I
I would I personally would want
to better understand how those
fit together. And I do have
some.
Concern about
it's a.
Push and Cho, right? Like put in
statute or put in rules. We put
everything in statute, but
You know, we have, we have
different rules, which I think
should be in statute.
Um, because we've had periods in
the past where rules weren't
enforced.
Um, so,
And we'd have to figure out.
What that looks like.
And Mr. Jerry, you, you, there's
no disagreement here on, on
behalf of the administration.
I'm just making the point that
the water quality Act
does not allow for
Untreated, brackish produced
water, septic, uh, you know,
anything to be discharged and
this particular strategic water
supply bill does not augment the
authority that the legislature
has already created in the Water
Quality Act.
OK.
Um, could you address as, uh,
hopefully part of your
presentation. Um,
What the waters can be used for?
Uh, how it's gonna get there and
how it's could be paid for. And
I, I would just point out, uh,
like we, we always hear, um,
Oh, this would be great for
green hydrogen.
Won't this be great for green
hydrogen, yeah, using this
water, um.
And, you know, my, my sense is
that producing hydrogen is
Uh,
capital intensive to begin with,
and it's gonna be a lot more
affordable if you're using
fresh, clean water, and then if
you're
pulling up, you know, brackish
water from the depths and having
to treat it, it seems to me that
that's a pretty substantial
cost.
Uh, to the prospect of green
hydrogen, so uh, do you have uh
information about that in terms
of how that's reflected in the
bill.
So Mr. Ja, um,
The feasibility study that we
embarked on at the end of the
last session and worked on
Extensively over the interim and
just finalized yesterday, uh,
addresses regions of the state
that would be more beneficial
for
The, the treatment of brackish
water or produced water.
So to your point, there's costs
with the energy, it's an energy
intensive process to remove
salts and other contaminants out
of both of these waters.
You want to treat that water as
close to where you're going to
use it, and the cost to move
water is expensive, so it would
not make sense to treat water in
hobs and truck it to.
House, for example, like that
would not make sense. So the
feasibility study, not the
strategic water supply bill, a
lays out sort of what you could
expect.
From a strategic water supply
investment or a bill passing.
But the bill itself does not
address the
Geographic location,
the economic, I think you're,
you're, it doesn't address the
market incentives that would
otherwise come.
From
The strategic water supply bill
itself.
And I think that's fair, like,
you know, how I'm not sure how
you put that in the bill, but
Uh, you know, I'm, I'm still
I have not looked at the
feasibility study, I'm still
Concerned about the feasibility,
right? I, I mean,
I, I think in terms of the
potential uses of the water.
You know, I, I'm a believer
that, you know, that.
The cheapest water will ever
find is the water we don't use,
water conservation first cut,
and then if we use our
freshwater.
Sparingly and appropriately,
it's a lot cheaper to use fresh
water.
And if we're talking about
economic endeavors.
That are
You know,
market-driven.
You know, expecting them.
To
Come up with the money to pay
for.
Really expensive water.
You have to lift, that you have
to clean.
I, I just, that goes back to the
feasibility issue for in my
mind, and I do maybe one other
issue um while I'm thinking
about it, it, it seems to me
that once you clean, um,
Brackish water, you're left with
uh a smaller amount of much more
brackish water, and I'm curious
what what you do with. So, Mr.
Chair,
Um, and I invite my colleagues
to jump in here too as well. um,
Mr. Jared, the
You're on the, your last point.
You know, creating heavy brines
in the state of New Mexico is
probably something that we're
gonna see happen for both
extraction purposes and and
other industry purposes and and
some of those will have value,
and some of those will not have
value, so they will either enter
into sort of a commodity market
and be utilized for things like
drilling, or they will be um
Disposed of in likely either
evaporation and then landfilling
the salts or or disposed of, uh,
in, in injection wells.
Uh, depending on the source of
that water, if it came from oil
and gas, in other words.
So
Noted and agree with you that
Heavy brines will be generated
and will
He dealt with just like they are
today.
Um.
Yeah, so
Uh, and, and maybe this is what
the, the uh state engineer is
going to mention. I, I think
it's also important when we
think about the economics to
know that, you know, the
Amogordo desal plan and and the
investments that are going on in
Santa Teresa, uh, for Dal I know
uh my colleague can talk about
those better than I can. Um,
But the, and then the industry
that's looking at more
conservation of freshwater
resources by higher reuse of
their produced water.
Um
Those are, we're talking a lot
about projects that this isn't
in the abstract, I guess is what
I'm trying to convey to you is
that there are investments
pending, and those may come here
and utilize fresh water, or they
may not come here, um, and
therefore spare us the water,
you know, spare the water usage.
Mr. Chair members of the
committee, I was just going to
add to that that the um the
desalination that's already
taking place right now, I mean,
there is a there is a
desalination plant in
Alamogordo. It's not a deep well
plant, but they do have a
desalting plant. There's down in
um down in El Paso. I'm sure you
guys have heard about the Kay
Bailey plant that um has been in
operation for at least 20 years,
um, and they, they do take the
concentrated brine and.
it down a, a deep well disposal,
um.
Well, and, and that's their
disposable mechanism. A lot of
time with inland desalination,
the cost of concentrate disposal
can be equal to the cost of
treatment, so it's a challenge,
but it's something that we need
to be doing, um, here in New
Mexico. We do have brackish
supplies of water and um and it
would be it, they, they
represent an opportunity, um,
more so for things like
industry, it can be a great
backup for a municipal supply.
but I think in general people
see those as finite resources.
You have to be cautious not to
overcommit to, um, but they do
have a great opportunity for uh
for a lot of uh just as a, as a
water resource in New Mexico.
It's expensive, and I think what
we're trying to do here is to
stimulate that economy so that
we can, we can take advantage of
those resources.
OK, um, thank you. um.
Uh, Mr. King, did you have
anything else you want to add or
go over or you're ready to start
fielding questions from the
committee, Mr. Chair, you know,
uh happy to few questions, but
let me just add one last thing
here, um, we, we, in our press
release, I'll make sure you all
get a copy of yesterday we
announced again on the
feasibility study, I just wanted
to share some of these numbers
with you because I think it's,
it's important to hear these
numbers, that the, um, solar and
automobile sector, uh,
We're gonna use effectively 3.6
billion gallons of fresh water
port per manufacturer per year.
Like, that's just on an average,
and we can support like if they
make this many solar panels or
cars.
Um, so 3.6 billion gallons of
fresh water per year, a data
center, which, you know, I would
hope that New Mexico could
attract some of those data
center investments, that's 218
million gallons of fresh water
per year.
Um, and cement for wind
turbines, you know, think of
Suns and and other investments
happening in the state, that's
105,000 gallons of fresh water
per wind turbine. So, those, uh,
you know, if we're gonna
continue to bring in in our
economic development department
does a great job where, you
know, leading in many economic
development, um, indicators.
If, if we're going to continue
to bring in those investments,
we're going
To have to make a decision, uh,
as to forego those freshwater
resources to those industries,
or we're going to find a reuse
option for water that isn't as
good as drinking water to be
used in those industries, um,
which I don't want us to ever
forget. That's the whole reason
we're bringing this proposal
forward.
Um
We have modeled out some numbers
and and numbers like a 5 million
gallon per uh per day plant, um,
You know, that could cost around
$54 million to build a plant
like that. Um,
So we want, we wanna use the
strategic water supply to incent
the the building of those plants
in a way that can deliver that
water for the purposes that I
just went over.
Um
And I think Mr. Chair, we, we
have more to share, but I, it
would probably be better in the
context of questions and
answers.
OK. Thank you for uh the
presentation. Thank you for
focusing on those elements, um,
Montoya, thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Um,
The
The numbers that were given
earlier 2.1 billion barrels of
uh produced water. Is that,
that's annually?
Um, but 60%.
are currently uh reusing and
recycling, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman and
Representative Montoya, I'm
sorry, no, I misspoke on that 1.
60% of the water that is used.
Um, is recycled or being or
reused. So of the 2.1 billion
barrels. I think we estimate
for, again, this is our our test
year is 2023, fiscal year 2023,
um,
I think we had about 800 million
go into the uh
that under under the proposed
fee would not be eligible for
this 800 million barrels.
OK, so less than
Less than half.
Um, so, um,
And, and currently, is there
not uh water reuse standards are
we are we not waiting on water
reuse standards to be.
Um, finalized, or is there not,
is, I understand there's
rulemaking going on right now.
So I'm, I'm wondering if this is
a little premature. I mean, we
haven't even defined yet what
reuse standards are.
Uh, Mr. Jaron representative,
thank you for the question and
you're correct, there's water
reuse, um, standards before the
WQCC right now. So tho those we
hope they deliberate on in like
the January time frame and if
all goes well, maybe they'll
even deliberate and have an
answer before this, you know,
goes through final committee and
final vote, um, but those water
reuse standards would be for the
uh non-discharge use of of tree
to produce water. So things like
I proposed or was talking.
about non-contact.
Uh, non-discharge.
Um, all the examples I just gave
would fit under the paradigm of
what I'm talking about within
the reuse rolls.
In other words, the reuse rolls
would not be indicative of
whether any of these projects
could go forward if the
legislature would adopt this
bill.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair, um,
Mr. Shelton, Mr. Kenny, um, so.
Currently
Who is, which companies
Not specifically, uh, but
Generally, which companies are
currently recycling. It's it's
the larger companies with, would
that be a fair statement, the
larger companies are recycling
and the smaller independence.
Maybe don't have capacity to
recycle.
Mr. Chair Representative, I, I
Not really in a position, I
think, to support that. I
wouldn't say that it's
necessarily true that the
independences aren't doing some
recycling. I think recycling is
less a matter of access to
capital, and it's more a matter
of how you set up your
operations on the front end, how
your timing and sort of
coordinating with our neighbors.
A lot of, a lot of recycling is
sort of coordinated to occur,
you know, when one well is
producing a lot of water,
they'll try to time it up so the
well next door is getting ready
to inject and we'll pretty much
carry the water straight over,
right? So those are the kinds of
opera or kind of opportunities
and activities and that's not
necessarily limited to large or
small operators. Certainly for
larger operators, that sort of
centralized planning and the
capital investments need to make
that easier, probably a little
more available.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Shelton, I, I did reach out to a
few folks from industry.
And it is widely
Understood the people who, who
would be able to comply with
this.
Who, who would be able to not.
Have to
pay the fee, generally the
larger companies in a much
better position to do it
because, uh, generally they will
be potentially working on
multiple wells simultaneously or
back to back, whereas the
smaller companies may or may
not, so it, it, it, it does seem
like uh to me that this
potentially could be harsher.
On the independence and so I, I,
I don't believe, as I
understand, talking to
Uh, after I looked at the
schedule and reached out to some
folks, uh, last night.
Doesn't appear as if um maybe
independence had been at the
table yet to discuss whatever
bill.
is going forward, so I would
like to see that. I, I
Um
Generally, uh, the, the larger
guys
They can pick up capital and
move to another state. The, the,
the smaller guys they're either
in business or out of business,
so, um, I, I, I would like to
see.
Independents have a seat at the
table in this going forward
since it's not fully
implemented, um, and, uh, I, I
think
I think there's a problem
potentially with this which
majority of the produced water
right now is in the Permian.
There's not a lot of new
activity in the San Juan Basin.
And so the the the 5 cents fee
per barrel.
For some of those southeastern
counties, it, it might be
cheaper.
For them to just uh pay the
cost.
Of trucking.
call it to Texas and sell it
there where the restrictions.
For produced water, are much
less.
The requirements there are much
less than ours, so I, I'm, I
know you're counting on 68
million for the model. So,
Um, I, I don't know that you can
count on that full 68 million.
For two reasons, uh, talking to
some of the independents, uh,
Over the last day or two,
This might be too expensive for
some of them, the recycling.
They don't have in-house
recycling, so there's a an extra
expense to them if they have to
recycle.
Um, but if they then truck it to
another state.
There's, there's two problems
there. One, to, to, to, if
you're trying, if you're trying
to pay
Mostly for this $75 million.
Fund
If we're, if we're trying to
offset that.
And we're counting on 68
million. I, I don't know that we
can count on that if somebody
smaller independents just sell
out to the larger guys who can
do this.
Or if the
Or if they just truck it because
it's 4 cents a barrel versus 5
cents a barrel.
to comply. So, um, I don't
really need you to respond on
that. I just think you need to
consider that. I don't, I don't
know that.
I mean
If it's cheaper to go somewhere
else and do something else with
it.
I see industry doing that.
Um, one last thing, um, Mr.
Chair. um, Mr. Kinney, uh,
What other fees?
Does NMED.
put on, on.
Producers, are there any other
fees that you have? I mean, I'm
not not sure you have.
Necessarily the
But
The Authority to to to do it and
a fee from NMED or would
OCD be the one who would, who
would implement.
The fee. Who would be collecting
the fee? Mr. Chairman and
Representative Montoya, the, the
OCD under the current version of
the bill is contemplated is
doing basically the accounting
and billing for assessing the
fee and passing that to the
state treasurer for deposit the
fund.
OK, so Mr. Chair, uh, with that,
I would suggest that we have to
retitle this not a fee but a
tax.
Uh, because we're implementing a
fee from one department.
And then another department will
be spending the money.
So I, I don't, I don't believe.
That it meets the legal
definition of fee. I think we're
gonna have to call it what it
is, which is a tax.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative
for representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you for the presentation. There
are so many moving pieces to all
these uh
Things we're we're trying to do
uh with water and and the um,
the effect of it on our economy
and our infrastructure build
out, um.
So some of the questions I have,
um, just based on
I mean, this is, this is
evolving, and I think um a
presentment twice said something
um.
Um, the standards are, are they
being work, they're being worked
on right now or have they been
decided? Any standards around
produced water brackish water,
Mr.
Chair and Representative, um,
your question is, what are the
standards, um.
are reused standards that are
before the WQCC are for a
non-discharge purposes, so they
are not sort of a milligram or
parts per million or anything
like that, we are working with
NMSU
well through our produced water
consortium to establish what
those standards would be for
treated produced water, but
those are not before the WQCC as
of today. OK.
Thank you, thank you for that
update. I know things are like I
said, things are running now.
All over the place, um,
So with the legislation we have
before us, um.
That this legislation then
assigns fees, correct?
There's a fee assignment in this
bill, and that's the 5 cents.
OK, OK, thank you.
Um, and that
And and I'm still, I am putting
all this together, Mr, excuse me
for this. I guess my bigger
question, my, my question is it
does this.
When the water, the produced
much water is cleaned up and and
processed.
Is that what does that water
then stay for the benefit of our
state.
in our state and are there
assurances or insurances or
language that you can point to
that tells us that.
In the bill.
Mr. Chan. Yeah, Mr. Jar and
Representative, I, I think the
question that you're asking is a
good one, and, you know, we, we
always wanna make sure that the
water is the benefit of New
Mexicans. So we, there's,
there's no distance in, in your
sort of question and and what
are, what we're trying to
achieve, which is why this is
part of the 50 year water plan,
what our action plan, which is
why it's going to save, I think
it's 150,000 acre feet.
Um,
These actions, including the
strategic water supply with
respect to the 50-year water
action plan. So,
Not only is this water staying
within the state, that would be
uh treated and, and used in
these more beneficial ways, it
would allow for the um
Conservation of other waters
that would have been used.
As well, so you see what I'm
saying? So
it's there's a double in other
words, is that correct? Yeah, I,
I get that point and, and
that's, that's why I wanna make
sure I'm asking this question or
this is the question in front of
me because um I think there have
been other discussions or other
uh conversations where the the
water will be sent out to Texas
perhaps or you know, sold
elsewhere, and I just wanna
You know, capture, um,
Some of those, uh, those pending
questions that I've heard.
And Mr. Chair and
Representative, you know, I'm
trying to pull it up right now.
Um, but, you know, it would be
remiss if we didn't talk about
the, how the 2019 Produced Water
Act incentivized the
preservation of fresh water.
And also incentivized a market
to come in that helped bring
those numbers that my colleague
talked about up to greater
recycling within the oil and gas
field. So, you know, infinity
water solutions is now
investing, I think it's 150
million into New Mexico to treat
the produced water that Mr.
Chair, that, uh, Representative
Montoya was talking about from
some of those independents where
maybe don't have the means, I
agree, to treat their own
produced water, but still have
the need.
to dispose of it or or handle
it. And what they're doing is
utilizing this midstream water
market that evolved post 2019,
that's probably had
Hundreds of millions of dollars
of investment in New Mexico,
again, conserving our freshwater
resources. So I think we're on a
broader trajectory to do more to
preserve and protect our
freshwater by by incenting the
reuse options.
OK.
So I'm uh, I would still be
concerned that um.
That there would be a the the
incentivization of
Cleaning up the water and uh
using.
are
Our resources to do that as far
as funding, but then require
that that water to stay in New
Mexico.
And so maybe we're saying the
same thing, but I, I'm, I think
I'm hearing, you know, that we
do have a benefit within the
produce Water Act allows for
marketable, um, uses for
produced water, um, I just want
to make sure that we are we then
produce language that
That that uh insurers that we
are, if we do this, that the
water does stay in New Mexico
for our benefit for, for both.
Offset and then for use.
Mr. Chair Representative, let
me, let me back up. I should
have said this earlier and I
want to say it emphatically
that, you know, because you have
a Home Depot 5 gallon bucket and
a bunch of tennis balls, and you
say you can make clean
brackishure produced water into
something drinkable like we're
not interested in talking to
you. Um, you know, this is not a
program that's for everybody,
and this is not opening the door
to anybody. This is a, a, you
know, compared to last session,
a modest appropriation, um, that
is designed to
incent some of the existing
investments that this body has
already made,
these operations and also in
sent new um uses of treated BRCA
and produced water for the
applications that I've talked
about. So a contract, and I, Mr.
Chair, I forgot to mention this
earlier, that the way in which
we would contract with these
entities would be through the
procurement process and that
procurement process, we would be
able to put
into those contracts, things
like no net, no new carbon
emissions or a net negative
carbon emissions in terms of
your treatment, that you would
have to further the, the, the
executive's climate goals that
you could not contribute to
ozone pollution, you know, by
burning diesel for the purposes
of treating water, um, that you
would have to electrify your
operations where available or
use things like the Mr. Chair,
you and I have talked about, uh,
for a long time, hydrogen in
various uh committee hearings.
Um, so,
I, I really do want to stress
that
Our intent is to not big box
this for every community.
throughout the state. It, it's a
fit for purpose used to get us
through the water scarcity
issues we have and implement the
50 year water action plan.
So, um, again, I really wanna
State that this is not the
cottage industry bill.
Yeah
Appreciate it. Uh, and, and I
see, and I see where I, I
understand those those portions
of what you're what you're doing
there. Um,
Uh, I do, um.
I do remember us also Mr talking
about maybe this, and we're
talking about the off offsets
and whatnot and water, uh, using
this water perhaps and helping
us in our our compact
obligations with Texas. Is that
Uh, would that be a potential
use, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair.
Representative Lujan, yes,
that's, that is one of the there
are projects conceived in the
lower Rio Grande that would
utilize BRCish resources as a as
a source of water to help me
compact plants.
Thank you. Mr. Chair, the,
again, this is where we have to
have shared ownership of, of
these, um,
of, of, of, of this topic, you
know, I always think of the
state engineer as what quantity
and the environment department
is water quality, so until we
have water reuse rules that
would allow for the discharge of
that treated water, we would not
be able to put that into the,
you know, into a.
Or water compact purposes.
So, again,
I agree with the state engineer,
and I'm not undermining her
authority or her statement, but
we have a shared ownership of
these discharges, and we need to
make sure that the quantity and
the quality are in in step with
state.
Law and rules in order to
achieve that outcome. I
appreciate that. And, um. That,
that is, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative Luton, I'll just
add to that.
I love working with Secretary
Kenny. It's true we do have to
work in lockstep because
quantity and quality go hand in
hand, and in some cases for uh
for that type of situation, you
wouldn't necessarily necessarily
clean up that that desalinated
water and put it in the river
because that's a great supply.
It's a very clean water at that
point, so maybe you're using it
to provide to a community that
uses it for drinking water
supplies to offset their use,
like you said before, we're
offsetting another.
used to conserve the other
supply of water. And so in that
way, I mean the purpose of this,
this bill is certainly to keep
the water in New Mexico, you
know, we don't wanna, we don't
want to pay people to create
projects that then will that
then we'll take water across the
state boundary, um, the purpose
is for use and conserving waters
of the state.
Thank you.
And as we're talking about uh
quantity and quality, the
quantity of this, what is it?
Would you consider this finite?
Um, a finite, uh, quantity of
Of, uh, of as a resource and you
know when it would be.
Um
And in the limitation of its
usage.
Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, uh, I, I think
just generally speaking,
brackish water and uh produced
water are we should think of
them as finite resources,
they're not hydrologically
connected typically and we want
it, that's why we're really
interested in making sure that
any brackish water aquifers that
would be utilized are confined
and, and, and not connected to
other aquifers, right? So that's
why some of the money that goes
into the New Mexico tech and the
great work they're doing there.
and NMSU um are so important to
make sure that we understand
where these aquifers are.
OK.
I sure I.
You know, we've, we've been at
this conversation for quite a
while, and the last time we were
at New Mexico, Mr. Chair, we
have this, and we had.
You had a presentation from our,
our advocates and in the
environmental sector, um.
How have you engaged with them
since then till now on this
film.
Yeah, Mr. Chair and um
Representative, thank you for
the question. We've been
engaging with all stakeholders,
um, throughout the interim, both
in the uh the state of the
science effort that we put on at
NMSU, um, trying to keep
stakeholders informed ENGOs of
what we're doing, and I admit
that writing a bill and ensuring
that we get all the agencies and
the executive, everybody on
board is a little bit of a
Black box. I think that's true
of every bill, not necessarily
this one in particular, um, but
we've been having those kinds of
meetings, um, Rebecca, the state
engineer, myself, um, probably
Mner have engaged in multiple
ways in multiple venues with all
sorts of stakeholders, including
the ENGOs, um,
So, uh, it may be importantly to
note that any one of these
projects would also, uh, through
a contracting mechanism be
required to have permits, which
is another opportunity for site
specific permit engagement.
Um, so I don't want to, you
know, there's no railroading of
the process simply because a
bill would pass and we'd have
the money to invest in these
kinds of projects. There's all
the safeguards still are in
place with respect to public
participation. OK.
Um, I, I think this this cover,
you know, um, to the.
The questions that I have and,
you know, early on this year,
Mr. Chair, we, we, uh, we, I was
out.
I guess in in County.
For hearing and
Our cobs in our local
governments were very supportive
of this. How are our local
governments? Where is their
voice in this as well, Mr.
that's my last question.
And Mr. Chair and um
representative, it's a good
question. We've been going
around with the governor, uh, in
the governor's office, uh, as
well as the whole cabinet doing
cabinet in your community
events, um,
All around the state of New
Mexico now for a while and we
typically get a, you know, water
is always a topic. It's no
matter where you go, uh, water
is always a topic and, um,
access to water, whether you're
down in Texaco or, you know,
going up to Farmington, um, and
I'm thinking of a specific
conversations that I've been in,
ensuring that communities both
have water and communities are
tied into good quality water.
water. Remember, you know, our
department issued uh 140
Please stop drinking the water
enforcement actions, um,
And, and many of those have been
corrected. So,
But at the same time, I'm just
pointing out that water in
communities, as you all probably
know, is, is a top concern,
reliability, safety, um,
security, and then they always
ask about economic development
and how are we going to make
that when our wells not
producing, how are we supposed
to have a new economy or how,
how can we attract folks? And I
think this is that connection
point between water security and
advancing our oftentimes rural
communities.
in a way that they can grow
their economy, not at the
expense of their water
reliability.
So we've we've heard positive
results, positive input.
Thank you. Thank you for
answering my questions. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, for the time.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Laura.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
all for your presentation today.
I have some clarifying questions
on the same proposed legislation
proposed legislation slide, um,
you all have listed 29 million
for the aquifer mapping going to
New Mexico Tech.
Over the last year I've been
able to learn and listen a lot
about how crucial that project
will be to our water future.
Um, it's my understanding that
the final amount or the total
cost of this aquifer mapping is
going to be much, much more.
Um, is that something that would
be eligible under the strategic
water supply fund once the fund
has money in it, or why is this
listed as a one time
appropriation if if the final
cost is going to be much larger
than that, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, um, could our
infrastructure advisor answer
that question? Sure.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Representative for that
question, um, Rebecca Ruth
infrastructure advisor Office of
the Governor, um, the 29 million
on the slide is a rounded up
28.75 is a three year need that
the New Mexico Tech Bureau of
Geology has identified in their
budget request, um, it's
Going, we're working to get that
reflected also in the executive
request. We wanted to compliment
that effort around budget here
in the strategic water supply
bill, um, in an appropriation
section to reinforce how
interconnected, the strategic
water supply program and fund is
with increased investment in
aquifer mapping. Um, to answer
one part of your question, the
current draft of the bill for
the authority of how the
strategic water.
supply fund can be used, does
not include the aquifer mapping
program at New Mexico Tech,
being able to tap into that
fund, um, it is so it's in here
as a separate appropriation
again to show the
interconnectedness of the
programs and the work, and then,
um, we'll be reinforced through
the executive request on other
funding to implement the 50 year
water plan and continued work
through this body and through
the executive to meet the longer
term needs of the
Aquifer mapping program, which,
which is, as you said, more than
29 million. Thank you, Mr.
Tarrant. So I appreciate just
for the sake of Claire or I, I'd
invite you for the sake of
clarity to potentially not list
that under a one time ask, um,
but at least clarify whether
it's an apprentheses or
something, that this is the
first year of 3, you're probably
doing that in other committees
where, where those budget
requests are more relevant, but
I would like to be very clear
that this.
When we're in front of
policymakers that this is um a
project that's going to take us
over several years to fund and
that to do this with the
integrity it merits. We're going
to have to be consistent and
committed to that funding over
several years, um, and then just
my follow up question now that
we've clarified the tech please.
Secretary Kenny, that was when I
first got to know you was
working to bring the produce
water research Consortium to
NMSU. I'm really proud of, of
the science that happens there,
science that can help us
policymakers and your water
quality control.
commission make informed
decisions about um potential
reuse.
Will NMSU and the research
consortium be um would they be
an entity that could go to the
water supply fund.
To figure out innovations,
pilots, all that you've listed
for the potential use of that
money. Would that include places
like New Mexico's higher ed
institutions.
In the bill is it's drafted.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, um, Mr. Chair and
Representative, you know,
Rebecca and I just caucused, and
we believe yes is the answer to
that question. Um,
So we, you know, we also hope
that there are other
opportunities for my department
to fund additional research at
NMSU as well, but
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I
remember back there was, I think
2 years in a row where I'd
figured out almost, you know,
$750,000 in capital outlay to
water research it and see that
was ultimately vetoed so.
I requested agencies to get that
money to to the institution I
represent to do the important
work of New Mexicans. Um, so I'm
hoping that this could be a more
reliable stream of, of those
dollars that are really critical
to us as policymakers answering
the questions with some science
to lean on. So thank you, Mr.
Chair.
And Mr. Chair and
Representative, just one
reaction to that, you should be
really proud that, uh, of the
work that NMSU and the state
have performed, there is no
state in the country that isn't
citing all the work that's
coming out in New Mexico that
has uh built their programs on
water reuse from Las Cruces. So,
thank you.
Uh, thank you, we're running a
little short on time, but
Representative Ferrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
uh, for your presentation. Um,
it's my understanding that it's
really expensive to move produce
water, right? I, it costs a lot
of money to move produce water.
Is that correct?
Yeah
Mr. Chair, Representative
Herrera of the current market
rate, if you are looking to move
a barrel of produced water, um,
fluctuates between 75 cents and
$1 a barrel.
So,
Mr. Chair, it's, it's my
understanding after looking at
this and studying it for a
while, that really the only two
counties that would really,
really probably use this or
probably mostly Lee and Eddy
Counties, that's where, that's
where the industry would come in
and uh probably fund these
programs and and probably uh
Probably help them in um making
produced water. Is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chairman Representative,
I guess just for produced water
projects, are you asking? Yeah,
I imagine that, um, generally
speaking, that where the
produced water is where the
projects you get proposed.
Well, you know, I was a big
opponent of this when it came up
last year and it was 500
million, so I'm very
Hopeful that, you know, we can,
you know, that this new
proposal, um, makes sense to
people, uh, and I, I certainly
know that Leonetti need to
conserve all the fresh water
they have because so much of
their water is being used in the
oil fields, so anything that can
help these counties, I think, I
think it's a step forward, but
I'm, I'm curious what role does
the um uh the water quality
control commission play in this,
in this whole process with
It, I think they have to go, uh,
I think, I think if you have a
reuse application, it has to go
through the water quality
control commission. Is that
true?
Mr. Chair and Representative the
um water quality Control
Commission adopts our rules out
of the Environment department
for water quality issues. So we
proposed rules or anybody could
actually propose rules to the
WQCC.
Um
And, and they adopt roles, uh,
that and so all of our roles
that require permits or um even
the adjudication of permits
really go through uh the WQCC,
um, ultimately they can, they
can wind up there. There might
be some interim steps first with
the department secretary and
then over to the WQCC, but
essentially,
They
They have the um we have the, we
are the first group in which a
permit would be secured, and
then if that permit was
challenged, there'd be
administrative practice that
would ultimately either get us
to the WQCC or if it continued
to be challenged to a court of
law outside of the WQCC. So that
that is kind of their role is to
adjudicate.
Rolls, permits, enforcements,
etc.
So, Mr. Chair and and secretary,
so what happens if they don't
approve your
Your reuse application. So the
Mr. Chair and Representative,
it's a good question. So the
rules that we have in front of
the WQCC right now are the sort
of an infrastructure role that
would, you know, lay out a
foundation for how reuse would
look in the state of New Mexico.
A part of that, and a big part
of it is produced water. It and
that that's sort of what the
news made. I mean, there's other
parts of the world that are
really important to us, um, but
the news sort of picked up on
the produced water piece and um
if those rules are
are not adopted, then um this
and the strategic water supply
bill was adopted, we would be in
the same landscape we are today
and that um projects could go
forward, provided they weren't
discharging to, to, um, they
weren't discharging to surface
or groundwaters. So, could, so
let me give you this example.
All the cement that's mixed in
the state of New Mexico to build
foundations for buildings,
homes.
wind turbines today. We, we
don't regulate that water today.
So if somebody was treating bra
tissue produced water and
building those foundations, I
would not have any direct
knowledge of it.
Um, they're not discharging
water, so they wouldn't get a
permit from me. Um, there may be
other pieces of, of, of the
state structure that could be
triggered, but I'm just telling
you from my
Uh, agency, those, those things
were not.
I, I wouldn't know about it.
Um
So the strategic water supply
going forward and the water
reuse rules not being adopted by
the WQCC are not um a, a
construct in which we couldn't
move the the strategic water
supply forward.
Um, we would instantly go back
and try to bring those reuse
rules back after we heard why
the WQCC didn't adopt them
because we, we as a state need
water reuse rolls. I mean,
we're, we're not gonna get any
wetter, um, so we need to, we
need to figure out that, but my,
I'm optimistic that the WTCC
will adopt the rules that we
proposed.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Herrera, I want to add one thing
to that too, that, you know,
this we're focusing on the
brackish or the produced piece
here, but if you flip that and
look at the brackish piece, we,
we can do all of the things that
we need to with brackish water
under the current current rules
and statutes. I mean, we, there
are bracket deep wells. There's
a process that people have used
to drill those wells and to use
those wells. Um, this just helps
us to develop that use and
brackish water is a.
resource that benefits the whole
state. I don't think you can
find a part of the state where
you, you won't find brackish
resources somewhere, so there's
a lot of equity to that, to that
resource.
Uh, thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chair. I, I just was wondering
what would happen under those
circumstances. So I appreciate
your answers.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Keats very
briefly. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chair. I just need a
clarifying, so the bill.
wants to charge oil and gas 25
cents a gallon.
Or of of treated water that is
either stored or injected,
correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative, 5
cents a barrel. 5 cents a
barrel. A barrel is 42 gallons.
42 gallons and this is for all
produced water that basically
comes back out and then there'll
be a reducer for the barrels
that they are reusing, recycling
or applying for enhanced oil
recovery.
And thank you, Mr. Chair and
the, and how much is it to move
the bracket rotter that you
Representative Mark Ray when I
checked a couple of months ago,
it was 75 cents to a barrel of
75 cents to $1 a barrel.
Thank you for that
clarification. Thank you for
your indulgence, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative Kate,
um, just a couple of quick
closing thoughts.
Uh, when I, when I see the, the
numbers, um,
The potential revenue from the
fee or the tax or whatever you
wanna call it.
It's pretty close to, you know,
you're sort of your opening
request for the fund. Um, it
would be
Appealing to me if
The industry that's creating the
issue also paid for this
solution.
So instead of, you know, some
something I, I would, would make
it more appealing to me would be
instead of using general fund
money.
Um, to put towards this if you
ramped up the the fee process
and created the fund from that.
Uh
That I think uh I think there's
an economic logic to that. Um,
but also that leads me to my, my
other point, which would be
I see a benefit to you.
Having a uh a bright line
between produced water and
brackish water.
Um, because I think there's a
lot of concern about what's in
the produced water and about
subsidizing that industry. Um,
if
Say, here's the fund, and we're
gonna use it for all these
different things and like
there's some things in there
that we like and that's some
things that are worth looking
into.
And then he's throw in the
produced water piece.
It all starts to take on a
different feel. Um.
You know, I, I think if there
was an initiative to
See if racus developing brackish
water was feasible, going back
to that word, um, I think there
could be support for that. I
think, separately, um, taxing
industry to pay for, you know,
the efforts that benefit that
industry.
I, I think that's there's an
appeal there, and I, I see room
to separate those two.
So
Secretary Kenny, yeah, Mr.
Chair, 11,
Aspect of the bill that I did
not cover, but you are, are, uh,
making me think about is
You know, think about the time
implementation of the bill. So
as it stands right now,
notwithstanding what you just
offered, but um if there was a
$75 million general fund
appropriation.
And that was available for uh
bracket or produced water, and
let's say there was a bright
line that that was for brackish
and not produce water to as as
one example, there'd be a period
of time in which the oil and gas
industry would have to pay that
5 cents per barrel. So
effectively the revenues fees,
taxes, whatever you wanna call
it, um, would come into Mnerd
and they would have that money
available sort of a year out.
Roughly. So, I think it would
give us a, a, a chance to
understand how is the brackish
market reacting to the general
fund investment.
And how, what are the revenues
look like from the produced
water or from the oil and gas
industry, um, and what are the
projects we're starting to hear
them talk about in the state of
New Mexico. So, minor point, but
I just wanted to say that 75
million would be around the
appropriation.
At the time, uh, bills became
final and then there'd be a
period of time to collect that
fee. So just wanted to
I felt I was remiss if I didn't
clarify that. Yeah, I appreciate
that there's definitely a
timing, uh, issue, but just keep
in mind like I'm not asking.
The oil industry, the fee on the
oil industry to be used for
brackish water. I'm saying we
should keep those separate.
Thank you very much for your
presentation. I, I look forward
to seeing the bill.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members.
OK, so that ran a little bit
long, uh, I thought that was an
important discussion. Our next
panel is OSC enforcement
changes.
Um
I, I, part of the reason the
last panel, I let that run along
as I think.
This is a uh more
straightforward, uh, issue.
And if we could have
Whenever you're ready.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, thank you for
having us here today to talk
about the enforcement bill. Um,
it's a, it's a critical issue
for our agency and we really
appreciate the spot here and the
opportunity to discuss this with
you. Um, I'm gonna go ahead and,
and hand over the presentation
to our rap director, um, John
Romero and our counsel Laura
Katz and, uh, and let them take
it for, I mean from there.
Um, can you hear me?
Thank you, um, Chairman McQueen,
uh, vice chair Stephonics,
members of the committee. My
name is John Romero.
I'm the rap director and water
rights director with the Office
of the State Engineer, and I'm
going to be talking about our
enforcement bill that we're
proposing for this next 60-day
session.
And possibly to get your
endorsement if that's the thing.
So a little history 2 years ago,
we had the same bill, Senate
Bill 380.
Uh, for this session and
Senator, Senator, um,
Where is she now here.
Yes, A Dia Lous was the sponsor.
And it didn't get very far, so
we now have a pared down bill
and it basically just increases
the penalty amount from $100 per
day to $2000 per day.
Or any penalties for water
violations.
So let me set the stage a little
bit. Currently, we have 20
enforcement actions statewide
for illegal water use or
something of that nature.
And we're on track to get about
45 to 50 per year. It's actually
gone up in the last few years,
these enforcement actions.
And right now we have 9 to 12
investigation.
Enforcement in, in the
investigative phase we're, we're
doing field checks and getting
the, the data or the facts on
what's going on.
So, what are we seeing? We're
seeing a lot of
Water, illegal water use related
to cannabis. The bill that was
passed 2 years ago with
cannabis. So we're seeing a lot
of um
Illegal water use related to
that. And some related to
commercial water sales, and both
of them are related, but
sometimes they're hauling water
for cannabis growing.
We're also seeing a lot of
unlicensed wild drillers in the
state drilling.
Illegal wells.
Um, without permits or
drilling wells and they're not
even licensed through the city
engineer's office. So we
license, the well drillers in
New Mexico. And sometimes there
are actually even uh drilling
bad wells and leaving the
customer or the public high and
dry with a well that's not built
to specifications.
So we're also seeing other
typical stuff like meter
installs where they don't
install uh a permit is, gets a
permit and the conditions of the
permit require them to install a
meter, and they don't, or they
do install a meter and, and
they're supposed to submit, uh,
meter readings on either monthly
or quarterly basis and they
don't.
So those are the types of issues
we're we're seeing.
So, we need to protect the
resource. And as you heard
before in the 50 year water
plan where we're gonna have 25%
less water in New Mexico.
We got to protect the resource.
We have drought conditions. We
also have the cost of water
rights going up all these things
lead to
Illegal water use and things of
that nature.
Also, I want to remind you that
the governor's water task force
in 2 years ago, one of the
recommendations was to
our agency to do more
enforcement.
To enforce illegal water use.
So, so what does the bill do?
Uh, you might have a copy of the
bill in front of you. It's a
draft copy it. I hope you do.
Yeah.
Right, you do? OK.
So the bill seeks to address
gaps in the state engineers
enforcement authority to ensure
that the state engineer has the
appropriate tools to ensure
compliance with water laws.
Enforcement tools that the state
engineer would receive under
this bill would be similar to
the enforcement tools that the
New Mexico Environment
Department currently has.
Uh, actually, their bill.
With their, their authority
allows them to go up to, I think
it's 15,000.
Per day for a violation. We're
just asking to go from $100 to
$2000 per day.
The bill would amend sections in
chapter 72 of the Water Code to
increase the maximum penalties
from 100 to 2000, as I said
earlier.
The bill would include automatic
increases for these penalties
indexed to inflation. So that
means we won't, wouldn't have to
come back in the future to ask
to increase the fee again, to be
indexed to current inflation
rates.
In addition, the bill would
clarify that the per day penalty
start from the day of violator
receives notice.
Of the violation. This would
incentivize violators to come
into compliance in a timely
manner.
OK.
The bill would also amend
72-2-18D to to remove the
requirement that notice of
compliance order be sent by
certified mail.
The reason for this is that it
is sometimes impossible to
successfully serve documents by
certified mail. Sometimes
violators refuse the certified
mail, they won't sign for it, so
it's hard to get it to them. So,
we'd like to be able to do that
in whatever means is possible,
whatever makes.
Makes sense or it's reasonable,
because that's an alternative.
So that's what the bill.
Basically does. It's really
pared down from Senate Bill 380
from two years ago.
So again,
Christina, illegal, an increase
in illegal water usage.
Throughout the state, we need a
deterrent or a tool or some,
some more teeth.
To, to, to help us.
In the agency to
Stop illegal water usage.
Um, we devote a lot of resources
from our attorneys, our, our
engineers, our water resource
specialists out in the field. So
we, we really need this bill to
help us, um, we need to protect
the resource and another
important reason why we need
this monetary, um, you know,
this monetary penalty is because
sometimes
Well, let me back up a little
bit. But when somebody over
diverts, let's say 100 acre feet
or they
Illegally divert
Water we, we, we, we typically
ask for that water to be paid
back either a 1 to 1, we can
also go for a, a double
repayment.
When there's water is not
involved, like in the case of a
well driller.
ruling without permits.
With a license or doing bad
wells.
No water's involved, right?
There's no water rights. We need
to have this monetary.
Uh, penalty, we can go after
those well jewelers. So that's
another, that's an example of
why we need this, and I missed
anything, I wanna
Pass it over to Laura Kates.
To
Tell me what I missed.
Thank you, um,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um, I think John, um,
touched on, on all of the most,
the salient um points that we're
trying to accomplish with this
bill. Um, I'll just point out
the um current penalty amount of
$100 was established probably
prior to it, I found it at least
in 1915, but it was probably
established prior to that. I
mean, it hasn't ever changed.
And so we're just we're trying
to adjust it and this would be,
um, you know, inflation adjusted
to today's dollars would be
about $1800 so it seems in line
and it's in line, certainly um
with other, with environmental
statute, um, statutory penalties
and um
We think that it's uh it's an
important mechanism for us, a
tool for us to have, um.
In these um situations that are
uh occurring more and more
frequently where, uh, payback of
water is not uh possible or
sufficient, um, and we want to
have the more powerful
deterrents of, uh, a stronger,
uh, civil penalty, um, to
encourage uh to incentivize
compliance, which is our
ultimate goal.
And if I could add one more
thing, um, Mr. Chair and members
of the committee just to kind
of.
Kind of like add to what they're
saying and wrap it up, maybe and
lead to questions, um, I think
we've talked about the budget
and the needs for the agency to
do more enforcement, um, but it
doesn't matter how many people
we have on the ground enforcing
our water rates if we don't have
a notable fee to assess when we
enforce, you know, you get out
there, you try and um manage
the, manage the water rights,
manage the use, um, but if there
isn't any teeth in the game to
um to.
actually enforced when you, when
you get out there and you issue
that enforcement, and they're
going to keep doing it. And
that's what we see happening. So
we really appreciate your
support in this. I know that
we've had a lot of sport in the
past, and we think we need to,
um, we really need to move this
one if we can in this session,
it would make a huge, huge
impact for water in our state,
and I think um with that, is
there anything else before we, I
have one more thing to add just
to highlight um the um when the
penalty.
can start accruing is really
important because currently it
can only begin after a
compliance order is final, and
that could be, you know,
oftentimes that could take that
there's a hearing, uh, you know,
alleged violator is always
entitled to a hearing, um, and
if they have a hearing, it could
take
6 months, a year, and currently
they just stay in violation the
whole time, um, until the, the
compliance order becomes final,
at which point the $100 penalty
per day can, can kick in. So it
ends up being effectively a $100
penalty. In this way, what we,
what we're asking for now allows
um for that penalty to kick in
earlier and have the problem
addressed sooner and come into
compliance sooner.
Which is in the interest of the
public.
That's it. Any questions?
OK. Thank you very much, members
of the committee.
It was.
Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for your presentation. I,
you know,
I get what you're trying to do
here. I always worry about the
unintended consequences. So this
doesn't affect ase yes.
Right? This bill doesn't affect
aseus
representative Herrera.
It could affect the sectors in a
positive way because a lot of
times they're affected by
illegal water usage.
Upstream of anesthesia, for
instance.
So, it could affect him.
Positively and if somebody in
aseia is over diverting, it
could affect somebody in that.
Um, and it could, and this could
affect a mutual domestic
systems, right?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Vedra could affect anybody that
uses water.
In a way.
You know, I.
You know, I have 44, mutual
domestics right now that are
just really struggling and as
you know, these are all
volunteer organizations in the
North. Nobody gets paid, they
run water systems to the best of
their ability. I have a roseca,
lasa Blanca, Baacitos, and we
have 4 of them right now. I
can't remember the last one
because
They changed officers and people
moved or whatever happened, they
didn't get the right notice from
the Secretary of State that they
had to, you know, reinstate
their their um their uh presence
with the Secretary of State's
office, so now they're not in
compliance with any of the
capital outlay money I gave to
them, and, you know, getting all
that.
To change around, yeah, I mean,
it's, it's just a hot mess. So
that's what I really worry
about. I, I worry about small
organizations and, and how fast
would these hearings, how fast
would you be able to do a
hearing for people.
And are you gonna be able to
hand deliver this to the person
who actually runs the program.
That's what I'm worried about. I
don't forget about, you know, I,
people move, people die. That's
what happens with these
volunteer organizations.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative
Herrera, I would say that the, I
think you're pointing out a
really excellent excellent
concern. Um, the intent of this
is nothing to do with um with uh
with
Enforcing against people who
have a water right who maybe
just don't quite understand it
or have over diverted by a small
amount and that's this is this
isn't really intended for that
type of scenario. This is really
intended for the illegal
diversions, someone who doesn't
have a water right. Someone who
drills a well without a permit.
Um, so that, that I think in the
scenario with the mutual
domestics, um, you know, they
would have a water right that
they were using this, this
wouldn't be to enforce against
them, um, this would be for
other cases. Mr. Chairman and
Representative, this wouldn't be
for somebody failing to register
with the Secretary of State's
office. This has nothing to do
with that. This is only for
water use.
Mr. Chair, and I, I, I guess I
need to, I'll I'll go offline
with you and talk in depth about
this bill, but I,
I, I
I really worry. I really worry
about this because I know what
you're doing and we have illegal
wells drilled for cannabis use
in the north. I know of that. We
know of that, and we know how
much water they're taking out
because you can't do it by the
will cause it's not registered,
but you can see how what effect
it has on the aquifer, and, and
local communities have banded
together and, you know, said,
hey, something's going on and
and I I'll give you credit, the
the state came in and shut him
down, but
I, you know, I, I just know.
I, I guess.
I guess I just where I need to
be briefed more offline because
I don't want to be against what
I think is a good intention. I
and I think needed, I think
needed, uh, in some case, but
you don't specify this is for
illegal cannabis use, you know,
and if if that's what you're
intending, maybe we ought to say
that, but when it applies to
everybody, I just get really.
Really worried because I just
know, again, these are all
volunteer organizations.
Um, you know, they have a job,
they come home and they do their
volunteer job, which is keeping
clean drinking water, uh, to
communities and, and no one gets
paid for that, so.
I'm worried about it. OK, that's
all I have to say, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, and Representative
Herrera, I really appreciate
your concerns and um there can
be unintended consequences. But
here, these, these types of
penalties are really um geared
towards bad actors, they're they
are, um, that's, that's where
they are focused and we
routinely work with other water
users and especially mutual
domestics to, we, we just want
them to get in.
compliance, and that's our
motivation, and we routinely
wave, you know, penalties or,
you know, and work with them to
make sure that they can get into
compliance because they're
really important to serving
their communities and their
customers. And so these
penalties um are really geared
towards the bad actors and we do
routinely exercise our
discretion, um, to, to work with
other types of where it's more
negligent or or things that have
happened that are outside of
their control.
um, and that's something that we
do all the time, um, and then,
and, and if we're not, and if
There is a check on on our
discretion, which is uh hearing,
but I really think that these
tools are super important for us
to be able to deter the really
bad actors, so that other water
users can get the benefit of
their, um, efforts to, to comply
and to, to work with us.
Yeah, and just adding to that as
well, I think this is.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pereira, this as, as, as John
Romero said as well, this is to
protect those those water users.
This is, this is in the in the
benefit of the Asakias and the
mutual domestics who might have
someone come in and start using
the water that's in an
unpermitted unregulated way. We
need a way to be able to keep
that from happening to protect
our water supplies.
Oh, well, Mr. Chair, and, and uh
uh panel. I, I just wanna know,
I know state engineer came in,
there was a there was a um
constituent of mine who had who
had bought a small farm to, and
she had water rights, and what
happened is we had a lot of rain
in the north this last spring,
and what happened was the Asea
overflowed and it went into a
portion of her property that was
kind of like just a hollow area
and it build up pond and, you
know, the state engineer's
office came by.
And, and gave her a, a, you
know, a citation for for ponding
water when she had no uh.
authority to do so and it and it
overextended her water right
usage and you know she, I mean,
it took us a year.
To to
To
Get this fixed and I'm not
kidding. I wrote, I wrote like 4
letters to get this fixed
because it was just an overflow
problem with the water, but
because it created a natural
pond, her acre feet was above
what it should have been, and,
and she got sighted and she had
to go to court and she had to
hire a lawyer and you know it's
all of the above.
That's why, you know, and it
was, was it well intentioned?
Was it a was it a good worker on
the state engineer department,
you know, and he accused her of,
oh, you're just growing, you
know, you're growing cannabis,
that's what you're using and she
goes, we're not growing
cannabis.
We sell it in the local farmers'
market. I'm just saying some
sometimes things don't go right.
So let me say.
Representative cases.
Thank you, Chair, and, and thank
you very much. Just once again
clarifying questions, so I, I
had the same many of the same
concerns that uh representative
Ferreira has on page 2 paragraph
B. Does this not address some of
that, this section shall not be
construed to effect or interfere
with any jurisdiction of an
irrigation district conservay
district, the state court.
Um, does that address some of
her concerns.
Mr. Tay, uh, Representative
Keats, um,
I think that there are
So I think what Representative
Herrera is expressing concern,
which is one type of
enforcement, um, uh, mechanism
that we have is injunctive
relief through the courts. And
so the state engineer can, can
bring those um actions, uh, OK,
so, so what is page 2 section B,
covered. What is it stating?
It's stating that the uh the
jurisdiction of these entities,
you know, that the state
engineer, that this, these
statutes don't interfere with
that
with the jurisdiction of a court
or a, you know, or, and then on
page 3 lines 4 through 6.
Nothing in this section shall be
prohibited, prohibit the person
named in the order from pursuing
an informal resolution of the
matter after.
timely request for a hearing
that has been made, will this
also address some of the process
for, I mean, I, I, I have very
much the same concerns as
Representative Herrera. I'm just
trying to clarify if we have
some process in here to address
those concerns.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Kates, the, um, we always have
the ability to to enter into
informal resolutions which we do
in most cases, um, we work with
uh people that are um alleged to
not be in compliance to come up
with, you know, mutually
agreeable resolutions instead of
uh, of litigating through the
process either in our hearing
unit or in a court.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you for that. Um, just
one, comment.
Um, I, I appreciate that you're
taking out certified mail.
I think certified mail is a
disaster.
Uh, it's just a waste of 5 or 6
bucks to send the certified
letter. Um, you still have in
their receipt.
And I wonder, um, you might want
to think about.
Um, how you prove receipts. Uh,
I don't know if it's just a
letter. I don't know if you're
talking about personal service,
um, posting on the property.
So, so it's, it's page two, line
23.
I mean, they, you know,
obviously they have to receive
notice, but um,
Uh, Miss cats, you might want to
think about what, what that
entails.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
It's a good suggestion.
And thank you very much uh for
your presentation.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you for having us. Thank you.
Thank you.
OK, we have uh
We're back on schedule, which is
great. We have one last
presentation today. uh, surface
water permitting program.
Uh, with Shelly Lemon, um,
It's been kind of a long day and
it's late and we're tired, and
this is a complicated, um,
proposal. So, um, I encourage
Uh, those of us who are still
here to
Bear with us.
Yes.
Whenever you're ready. OK. Uh,
thank you, Chairman Queen and
vice chair Stephanics and
members of the committee. Um, my
name is Shelly Lemon. I am the
surface water quality bureau
chief for the New Mexico
Environment Department, and I'm
here today to provide some
background and update you on the
department's efforts to develop
those surface water quality, um,
discharge permitting program.
And thank you for
Hearing me out, the last of the
day, I will try to make this as
quick as possible.
Uh, next slide please.
So, um, just as a reminder, the
department is proposing to do 2
things under the state, um.
Permitting program, one is to
seek authorization to run the
federal national pollutant
discharge elimination systems
program in New Mexico or the
NITES program. And the second is
to create a surface water
discharge permitting program for
discharges to surface waters of
the state that will regulate
both point source discharges and
discharges of dredged and fill
materials. Um, the state program
will be similar to the federal
permitting.
Programs under the Clean Water
Act, but adapted to address New
Mexico's specific issues and um
the combined program, both the
NIPTIs program and the state
program will cover surface
waters of the state, which
includes waters of the United
States.
In an integrated system under
unified administration by the
department.
Um, the program does not apply
to tribal waters, but, uh, the
department will be responsive to
tribal concerns and ensure that
permitted discharges do not
adversely affect tribal water
quality.
Uh, so, New Mexico or the
Environment department convened
a surface water advisory panel
composed of a variety of
stakeholders across New Mexico
with the basic premise of a
state permitting program being
that a discharge of pollutants
to a surface water is not a
right, which is why we are
looking um to regulate this
activity. The swap, the surface
water advisory panel met 6 times
from August 19th to October
25th.
5th to assist the department
with the development of the
state program, um, they provided
technical information, practical
considerations and policy
perspectives relevant to
adopting and implementing a
surface water quality state
permitting program in New Mexico
and also, um, they have informed
the department's development of
legislation and also rules for
consideration by the water
quality Control Commission.
So the swap discussed a variety
of topics, um, over those 6
meetings including existing
authorities and protections,
Nipy's delegations and just
general principles for a state
permitting program. Um, the
scope of a state program under
the Water Quality Act and also
program process topics, options
for both point source and drudge
and fill discharges under the
state program and estimates of
program costs and
funding approaches. Um, and then
any needed legislation to
provide authorities for Nipy's
delegation and the state
program.
Next
Um, so moving towards the
legislation, you should have to,
um, different copies of
legislation, um, the first is,
uh,
The national pollutant, I mean
the New Mexico pollutant
discharge elimination System
Act, uh, which gives the state
needed authorities to obtain and
retain authorization to
implement and enforce the
federal NIPTIS program in New
Mexico.
In drafting the statute, uh, the
department has kept some guiding
principles in mind, the first
was that we assumed the state
will take over all 5 program
components under NIPTIs that
includes municipal and
industrial discharges general
permits, federal facilities,
pre-treatment, and biosolids
programs, um, we decided to
draft a stand-alone statute, so
it's easier for EPA to review
and also avoids
conflicts with the water Quality
Act. Um, it's a lot tidier as
well, and we drafted the statute
in a style that is typical for
New Mexico environmental
statutes and follows a familiar
outline. Um, it establishes a
purpose and delegates and limits
authorities, um, and it's
general, um, it contains what
needs to be in statute and
leaves the rest to rules.
next slide, please.
Um, so the NMP DES Act follows a
similar outline as other
environmental legislation, as I
mentioned, and you'll notice,
um, that we changed the title of
the act, um, in the draft that
you have.
Oh, it is changed. The New
Mexico pollutant discharge
elimination System Program Act,
not delegation Act, because it's
more than just, um, delegating.
So the purpose of the New Mexico
pollutant discharge elimination
System Act is to protect New
Mexico's precious water
resources to control water
pollution by regulating point
sources that discharge
pollutants into waters of the US
within the boundaries of New
Mexico and to maintain and
improve.
water quality in the state's
surface waters, and I'll provide
some highlights on each section
in this um legislation.
So section 3 covers the
definitions, um, that we are
proposing in the draft statute
and in section 4,
It requires a permit for the
discharge of pollutant from a
point source to a waters of the
US. So those are pretty simple
and straightforward. Next slide,
please.
Um, under section 5, like the
Water Quality Act, uh, it
delegates authority to the water
quality Control Commission and
the duties and powers of the
commission are to adopt
regulations which are necessary
to obtain authorization, um,
federal regulations can be
incorporated by reference. It,
um, adopts, allows the
commission to adopt a schedule
of fees sufficient to cover the
cost of the program, and allows
the commission to hear.
petitions for review of
department actions, um, that
require issue renew, modify,
deny, or terminate a permit or
issue a compliance order.
Um, in section 6.
Uh, you have duties and powers
of the department, which are
necessary to implement the
program, including the power to
propose rules, conduct
investigations and compliance
inspections require monitoring
and reporting grant and
terminate permits and issue
compliance orders, um, and file
civil and criminal actions for
enforcement. It gives the
department oversight
responsibilities for discharges
to waters of the United States
from oil.
and gas activities as well.
Next slide.
Um, section 7 and 8 grant
administrative, civil and
criminal enforcement authority.
They describe who may request
review of a department action
and who may appeal, um, a
department action to the Court
of Appeals. Um, it's
Well
It has in there some, um,
penalties. There's a minimum
civil penalty of $5000 per day
and a minimum penalty of 10,000
per day for continuing
noncompliance under criminal
enforcement. These um dollar
amounts match the Clean Water
Act. So, um, we cannot be less
stringent than these numbers
because it is the federal
program. Um, but it can be more
stringent.
Next slide please.
Uh, section 9 and 10 deal with
appeals to the commission and to
the courts, they uh describe who
may appeal, and when, uh, and
also when they can appeal and
These sections describe the
processes for commission and
judicial reviews.
Next slide please.
Um
We are looking at um adding a
new section, which is not listed
on this slide and which was not
provided in the draft because
it's not quite ready, but we're
looking at um adding a new
section, which establishes a
citizen suit provision similar
to the Clean Water Act and other
states that have nifty's
authorization, um, the provision
will give a person a private
right of action against
violators of the law or against.
The department for failure to
act and will authorize the court
to award inju injunctive relief
and sometimes to impose
penalties. Um,
That's forthcoming. We're still
working through some of that,
and I'll explain in a moment.
Um, section
11, which is listed on this
slide, establishes limitations,
permits cannot be required, that
would take away or modify a
property right in water, a
permit cannot be required for
return flows from irrigated
agriculture for stormwater
runoff from mining and oil and
gas facilities if there is no
contact with water contaminants,
and for certain, um, silver
culture activities, and then,
uh, for a section 3
the availability of records
specifies um that records,
reports and information obtained
under the program and under this
act will be available to the
public except for things, um,
that are confidential,
confidential information.
Next slide, please.
Um, the 2nd legislative ask uh
that we are seeking is amending
the Water Quality Act to provide
authorities needed for a
comprehensive and efficient
surface water quality state
permitting program, and you
should have those water quality
act amendments that are specific
to the surface water permitting
program, um, specifically, we
want to authorize the use of
general permits, uh, in a state
program, we want to update.
and modernize the public
notification requirements, um,
allow for the requirement to
mitigate for unavoidable
impacts, uh, to water quality
and water resources from those
dredge and so discharges, uh, we
want to incorporate an
anti-degradation provision to
protect high quality waters and
um we want to amend the
oversight responsibility for
discharges to surface water
that's currently under the oil
conservation.
jurisdiction.
Next slide please.
Um, so for authorizing the use
of general permits, we have
several different areas where
we've added language under
section 74-6-2 and definitions,
we've added two definitions,
general permit, which is the
permit that we're talking about,
um, it applies to one or more
categories or subcategories of
discharges, sludge use, or
disposal practices or facilities
within a geographic area,
including a statewide general
or regional or watershed wide um
general permit. And then we've
also added general permit
coverage, which means
authorization to discharge under
that general permit. So it's for
the actual um.
Discharger or permittee.
And then we've also proposed
amendments to add language
throughout section 74-6-5 to
include general permits in
existing provisions, clarify
public notification requirements
for general permits, authorized
fee collection for approvals of
general permits and outlying
causes for termination or
modification of general permit
coverage.
Next slide, please.
All right.
Um, in section 7465F, uh, we are
updating public notification
requirements, and that's to
clarify public notification
requirements and also provide
some exclusions for general
permits, um, basically, you
know,
Excluding General permits from
um requiring notice to adjacent
or nearby landowners because
it's a general permit that
permittees are not necessarily
identified under the general
permit into the, until they
apply for permit coverage. Um,
and then posting, excluding
general permits from posting,
um, the permit.
To the public near the discharge
are proposed discharge site, uh,
where intending to have um
A map or something similar where
the public can go to see where
there are permit coverage, um,
authorizations, but the general
permit does not
Uh, lend to this type of process
that's in the water Quality Act
right now.
Next slide, please.
Um
Under 7464, uh, we're allowing
the requirement for compensatory
mitigation related to
unavoidable adverse impacts, um,
to water quality or water
resources related to dredged in
film materials, and that will
require the commission to adopt,
promulgate and publish
regulations to mitigate water
pollution and authorizes the
commission to impose reasonable
permit conditions that require
Mitigation to compensate for
that unavoidable impact.
Um
Under section 74 6 12 which
cover limitations, um, where
Um, incorporating an
anti-degradation provision to
protect high quality waters as
the water Quality Act reads
right now, you're allowed to,
um, discharge pollutants into
the water up to the water
quality standard. We do not want
to do that if it's a high
quality water and the
concentration of a certain
pollutant is well below the
standard. We don't want somebody
to discharge up to the standard
we want them, um, to discharge.
According to the water quality
and maintain that high water
quality, so, um, we, we, we
would like to incorporate that
anti-degradation provision for
surface waters of the state that
already exists in the federal
program, um, so it's a similar
concept under the state program.
And finally, under section 74612
limitations, um, we want to
amend this section to basically
amending the oversight
responsibility for discharges to
surface water currently under
the jurisdiction of the oil
conservation commission.
Next slide, please.
Um, so both of these um uh as I
mentioned previously, we've been
working with the surface water
advisory panel. We had 6
meetings. Um, we've also been
working with the US
Environmental Protection Agency,
and we've requested and received
some feedback from both EPA and
the advisory panel and we're
working through those comments
and considerations. Um, so we're
evaluating that feedback, um, we
will be revis
the
statutes, these draft statutes
according to the feedback that
we've received, but the intent
and, um, the ideas behind the
statute is, um, what we're
focusing on right now.
So I also wanted to provide a
brief update on the permitting
database because the department
has been, um, working with our
contractor to develop a water
quality permitting database,
which includes permitting
compliance and enforcement
functionality, um, applicants
will be able to submit
applications, supporting
documentation, reports and
payments through the online
database, they can track their
app application status using a
dashboard.
um, they'll be able to view
interactive maps and GIS
features associated with their
discharge and ensure compliance
with EPA e-reporting, and the
department will be able to track
and automate regulatory
processes and manage staff time
and efforts using the database
and dashboards, um, we'll be
able to utilize tools for
creating permits and letters,
emails, and compliance documents
that are, um, more efficient.
And we can run various reports
and queries as needed to talk
about the permitting program and
also exchange and share data
with EPA and other agencies. The
interested public will be able
to review permit information
that will be updated.
On on a public mapper. Um, so
currently our um contractor is
focusing on IT infrastructure
like application programming
interfaces that talk with other
databases, um, specifically EPA
databases, uh, looking at GIS
functions and also storage and
tailoring, um, Montana system to
the New Mexico specific um
program and making it also
functional for a
subset of groundwater discharge
permits.
Um, so the data in that database
will be uploaded and available
to EPA's integrated compliance
information system, um, that's
ISIS for public access and the
information that's on there is
basically information on
regulated facilities, discharge
quality data, um, and also
groundwater monitoring data will
be available through that.
And finally, I just wanted to
put up here again an estimated
program costs, um,
When we look at, you know, all
of this depends on what's
approved during the legislative
session, what's approved by the
Water Quality Control
Commissioners regulations and
how we can implement the program
in the department, um, but
The combined system for the
Nifty's program and the state
program, um, where estimating
around 57 full-time equivalents,
um, right now we have anywhere
between 10 and 12, it's a range
because staff aren't specific to
just permitting compliance and
enforcement. We do, we wear many
different hats, um, so it's
about 10 FTE right now, so
that's looking at 40 more,
adding 40 more FTE.
full program if we take on all 5
program components and we
implement a state farming
program.
Um, so program costs, and which
we talked about with the swap
can um be achieved through a
100% fee-based program. These
will be um
Uh, discussed during the
rulemaking, and then you could
have a 100% legislative
appropriations to completely
subsidize the program or it can
be a combination of fees and
legislative appropriations, um,
or it could be an investment
fund that would support the
water quality programs and help
water quality in general, so,
um, with that, we have a
revised, somewhat revised
timeline, um, we met
With the surface water advisory
panel this fall. We're going to
session and then um by summer
after legislative session, once
we know um what's been approved
and what were authorized for, we
should have draft rules for
public comment in the summer of
2025, going to the water quality
control commission in the fall
of 2025 and
Most likely having rulemaking
sometime in the spring of 2026.
Um, and then initial rollout of
the state program in 2027 and
2028 and applying to EPA for
that Nifty's authorization in
2027, once we have the
regulations approved by the
commission.
And I think that's it. Oh,
I left a, uh, a quote from
Mahatma Gandhi, because, you
know, we're looking at a lot of
different things here. Um, and
what he said was the future
depends on what we do in the
present right now, you know,
things are
OK, they're not great looking
into the future and so making
those decisions now will
definitely have positive impacts
or negative impacts on what our
future looks like, um, and here
in New Mexico, our way of life,
clean water from the tap, um, a
day spent floating on the river
or fishing with your um family's
clear, clean water for
irrigation and livestock and
protections from droughts
floods.
And wildfires all depend on
strong water quality
protections. And so with that, I
will.
Stop and open it up for a
question.
Thank you very much. uh, going
to the committee. First up,
where you represent Bluhan.
Thank you for bearing with us,
um, or being at the end of.
Our um hearing today in our last
appearance.
For the intern, um,
This is, I mean, I really like,
I just wanted to go back to page
15 of your presentation.
The gas activity, um,
Excluding the discharge excludes
the discharge of a water
contaminant to surface water
from the oversight
responsibility of the oil
Conservation commission.
And places it under the water
Quality Act, what what is the?
was the um
Reason for. Um, it's too, uh,
Mr. Chair, and Representative,
um, the change is associated
with the trying to be consistent
across both the Nifty program
and the state program, so the
NIPTys program currently
administered by EPA issues
permits for discharges from oil
and gas activities, um, and so
this would be the similar, so
there wouldn't be different.
Um, rules and regulations for
the same type of discharge,
depending on where you're
discharging. OK, thank you.
That, that so a lot of this is
clean up but additional, um,
Additional, um, amendments to
what the, what we, what we've
been given.
So to speak, right from the
federal government, we need this
to tighten up.
Um, regulations for our state or
protections for our state
because of the changes from the
federal government, is that
correct?
chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative,
the state program is in response
to the weakening of the Clean
Water Act, um, and so the state
program is.
Mm
We want to adopt similar
Prostases and regulations, um,
but for state waters because
most of our state waters are no
longer protected under the Clean
Water Act. Thank you.
That is the overarching goal of
this, and I, I, I really commend
you for such diligent work on
this and for all your, um, for
bringing this to our attention
since it happened. I mean, this
is the 2nd.
We found out about this last
year. Is that correct, Mr.
Chair?
So the work that went into this
and and your all your
presentations and um.
Thank you. This is, this is a
good response. Is it enough,
Mister Chair?
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, it
There's always
stuff you can do more, um, and
that's, you know,
throughout this whole day, I
think we've been talking about
water resources and different
aspects of protecting water in
New Mexico. So it's not just one
solution as part of the
solution.
Thank you, that's fair.
Um, and I just want to say I, I
support this 100%. I think that,
you know, um, if we don't do
this, we're going to be, it's,
it's really gonna hurt us, hurt
our water, um.
protections that we don't or
we've we've lost in.
Um
Oh, I lost my train of thought.
The water, uh, Data Act. Uh, you
mentioned in your presentation
also uh the water, the data.
Um, I guess.
Go back to this permitting
database and so the water data
um act that we have in place is
that what you're using for this,
this uh database, the permitting
database and timeline or.
Because it's been, what my
concern is that we don't have
enough data. So, Mr. Chair, I'm
just
Asking, right, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, we are, we are
developing our own database, but
that database will be able to
talk to other databases, um,
that's what our contractor is
developing what's known as APIs,
so that that can be delivered
and downloaded from one location
or one portal, um, and so you
can get a bunch of different
information and data from a.
of sources from one location,
creating an aggregate. Oh thank
you. And where in your budget is
that um reference and with the
cost of that database is going
to be.
Um, Mr. Chair and
representative, it's under the
other related class. It's also
um mixed in with permitting
because it'll, it is a
permitting database. It's also
uh available, we're going to be
able to have compliance and
enforcement components with the
database, um, or compliance and
enforcement functionalities in
the database, um, so it's not.
specifically called out in the
table that I provided on 19, but
it is within that.
General. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I would like to have those
how I would like to know how
you're going to delineate that
when you're as you're gonna come
before us for your budget
hearings and knowing where those
are allocated within the special
requests and whether directly in
your budget, your operational
budget because this is going to
be important in order for us to
fulfill this, um, this piece of
legislation which is
Pretty so important and
essential for us, um, so I would
just ask for that, so just more
information there on your budget
request. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for the presentation. So, I
just wanna
see if I can put this really in
a local context because there's
an issue we've been dealing here
in Senate District 25 with
Bishop's Lodge.
It was initially proposing to
treat water and discharge it
into the Tasuki Creek.
And basically, because the state
did not have
As I understand it, I want to
make sure I've got this right,
the state didn't have primacy,
EPA is the one who was dealing
with that issue. Am I correct in
that assessment?
Uh
For the surface discharge, I
realized there's also an issue
with the
Yes.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator Wortz,
yes, um.
EPA is dealing with that issue,
uh, because they have authority
right now for the nifty
permitting program, so it is an
EPA decision. Mr. Chair, I
understand we're one of only 3
states, is that correct? It does
not exert primacy.
To do our own program.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Senator, that's
correct.
So Mr. Chair, I just want to
follow up on Representative
Lujan. I mean, there's, there
obviously was a Supreme Court
decision that also kind of
changed what
Could be regulated at the
federal level, um, but likewise,
this is the question of just New
Mexico stepping up and asserting
the primacy to run the program,
which is what this is doing, and
I think that's
Again, just having it hit home.
Right here, really kind of
brought this to light and all
kind of coming together. I, as
chair, appropriations during the
last session. I know there were
a couple.
Can you just tell us about those
and what were those for and how
are those going to tie in to
where we are right at the
moment.
Um, Mr. Chairs and Senator, we,
the surface water Quality Bureau
received 2 appropriations, one
was under the water quality
Management fund that was a $7
million appropriation for both
ground and surface water
protections, um, so we're using
that as seed money for
developing a program, um, and
also, you know,
Creating capacity and creating
positions and hiring staff and
um using a contractor to help
with this, um, endeavor. The
other uh special appropriation,
I believe was another 600,000
for the state permitting
program. It included, um.
Some money, I believe, for the
database, some money for
mapping, um, which we're
pursuing and some money for
interim measures to help, um,
when, when there is something
that happens, a discharge
happens that.
Is not
Authorized, um, helping with
that.
Either compliance or enforcement
issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I
think again, we had some real
money and then there was money
in the budget, again,
acknowledging I know uh
Congresswoman Stansbury's been
very focused on this issue in
Mexico stepping up.
Um
I guess the question
This is, this requires approval
by the EPA, is that correct?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, the
NMPDES Act requires approval,
um, we are working with EPA to
make sure that the language and
the act meets their requirements
and what is approvable to them.
Um, we do have some comments and
feedback from them, which we
will be incorporating into a
revised draft legislation, um,
but we will need to submit
an application to them for um
program authorization, but that
comes after we approved the
legislation, we approved the
regulations, and we have a
3-year budget for the program to
show that we have capability to
implement the program for a
period of time. OK. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. I'm just trying to
think through how we navigate.
Finance committee and that whole
issue given the FTEs up on the
board and the hybrid fee. I'm
just thinking that out loud.
Just one thing and there's lots
of, I'm not given the hour to
get into this, a whole bunch,
but I would note.
You might as well strike the
purpose section, it's gonna come
out in Senate Judiciary anyway.
We take, we just don't do them
anymore. Uh, so weave it in. I
think I did see it. It was,
it's, it's in the bill. You can
see what we're doing, but just
Better to do it now than to have
it come in, so again, thank you
for the presentation. Thank you.
Um, thank you, Senator. Uh, I
had a couple of quick comments.
Um
One question, I, I don't.
It's late and I'm tired. I had
not digested the bill.
Um
I know, uh, Senator.
Worth suggests striking the
purpose clause.
Um, I personally love a good
purpose clause, but they're
endangered species.
Um, I would, along the same
lines, I note on page 2, section
6, you, but notwithstanding in
there.
It's also um
Serra, a red flag.
Or uh judiciary.
Um, I, I wonder, you know, it
does say for discharge of a
lutin to water of the United
States, and my understanding of
Packet is that it essentially
gutted the definition of water
in the United States. So, by
using that same definition, are,
are you not limiting the scope
of your bill.
Uh, Mr. Chair, because this is
requesting authorization of the
Federal program, which is for
discharges to waters of the
United States, it that is the
boundary for the NMPDES Act.
That is why we're also
requesting the state program to
go beyond the federal program.
So, um, the NMPDES Act follows
the federal.
Requirements, which are
discharges strictly discharges
to waters in the US and the
state program is broader than
that to surface waters of the
state.
OK. Thank you for that
clarification. Um,
And uh
I, I think it's great you're
drafting your own bill, at some
point relatively soon, you'll
want to get it over to the
Legislative council Service, um,
they have their own.
Preferences they do a good job,
uh, you know, and sort of get
ready for um for the legislators
to see.
Uh, thank you very much for your
presentation.
Thank you so much for your time.
I appreciate you hanging out
till then.
And this is actually for uh late
on the last day. This is pretty
good crab up here and in the
audience. I I want to thank um
All the legislators who stuck it
out to the end thanked the
members of the public, both who
are present uh in online and in
particular, I'd like to thank
the staff, uh, who have worked
with us, um, all in.
And with that, uh, we'll see you
during the session. We are
adjourned.
Mr. Chair, I just also want to
thank you.
For the excellent job. It's a
lot of work steering the ship.
So again, you've done a great
job. Thank you. Thank you.
Sarah for packing the agenda,
getting everything that we asked
for the beginning of the. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
