Will govern everybody another
couple minutes to get their
coffee sit down so we can get
going and we didn't buy our
first presentations to come for.
Everyone we're going to get
started and we have
I think there's an echo okay we.
We have quite a few members here
so we're going to start with a
introductions and then we will
go to our presentation I want to
thank you all for being here I
don't know if the chair is
coming from the counter
commission but we appreciate the
city and the university being
here so please represent it
monthly.
Good morning and represented
mentor from farmington area
farming tonastech
beautiful drive up today new
mexico's at least from where i'm
coming from his nice and green
some of the places that I that I
have to drive through the day of
just absolutely gorgeous just a
as we're getting around during a
interim it
look around
it's it's good to know I it
helps you understand some of the
other members that you serve
with so anyhow glad to be here
and thank you manager
thank you representative
good morning john henry
representative of district fifty
four
I drove a blast night from
artisa much like what
representative montoya said it
is nice to see that our status
is dream lots of good rain that
I got to drive through as well
so pleasure to be here look
forward to the conversations
thank you they came out of chair
horrible I would probably
represent weekend you know
terror counties and just got
back from towels for lfc and got
to drive over here and look at
las vegas and even as
devastating as the fires
everything's looking beautiful I
noticed you crews around and
they were working on flooding
issues and drainage issues and
kick and water and doing all
that stuff so
glad to be here.
Thank you so much madame chair
my name is representative elaine
senate court has an I represent
the beautiful people of district
sixty two in southeastern new
maxico harbs to the forefront of
loving ten and it has been such
an honor to be in your community
this is my first time here and
i've made friends at the diner
at the coffee shop already
following me on social media so
you have a beautiful community
and i'm just looking forward to
the meaningful conversations
about policy and doing better
for the great people of new max
account thank you so much madame
chair.
Good morning madam chair and he
leave them here representative
from charity scounding district
fifty eight and glad to be here
thank you.
Good morning madame chair and
members of the audience very
good to be here in las vegas
today
so happy to join you all i'm
show it little I represent has
just strict sixty eight which is
in the northwest corner of new
mexico and not quite as green as
it is here so it was really
wonderful to be here today thank
you
when the other level so
representative they may get
garcia from a three score
represent district fourteen some
of the more historic areas that
in the attorneys go valley
in burning accounting and also
some of the historic areas
within the city on good car came
these are kind of my ancestral
lands here in some good county I
agree great grandpa one day
there was my sa was alcohol in
my
eighteen forty six when general
crony came into town and this is
for general curning declared new
mexico to be the new territory
he didn't do that in santa fe he
did that right here in the plaza
on top of the building that my
great gray grandparents which is
that little blueish rest right
across the street from the
college restaurant and
my great grandfather also had a
grist mile this is kind of a
a meal that kind of grinds
flower into different
categories and the what happened
after the forts were established
here the calvary guys would come
into town for our narrow and
they started getting out of hand
and started kind of abusing
sexually abusing our women and
picking fights with the locals
so on my great gray grandpa
being all called the my order
which is kind of a combination
of mayor and magistrate judge
told the forts that they could
not no longer purchase on
credit.
Well shortly after that
long behold that the griss
miller my great great
grandfather in sun we went less
which is now story lake was
burned
and my grand great great
grandparents moved down to
someone who steam which is kind
of easter but a romarovia but I
have a lot of family here my
aunt hundred two years old
that's here in tenth street in
its always an honor to be here
and my ancestor land holdings
thank you manager
thank you representatives of
chat.
Good morning madame chair jack
chat field new mexico house
district sixty seven go back to
curry heart and quay san miguel
and the union cannot it's great
to be here this morning.
Good morning senator
good morning everyone states
that lorry scott district forty
two uh lee eddie and cherry
southeast corner state thanks
for having
a center composed please
thank you very much madame chair
mister vice chair members of the
committee to the audience to the
presenters and all those will be
coming in throughout the day uh
please spread the word that last
vegas is here were vibrant we're
ready to celebrate the fourth of
july it so it's a great
celebration so please come back
and i've I believe that
representative creating or
probably come back and
participate in the braid so he's
going to be here with us uh so
that's a general invitation to
each and every one of you come
in and in really enjoy a great
time state senator pete complex
representing all our parts of
seven counties and las vegas is
my home thank you very much
madam chair.
Good good morning madam chair
and everybody my name is martin
sobora I represent house
district sixty three covers the
south half of curry the north
half a roosevelt the back ago
loop in a touch sun megan county
glad to be here today thank you.
Thank you my neighbors out of
its deal opens I represent
district sixteen and albuquerque
which is the area in your
unmcnaming up to the southeast
it actually includes the base
now
so it's it's a very large
district for albuquerque
and i'm very happy to be here I
have a lot of connections with
las vegas through the university
of uncles and answer graduated
from here a brother who attended
I have an uncle who's a whole
famour here in las vegas so it
really is I remember coming here
for girl state when I was in
high school it's just a really a
special place I really love last
week.
I think you chair i'm
representative of kathleen case
from district forty four just
forty four is all of crowles
parts of rear rancho and the
northern part of alba cricket
and a small section called the
unincorporated area of alamita I
think you once again for hosting
us in the big fan of last
figures and highland university
um and we're district forty four
gets to hose to highland
university branch campus and
rear ranched across the street
from intel and I so appreciate
the partnership with this
university's for decades
for the entire stay as be turned
out classes social workers and
educators so thank you very much
I love how green it spend this
trip as well I can't believe how
green we are.
Thank you madame chairman voiced
here it's great to be here last
week as it's been a little while
um I am debbie saranian I
represent the house district
twenty one in bernel county them
on the other purple area months
on a high school area and it's
like I said it's great to be
back here um it's it's a green
and beautiful today and now but
looking forward to the meeting
thank you.
Thank you mister baster
thank you ma'am chair I matter
macqueen a currently represent
house district fifty has to
strict fifty is the southern
half of santa fe county in the
place see this area of stand
while county I live down the
gallery stay out it's great to
be here this is a great facility
and we voice a good meetings
here and they we get to come
back in two weeks with the
language committee thank you
very much
thank you and i'd like our staff
sarah which you please introduce
everybody and here is the chair
right here for senator brand.
Oh and let's go before we go to
sarah representative
more mirable more
thank you madame chair good
morning my my name is a uh tiny
meat about my district seven
which is blending counties so
that is the city of bln and most
of the eastern part of a lincoln
county I am a proud uh beling
high school teacher so na and it
so I
been up here for less sea and
actually I think i'll be back up
here in a few weeks so I always
love coming to biggest so thank
you
thank you and now so would you
let's do senator bringing and
welcome
to morning
sooner brand from rearrange and
a district forty and it's always
good to be here and we have a
lot of water issues so
if i'd be honest committee this
year
thank you and sarah staff please
think email chairmen of the
committee and in the may cheaper
hosting my name is so remarried
lead staff for the committee we
also have angela day can support
staff and our new drafter for
this year is in color thank you
and did we introduce it and our
webcast is dave zoom
thank you very much for all your
service
I am loose to fan exam the chair
of the committee senate district
thirty nine parts of four
counties so used to have six but
they still have a lot of send me
a big torrents and volunteer
counties and I know that it's
been
already a while flood and fire
season and I hope we don't
continue in that vain throughout
the state
before we go to the
first panel i'd like to express
my appreciation for all of the
hospitality the university puts
on in the.
City you know for weeks and
weeks for us
so many of our committees come
here and we appreciate your
hospitality very much.
Committee members if we have
more people come your side is
already crowded but we'll have
to add in more chairs as more
legislators attend today so with
that i'd like to turn to our
introduction of our first panel
and it is a new world the
president doctor neal wolf the
president of the university and
mayor david ramero
thank you manager and welcome
everyone to be used for campus
and thank you for your service
for new mexico we take a
regional responsibility very
seriously as a member here of
the northern mexico community
and we're grateful for you
official service to let you know
that we are here to serve and if
there are needs that the
university can help me we're
happy to have further
conversations about that I
wanted to and we're missing
we're missing one of our
chairman garcia we call each
other the three meals I call
ourselves to three might
grateful to the mayor and the
commissioner for for the
partnerships that we are
building and and have export I
wanted to mention a few things
that the university is working
on
some of which are related to the
work at the committee in then
happy to have questions and
remarried will also have some
remarks
and
we have a number of new academic
programs that we are exploring
in response to that need for us
to be recently responsive
one of which were pretty excited
about and will grow in the
health related field but we're
working on and sees theology
assistant program to help fill
the needs medical needs of the
state
russell working on and we
receive funding from the
legislature so thank you in
previous sessions for the doctor
it in nursing practice it'll be
our first doctor degree and
we're really excited about
watching that this next economic
here in recently received
funding through rps before a
doctor in social work.
The university has the center of
excellence for the social
program and throughout the state
and so were excited to expand
that and provide terminal
degrees to help more in the mex
can stay here and in servant
social workfield
one of the things that were
really excited about and this
may be something that'll help
some of your needs as we are
changing are a current masters
and computer science program
we're offering a program through
entity called sandbox so what
that'll do that will allow for
students to take a year of
course work but then their
second year they're going to
work with venture capitalist the
router united states i'm
creating their own technology
company and so it be one of the
first times in the nation that
this program exists where
students will come out with the
master's degree in end with the
experience of starting their own
technology company worth the
help of venture couples
throughout the united states so
some of those students as their
considering starting the company
they do that in relation to
needs of the state or the area
in which they're in so if there
are areas that you're interested
in potentially having students
how they are creative activities
um
focused on please let us know
that we can help share that
information with our students so
we're really excited about that
will have centers for that
located actually throughout the
united states so there'll be a
growing and pretty big program.
We're also working and in
relation with the city in the
county we very much appreciate
the collaboration that we have
on working on natural resources
related issues are water systems
and projects
are economic development that
may or twist of my arm and he
has made me the vice chair of
the cities economic development
council and very grateful to
collaborate with him on on items
related to that.
We are
interested in me enough this are
living in receipt owns a gulf
course and it is undeveloped
land and there are significant
housing needs in this um
area.
Almost seventy percent of our
faculty do not live here in the
area because of availability of
homes
so we have the land available
the border regions through their
leadership and and chairman
sign shares incorporated the
land development dentity and so
we are moving pretty quickly to
develop on the golf course to
make more housing available
not only members of the
university community but members
of the last vegas and same ago
county so we appreciate also the
collaboration that we have with
the city on that
we're working to prove a future
proof student housing
a lot of student housing uh in
times past has been only
reflective or available for
students we actually want to
change that model and have
student housing on campus be a
mixture of academic space of
living space of community living
space in a facility and staff
living space so we won't have
rebuild a community in such a
way that we not segment
populations away from each other
one of the things i'm really
excited about in this committee
may be as well is we are going
to be the first public
university in the united states
to be energy independent so what
does that mean
so it's a bold statement or okay
with that what is I mean so we
produce about six thousand
metric tons of carbon docks
either greenhouse gas emissions
per year.
That is to a cost and annual
cost of about one point six
million dollars.
At one point six million dollars
that will be like to spend in
support of our students.
And so that we have the
resources available uh through
solar wind and geotherman to be
energy independent and so we are
working pretty a hard to we've
established the the inventory of
what are
our uses are we now entering in
the next stage to to get a plan
for how do we reduce that and
we're not going to do it by
buying credits when I can
achieve we're going to do that
by substantive measures so we
can be in the energy
independence so we're excited
about that in any involvement at
the this committee would be
interested in helping us on
where it's happy to explore
one of the final notes are
mentioned is we are working with
dhm female on
mentioned that the burns car.
One of the opportunities exist
for there are a lot of trees
that have been burned but are
still in danger of creating
feature home trees that are
close to roads powerlines uh
private property and things
those trees need to be removed
and so working with dhcm the
university is we'll soon be a
fiscal agent for an opportunity
to identify which trees need to
be
taken out and then go ahead and
do that so we have a water shed
institute that's of nationally
recognized um institute in a
reforestation center there is
actively working with the mix of
state even them and more a you
may have seen or non more
accounting up and more is where
we're going to plant trees with
them will plan anywhere else in
the grandscare but we have to
gather the seeds so a lot of our
students go out through the
summer gather the seeds we drive
the cease with grown we get the
south going and then we work in
with the mixed statement with
them to help reforest this area
so we're excited about the
opportunity to be a better
regional partner both in terms
of our community are environment
for natural resources and then
what we offer a students so
without a stand for questions or
if we'll have into mirror mari's
remarks
let's go to the mayor and then
we'll come back for questions
thank you
good morning and welcome to las
vegas new mexico it's an honor
and
along with highlands university
to host the new mexico water and
natural resources committee here
in our community I want to begin
to sincerely thank each and
every one of you for taking your
time to be with us here today
last vegas has faced
more than just a share of
challenges in recent years in
wildfire recovery to ongoing
water and natural resource
concerns that's why I believe
it's a perfect time and please
for this meeting it reminds us
of the importance and that full
policy strategic planning and
the resources needed to prepare
our communities for what lies
ahead.
With the changing environment.
To the full committee thank you
and I especially want to
recognize senator peak compos
representative jack chatfield
and representative martins are
modern on behalf of our region
for their advocacy and specific
thanks to senator lister finux
for her leadership
as chair of this important
committee your commitment to
addressing critical resources
issues in northern new mexico as
deep are deeply appreciated
we know you'll be discussing
important matters over the next
couple days but if you happen to
have a little downtime we
encourage you to explore the
community
and connect with our residence
you'll see first hand how
grateful our people are for the
state's ongoing support to
everything that we've been
through as many of you have
mentioned it's it's very green
but I want to assure you know
we've had our share of
challenges through fires and
floods and and everything that
we've been adoring as some of
you have also been in the
having to endure you know this
in your own communities
but you know despite all those
challenges we continue to work
tirelessly to improve the
quality of life here now in our
community in a partnerships with
highland university send me gill
county and in other entities
within the city you know that's
one of our main focuses you know
we can't let what has happened
to us and the challenges burden
us so we work hard and as you
see you know that you might
encourage encounter of you
you know detours throughout
community but great things are
happening here and it's with
leaders not only here at the
local level but also you know
leaders from you know that
representatives in sanity you
know we have our challenges and
again you know with the changing
environment and and things that
were having to endure in times
are changing and we're all
having to adapt adapt with uh
what we're dealing with
it's green because we've had
plenty of rain we've been able
to sustain you know no major
flooding but we're prepared for
whatever uh comes.
With those with those man soons
again thank you guys for being
here
appreciate all your work that
you guys go through and like I
mentioned you know this
committee is very important to
the state and anything that we
could be a part of to help
communities go through what
they know what we've been
through and to make life easier
for them and for their leaders
were here to answer those
questions thank you
thank you and before we go to
questions and comments and I
know some of companies will have
a lot could you each talk about
something separate may or maybe
you could recap for everybody
what happened with the clean up
of the river walk in the and the
uh river downtown you had great
press about this and then
president if you could talk
about your reforestation program
because we're going to hear from
university of new mexico new
mexico state and they want to
make sure you talk about it as
well so may or please okay thank
you
thank you chair I did you know
speaking of a lot of clean up I
mean we're we're focused more on
clean up specifically on on the
river we've had challenges with
every every rain and every month
when it comes in in or we're
having trash and debris through
the area so you know a
specifically about two weeks ago
we gather a lot of community
members got some waiters on and
started cleaning up the river
walk
you know again you know this
debris that doesn't just come
from within the city it comes
from within the water shared the
the burned scar
you know brings trash
immediately I think we pulled
out probably about a a truck
load of wood pellet of of
pallets you know the ball it's
it uh you know just within our
river walks and just kind of
tells you you know kind of goes
to show the amount of debris
that's picked up along
you know with his with these
major rainstorms the debris that
you know up up on the on the
burns car that brings it down
here into the city where you
know I think I believe it was
about.
One truck load and then you know
because quite I I couldn't count
how many you know how many of
those would pellets are in other
was but you know it's it's a lot
of a lot of effort to lot of men
power that is taking a clean
this up and you know we're just
you know as and you give you
guys do get some downtime I know
you have a lot of work and you
know a lot of collaboration
amongst you know the committee
here but take a walk through our
river walk I think that's one of
our are our bright spots in our
plaza area you know it's it's
it's turning wonderful we've
like I said we're improving the
quality of life come during
christmas that river walk
relating it up and you know it's
it's become our own version of
in a river of lights we call it
looses and enrille but a lot of
good things are
number we're having to overcome
you know despite what we've been
through with the the floods but
we're cleaning it up and it's
taking all of us as a community
to do that not just one person
error a few individuals is
taking us as a community clean
things up thank you senator
president yeah thank you for the
question as you mean no mountain
chair and members of the
committee new mexico highlands
has the only forced you program
in the state and one of the
spin offs of so we have the
forced program this work in here
in the state in the region where
the
our reforestation center as well
and that's the entity that's
working in this partnership with
them nerd with u n with new
mexico state because not only do
we have the burns car the more
most recent hermes speeds calf
kenya fire but we have
additional wall fires throughout
the region throughout the state
that we're taking its impact on
our natural resources in so this
entity this effort collaboration
with these with these groups is
trying to speed up the
reforestation of the areas
affected by the increased amount
of wildfire in our area and so
there are millions of trees that
need to be replaced and grown
and that takes time efforts and
dollars to do so.
But that effort is going to help
remit help out clean our airstay
clean and help our areas stay
beautiful and and green so we
are very appreciative of the
opportunity that we have to work
in this joint collaboration
effort we are
part of the recent efforts with
the reforestation center is as
they build out the community up
and mora we're going to build a
seed bank here in las vegas and
so those seeds need to be
harvested drive and then planted
up and more so we're very pieced
of that club effort
thank you and I think we'll
start center companies on your
side and just go right around so
sender composed any questions or
comment you like to make
thank you very much better don't
have any questions today I would
just like to reiterate a couple
of things that have been
discussed already number one as
we move forward within the
region there is a lot of
innovation in a lot of things
that were needing to follow up
with when it comes to the to the
fires and flowers and so you can
see that there is definitely
that work that is ongoing the
second thing is it really takes
a team and within the last vegas
i'm regular county community
what we are doing is we're
working diligently to help
people overcome if you will
some of the difficulties that
we've all encountered and then
and then the the important part
about all of it
is that when we tie an education
to the actual practitioner piece
what what we see is a community
that is is growing stronger in
things that we've had all
recommend so that madam chair
definitely makes us a much
better community so don't know
what's happened to my voice but
anyway to start that's that's my
feeling today thank you
thank you
anything representative.
Yes thank you madame chair and I
learned to live something today
we always come to these meetings
and we learn a little **** bit
here in little tip at there
so what I was learning and
talking to center to complete
about is so we're looking for
native seats for native trees
and then is are we going to
manage what kind of date of
trees we want more of her or is
there are we gonna try to go
back with the same landscape.
I think the question that
the answer is that is both
through the expertise of the the
folks they have peach d's in
this area they're looking at
what's best for future proofing
of the the fire needs and the
other economic needs of the area
so they're they're spoint both
expansion of the need of plants
and treasure in the area as well
as others that may assist with
reducing fire
privilege so thank you for that
answering man churn and mister
president so then
are are you going to manage the
brush in in the forage followed
that the cataly and the elk and
all that too or
you just got concentrated on the
trees for now
and manager and mister was worth
that's a great question it's
it's probably outside of the
perview of mounting brush that's
a much bigger a issue that that
needs to be managed but still
those questions can be
discovered and we can work
together on with that
possibility
thank you for that thank you
madame chair that concludes my
questions thank you anything
center
I just wanted to to say how
impressive it is to see the
strength and the resilience of
the of the community it's just
incredible and my question is
about i'm very excited to hear
about being the first university
to be energy independent and
then you mention some of the
strategies when our I mean that
that is just so exciting but
what do you like is it going to
be primarily solar how you
measuring it you said you're in
he didn't inventory just want to
hear a little bit more about
this exciting project a great
question about chairman and
that's to be determined in
that's our next phase is in what
areas can what's the potential
for solar which I think is
really high was the new
potential is emerging to
alternate activity it can be
produced and wind and someone
will do in the next phase is
that identify how much of.
Strategies can help contribute
to the reduction of the six
thousand or so magic tons of co
two we produce don't get a great
question in to when they were
going to were entering into the
next phase of discovery I look
forward I look forward to
watching this eagerly you may
know why I
contribute to capital that way
to the parking garage at the
solar parking garage because
there's a lot of roof types and
here so i'm i'm really excited
and i'd look forward to watching
how this develops
thank you anything sender brent
okay represent occasions
anything
you very much the senator took
my word of resilience at last
biggest resume should be in the
dictionary because it's special
definition and so I appreciate
that i'm think you as well
updating us on the energy
independence and and and i'm
sorry that we have become the
countries while life wild fire
expertise by I do know that in
our previous meetings that was
something that we were offering
to other states as well and I
just would like to remind the
listeners
that
the challenges have created
opportunities and I much
appreciate.
Thank you anything
representative we're here couple
years go with the different
committee member and i'd like to
see the brothers that's happened
in those couple years is it is
significant and you say as far
as the burns card to her repeats
area is that go back
significant.
Not not to what we want it and
me not enough to I mean you know
the
the ground was I mean totally
toasted so you know of course
the growth hasn't taken I think
and and I know
just in in speaking with the
experts they haven't you know
had the group that they I mean
don't don't get me wrong it's
growing but not I think not it
the expectations that that we
wanted is so there's a lot of
work that still needs to be done
but I think we are you know
collaboration with the states
doing in highlands and everybody
I think that you know it'll get
better
I know some of the people
membership who who guided us
that it would take generations
to come back so at least it
started so thank you yep thanks
thank you mister
best year
thank you matter
so searching for both your
german we're gonna hear a lot
about the fires today tomorrow
and they really appreciate that
doctor will fight just want to
say
I I really appreciate the
housing effort I think this is a
steep white shortage we're
facing in so we need to get in
the bed then all hands on death
so thank you very much
thank you some scott anything
just very briefly madam chair
how many involved in your
rehabilitation efforts.
So the great question I millions
because the efforts of the
reforestation center goes
throughout just not only more
than mexico but the region
including
arizona you talk to all over the
so it would be it be in the
millions of acres
and the timeline
i'm going to persistent and
probably forever.
Thank you and let's see
representative field anything
thank you matter chair good
answer
good answer you know when it
when you have a fire it takes
things back to zero in a starter
process called succession and
normally that's accession you'll
have all crush or come back from
the root that's good dear food
then you'll get forms that's
good quail food
then you start getting annual
grasses for any grasses that's
good out food then you get
shrubs which the dairy then you
start having some trees which
provides coverage shading
so you want to wind up with a
patchwork of it all so you have
food and cover and shade and
thanks to hold your water into
the ground and we have worked
with the mexico state university
to start raising some seed and
in some of the excited centers I
I think you guys probably
hopefully are are using some of
that seed already but
also the seat bank also deal
let's don't put it on was but if
something burns it down it won't
get all of it right I I know
about some midnight rescues in
the back of a pick up truck they
went on up there this during the
fire this last time to get the
seat bank out for native seeds
in new mexico and it's a it's a
big job to collect cotton would
see that to collect all the
different
native plans and in that
particular wood will grow better
here than one that was collected
in colorado were somewhere far
away I think you all for the
great job you're doing I think
for the effort
I mean exciting to see
more to go yes thank you matter
chair
thank you.
Anything represented
thank you madame chair
and thank you mister president
and done
or call the
mister president neal
three years ago
the language committee came back
here and you did a presentation
as well I raised the two
concerns
one was a radio program here in
highlands and the other one was
a senate situation with the
rough riders museum so my
question and mariam chair is
regarding the rodio program
I basically encouraged you to
restart the program the last
director of the program was my
third cousin daniel garcia
and he made it into a renound
national break recognized rodio
program you're at highlands so
is one of the best and
apparently we did away with it
daniel is the sun
legally that I thought leeway
garcia a good friend of
riverside in the chat field is
deceived
but lee by was renound all
around cowboy for a senior
mexico until he died
in eighty five years of age
about seven eight years ago
and the level
in this fifties was gaining all
around comboy owners here new
mexico
and I raise that manager because
this portion of the state
the eastern communities that
I
land based traditional spanish
communities a produce some other
world's best horseman
not only in on in terms of
convoy stuff and rodeo stuff
we're talking about generational
going back to the colonial days.
In terms of the seabolaros the
first buffalo hunters out in the
planes came from here all these
communities along the eastern
sunday the crystal motor all the
way to into cheek came from here
their first command generals
came from here these are
basically hispanic man that got
on the planes and bargain and
deal with the commercials but
they also engaged in
horse trading and also human
tradie in terms of inflation
women that's why you have we
have a lot of indigenous plan
within the national mexican
spanish culture
so
where are we in terms of getting
that road of program after
ground
manager
thank you manager yes here
today is my one year anniversary
and so the direction that you
provide is three years ago I
can't speak to in the year that
i've been here I know that the
rodeo program has come up as
opportunities one of the things
that we always explore is what
is within the mission of the
university what is in the
financial abilities of the the
university and then but also
what is in the community needs
and so we are not at the point
we'll be able to restart that
program yet however we do know
that place like highlands this
is where heritage meets higher
education and the rodeo program
is as an important part of that
we're not ready to yet
one of the things that we have
to work with because the roney
program it's not an athletic
funded activity it would have to
be a student fee funded activity
and so we would have to have
significant contributions and
involvement by the students.
So as we operate with shared
governance with our student body
and their student by the council
it's a conversation that I think
comes up pretty regularly but as
the interest of the students are
with leaders to do more of that
but we're not reading it but we
do know what you're interested
in that and the something that I
hear
um i'm a fairly common basis of
a we remember this program is a
great program
I understand that that there are
and we would like to explore
that and see what's possible
when we like to deal with the
students together okay thank you
manager thank you mister
president and all of get with
the president afterwards madame
chair on my other question but I
take enough time as it is thank
you
thank you anything
representative
yes very briefly madam chair
think is so much thank you
mister meir and president
very happy to hear cause i've
not was not aware of the forced
your program that you have here
very excited to hear that I
actually I come from the
published I was raised in south
low and my mother's from tales
also very much impacted by
forced fires and fires in
general and so to hear that this
program is available here I
would imagine that most of the
trouble natural resources
departments are aware of this
and I know of many young people
who are looking for a m have
expressed an interest in this
area and agriculture of four
street and i'll be sure to
spread the word about that i'm
very happy to know about this
secondly I have a new sue
graduated from here from the
mexico highlands she is now a
public health educator at you
and m ironically but she is has
enjoyed so much of her time not
just here at the university but
in the city of las vegas she
adjusted very well it was a a
community that she adapted to
very quickly and embraced I went
on to play basketball for.
Helens and um just really proud
of her so she's already
spreading the word about the
opportunities here and I will do
the same and just want to thank
you for presenting the
information you did this morning
thank you thank you madame chair
thank you
representative mirable moya
thank you madam chair thank you
for your presentation I had the
privilege that I guess somewhat
two years ago with the language
committee to write up on side by
sides and see the that to get
that point a year old burns car
so we got to see it from from
the type of the mountain and it
was devastating it it's hard
breaking to see that the amount
of devastation that was there at
that point in and after the the
fire they were
planning seeds to kind of hold
onto the to the ground and and
and stuff like that for certain
grasses and stuff in and now i'm
excited to see that now it's
transitioned to okay let's start
putting some trees back
I think mr chatfilled for or
representative chapfelled for
giving us the progression of how
everything comes back anyway but
my question I know then they
were they were still holding
their breath on wildlife coming
back into the area how is that
happening is as as some of them
come back now that it's three
years after the fire.
Thank you
right now that i'm in the wild
life is
it I think improved I think what
it has done is it's thrown
you know where they would their
net natural habitat I know we've
had issues as a matter of fact
here at the city we know not at
our airport we're having to put
higher fence because we've
actually had two accidents
pertaining to elk into our
airport so you know that the
habitat of it you know has
changed so you know like
representative chatfield
mentioned you know hopefully
once things start growing and we
keep them keeps important they
should be and not roaming
through other areas but for you
know it has had an impact you
know with everything that we've
been through thank you manager
and mixo houses also trying to
add and bring back while life to
the area are enrollment is ahead
for fall and so we're bringing
back around student wildlife to
the area
thank you better insurance thank
you i'm i'm excited to see how
your
your efforts and and the
forestry program is going to
help get the stuff get every
everything back where it's
supposed to be instead of where
it's been displaced thank you
thank you very much anything
representative here yes thank
you manager thank you for the
presentation i'm interested on
the
programs where where does this
start from the seed to the
plantings age how long does that
take in order to
plan it.
And a chair
I don't know
two to three years two to three
years a little bird of my
shoulder
thank you madame chech and what
is the success of the trees
growing and i'm coming to
practition
i'd say that one more time
please
when you plan the tree I mean
what is the percentage of that
tree it's gonna survive
manager it's a great question I
do not only answer to that maybe
the little bird over my shoulder
might but we can we can try to
get that back.
I'm sorry we need you to come up
to the make because it's not
recorded for the for the public
so you're at your asking about
their expectancy
so my name is journal metal and
i'm the district manager to get
a month and some water
conservation district I will be
present into your folks tomorrow
but the survivability and most
cases even an ideal conditions
is somewhere before fifteen and
twenty five percent it's not
very high success and the
reforestation centers is
definitely trying to produce
trees that are more resilient to
drow they water them irregularly
like the rainfall volts here in
the mexico and they're showing
that they might have the ability
to have a higher survivability
or right now it's not it's not
very high
thank you for that answer thank
you madam chair thank you next
we have represented senate
protest you go anything yes
madam chair thank you president
and mayor when I was most
excited about in your
presentation is that you're
starting your doctoral program
and the community I live in we
have university of the southwest
and a couple of hours from my
home town is eastern new mexico
university well
our university university of the
southwest you may home town did
the same thing they they were
the first in the area to start
at a doctoral program and I was
able to be part of that first
cohort in twenty eighteen and it
was one of the greatest journeys
of my life and I definitely
dissertation and published in
twenty twenty one but the beauty
of that is is that the
university was able to grow
their own and i'm so excited to
see what your university das and
growing your own and so for the
past three years i've been
teaching business courses at the
university of the southwest and
i'll set my other online modern
eastern and so I think you have
a long list of very impressive
accomplishments but being able
to grow your own.
And being able to keep people
here in new mexico where they
choose to raise their family and
build their business and have
their careers I think that right
here in las vegas new max
because you're giving people
that opportunity to make new
maxico their home and that's
what it's all about that's why
we're doing this meaningful and
life changing policy work is to
make new maxico batter and
seeing what you're doing at this
university does as that and as
you can tell nothing makes me
more excited than politics and
academia I want to just
distribute a book of freshly
sharp and pencils to everyone
just being on your gorgeous
campus so thank you for the work
and the commitment that you have
to hear city to your people to
your students and new max
account thank you madame chair
thank you and represent them
since anything thank you madame
chairman my mind my question is
for the mayor and as I was drive
in and I noticed that you have
cleaned up a lot
how much more do you have to
clean up.
Madam chair representative
are you talking about clean up
from the burns global clean up
in so we we've done a lot of
work like I said you know we
continue to improve the quality
of life you know all around
you know from the city the
streets improving our our roads
in in cooperation with deal to
applying for more funds applying
for more beautification grants
it'll never end you know how
mean that there there wouldn't
be an end each and will continue
to
apply for grants whatever it
takes to continue to beautify
this area I think for the
longest time
the the focus has been and so
many other things but I think
the beautification I mean if you
go in a bottom more ac the end
of the improvement set story
lakes they park I mean it's
probably packed right now in a
quality of life you know all
around I think in the past
couple years you know we made an
improvement and strives to make
sure that when individuals like
you and and you know tourists
come to when the commission
hopefully you know we get one or
two that want to stick around
and live you are so you know
we've made big strides in in in
cleaning up this community
arrange with highlands and
making sure you know not only
highlights but the county so
we're doing a lot of work so I I
could you know to honestly tell
you representative that the work
will never end is as long as we
continue to to improve into that
quality thank you madame chair
and
I know that this here
home with you guys on this fire
and we watched it
from lincoln county and then we
went through it and
I know how you feel maybe not we
didn't lose as much but I do
know how you feel and you know
the thing that's probably been
the most frustrating for us is
read tape and beer rocker see
and dealing with them.
And dealing with the stay
because we want our places
cleaned up as fast as we can
possibly clean him up
one of my questions is
is it hard to draw down your
money as it hard to get paid is
it hard to pay your contractors
and adam chair representative
you're correct I think I says
leaders here locally that's
probably the biggest frustration
is the red tape that you you
know have to endure
that's one of the main reasons
as manifect last week we came
into a
intergovernmental agreement and
i'm sure later on you know I
know we present later on today
and that might be when the one
of the topics but that was one
of the reasons why one of the
partner with the stadium hopes
that you know we could eliminate
or or at least.
Tone down the amount of time it
takes on some of the red tape
that does that it that we have
to go through
you know as far as dry downs
honestly occur you know we're
still we're still waiting on a
lot of that are that that money
so
it's difficult it's frustrating
but I guess at every level
except maybe the federal
government there are the ones
that's not as frustrated as you
know as we are but I know here
at the local level the state is
probably filling the same thing
i'm sure you in other status is
encouraged in incurring those
same frustration so it is
something that we have to be
resilient and continue to fight
and that's what we do on a daily
basis is continued to fight make
sure that that we don't stop in
you know though those meetings
with female sometimes get
pretty heated but you know
that's something that I guess
we're all elected to do and we
won't stop
thank you matter chair and thank
you mister
I I think I have a fixed for it
and you know how people like to
make rules and procedures and it
gets worse and worse and worse
than madam chair.
I think when the state comes up
with the procedure they should
send you a consider service so
they have to go by their own
they need to send a
representative down here to live
here
and they need to do all your
reimbursements and see how
frustrating it really is because
a lot of your locals especially
your local contractors they need
to be pay
and some of the some of it some
of the time there happened to go
to ninety days all the way up to
a hundred and ten days before
they can get paid and when there
are steel bills running twenty
five thousand a month and their
payroll is even more than that
that's a that's a serious
problem
I don't even want to ask you
that question because I think I
can call the answer we got to
figure that out we need to give
things done and and we need to
get him done rapidly and you
know it was it was an honor to
get to work with sender composed
this year on senate bill thirty
one I signed on to that bill and
the concept was.
The year pre previous win we had
our fires in june we had a
special session we passed a
hundred million dollar bill
through HB one
because of the
language in there
you couldn't replace beings
because the bill wouldn't let
you take care of debris
my question was if you have a
house wrapped around a bridge
doesn't comment since tell you
that you have to get the house
off of the bridge before you can
fix the bridge that's that's the
stuff it's frustrating so we
went back with senate bill
thirty one cleaned up a lot of
that language to where we can do
a lot more of the common sense
things that we need to do in it
does take care of categories a
three g on the fema cleaner so
thank you center compose forget
that done and i'm hoping that we
can get a little bit smarter and
my priorities are going to be
thinking fenning feeding because
i'm sure you guys are
experiencing a lot of the
insurance problems that the rest
of the state and we're gonna
it's can be real interesting to
hear from the os I tomorrow to
hear about the insurance because
one thing that I want
audience to know
insurance traditional insurance
they're not as excited about
come into the table anymore
and the only reason that they're
here is because we can I I know
you hear a lot of the
commercials about bundling
insurance
you know I guess I understood
bundling insurance but I didn't
really understand it still
answers started leaving and in
our folks don't have insurance
in lincoln county as well as in
new mexico and what the
insurance company there's
companies are doing is they're
taken as a s.
Shot from a satellite image and
if you're in a flood zone
or if you're in a burned area
a potential burn area
you're not going to get the
insurance or your insurance is
going to be so high you will be
able to afford it so we have to
we have to do our part and
tomorrow I think we're going to
hear from our state forestry we
have to start taking some of the
rears
and we have to quit burning
people's houses down the forest
service needs to come to the
table the state needs to come to
the table and we need to start
finding fanning feeling take
that risk out so we can get our
traditional insurance back and
get normal premiums baked him
out of chair madam chair
yes mayor madam and i'm sure
representative
I I do want to know type in to
many disaster recovery
conferences you know online zoom
and and I will I do want to you
know acknowledge and think each
and every one of you and
everyone in santa fe because the
work that you guys have done
that you know the SB c excess be
one SB thirty one those are
things that a lot of other
states aren't doing so I think
in as far as policy work you
guys are are in the right page
and and ahead of many states and
I think sometimes that doesn't
go acknowledge the way it should
be so you know you guys continue
to fight for that I think we all
us that have endured this very
support above that so keep up
the good work I I do want to
think you guys for that I
appreciate don't take him out of
chair or something the last
thing I want to say is it was a
pleasure to work with center
compos and you know sender
garcia
he likes rodeo
and I like low writers nobody
knows that I do like I don't
know the low router but I do
like we'll write or so I think
there's a lot of middle ground
that we could come up with and
and this is a buy partisan
effort to get our forestand
because nothing makes me more
mad then when the forest
service.
Says lessons learn
do we really learn our lesson
or is that just a catch phrase
lessons learned we know what's
causing these fires we knows
what's burning people's houses
down him we shouldn't say
lessons learned anymore until
we're gonna actually learn our
lesson thank you
manager thank you represent
henry anything thank you
representing me did you have any
comments okay thank you I would
like to thank you both for
coming this morning i'm sorry
that we didn't have the county
commission here but i'm sure
something came up
thank you for your good work I
know we'll hear from the mayor
again and thank you for the
hospitality both of the
university and the city thank
you thank you committee members
we do have a forum and you have
the minutes from the very first
meeting and that syrap prepared
and I would entertain emotion
but before that I would let you
know that our work plan was
adopted by legislative council
and the debate about our teacher
versus cost bad we ended up with
our teacher
so we will be traveling various
places around the state and we
hope that representative henry
will help us with that down
there okay so is there emotion
on the minutes from the first
meeting.
Manager i'd like to make motion
to prove that minutes.
Thank you representative cater
zero second
there is a second from
representative sarinana is there
any debate
on the minutes is there any
opposition to the minutes
okay we have adopted the minutes
from june third and we thank the
staff very much okay we're going
to get ready for next
presentation if they would come
forward
we apologia
we have debit huges here
john romero
jonathan martinez and
john kyle sure why don't know.
Yeah.
Okay we're going to go in the
order that it's on the agenda so
I will start with the paula
debit john johnison john and if
you would introduce yourself up
for your part of the
presentation members we will
hold all our questions and
comments for the end we want to
around robin again if you would
let us know of you have a
question or comment server will
start the list okay so paula
please.
Good morning madam chairman
members of the committee my name
is poli garcia when is the
answer that yours welcome to
last thing
my name is
director the new mexico sick
association and i'm also a
former county okay
i'm director of the new mexico a
second association and i'm also
a former counter county
commissioner from what I county
and are biggest as a very
special place in this region
it's a as you can see it's a
beautiful town but it's also a
hub for the whole region and all
of our rural villages and and
farming and agricultural
communities and my my
grandparents remind me all the
time that they used to they used
to hall a wheat from motor to
anton cheekoff and they would be
writing like a low writer in
their truck up to until chicago
and then on the way back month
on chicago they would be very
light and they would just have a
little box of chile and so it's
a a special place a lot of a lot
of stories and dumb they were
spanish speakers back in those
days and and now when the when
the farmers and ranchers would
see them each other here and
biggest they would say in
english farmer and town and so
in my brick grandparents rent
their nineties they would still
a joke around and say firmer and
town every time that that they
come to vegas so it's it's so
it's a big deal we call it look
plasta you know he were going to
look at that means we're going
to town means we have business
particular parents up for dinner
whatever it is something special
so welcome to bakers
i'm from what I can I come from
multiple generations of farmers
and ratures and loggers in the
motor area and are the
organization i've been working
with with animal april most
thirty years in fact debbie
hughes and I call ourselves the
over thirty club because we've
been coming to legislature
brought for a ****.
Thirty years so I think we're
pretty good counterparts and
what we do is so we provide
technical assistance and
community education to a second
across the state in fact one of
the reasons that I was able to
be supportive in the disaster
recovery effort here and the
hermit's peak can't canyon fire
was because of previous work
that we had done in lincoln
county and representative
instance district
with the second there and so I
knew how to talk the mine dhcman
I was grateful for that
experience and today what we're
going to do is give you an
overview of a second disaster
recovery efforts and i'm very
grateful for for every person
here at this table for being
such good partners i'm going
through a disaster as a
devastating and humbling
experience
as senator compass can attest
being being here during the fire
is it's frightening many of our
families last homes and men and
where I live a lot of people
lost forest land and and it
really does shake your
foundations but this communities
resilient and and despite the
hardship I like to look at the
glass house for and to see the
the positive work that's
happened in the last three years
my personal personal assector
not personally it's a community
of secure but it's very personal
for me because a we thought we
got water in our secure flowing
regularly for the first time
since the fire in june of this
year and and and i'm not looking
at i'm not complaining that it
took long I am grateful that it
happened because it is such a
huge effort to pull all these
pieces together and i'm very
grateful that a second flowing
again it's it's because every
everybody here and this table
has played a role in that and so
it takes a lot of time work.
And we want to share with you
some of the the lessons learned
the challenge as we've had that
the road ahead what we need to
do in the future
so it's my one the first thing I
want to show you is this this
picture is of a second mother
the home and this is a second
debris removal project in what I
county that was done make by new
mexico department of
transportation and I you'll hear
a little bit about that that
effort in a little bit
and this is one of the second
that gets flooding on under
recurring basis so after a fire
there's flooding that happens
very often but where I go any
further I I do want to mention
that we have members of our
enemy eighteen year old
technical assistance providers I
just want to ask them to stand
up and like the committee known
madam chair that that we built
up a team and build capacity
around a second governance and a
secure end a second disaster
recovery and infrastructure
that's grown since uh twenty two
since this happened so we do
feel that as we go forward with
future disasters will have more
capacity so thank you for
letting me acknowledge them for
being here so you want everybody
from the government's group to
please stand
thank you for being here with us
today we really appreciate so
let me ask first before you go
ahead is anybody having trouble
hearing police okay so apologies
I turn this off either we're
going to try to get you closer
or to see if there's anything we
can do thank you.
Is that better thank you sorry
about that.
Alright the next the next sheet
has art presentation outlined
for from my presentation and
at first thing I want to talk
about is which a second are we
talking about that have been
damaged in major disaster of
statewide secondly I know review
of disaster programs and then a
status of the disaster recovery
and then i'll end with some some
lessons learned
first of all it want to point
out their number of seconds
there that there are statewide
there are about seven hundred a
seconds across the state of new
mexico and twenty three
different counties so you'll see
that they are statewide and they
tend to be in the tributaries to
the larger rivers so that puts
them right in the areas that are
most vulnerable to fires and and
post fireflooding highlighted in
red are those areas that have
been hit with major disasters
fired and post fire flooding
just in the last three years so
you can see there we've got
curse from its peak cafe kenya
but we've also got the the link
in county area
the healah and members valleys
are real charm of flooding
there's also disasters in the
hemis area and those are the
major disasters in any given
year there's several flash
flooding events across the state
that tend to be smaller
the next slide number four
gives you a quick summary of
where those disasters have taken
place in the twenty two black
fire
about three hundred twenty five
thousand acres and twenty five
damaged a second and twenty two
hermets peak cafcanian three
hundred and forty thousand with
ninety damage to seconds and set
up allow had one etc although
that one second has multiple
assectors attached to it and
then the south fork result fire
twenty five thousand acres in
about twenty damage to set
real charm of flooding about
eight a second and then other
non federal disasters have had
smaller numbers.
Um in dixon ramadio and a cruise
ser county and several others so
out of that seven hundred and
seconds we were estimating about
a hundred and fifty in three
years have been damaged in some
way through the recent disasters
so one is shared the next thing
which is a quick overview and I
know this is probably redundant
that you you've heard this and
your familiar with this but one
highlight if you elements of the
disaster programs that are
really important for me to
secure perspective
first of all female female
public assistance and the reason
I I want it bring up fee my gad
it's so important it's a very
important agency and as
representative
vincent said there there's
always a that red tape element
to female
and and that is going to be
something that will talk about
as a panel but i'm gonna stick
to the the fundamentals be my
covers emergency to bear in
mobile and structural repairs
it's under reimbursement basis
so I think i'm very grateful
that the the legislature has
addressed that reimbursement
issue with SB six and as be
thirty one which provides
upfront money for local
governments I think that was a
very
a very good
these public policy under fema a
second would administer their
own projects so if you if you
think local governments with
staff have difficulty with red
tape just imagined why the
volunteer organization would do
with all that red tape
so secondly you have d h s c m g
h s c am is uh they do their
smaller disasters it's similar
to female pay
and again a second would have
administered their own projects
both of these have a seventy
five twenty five cashier so if
it's a female project it's a
seventy five federal twenty five
state and local if it's a dhcm
project at seventy five day and
twenty five percent local.
Um you also have it in nurse
emergency watership program and
those are declared by by nrcs so
they don't need a presidential
or a governor declaration but
and they can declare those on
their own but those also have a
seventy five twenty five
customer what's different about
nrcs is that the sponsors which
are usually saw water districts
are a county they will my
administrator of the projects so
the second doesn't have to ask
for money and get money
appropriate here contractors the
agency or the sponsor does that
for them so that's going to be
an important distinction will
talk about a speaker forward and
forth you have the hpc claims
office that's unique to this
disaster so
we can't really generalize from
that experience to other
disasters but under that one
there is no cash it's a hundred
percent federal because that
legislation was based on the
premise that it was the federal
government's responsibility for
this disaster
in terms of partnerships on
disaster recovery these
partnerships build on those
disaster programs the first one
I want to mention is an mdot
emergency at the brief removal
and this involves female dhs
yeah DFA plus and am dot takes a
lot of coordination to make this
happen and that's what john
romero is going to talk about
in those examples it's only
forward emergency to previous
mobile so female has a category
a and b which emergency
depending on other types of
permanent work
so enemped your tea administers
the project's procures the
contractors and does the
depremental and then they get
reimbursed by female so that's a
gift to the asset yes the second
does not have to do all the
beamer paperwork they they fill
out one paper for dot and dot
the state agency does the rest
so.
We consider that really good
model
there is a seventy five twenty
five cushion except for hermes
peak which covered a hundred
percent in rcs and ewp again
that space on local sponsors we
have a very capable incompetent
sponsor here with them gerald
romero with a terrible desk
they've been a real a godsend
here in this disaster
they also work with dfa cause of
the size of this particular
disaster
and an enemy has worked under
contract so awc requires a
sponsorship the sponsor provides
the match manages the projects
and procures the contractors
course hpc there was no cashier
we have an assector bureau at
isc
they have a role to play the
haven't had to use a lot of
their funding because other
programs are covering the
funding but it's a good they
have a fine that can be used for
disaster recovery in chinatown
we'll talk about that it can be
I think i'd be particularly
useful for cautious our
requirements they can also fund
assessments and are lastly
new mexico second association
our non profit is a ta provider
our main role is on the under
finance we do the outrage we
will be informer seconds about
disaster process and help with
applications and we have a
contract with high water mark
and they help with a more
technical aspects of female pa
the dat program and then damage
in retortion each and each
studies
slid seven gives you a summary
of the status of and pride some
data but a numbers of these
recovery efforts so the first
thing I want to point out is
that the state wide nature of
these disasters you've got her
midspeak black fire self iron
self work real channel flooding
and then all the others the
smaller ones.
And altogether these amount to
about hundred and fifty
statewide and each pcc that the
highest number that you'll see
it is for nursias e w
and there were over a hundred
applications and are name is the
the cheap partner without which
was will talk about
and the reason I said as they're
tending to go with this this ewp
program is because of what I
described that the agency the
sponsor administers the program
so you'll see the progress so
far there's fourteen completed
including my own which is very
nice there's forty seven designs
and completed forty nine designs
and progress so there are still
a ways to go and wear near three
so gives an idea of the the the
long time that it takes part of
the issue of the reason it's so
long which which will be touched
on later is is the need for more
engineers and more contractors
so we we hit a bottle neck in it
each of these disasters because
of a need for more firms that
provide these services
and mdo tea to bring mobile
there's fifty four most so email
ways that one paper that one
document it's a memorial of
agreement of the assector fills
out to ask for help from mdrt
and they've completed thirty
eight
again these are reimbursed by
fima it's really important that
this program continue beyond
august
of this year because there are
cascading events cascading
events are the recurring
flooding that happens on the
burned score
you can see the numbers or black
fire there there's smaller but
i'm still very important to us
that was actually where we
really learned how to go the
partnership around and then drt
to do the breathing move in the
salt fire and soft work
there are about twenty rpa's.
And about the same a second also
did in our csewp but their
mostly opting to go through your
p
I am not i'm not starting how
they're meeting the cashier I am
still trying to understand if
that's going on real comma they
have we have a rpa's and
probably the same number of ewp
applications so
if you if you are from any of
these areas i'd be happy to
answer some more questions
offline
i'm gonna quickly run through uh
couple of low cheese that is to
illustrate how these problems
work their like a puzzle and
every second a little different
and how you peace together these
different programatic pieces
so i'm a share with you my asset
your first this is a second time
not there and they had to piece
together
three different programs and
this was through a lot of
cooperation but first the second
had to dig themselves out first
higher their own backhaul too
clear about a hundred feet of
selt and they did that every
time it rained now they're
asking for that to be reimbursed
by the claims office but the the
debris move off through the
length of the ditch was done by
mmot contractors and they did it
really excellent job and thirdly
for the structural repair or or
you don't we have to rebuild
the diversion because of the
amount of solved that was
accumulating so nrcse wp and and
it is a really great program
because they did the design and
they said that people out and
they took care of the
contraction and everything I
mean they just consulted with us
we had to sign off our secure
official officials
but it's a it's a really it's
inefficient program it's not
fast all the time but but it's a
really good model for a second
that's why I think is there are
using it.
Also great help a ditch this is
in the mean and this this the
second used in mdot for their
depremental and a a second alarm
plaster and dixon they used
mmdot as well for their debris
removal and both of the
assistances the state covered a
hundred percent and that was
through governor emergency order
dollars so i'm gonna wrap up
with some lessons learned
number one cautious requirements
about twenty five percent
caution and it does matter what
part of the state you're in it's
going to be prohibited for local
communities it's definitely on a
problem for a second because
we're volunteer we don't have a
tax base there is no way that I
second could cover this cost but
this is a married major problem
for counties and towns and and
local governments of all sizes
so what we've
looked at is is options for
meeting that cash requirement
again hermes peak caf ken and
didn't worry about that it's a
hundred percent federal but any
other disaster black fire the
salt
south work those ones real
charmer flooding they will have
to worry about that cautious
some ideas for how and the
second I can cut cover the
conscious through the secure
bureau that are jonathan
administers there's also the dfa
match fund and I was checking in
with df over the last few days
and
they said they are going to be
using some of the the match fund
for the real chama for the
program in the real charmer so
that's the first example i've
heard of that
where the batchman is being used
for a second disaster recovery
but that's a very positive thing
we might want to think about
what happens if there's a
disaster and that match fund is
depleted because i'm also i've
also been made aware that that
that match fund gets bent.
The the the demand for it
exceeds that on amount of
dollars so if there was a set
aside for disasters not just a
second but disasters generally
then it would answer a problem
for all our communities not just
a second so that cautious is
something we have it mailed
because of the lack of cautious
every time that they're doing a
disaster were reinventing the
wheel where is the cause you're
going to come from and everyone
scrambling to find the cashier
that slows down the recovery and
that's not good for anybody so
that is one of the most
important things a second the
emergency deprivation of all
again this is related to the
caution if we're having to
reinvent the wheel every time
there's a disaster it's going to
slow down the recovery or in
some cases they're not going to
get emergency to breathing over
from dot which works very well
and like in the case of redossal
the second there didn't get the
nd will walk because there
wasn't a cashier
so we this has to be
institutionalised with
agreements between the agencies
that are formalised and a
reliable source of money that
steady another lesson learned
and recommendation is concerning
cascading events
it sounds better than recurring
flooding cascade sounds like a
waterfall it's cascade so I
think that's why people like
that word
but there is going to be a point
where these federal disasters
are not going to be extended
anymore we get extensions from
female and as long as there's
that emergency that female money
keeps flowing but once that's
over and the burns car still
there guess who's on the hook
for that these are going to be
state disasters and so we can't
think of his disaster as like a
one time thing and then we move
on to normal times like
disasters are what's happening
this is we'll weigh it is now
and disasters like a permanent
state of being.
In our communities now so we
need to think about looking
ahead and preparing for that
increasing cost for state
disasters after the female dates
expire
number four technical assistance
asked or government and managed
by volunteers so specialized
technical assistance is very
video
nmcd has
great expertise with former nrcs
implies like norman behill who's
here in the back the guru and
and all of these
efforts out we're trying to
build capacity with our team and
in doing some training on
recovery but we need to expand
dhcms recovery efforts there's
actually a really positive
development a length of walker
is here and she's the first ever
a secure dedicated staff person
that dhcm and so she started a
maybe a few months ago here
actually is from swaving a line
of walker is keeping a tracker
of the different asset yes and
what the status is that why all
the partners can have a same
data so all the partners ideally
weren't worth sending data to
her she compounds it into one
tracker and we can all
communicate across the different
partnerships so
also in terms of any man we've
developed a certain level of
expertise that's really helpful
particularly with the outreach
and that initial application
process and an increase in
technical assistance will be
needed there in the future
number five I mentioned the
reliance at nrcs and as I
mentioned there's a reason that
seconds are going within our cs
instead of female because of the
way they handle the project
and so given a try they'll go
with it with either in our cs
date and look the local sponsors
are going to need capacity to
continue to prove to provide
this role.
And that staffing that's a
technical expertise
we're also concerned the nrcs is
undergoing a reduction and staff
at the federal level because of
federal budget cuts and energy s
is a is a really wonderful
agency and
it's tragic to see those cuts
and but I I think they'll be
applications for these programs
if if those cuts continue
also a psychologically for
inner cs has his for some reason
been going to the nrcs chief
every time there's a disaster
when I should just be a matter
of policy that were eligible
that delays recovery by months
we didn't get the n r c s e p
program in her might speak for
several months after the
disaster and it should have been
in place and day one
lastly a state should develop a
program like you
p
that is covered with female
reimbursements and our state
funds and modeled after the
empty or two program so that the
major gap we're going to have if
in our cs chant meet the demand
is that nmot could do the
premoval and and the the
structural repairs that and our
cs is doing
fnrecist and isn't able to keep
up with the demand that state
dollars may be needed for that
in the future
so that madam chair those are
those are some recommendations
and
be happy transfers from
questions after my colleagues
present thank you
thank you very much
if you didn't reduce yourself
for the committee thank you.
Better chair there was the
committee who's on the executive
director with the new mexico
association conservation
districts that are forty seven
solar water districts are or
members and
we've been proud to just
can everybody here okay so
you're going to have to
reposition
thank you that better
we've been proud to be part of
this partnership before I get
started I do want our lead
program manager the one
responsible for getting all of
this work down to the please
stand out norman be held
norman
is retired from usda in rcs so
he already had that those
qualifications and he actually
prepared this entire report so
if we get into technical issues
will be talking to norman you've
also met gerald romero and I
want to make sure you understand
really what gerald did when it
comes to this and what this
chier montest district did like
policy they can't even bring up
the money the federal money to
the state without local sponsor
so chairman does and the western
morris
and said okay will be the local
sponsor gerald has done some
presentations and you're going
to hear about here from tomorrow
about four street but he has
told us that he had over twelve
hundred land owners come into
the tier montes office most of
them were yelling or crying
after all this disaster so he
didn't get any staff increase he
just model through and did what
he had to do I think there's he
has two other people
but we are excited that you've
given us funding for the next
three years I could help with
staffing so i'm gonna start out
with letting you know about an
opportunity that we hope it's
still coming to the mexico in
december we sign up a new
contract with usda for fifteen
million dollars that fifteen
million dollars most of it would
go to new mexico thirteen point
six million just a work with the
sake yesterday white like
political there's a lot of the
sake.
Lot of their structures
infrastructures very very old so
we are met with fsa in march
i've talked to him since then
they're like don't give up we're
still reviewing this so it's a
water savings water conservation
program that we hope we're still
gonna be able to bring this
fifteen million mexico on the
hermets peak cafcain and far
you've got to hand out there and
our state association was first
asked to go in and do
assessments of the damage and
the sake is so that was kind of
our role
as in our cs was able to get the
ewp money emergency waters are
protection money they came back
to us and said we need you guys
to handle all the rebuild for
the sake yes because we don't
have the staff this was before
the big staff got to so it's
just they didn't have people
anymore that we're trained to
work with the sake of somehow
we've got to figure out how to
get more people trained to work
with the sake as guys anyways so
you can see the numbers on here
the numbers of assessments we
did
like police said the diversion
dams I mean if a diversion was
come out of a river and account
completely wiped out you can't
get water to the asset yet
without fish it fixing that so
like she said our slow down
partly was requiring a study
archer surveys kind of got
through that then they're
requiring biological opinions
for a little mouse
able to get around that because
in our cs stepped back in and
said this is an emergency so we
will handle it
so we've run into some road
blocks but we're moving pretty
good now we have hired two
additional engineering firms so
now we have three and three
different engineers working on
this and we've expended six
point three million already just
on doing this work with the sake
is in this tournament speak cafe
can if I remember more norman's
report
he was estimating it's going to
cost like forty three million at
least just to get these a sake
yes back up and running with all
the work that we have to do.
I also wanted to point out that
our partnership started in two
thousand and fifteen probably
and one of the reasons I think
we were more prepared to do this
is because we had worked
together
in two thousand and eighteen i'm
just i'm not going to go through
it all but I just want to show
you that core partners in macy
was already working with her
state association at the sake
yes we are already working with
their state streams
and several of the sale wanted
to have their own millery commit
a lot of their dollars for a
sake you work so there was
twenty two projects that were
done then we've listed a bunch
of projects
we actually had three different
what we call regional
conservation partnership branch
that we had to apply for and
even bring the money to the
mexico you have to have at least
a wonder one match so for every
dollar we were asked for which
in this case was seven point two
million we had to have a wonder
when match but if you'll notice
on here
at one point our partner
contribution was over fifteen
million and that's because we're
working together we were getting
the value that association was
doing but also the capital
outlay that you run through is
see the core of engineers money
all that we're we're able to put
it together and make it work the
sake is or not having to pay the
twenty five percent or ten
percent or whatever we work
together as a team so I wanted
to just show you that
if we did finish about fifty six
different projects with it was
seven point two million over six
point six went on the ground
parliamentary dfa me or they're
working really great with us we
were able to get an emergency
agreement to start working on
this stuff but they've had some
growing pains too I understand
now they have an infrastructure
bureau so maybe that's going to
help with some of this
but the other thing you do need
to know and paul a mentioned it
is us date in rcs which had a
hundred and seventy some of them
people just last fifty two
people in new mexico so as far
as technical.
Help that's going to really hurt
us with our foreign real
programs our disaster programs I
believe in our cs reported the
other day that there's fourteen
or fifteen ewps in new mexico we
have the most of any state
anywhere we are more herson
floods in any state horribly but
that's that's true.
In mcd also has a couple of
contracts with the four service
we're working with them on some
technical work
but as far as thinning
benefiting that representative
of vincent mentioned the
songwater districts are also the
ones that are applying for and
putting money on the ground
through state four street and
the water trust board we are
trying to get more the districts
to stand up and do that I will
point out that our project
manager normally be hill is also
the chairman of the upper
chamber so i'm water district
and they are doing a huge amount
of force standing up there with
money that they've been able to
get through state for street and
so the more you can partner
together use the strength of
each other the better better off
you're going to be I did want to
point out one program because
police said we may need the
state to help more with the
fifty two people gone from nrcs
I think we are we're looking at
needing to
a mandate or kind of ramp up or
program that you have been
funded finding force for over
twenty years it's a technical
service provider the money goes
to the university and mexico
state university and our state
association has been been
bidding on it but then we
actually hire people it's half
funded by the state how funded
by fed so you're putting in
about six hundred thousand for
this technical provider
additional money and we are
placing people in it the
universities officers right now
we have about twenty nine and
we're still hiring because it
rcs is going the other way so
one of the things is going to
save new mexico is the fact that
twenty years ago we were smart
enough to set up this program
but right now you're putting in
six hundred thousand and if
we're going to be able to to
ramp up the work that we need to
do with the thing and everything
I think we're gonna need to wrap
that procedure project up and
the sole our districts are
working on evidence but i'm not
gonna go through the list I want
to make sure we get the whole
panel in here and we really
appreciate what glad to answer
any questions thank you matcher
thank you very much next we'll
go to january
can put this right on my mouth
where you guys can hear me.
A good morning everyone good
morning a matter of chair vice
chair committee members my name
is general merrill i'm with the
nmt arm I am the how we operate
individual director so just a
real quick story but growing up
on my data my uncles you know
always trying to move to to be a
good person be a good student
due while in life and one thing
they constantly told us is if
you don't do good in school
you're going to be a digitally
when you grow up
I try to get good rates I did
agree you got a good career and
here we are i'm a digital
but in all seriousness on you
know a secure you know anywhere
everyone in the mexico were all
affected and were all part of a
circulars I myself in a
participant in two seconds in
the pocket area and one thing
that i've noticed growing up is
embarrassing in their secures
has decreased every year when we
do a routine maintenance there's
fewer and through people that
show up and the people that do
are getting older and older and
my circuit that used to take us
maybe six hours to clean now is
taking this two weekends
we actually got someone around
this I have year we asked our
local football team to help us
guide a down on one day so that
was great but you know it's just
routine maintenance I couldn't
imagine how would be on my
secure to have these kind of
disasters in this type of
flooding on you would be
something well beyond our means
so I think through the efforts
with any and r c s teachers him
all this of the paula talked
about this is immensely
important to our seconds to help
keep them going
our work with your secure
hovered around the fires in two
thousand twenty two the hermit's
peak cafcanian and the black
fire so we've been helping with
those and continue to help with
those as a as as time goes on
and I apologize that not
abroad my presentation but I
will show you.
What pages were on so second
page it's title the secure work
and this is based basically
outlines the process that we
followed with the hurbans people
cafcanion to
coordinate work and
not only with female with dsm
and with the seconds themselves
to get them done now the
important thing and I I might be
repeating a a bill of what
policy said is the female
process itself and again whom is
capcainion where we're following
the public assistance program
we're doing the dealt can only
do the cat be work which is
debiting move on emergency
repairs.
Um but it is very challenging
and for a couple of reasons
first it's reimbursement based
we got a you have to be able to
front all the money
second there there's an enormous
amount of administrative work
i'm not only with how you
contract with your vendors how
you monitor him how you keep
track of them how you are submit
reimbursement requests and
through all their efforts we
we've been able to to help to
accomplish at that.
So moving on to the next page
are spent to date
so as
as polite explained we've done
so far thirty nine a second
within their misp cap canyon
brings car only amounts to over
a hundred miles of a secure
clean up and you know going back
to cleaning ditch a lot of times
it's back breaking work
especially in a lot of our
northern ditches it's hard to
get a equipment into and so we
we do get equipment where we can
but lot of it is manual labor so
err it's it's been an extreme
effort there's some dollar
amounts that we we've incurred
the debris and we've all we've
contracted with stampede
ventures incorporated just over
sixty five million dollars worth
of actual debris removal work
now the minute I mean this is
where the administrative work
comes in thompson consulting
services has been helping us
make sure everything's bunded up
we get all of our environmental
clearances everything looks good
so we can get a reimbursement
that itself is around three
million dollars so it's roughly
around five percent of of what
the construction costs are.
One thing with our our prime
contractor you know we procured
him to emergency per chairman
but one thing we placed in the
in the contract as we highly
encourage them to hire local so
especially with their secures
we've been hiring their subs
that they've been hiring are
either local companies
or local people so for instance
thompson consulting is hired a
lot of people from around this
area top of the monitoring and
stamp adventures has hired a lot
of local companies to to do the
actual work so that way this
money i'm gets repenishing it to
put back into the community
we've been trying to to make it
as equitable as possible split
it up amongst the companies and
I I think we've done a pretty
good job of that swine to the
next two slides and also to
shuffle through them real quick
you can look at them with these
of the list of the seconds that
we've done today again five
hundred and forty four thousand
feet which is just over a
hundred miles that we've done
today
one thing I want explain about
the asset is an apolognes
touched on it a bit would just
floods in general the weekend
looks at it is disasters are one
and done a tornado comes it's
gone a hurricane cons it's gone
even a fire comes it's gone but
flooding last several years and
it took some work to we're in
working with our consolidated
with homeland security to
explain to female exactly that
can hundred that were in that
this isn't just a one time event
and to allow them to participate
or convince them to participate
in cascading events.
A lot of these ditches we've
done multiple times and so that
that's been a huge thing another
thing that the more wasn't
filming familiar with is a
secure is right first that even
what that means but just how
how we we clean him how we
report on in a lot of female
disasters when we are doing work
whether it's knocking down a
building cutting down a tree
that type of stuff we have
comparables throughout the
nation that that they can refer
to to make sure we're
establishing honest prices for
that work or ditch digging out
we couldn't find anyone in the
internation that does it so it
took a lot of time to explain to
him how tedious and expensive it
can be especially when you're
doing hand labor so again to our
concern through paula's group
and to home that security we've
been able to overcome that
hurdle with female so I believe
now that they know what in a
secure is and they know what's
involved in it when flooding
occurs.
On these last two slides are
just of some before and after I
think they admit to a secure
association showed some better
ones but we can shuffle on
through those are the last slide
is just our work it's part of
the black fire project one
receive yes thank you
it was funded primarily through
executive orders or it was
funded through executive orders
it was not a a female
reimbursement project just
because it did not mean that
disaster did not meet the
threshold for female
participation
and actually whining back for
the hermes be cafen we did front
although you know through that
back who I knew my conversation
back we did not have to find
that through
we did find it initially through
executive orders
given by the governor's office
of which we are going to
reimburse as we proceed through
the female reimbursement so just
like what i'd like to close with
is this has been a colossal
effort with a lot of people
involved I think polo really
explained that well and even me
being part of this I still
learned I still don't have a
good undersign of whose who does
what I know what I hope to do it
there's just so much stuff
involved with this and that you
know I just really like to think
paul up and mess cool a second
association her efforts and
coordination I think is
impivated in making this whole
effort work and making a
successful thank you and I stand
for questions
thank you very much and will now
go to johnson marti.
Good morning everyone I know
it's getting close to lunchtime
my name is john of the martinez
madame chairman members of the
committee I am the second euro
chief with the new mexico
interstate strim commission
and we have a long standing
program of assisting a second
with their infrastructure
projects that that has been in
existence for many many many
years
in twenty nineteen there was an
effort made to create an
assector and community ditch
infrastructure fund
and during that legislative
session that was passed it
created a fund that allocates
two and a half million dollars
annually for a second projects
one of the unique things that
that
that bill did was also open the
door for engineering assistance
the program that we administered
through our agency for many many
years was strictly a
construction dollars for a
second project so was really to
get get that project on the
ground there were a lot of other
resources out there with nrcs
helping provide that technical
assistance which are no longer
there any more so we found that
the real bottleneck was
engineering and so
that that fund opened the door
to allow for planning and
engineering and addition to
construction
and twenty if you want to go to
an offense a slight yeah thank
you
so again the the assector
community ditch infrastructure
fund was created
in twenty twenty three that bill
was amended or that fund was
amended to add
to adding disaster response and
recovery decided to response
recovery and hazard mitigation
and I think that was an direct
response to the very
very bad twenty twenty two
wildfire season we had we had
two of the largest fires in new
mexico during that year.
Arm and so in response to that
that also opened the doors for
that
and that the other important
thing of the twenty twenty three
legislation is that also removed
the local cautious requirement
for a second so a lot of our
programs used to have a local
cost share match that that they
had to put in in order to
receive funding from the state
or from our program that was
stripped out and so there's no
longer a match so it's a hundred
percent state funded or if we're
matching with federal could be
federal and steep state match
again two and a half million
dollars
for planning engineering designs
construction and the disaster
response recovery and how
certain mitigation
again planning just a brief
overview of of kind of each of
these planning and scoping is
really just to help your secures
identify
help them find a solution to
their problem get an engineer
out there and give them some
real alternatives to what
problem they're facing and what
are some potential solutions
with some real high level cost
estimates so they can make an
informed decision on how they
would like to proceed i'm
engineering design services
again those are grants that they
apply to our agency for to then
hire a consulting engineer to
design a project for them to to
solve that that problem that
they're facing
construction funding again is is
the funding to actually
construct that project but we
also include the engineering
assistance funds so that that
engineer can help that assect ya
bit out that project oversee the
construction to ensure that that
project is built according to
the design plans and
specifications for that and then
lastly the disaster response
recovery and hazard mitigation
funds again this is new this
this
was added in in twenty twenty
three.
We have not used this very much
as of yet we have been fortunate
enough to have some capital
outlay appropriations and some
special appropriations to the
agency to assist a second that
we have utilised for some are
disaster response efforts but we
do have the ability to use a
cdif wondering assuming that we
have the funding available
to to assist a second with their
disaster response recovery
efforts
again the two and a half million
dollars part of money doesn't go
very far when we're building
projects it used to be that we
could build diversion dams for a
hundred hundred and fifty
thousand dollars and these are
on smaller streams costs are so
high now that you know those
same projects or anywhere from
two hundred and fifty plus and
so the two point five million
just doesn't get us very far but
we do have the ability to to
fund out of this this program
for that effort
next slide just real briefly
some of the deadlines so
planning applications that's on
a year round basis on a secure
basically just needs to give us
a letter of interest addressing
the problem in knee or
explaining what the problem in
their need is so that we can
work with our own call
engineers or consultants to get
somebody out there to do that
engineering and construction
applications have some pretty
hard deadlines because we have
to present in our work plans to
our commission the interstate
stream commission the list of
projects that were planning on
utilizing that two and a half
million dollars for or any
additional specials or or
capital for i'm and then the
disaster response recovery and
hazard mitigation again it's
your round they can approach us
at any time we can't put a real
hard deadline on that cause we
don't know when these events are
going to happen so any time as
long as the demonstrate that
they have.
Been declared a disaster by
either of the governor of female
and or e w p program and that
they've reached out to those
programs on these funds can also
be used as kosher match to help
with these programs for any
caution match requirement
and slide
a little bit on some of the
disaster assistance that we have
provided
due to the twenty two wildfire
season
we did higher a consultant that
we have on call to do some
damage assessments of the
impacts in the black fire burns
car area out in the health
members area as well as the
hermit's peak caf candidate area
specifically for a second this
was an effort really to try to
support their claims to female
of the amount of damages they
sustained and so we we mobilised
a consultant out to these areas
to do some assessments and help
those the secures understand
that real extent of their
damages and what some rough
costs were with that one of the
other things I would like to
point out is that we have also
started some a regularly
scheduled they started on a on a
kind of a monthly by monthly
basis some a secure funding
coordination meetings these were
meetings that that we
started with you know and
they're held between us the the
asset is see a secret program
department of finance and
administration the new mexico
secure commission second
association
department of justice officer
state engineer as a recently
we've got something normal
involved in I think the last
meeting with enemy
but but the idea there is to try
to coordinate and make sure that
we are all on the same page and
and core needing our efforts on
funding opportunities for a
second.
In general but also for for
disaster response
just a few slight and and you
can look at these that you're on
these are these are just some of
the projects we have constructed
over the years these aren't
necessarily related to disaster
response but just a second
infrastructure type projects
that we have we have constructed
and helped us secures to keep
keep their culture going and and
secures a live so with that that
concludes my part of the
presentation thank you.
Thank you very much
have a list that started and so
far I have represented my clean
representative instant
representative center carters
representative little
representative case
others
okay so let's start mr
thinking man chair
thank you all for your
presentations the question is
the thing to paul and debit
and that the johns might want
the chairman on this too but
whenever I hear me you're
addressing the difficulties of
coming up with costs and I get
that but whenever I hear
anything relying on federal
funding or federal agencies
these days I start to get crazy
feeling and I just wonder
if you if you could address that
you may thought about
the prospect for the lack of not
only federal funding but really
you know a partnership with the
federal government these
projects.
Madame chairman representative
mcqueen
you provides are very important
point and I share your concern
about
the liability of partnerships
considering the type of budget
cuts that are being are proposed
at the federal level and that's
why one of my
lessons learn and
recommendations has to do with
what we do with the reduced
staffing at nrcs and I think as
as debi mentioned it shifts the
burden to the state
and that's that I think the
important take away that as the
federal government pulls back
from from assistance a lot of
that burden falls to the state
and you can see the dollars that
we're talking about just the
dibirdian move and this was I
think john that was just h pc on
our with AP eight eight uh h c c
black and and rear ribe
but if I recall it was like in
the sixty million dollars range
just for debris mover and that
for hpc that was that was
reimbursed by fema
so the other concern is will its
female gonna be um
is it gonna be viable for female
to continue paying those can
reimbursements or not just here
we're talking about disasters
all over the country and if if
without that federal money it
puts a very major stream on our
communities so I mean i'm i'm
hoping that color heads will
prevail at the national level
that disaster programs will be
nonpartisan that
that we can see the all of our
communities have a stake in
recovery and that that funding
those agencies will continue to.
To provide the support that's
needed in our communities
thank you madame chair
represented mcqueen
i'm a little more positive about
the federal funding this one
water districts about half of
mine new mexico actually
cohoused with the federal office
so we weren't very closely
within rcs
yes I understand they've cut a
lot of staffing I agree with
have to pick it up at the local
level but my understanding is
they are some of the money that
wasn't spent last year they're
going to add about a billion
dollars back into the farm bill
so I still believe we're gonna
have really good foreign bill
programs coming equip csp I
don't know what's going to
happen with the p
but we are stepping forward
we've already restructured
district employees and our tsps
and said how many of you are
ready to actually do
conservation planning training
so because in our cs is not
going to have those folks we are
working with in our cs the
department bag in a i've already
got twenty five people signed up
statewide that are going to sign
up as conservation planners so
that we can help at the local
level so
a point I want to make is as you
can tell this has been mass
confusion because so many
programs so many dollars coming
from different directions that's
one of the reasons it's taken us
a while to all get going but
also another point is there's
private and there's community
asakias and the private asakias
don't qualify for the wp even
though we're paying a hundred
percent here so i'm still
hopeful that the farm bill
brings us a lot of money oh I
think our state in our cs hoping
that he'll get to hire more
people back in the meantime
we're actually hiring some of
his folks that left in our cs
we're hiring them through our
state association and our tsb
program so they can continue to
work in a mexico thank you.
Well thank you for that i'm
going to hear at least a little
bit of optimism you know and
each pcc is
it is an interesting example
because it's not just female but
you know like a hurricane you
know there's federal
responsibility there because
they started the fire
my senses were losing reducing
funding we're losing personnel
we're losing expertise
in its it's can I have real
consequences
I think we use the state need to
you know hope for the best
essentially is that he said but
also prepared to go the long
because I think when pushchams
deserve
yeah this partnership three for
light on the past might not be
there thank you very much.
Thank you next we have a
representative vincent.
Thank you madame chair and they
keep presenters this is
really an interesting for me so
I heard that pesky word again
less since learn
and when I was wanting to know
is
the lessons that we say we learn
how are you going to document
those and how are you going to
roll that plan out and how are
you going to measure the
progress
of the lessons that we learn in
the work.
Madame chair represent the
incentive i'll take that
question since I used that term
and I I do as I said at the
beginning of the presentation I
I do look at the glass have in
terms of where what's been
accomplished so far
and what we've learned and I
think all of us have told you
that it's an enormous effort you
have experience and we we know
our piece of it
and then somehow it's all
getting done um there's there's
in a second task for us that's
been convened by dhscm and every
time we we meet there's a new
problem that comes up and all
the partners have to
troubleshoot and problem solve
around how to how to get past
something um sometimes it's a an
a secure brings forward a new
challenge that we hadn't
anticipated so
that's one place that notes are
taken decisions or made and
there's a record of that problem
something so I think that's a
positive thing that that a
second task for us exists and it
meets regularly and it's it's
not just specific twenty one
disaster so
i'm i'm really glad that the
agency has assigned staff to
that and they take very detailed
notes there is to do less after
reach meeting and people circle
back and hold each other
accountable so that's one place
as far as
a plan with with metrics and
no things that would deliver
both things we can monitor I
think that plan still has yet to
be developed
the the policy recommendations
that I sure today are
conceptual I think we need to
add dollar numbers dollar
amounts to those and program
designs.
So that we can make those
actionable recommendations and I
think we're three years into
this we've learned a lot but I I
agree with you that unless you
put canceled to paper and make
them actionable steps then there
was less than learn
won't become reality unless we
actually take action on them so
i'm i'm with you I fully agree
that that we need to be forward
thinking but actually implement
those and and I can say we have
a way to go but I I do think
that we have a good foundation
from which to build that plan
they came out of chair and
one thing.
One thing I would hold that you
guys are doing is i'm gonna give
you a real quick scenario of
something that happened in
linking county
and we implement these
strategies okay in your position
and all of your other state and
maybe federal
stay colders
and we don't listen to the
locals
and the locals those guys
especially those ones that have
modes a gray hair that's been
around a long time that seen a
lot of things there often the
smartest people in the room they
might not be an internet but I
would I would say that they're
smarter than the engineers maybe
not died actively
but history wise
and we had a bridge put in
and we had one of our all timers
I call them my old timers
told
the agency don't put that bridge
in like that because it's gonna
flood me out
they did it anyways it flooded
email and now there's a lot of
suit
why can't we sit around a table
like ladies and gentlemen
and even though you do have an
engineering degree
listen to what the local stay
and look at some of the history
that's happened and at least
implement some of their ideas
they might not know what the
gravitational head of a water is
going to be but they do know
that back in nineteen fifty two
at waster d southern bulldozer
down to honda valley they do
know that so whatever
measurements you want to put on
how much head pressure has it
has to have to take a d seven
cat all the way down to hondo
listen to what he's saying.
And then you put your numbers
together that's what I hope
happens especially when we're
working on implementing
strategies and then we we roll
out these plans
all I hear is meetings and plans
sometimes it's when do we get
the boots on the ground and when
do we get these things fixed and
that's that's what I hope
that's what I hope I have to
offer now one one of the last
questions I have as
representatives for our district
so i'm looking right here at
least county I know how
important those are safe is our
to the people in the honda
valley
and they look at me as a as a
state registrator representing
them and they want to know what
i'm doing about it well I know
that whenever I come around
special when people are in the
field they're like another
elected official it's not I want
to bird dog these things I want
to make sure that they're
getting done because we had a
flood back in two thousand and
eight in rid also
female has was going to replace
four of our bridges
you want to guess how many those
bridges have been replaced since
two thousand and eight nine
now the general public how do we
tell them that you know it's not
exactly our fault I hate to just
beat fem up all the time but
it's really easy to be to
what do you guys expect out of
us in our districts for a sake
years to make sure that works
getting done and how can we help
you.
Madam chair and representative
a very much appreciate your
sentiments and your your
comments about local expertise
that
definitely bears out in all of
our experience i'm sure any of
us could tell you that if we
don't consult with the local uhm
people that are keepers of
traditional knowledge and and
that have observed the way these
rivers flow the projects or
simply not work unless we
consult them not I I think it
could always be improved but I
i'd completely agree with that
in response to your question
about what that can you do as
representatives
well I was a a county
commissioner for several years
and are are constituents they
come to you because you're other
person and it might not be in
your power to fix things but
they come to you it might be off
out of your scope of work but it
doesn't matter and so I I think
that
the one of the most important
things is is an elected official
can help guide the the community
through the different programs
and resources that exist so you
almost have to become an expert
and like a case worker to help
people navigate all of these
programs and those of us that
are the the technical service
providers and techno assistance
writers like we need to simplify
that so that you can get that
message out I think that's one
of the most important things and
and so as a public servant
I you know understand where
you're coming from and help your
people have expectations of you
and the the other part is is is
what we're doing right now today
is how do we put a plan together
going forward to these are
resourced and like I said the
resources have to be there on
day one we can't every time
there's a disaster coming
together like where you first
that cautious are going to come
from.
You know how are we going to do
is like we should know there's a
find there's a fine that the
cash here is going to come from
so that when those female
dollars are ewp wallet dollars
are available this they can come
into match we need a contingency
plan in case the federal dollars
are interrupted or disrupted in
some way and that that means
that we need to have a plan with
dollar numbers for you that we
when you're planning your budget
we can start to realign
resources appropriately so that
people see results and I think
the the challenge with fima and
and is and I think it i've
looked to do tifer for this
expertise when they brought they
brought in a consulting firm
that talks the female language
and I worked with them a lot
they're called thomson
consulting and i'm sure there's
other consultants like them and
I you know I don't like the way
it sounds coming out of my mouth
like i'll get a consultant but
they know how to do the
paperwork and so they're getting
a turnaround I don't know how
how good you're turned around
and reimbursement so that's
probably not it's good if you'd
like it to be but but if you
letter to the second or more a
county to do that we would
nothing what are going done but
because at drt state then with
their procurement prowess and
there's consultant to tell him
this is how you get reimbursed
this is how you do that this is
how you environmental historic
preservation clearances those
types of things in n r c s and
they're say that they have those
counterparts too so there's
expertise to navigate those I
would like for a female to clean
up the bureaucracy and red tape
but we're managing you know
managing it now so I think
learning how they did it and in
getting through female kids were
getting their breathing over
with a matter of lights then
it's not eight years and I am
very sorry I heard of in the
second in your area that they
had just completed a female
public assistance project.
From the memorial day flooding
in twenty one just finished it
when the um
the flooding laughter happened
so from you know they had it to
them four years and then they
got flooded out right before
they were going to start your
regating and that's just
painful but I think that there's
a there's a turnaround with
female that's reasonable with
the the expert team to navigate
and I and I think it has to be
funded and that's where the
legislature comes and it's is
for you to have realistic
numbers on what it takes to make
this recovery machine work and
that that's probably the biggest
opposite with funding and debate
as a comment
as matter of chair percent of
instant I think
somehow are nonprofits need
support because we are the ones
that jump in immediately and
start helping yes we're a non
profit but our members are
elected officials or members are
local government bodies and yet
I know senator combos has been
talking about this for years
debate we need to figure out
some way to help find your
association that two million
dollars DFA contract that we did
the emergency contract we get
zero admin or indirect all of
the rcp that we brought to new
mexico federal finding no
indirect for that program
whatsoever and so it's hard to
pay for these twenty five
thousand dollars
that we have to do because we
handle so much federal money but
they're not needs to be away to
help support our associations
that are the first ones on the
ground helping the local people
thank you thank you matter chair
and I appreciate that as
presetal's answers and
you know I I listen to
representative mcqueen while ago
and he said he gets queasy
thinking about the federal
budget I said on house
appropriations and I get queasy
white and us how we spend money
it makes me super quickly so we
have something a common again.
Representative because I I get
queasy like that because we have
so many issues like what we're
talking about and
I don't ever want in my district
somebody thinking that i'm lax
and easy that i'm not on top of
things and there's nothing worse
and given one of your
constituents the run around here
called this person though first
person that they call it the
state you think the state is
going to answer the phone
probably not and that's just the
way it is they're probably not
going to answer the phone and
then when they do answer the
phone and your constituent gets
the run around they actually
give up because that's what they
expected and i'm very thankful
of our constituent services
because they hound our people at
till our folks get the answers
that they need and they know
that you're at least try and to
head them in a good direction so
we can get a lot of this fixed
and I I always want to work with
you I never want to work against
you and whatever I could do in
specially in my district to help
with a sake years now my last
question
man chair is I just had it
taxed
and I don't mean the money this
at all as sake years i've never
thought of this way
I know how the river so if I
want to go fly fields to be
through the river and I want to
get on private property I can go
right now through the river as
long as I find a public access
do people recreate in a sake
years
is it against the law is there
fishing could they finish i'm
sorry as that question but I
just get that text night I
thought I throw that on you
madame charine in reptile
vincent if you counter kids back
in barefoot and playing in them
I would say yes because a lot of
us how our first memory so
there's that kind of recreation
but.
The type of recreation are
talking about
I would say no there's no
phishing typically like a
regular person on the public
couldn't just go using the
second for you said typically is
it a lot
a second run through private
property
and the seconds have an easement
but their second eastman can
only be used for official
purposes so that's a lot so a
person can not walk down through
in a second that's correct only
the the officers and anybody
that's engaged in an official
business like a work crew and
when when there's an
construction project are right
of entry have to be obtained
from those private property
owners thank you madame chair
appreciate that answer
thank you
we have represented center
courtese and representative
little than representatives
so representative center critics
thank you so much madame chair
and experts i'll be quick
because I know I were standing
between us and lunch in the next
six or seven minutes but my one
question madam chair and experts
really focuses on infrastructure
and disaster
so do you have any
recommendations for perhaps
modernizing the assector
infrastructure so that it could
withstand future climate
disasters and still preserve its
traditional function.
Madame chair representative
senate court desk
that's a wonderful question it's
really important to be thinking
about that in terms of
I think there are two
two thousand I have about that
in some places and johnny then
probably has some opinions about
this
there have been a second her
engineered to withstand high
flows using like a boulder type
construction using rock we are
damps.
And with the with the idea that
those may be more resilient to
flooding jonathan was kind
enough to share on the left hand
side there's an example of a
rock we are down and it is a
tiered kind of design with
bolders that slows the water
down and
theoretically it could withdown
flooding better and as well also
because of the design functions
better with low flow so there's
a lot of thinking behind how to
make designs more basilian
my understanding is these are
more expensive both from the
design engineering designs down
plan even the construction side
but it may very well be worth it
so that's one approach
another approach that i've heard
is is to simplify the designs so
that they can be rebuilt more
easily so um
the the unamtical of engineering
had a resolvency conference a
couple years ago and one of the
presenters they have weren't
talking about in a second
context but it had an impression
on me that that the the simpler
of the design the easier to
rebuild and we have in a second
in monta county that still made
up of lugs and rocks and it's
very rudimentary
in fact jonathan's familiar with
this it's in home and they chose
to make it that way because it
were their situated if they have
to rebuild it they could rebuild
it in the chance of thousands of
dollars instead of the hundreds
of thousands I don't want to i'm
not saying we should i'll go
back to rocks and logs but but I
think that risk assessments
should be done and every I think
I should should begin informed
decision about what what design
is best for them
based on their risk of flooding
thank you so much madam chair
expert and is there funding
available for that ti.
Prevention and forward way
thinking
i'm gonna ask john of them too
to rips by kids he has more
experience
madam chair and a representative
senate cortesed um definitely
those types of projects are
a qualified for funding
throughout ecd program so we're
definitely um
you know amenable to to working
with a second on that type of
work one thing to keep in mind
as after a major disaster like
hermes p cafcanian and and some
of the others is there
the key thing is not to go in
and put in real heart
infrastructure right away
because of the flooding and that
in the years of flooding that
are going to occur after that
until soil stabilities and and
vegetation regros and so the
idea is is build some of these
smaller projects
that allow in a second is still
divert water or combat water and
with the idea that that that big
larger structure that's going to
serve a more permanent function
comes in later on down the line
but definitely those projects do
qualify through our program
thank you so much madame chair
and express
thank you and next we have
representative little thank you
madame chair
my question a has
actually has to do with me
wanting out to make assumptions
manager and so when you are
we're speaking of the funding
that would be much been made
available to
the non profits because you are
the first on the ground you are
there
I don't want to make assumptions
but are we talking about the
antenna should
is that limitation or please
explain him something else
I think both when I can explain
that
where executive directors have
non profits that provide
services and in I I can speak
for our example
we work.
Under contract with dfa a part
of our work and
in in terms of that it's a
professional services contract
that goes out to bid so because
it's a professional services
contract and there's a good work
in its open to the public there
is internet take donations issue
and that program is headed by be
done with all those who's here
he's our director of policy and
planning and
we have a a team of that
provides direct services so
that's how ours works maybe
debbie can talk about it
yes madam chair represent little
yeah my understanding is the
land branch in the sake yes do
you have funding in house bill
too but it goes through the fa
and then they have to let an RFP
that's what we're trying to get
for a state association because
of all the work that we're doing
that stolen water districts we
may get the state appropriations
because their government entity
and our law itself says they can
put funds tools equipment feed
seat fertilizer on the ground as
long as we're helping to improve
the natural resources of the
state so what are quality
projects healthy soil projects
all these kind of things so that
some water districts are
spending a lot of state money
through water trust board
healthy soils all kinds of
programs but they can do it
because our government entity
poll and I the only way to do it
is to have that fine go to the
fa and then they let an rfp
thank you for the question thank
you so much that really helped
me secondly
and the second quick question
was on trying to establish a
budget and you were speaking
specifically I believe it was
a gentleman at the end yes that
you were describing how you were
trying to figure out the rate
for manual labor for the ditches
then for working did you
actually i'm curious pick my
curiosity to.
An amount
a rate of p identified manager
madame to representative little
when your great question in a
cannot build tales into a
representative
said about precedent.
We didn't bill we didn't submit
reimbursement or pay the
contractor to a force account
which would be already read the
equipment things like that it
was by linear foot and the way
female was used to it was about
cuba cards which is very
difficult to estimate and
quantify when you're cleaning a
ditch and so we were able to
to convince them about a linear
footage rate and justify that
and I think how that
a result into lessons learned is
it sets a precedent that is
documented for future secure
work through female and we
haven't we now have a base for
how to price that how we build
that with the correct union to
measurement is and all that type
of stuff
I think other precedents that we
set with that is you know
incorporating a martial most the
the olders that have the real
life common sense experience in
my our process one of the main
things was my little more
approval I should have put at
the beginning because he's
involved or she the entire way
so that way we can garner my
little more approval so you know
our purpose was to help navigate
the female process help fund it
but the
responsibility and the expertise
of how to clean the ditch how to
operate the ditch was a hundred
percent the ditch we never took
control of that we follow their
their opinion the entire time
thank you thank you for that
information it is quick follow
question then to that just to
follow up the you mentioned a
linear rate than that was
established can you sure what
that would discover me with me
with that rate was established I
don't have that with me better
can follow with you and i'll
send you I just between email.
Thank you very much
representative keys
thank you very much thinking
manager and thank you
representatives was
excellent presentation so very
much needed
because analyzed question the
day i'm gonna ask for concise
answers if I can get it I know
you talked about your your
you're contributing your car
share as well as a gratitude for
the technical assistance and
being able to navigate like
volunteer groups and very
complex federal it does not fa
and water chest offer
car sharing matches for a
federal grants and don't they
also offer technologies for this
sort of federal funds.
Men and chair represented kids
at what a transfer does not
provide any assistance technical
assistance to a second mf does
not provide technical assistance
to a second the only technical
assistance available to a second
through are not profit and
debits not profit and then our
agency partners and how is that
funded
the eneme is funded mostly
through foundation grants
part of this technical
assistance work is funded
through a contract with the dfa
local government division and
most recently we got a grand
from eda app from the federal
level to help with disaster
response thank you think you
madam chair
I know that we've talked about
trying to train the next three
generations
in
the
wonderful message rather purpose
providing water to community so
whether that's safe yeah or
water shared or any kind of
community water systems
are any of these organizations
including the inner stream
working with more for a
solutions to develop these
apprenticeship programs.
A madam chair representative
could repeat that is that a
specific organization or work
first solutions
madam current reps and kids
but we have not we do train our
employees are just yesterday our
new employees who are sitting
here with us today went through
a training with a fee be sweener
from highwatermark and her team
on emergency management is asked
to recovery
and it's it's such a specialised
area of work
i'm not aware of any kind of
work for solutions program that
helps in this way but we would
be very open to
figuring out a good partnership
is so much matter in chair and
thank you I agree that it is
very specialized and it's why we
probably haven't let them in one
we talk about
training and marketing and
having a child discovery in our
other types of trades that we
need to make sure that our our
water advocates are in that tree
poor as well and you'd be able
to cash for that I thank you so
much for your answers I have two
quick more questions wine is
I will you're talking about the
infrastructure you know family
these are through man made
either deferred maintenance or
through natural disaster
are you have you run across
water users it affecting their
property tax status has not been
able to access water for
resufficient agricultural needs
are you running across the near
the sort of issues.
Man i'm sure represent a case
in in my work with a second and
the landowner so we haven't run
into that issue here and even as
our agriculture has been
interrupted for up to three
years I think it's commonly
known that the disaster is the
reason for that interruption and
agriculture.
I thank you very much and
manager I would just like to
mention just because i'm doing
it for housing and do tears here
as well i'm not sure why our
we're not having conversations
with the state level of creating
a buildings material bank we
have land we have ability we
could have ability to secure and
then we could negotiate and be
able to plan what our costs a
lot of our infrastructure
whether it's roads housing or
water is is trying to except
moving target of our budget and
if we had a place where we could
negotiate and buy large amounts
of material to be able to store
them securely four public
projects it might be able for us
to stabilise their costs and so
I just throw that out again and
and thank you very much for your
indulgence by themselves
thank you are there further
questions
representation could you
introduce yourself
yes good morning madam chair i'm
representative lack of the from
south until you mexico a house
to stick to lonely and account
glad to be here thank you
thank you very much so before we
break for
lunch i'd like to mention that
the snacks and coffee today are
being provided by new mexico
highlands university and the
lunch is being provided by
michael cantana and we thank you
very much I think that panel and
your thoughtful responses as
well as all your presentations
today and
committee members if you would
reconvene before or by twelve
forty five we have public
comment at that time thank you
please have lunch.
