Good morning if the first panel
would get come up and be
prepared.
You might wonder but we're
sitting here squinting because
we're looking at the sun and so
if we're looking down it's
because we're giving our ice
rest.
Good morning everyone I hope
everyone had a good evening and
will get started with our half
day to day we're starting with
post fire flood issues with the
journalists arm strong jeremy
class and john remerrill and we
recognize that we have a couple
genre so this is not the john
tea
so that's start john c starting.
I'm sure the voucher thank you
good morning
I feel like yesterday's
presentation that I gave in
terms of the
apologies.
Terms of the impacts of
firefloods and drought hundred
mortar systems is really close
to this morning's topic about
post via flood issues so I won't
say who can hear
okay we have people who cannot
hear so you're going to have to
somehow
maybe you
angle
were
ok and i'll try to just look
straight ahead
so as I said yesterday in my
presentation our staff and in
the drinking water bureau
provided hundreds of hours of
technical assistance support
during and following fires and
floods in the last few years I
systems in general now have been
stabilized after those emergency
disasters but we do
work with them as issues arise
to manage their responsibility
to provide safe and reliable
drinking water and to maintain
compliance with our regulatory
standards that are in place to
protect public health
i'd said yet systems are in
general stabilise now we have
one great example here with the
city of las vegas as municipal
system
in terms of being stabilized the
most recent update just came
yesterday where we had worked
for years with the city to make
sure that they had a pre
treatment system at their plate
in place to deal with the
increased tribidity from the
flooding impact in the fire
impact so but there was an
initial system installed on a
temporary basis that we provided
temporary approval for
that was then removed in the
city
installed a new system
and actively is the manufacturer
recordable
company
I think it's the biggest water
treatment company in the world
that makes the active flow
system
that was installed about a year
and a ha.
Half a go we provided some
initial approval for them to
operate it on a temporary basis
and then worked with the system
and the manufacturer to insure
that it met all of our
regulatory standards and we
finally yesterday after some
back and forth over the last few
months and some request for
digital information from the
city provided the full
certification for them to
continue operating that pre
treatment system as part of
their drinking water treatment
process so that is a huge step
forward for the city it is not a
standing for replacement of
their system in the long run but
like mr martin is the utility
directors mentioned yesterday it
does give them a longer runway
to deal with that so excuse me
so please repeat what the
agreement in the steps ahead
include in case we didn't catch
it on
apologies I I wasn't speaking to
an agreement I was speaking to
are the approval from the
environment department of the
pre treatment system and so we
worked with closer with them to
get that done the pre treatment
system so
could you explain how what that
is in relation to the whole
project how much it's costing
words funded thank you
absolutely I can speak to where
it's it's in terms of the
treatment process
I cannot tell you personally how
it's funded I do have my drink
wanted your chief who might know
that answer but I think the city
would be more able to to answer
what funds they used to pay for
that
the way that that protreatment
system works is because of the
change in the water chemistry
from what had been typical
before the fire and flooding
they needed to
have increased essentially
filtration on the front end of
their existing treatment plan
and so
they had a one temporary system
installed it looks like.
Mr class has some information
maybe
manager I can kind of speak to
the amount of money that's been
obligated for by fema through
the public assistance as well as
the claims office for the amount
of money is that they've
received
for the implementation and
design construction of their new
water drinking water system they
did receive ninety eight million
dollars that they currently have
in hand for the design
construction
of that facility they also
additionally I believe were
awarded at two point six million
dollars
fund for the actual design of
that system and so that two
point six would be to design
because they kind of scrap the
original design that was posted
fire or prefire and then that
was for the design and then they
received ninety eight million
dollars that they have enhanced
for the construction of that
there was a total allocation of
a hundred and forty million by
female so there's still some
money sitting waiting on some
progress that they need to make
so then they have that those
available funds on the emergency
drinking water system we've been
working with them currently the
project for this pre treatment
facility they've been awarded
approximately five point four
million dollars for the
implementation of that they've
been we've been working back and
forth I think they're original
ask was about eleven point six
but based on
some requirements that females
asking and the documentation and
what that's gonna take for the
sustainment of a three year
period it's still up in the air
but the five point four is what
they currently are allocated for
for the pre treatment facility.
The.
Thanks for the chair the last
note that I have to cover this
morning is just that in addition
to the emergency funding that's
available there are other
funding sources that you all
have created or partnered with
federal government to provide
matching funds for like a
revolving loan funds that are
available to systems to help
them prepare for and respond to
fire and flood emergencies
we would be happy to meet with
any of your communities at any
time about our funding programs.
The.
Thank you and jeremy
morris manager
drive to germany class for new
mexico department homeland
security emerance imagement and
as I had mentioned yesterday
we at dhm are kind of
leading the way on the watershed
restoration aspects of the
various disasters that we
currently have in the state new
mexico and
I think what I want to talk
about today is through through
the house disasters and how
we've continued to work through
and build the recovery program
and how we actually need to
address these water sheds in the
damage that these fires
occurred.
Or that caused
there's really we've identified
the need for some post fire
programs and that definitely has
a role to play if female is
going away a federal funding is
taken away and states are kind
of left holding the recovery a
of post fire impacts here across
state so unfortunately
we are getting pretty good at
this as we've had multiple
disasters were currently working
on now we've got three federal
open disasters all associated
with large scale wide fires and
so we add the hsema also tasked
with dealing with post fire
recovery and the immediate
response right after the fire
goes out and so I think the
statement of intent as you guys
all have it's really to build a
sustainable recovery framework
by working across all lands
ecosystems in jurisdictions and
coordination with federal state
tribal local non profit and
academic associate associations
to support post fire recovery
efforts and I am gonna expand a
little bit on that
the challenges that we currently
face outside of whatever is
happening with fema is the rear
current periods are shrinking
and sell we had the most
devastating wildfire season and
of course hermes be cafe can
occurred then we had the assault
in south fork fires currently I
don't even know how many fires
we have across the state we've
got the trouble fire
you know the everything that
happened in valencia county
that's the desert will complex
moscow who has another one we
had a two cabins fire so there's
fires everywhere and sell those
re occurrence periods of
shrinking and obviously we've
got cascading impacts that were
that's what we're calling these
post fire impacts so immediately
right out for the fire months
ins come in and we start having
post fire debris flows and that
obviously.
Has an impact on critical
infrastructure and that's
honestly when we start losing
lives fires are easy to evacuate
people but as soon as those go
out people on a repopulate and
so those those post fire impacts
are incredibly dangerous and so
that where we at the state level
may be or not necessarily
managing fires on federal at the
federal level or on federal
lands
fire and water do not know
jurisdictional boundaries right
federal programs are not
structured to address those
cascading impacts inherent to
post fire landscapes prior to
major shifts at federal agencies
and so
obviously there's if there is a
fire on federal land the federal
government the four service will
come in and they will put a
complex incident management team
in place state assets will be
used and they coordinate with
state forestry however they
manage fires what actually
occurs on those jurisdictional
boundaries where fire goes in
the state and private lands we
have issues with anti
delineation clauses state
forestry can address that once
that jurisdictional boundaries
cross from february state lands
but again it's just fire
management who actually is on
tap to a hat to deal with those
postfire floods that's the state
because it automatically and
immediately goes to a response
effort and therefore that is on
dhcm to help manage and that I I
think that paradigm that
currently we have been working
in with emergency management is
disasters are managed locally
supported by the state and
funded federally what that looks
like in the future we're not
necessarily sure but those local
jurisdictions are immediately
put at the forefront of the
response when that post
fireflooding occurs off of and
crosses jurisdictional
boundaries and we also have
program limitations and lag time
for february declaration
requests.
This definitely limits funding
and what we can and cannot do
currently for the fires that we
have across the state we did
receive three fire management
assistance grants that is from
female we were closing was state
forestry we put in for a fire
management assistance grant that
is money that female provides to
the state that
helps get resources funds so you
know immediately provide some
money
in the form of reimbursement but
it per immediately provide some
money for the state to make sure
that we do everything we can to
throw at that fire so it does
not become a federal disaster
what those limitations are there
very specific to firefighting
activities and stuff like that
not debris management so again
when we deal with a fire on
federal land we have all this
debris flow coming down the fire
management assistance grants do
not offer the funding to do
private property debris and
start going in and removing the
debris off the same cell again
there's there's a there's a
dramatic loophole there in fire
means missus assistance grants
how fires are managed but then
how do we manage post fire to
brief flows and what comes off
of those burned scars
ali I hate doing this because
where I feel a bit like a used
car salesman but ali did it
really well at the end of her
presentation yesterday obviously
we've got a lack of capacity in
funding at the state level again
madam chair you had mentioned if
states are gonna hold
the responsibility if female
federal funding goes away we are
is that we need we need capacity
and we need some funding to be
able to manage that dhcm really
runs on a very shoe string
budget for what we actually do
and the amount of money that we
are currently managing it's
pretty amazing with the
capacity.
And the staff that we currently
have and at the federal level
with the change and
administration they're currently
is a
a star on the post fire network
there was a big push out of the
white house to put together a
whole list of federal partners
that was working on developing a
post fire network and then they
were going to integrate with
states and stuff like that that
has been stolen
and so now what the question
really is how do we find how do
we put together a regional how
do we build regional capacity
how do we build state capacity
to be able to do at this post
fire sort of work
on the next slide
just some things that we're
doing at dhm and a dressing post
fire disasters
ali had mentioned yesterday
the bear team and so that's a
federal program right that's a
ba e r so it's burned area
emergency response and so what
they do they collect satellite
image then they go on the burned
scar they evaluate the burns
severity and do that and then
that's what's you obviously that
gives you the severity of burn
map right then the US g s will
come in and utilize that
information and develop a actual
bomb to brief low mouth however
that only gets applied at the
federal level and so light
hermes peak in caf can and I
mention that fires do not know
jurisdictional boundaries we had
what thirty percent on federal
land seventy percent burn fat
this private land anti donation
has
hinders our ability to actually
do somewhere mediation
mitigation and recovery on those
lands and therefore the first
step in that is trying to get a
burn severity map and get those
debris flows across this
jurisdictional boundaries what
we've done is created common
operating pictures that are geo
special in nature they they and
capsulate all these different
data layers so we've used.
This burned areas severity maps
there was debris flow maps we've
identified pinch points and
helped of develop priority areas
and we've got one here at the
hermes p cafcanian area we've
developed one for the salt in
south fort fires and so we've
been putting a lot of good
special data to where we can
actually identify those priority
areas that we need to go in and
get projects to actually help
and save critical life in an
infrastructure
the problem with that is that
i'm using mitigation so we get
mitigation dollars from female
on our disasters these costs a
lot of money and i'm having to
use federal funds to be able to
develop those maps and so that
helps coordinate the recovery
process what it also does is I
know the time frame in the
recovery and everybody says you
know we've got all these things
but what about the water said
well
we it that's jurisdictional
boundary so we have to
coordinate at the top of the
mountain all the way down to the
bottom we have multiple federal
agencies that we have to
coordinate with and then we've
got private land to navigate as
well so that coordinating peace
and these operating pictures
helped to get you specially put
that all in one frame and then
work in a coordinated effort of
course that takes a lot of
federal capacity and
coordination female helps us to
do that a lot of these things
are funded by mission
assignments those kind of have
gone away we're not getting that
so how do we do that how do we
engage with our federal partners
once these recovery efforts and
female dollars are pulled away
that's a difficulty that we're
going to have
the other the other thing is
trying to make sure that we work
with all of our state partners
and actually build capacity and
be able to do that right
one thing that we were able to
do on the trout fired that we
were able to integrate local
emergency operations with
incident management.
This is paramount this is never
really happened in the four
years that i've been at d h s e
we worked closely with state
forestry the nature conservative
and the incident management team
so I mentioned the incident
management team that came in and
responded to the trout fire was
on federal land well what we did
is we were able to integrate the
local emergency manager right
there with the incident
management team and so we could
be their officers right next to
each other and so that helped
develop that jurisdictional
piece that was missing where
they were fighting fire
immediately we had remnants of a
hurricane come up for mexico we
switched right to
float and again I mentioned the
incident management team they
fight fires they don't deal with
the flooding back of that comes
to dhc and we activated our eoc
but through that partnership was
state force in the nature
conservacy and the answer to
management team ali had
mentioned that we developed a
very kind of rudimentaries sort
of burn several map because when
the federal government comes in
does that it takes a couple of
weeks we were able to do a very
rudimentary go okay we need to
focus on these areas based on
the burn severity that we've
identified we need to stage we
need to preposition swift water
teams national guard sandbags
all that sort of stuff and so
that was a very innovative
approach and it's never happened
in it actually showed I think
our local partners the federal
government and our state
partners that we were leaning
forward as an emergency response
unit at dhm and so we were ready
and willing to actually address
that that post fire need and so
rap horrible
you know that was one of those
things we've learned right we're
getting good at this we've
learned through these things so
we've we we actually leaned
ahead and so hopefully we can do
that moving forward as well
again I have mentioned that we
have been using each mgp funding
that's a hazard mitigation.
Plan funding to create watershed
restoration plans we've
developed that here at the
hermet speed cafe canyon we've
done that on the sale in south
fort fires that's also going in
and using this common operating
picture developing mitigation
and recovery sort of projects
two address what's coming down
the mountain the time frame when
i'm talking about we need all
these data layers because though
the landscapes changed everybody
knows that but it takes
engineering it takes a lot of
data because we have to build
not only what female claims is
what we get those public
assistance dollars back as we
have to we have to build back to
white was there at the beginning
of the disaster but we wanted
you to lies all that data to
make sure that we are building
better and can mitigate the new
conditions that are coming down
we don't want to invest a lot of
money in these infrastructure
product projects that occurred
down at the bottom of the
mountain unless we're addressing
you know the settlement all of
the things that are coming down
from the top the other thing i'd
like to highlight is we're
creating innovative technologies
and advancement to address the
media needs I think everybody
associated with these wildfires
knows that has a trees or an
issue but again a like unhermet
speed cafe can you assault
themselves for it fires
there's a lot of private land we
can do there there we can do a
very small footprint about
around home or where the home
was right because anti donation
doesn't allow for us and female
policy doesn't allow for us
expanding into the forest
while we're able to do and sell
their slides on you these are
actually taken from a pilot
project that we used i'm on
identified through more it and
same again electric land
the utilised the burns a very
map because and it was it was
high burn severity we utilised
drones and then lied.
And
lasers right we we shot a laser
down through the tree cannot be
and did point clouds and we
actually identified all
individual trees and so we had
over thirty three million points
we built point clouds and then
we're developed and actually
developed this map that you guys
see there to identify trees that
need to actually be cut down as
a hazard tree took that
methodology and unhappy to
report that it recently was
accepted by female so not only
are we learning how to manage
post fire to briefly using
innovations to change policy at
the federal level and so what
this is going to allow us to do
is go in and so we're currently
working with highlands
because we need an eligible
entity to take this on but they
will help they will be the sub
recipient and they will go and
try and sign up all of the
private lane owners that can
will utilize this methodology to
build a scope of work identify
how many trees we have to write
projects and actually go in and
address the hazard tree issue
this just got ok early this week
so we're planning on trying to
adapt this and go out to the
other burns guards in areas to
be able to utilize this
methodology and this algorithm
that we've developed and it it's
a fraction of the cost to be
able to go and identify those
hazard trees and sell these are
the things that we're doing
what's really needed is we've
got a coordinate better across a
agencies across authorities and
across jurisdiction that's
always going to be an issue that
we're going to have in these
post fire fire sort of things
we need to start working and I
don't know I I spoke with at the
western governor's association
we don't know who's going to be
our cartifying sort of agency
that's going to be pulling
together but we need like a
regional post-fire program and
we're working on a proposal
that's really intended to
establish at the state level.
You know that burned early
assessment that we can go into
state to private and state lands
and expand upon that the burned
area assessments stabilize in
recovery mechanisms to rapidly
deploy resources for wide fire
events in the transition and
recovery soon as possible
we also need a sustained support
from a state network of
practitioners we've got you know
the forestry program here at you
and age we we need to brilliant
band together we've got a pool
our resources we can't be siloed
we need funding we need
coordinating so leaving that
post fire sort of a program is
paramount for the state to be
able to pick up what the federal
government or whatever that
looks like in the future isn't
there an um you know there is
the need and that was the
western governor's association
was talking about that regional
working group and and building
those agency partnerships we
have that from a response we
currently have texas emergency
management here in our eoc
helping the augment our staff as
were elevated to a level one and
working through this federal
disasters because we've got the
fired in the monseen season and
so we work we bring in and we've
worked and developed that but
that's a that's within our
female region we will need to
work you know with other states
and bill that that sort of an
regional working group with our
western states really because as
if you did if you weren't aware
regions six as far as female
it's us taxes are inside
louisiana and oklahoma
wire we need to understand and
work with our western states on
how they deal with you know
these wildfires
and so
look forward to your questions
and thank you for your time
faster to jump
thank you now to the one john
remember.
And actually good morning madame
to advice chair and committee
members i'm john dot romero for
a listing state government so if
you're looking for me
so good morning everyone
yesterday we were digging
ditches today where fixing roads
and so
again my name is john romero i'm
with the nmot
how operation division director
with you and mdot
so
made them a week for the states
who to get going enough.
Come
so
to road related issues right so
wildfires obviously compromise
water sheds increased flows and
create the breeflows that have
the potential to compromise our
road we infrastructure
so damages to our roads that we
typically experience are just
the roadway itself to bridges
training structures while
roadways tie slopes ditches
fencing card real signs on the
list goes on
I typically we try to perform
the majority of the repairs in
house
the reason for that is it's
typically faster for us to get
our crews out there to get him
fixed to get the road open again
it's typically cheaper
but one of the cons to that is
it does necessitate us to
reallocate our resources in both
equipment personnel and material
what that does is it decreases
our ability to perform normal
duties
you know whether it's moen or
cutting ditches but even with
our special crews we have
special crews throughout the
states that do a lot of payment
preservation projects I nearly
chips hills and those projects
are crucial to us maintaining
our entire infrastructure when
we keep up with payment
preservation it makes her
roadways last when we fall
behind these start degree in
exponentially so
her misp cap can as a private
example are our chips still sees
in that year was pretty pretty
much nor because our cruiser out
fixing roads the entire season
so that that that is a drawback
at another positive though of us
having our cruise going out
there is an are only allows i'm
in a woman to show case or
skills and in roadway
construction and and things are
the like but it helps us to
cristrain some of.
Are newer employees especially
when there is big debris that we
need to remove we get them and
pieces of equipment get them
used to it and on if it's
something that we're not able to
do on a daily basis as much
because during our normal work
it's more finished work and so
usually have our senior
operators on the equipment for
those but we do use this as a
training opportunity for them
sometimes we do employ a
contractor to do repairs these
are some of the major ones for
major structures bridges things
like that
these take a little bit longer
because a lot of times I will
require a design that you have
to follow us that we we can
develop the terms of the
contract as well as the
procurement that has to occur
even though emergency
procurement we still got a to go
to that process so it does take
a little bit longer.
The
now these flooding events what
we've noticed is after a severe
brand scar it we're dealing with
major flooding for a ball up to
three years so every year though
we areas that we fix we got to
come back and refix usually
after three years it starts to
stabilizing we do have increased
flows but our are structures are
able to to manage him and we
usually can count can move on
from the event
other things and it's not on the
slide that we do help with quite
a bit during flooding is and it
you know it's incornitaled
homeland security but just
through the oc helping provide
material sandbags transporting
materials and so all this you we
have people around the
around the state and equipment
around the state that can help
with that but then again it does
take away from what I did duties
are in a desire
our ability to perform our
normal duties.
But it's next i'd slight number
three it just shows the costs
and the
affordableness of us doing it in
house so the
canyon and this is in portal
codes but this is just costs of
having this user house cruise
material
staffing in equipment we did a
little major repairs and resolve
that in the in the master canyon
area and i'm gonna show some
examples of those we only spend
about one point five million
dollars which which is a bargain
for the sought south forecaster
about a half a million again
this is just for in housework
and then the rose of floating
granted it's not related to a
burns sky proceed it still did
provide is still did create
significant letterment to our to
our infrastructure
that was about a half a million
dollars and i'll go into some
examples as I move on I want to
think that is even even those
these are small amounts all this
money comes out of the state
road fund and so when these come
up we have to reprior ties our
our moneys for equipment for
material and especially if we do
have to use contractors which
can get expensive we have to
repurpose our funding so in
addition to adding a further
their stream to our state road
fund
we
there's less that we can do not
think that have helped us in the
past and were very appreciative
of it is one time general fun
appropriations we
those help to make up the the
difference from whether we have
to repurpose money or we cannot
do the payment preservation in
house that we want to that money
comes in extremely useful to
help us keep keep up with our
infrastructure i'm other things
I know that the department's
advocated for in the past is to
help
stabilise there are a road fund
and I know or secretary will be
talking about that he's talked
about it before and in upcoming.
Sessions but those things are
important because these are
distances where unplanned
instances where we have to use
money for things that wouldn't
typically go on day to day road
maintenance and reconstruction
one other thing I like to
mention is there is federal how
administration money available
early money it's called to help
assistance with some of these
emergency issues now typically
those we don't go after in this
the the cost for a specific area
is
so it's not the cost for an
entire event it's see if he
structure crossing constitutes.
Someone moving just to some some
examples of some of the repairs
that we've had to do this is an
example here in some of the
county hermes peak cafcanian
this is one of many road
recruitions that got compromised
because due to post fire
flooding
and then this is basically what
it looks like after our crews
finished with it.
This next one is as part of the
salt southwork fighter this was
the skiron road up to skia
patchy that road
was severely compromised and as
you can see in these pictures it
was pursue obliterated in
certain areas so our cruise went
out there we set up temporary
retained with some while barrier
we used matures we had unhand
and again all of our you can see
our folks out there getting to
it and the after effect it looks
like nothing happened are
cruised at everything from the
soil stabilization the retainage
as well as the paving and so we
were able to get this done
before the ski season happens
and of course this is very
important because these
communities are severely
affected as we know by these
fires but if we don't recover
certain areas it can continue
per put a strain on their
economy their tourism and all
that type of stuff so we're
really we really work to get
these roads open for multiple
reasons
now this one this is on us
twenty five between a.
Roswell and artisan this which
is due to typical fighting so we
get flooding even without a
phone right and so it's a
whipround it's a forting
facility to turn bridges and
they got severely damaged with
these floors that it was an a
very white channel that was
completely full over topping the
bridges and
uh
created a lot of severe damage
now one of the bridges the
northbound bridge we are able to
repair with our in house crews
and get it open for some time
we're having to do a detour of
their local roads right now
we're just where people can use
to eighty five although in this
area it's neck down to one
minute needs direction on that
one serviceable bridge the other
bridge has not been repaired
that's is going to necessity a
design and construction through
a contractor which we are
working on we're estimating that
costumes for that bridge to be
around three million there is a
potential that we would uh
pursue that or highway emergency
money for that
the bridge that we did fix
better ruger job that stabilizes
slopes put in ripraph repave the
approaches and we're able to get
that up and running and again in
this area it's important you
know we have the premium because
we have uh the whip the whiprout
and so these major bridges that
and structures that get damaged
they do create a significant
impact to the state that we we
like to remedy.
I'm going to go into a little
bit of him as part of counting
since we are here in some again
this is a little unique we we
did do quite a bit of a flood
mitigation in addition to what
we typically do for duty roads
are the duty as we explained
yesterday we helped with the
secure emergency to be removal
but we also assisted both some
young water county with their
county road debris moves as well
as private property to be moved
in the area which we continue to
do to this day
so thus fire with those efforts
we've spent upwards of a hundred
and twenty two million dollars
for all the the work that we've
worked on in this hearing to do
the hermes peak capanian
some of it fire some of it flood
some of it both
really with this what we how we
funded it is we utilized
governors executive orders a
hundred and twenty of them to
the two or ninety million we're
looking to get full
reimbursement for those
to date we've got thirty six
million dollars remembers from
female
uh as we get that money we we re
implemented into our efforts and
reinvested to continue to help
with the recovery of the
communities in this area
one last thing before I wrap up
you know other things that we do
and I know it's not necessary
related to to flooding itself
but it's part of the fire right
which causes the flooding is
when fighters sometimes are
folks are out there in essence
first responder is cutting line
and so we coordinate with a
state forestry we get our folks
trained in while then uh
fighting this relates to and in
instances like hermes speak
accounts approve it example when
that happened easter sunday are
true proud of equipment
aid with no necessary fires
approach but fire prevention
while everyone else got.
You know get equipment and hot
shots and things are the like
mobilised so it works out really
well to to do this because we do
have people and equipment stage
through the entire state
throughout all of our patrols so
this has been a a very good
collaboration that we think has
helped to to come back buyers
early on as they get created now
when the fires are happening we
do provide support a lot of
times sometimes we'll continue
to help with cutting line and
things like that but while so
help with uh uh transporting
material transporting fuel
transporting water and some
instances helping with forest
roads to to get old login rules
open so fire cruise can can
utilise them to combat fires so
we are quite involved in fires
as the account.
That's all they have free this
morning I stand for any
questions thank you.
Thank you gentlemen and i'm sure
we'll have questions and so
we're going to start with
representative instant and then
represent guns all the she have
any questions
since it's your area no
okay we'll go to represent an
inventor first
thank you madame chair and thank
you presenters and I know
sometimes you don't get bragged
on a lot but I do want to brag
on
our whole panel
we were slated on the ski run
project that you had it was
slated to start in november
because you guys had a backlog.
Because of people set down
around a table and knowing that
we had already been impacted
economically
you guys bought some other
projects and instead of putting
us till november you bumped it
up and did it through the summer
so that we could get our people
up there and I appreciate that
and i'm actually in the pavent
business and I drove up there
and you guys do the gift job
good job your cruise did an
amazing job and I think we're
fortunate to have you guys
doctor class.
I'm gonna brag on you guys a
little bit at the stay is
fortunate to have you an alley
you really are have set back and
watch you for a year i've seen
what you've done with my
community I haven't really seen
what's gone on here but i've
seen you with my community and
top notch applies brave or good
work.
One question I had on those
hazard trees on your map.
I was just sitting here brain
storm in and i'm sure that map
shells trees that are on state
private local and federal lands
have we ever thought about using
the forest service so they have
some of the best sawyers in the
country in the state have we
ever thought about utilizing
them for kind of a a cost match
in kind match anything like that
madame chair.
Nature represent
no I don't think that's ever
been a dressed I think we would
be.
Hindered a little bit by using
well I mean it is so the way
that the current system is set
up and talking about that parent
i'm
if we're using federal dollars
it's gonna be
not it we wouldn't be able to do
it so if the state were
utilizing if there was a project
written through female and we
were using those federal funds
to do that project being able to
do that with the foreser
residents wouldn't work
because we can't use federal
dollars out longer the match
part I don't think there's any
mechanism currently right now as
it sats to be able to actually
do that
I know
the four service is deadly been
hampered by budget cuts as well
and so I don't know what that is
but again I think that that
exacerbates an illustrates the
need to figure this out and
develop a post fire network and
come together and see what
resources are available how we
can actually utilise one in
other programs to kind of you
know fit the puzzle together and
figure out a a true mechanism on
how we actually address this and
so whatever vehicle we have to
do that it's just we're going to
have to develop it at some point
if it's regional if it's at the
state level whatever it is we
need to be looking forward to
that and figure out how we
actually address those questions
in those loopholes
thank you out of chair and the
reason I say that is because
there's a portion I don't know
if you guys have seen it.
There's a portion on gaveling
can
that they went in and clear cut
all the dead trees out and they
horizontally pandom.
And
it looks amazing and and nobody
can do that as good as you're
thinking people and your
handcruise.
And we've got handcruise that
are available and you know even
if we made it hey we're going to
give you guys a deep some detail
work and you're going to got
you're going to go up and do it
for two weeks it'll training you
know get ready for the summer
got their check some things out
pin some keep keep all that.
Good top soil from come down
into our river and look in like
a scary movie when it comes down
the river.
And I just you know while I was
up here I got a video and you
can see the stream running and
they're in their sunshine but
it's raining on the mountain.
And you can see this blah
it looks like mixed to me like
chocolate cake mix and it rolls
and you see all this clean clear
water and then here comes all
the debris and it clogs
everything up and here we go and
we're going to fight that for
the next three to four hours
everybody get to high ground i'm
just looking for ways
to bring people together state
local and federal to where I
know it's hard to roll out a
plan and then it's hard to
implement a plan but if we ever
get the plan in place and we can
roll it out in implement it
we're going to be doing good
work they can manage her.
Thank you and I think that
coordination is something group
of asked about several times
representative can tell us did
you want to make a comment thank
you and then we have
representative luham and
representative of cates on the
uh list.
The.
Yeah.
So
first up and giving recognition
I just want to you know think
you offer coming here and also
just will also want to recognize
our district for a deal teating
since we have the roads here
there was a conversation as she
entered but maybe today just
have some questions on some of
the roads and some of the
transportation work um we should
have a lot of work to do here in
our area with regards to
roadwork and I guess one
question I had was on capacity
so you know there's those
nations between private property
county roads and then deal tea
roads and all the work that has
been done so far in those fire
areas on the state roads have
all been up and running you know
I think we're still having some
slow down and think some of our
local or county roads you know
shared what the capacity or
maybe is there any current plan
with any you know partnerships
are collaborations just working
on if we were to do large skill
road repairs on the remaining
work that has to be done here is
that something of capacity
within dot to assess star local
governments.
Madam cherry representations
others that's a a great question
and I and I shouldn't mention
this in in my presentation so
when we're doing a few more
public assistance work we're
only allowed to do carried b and
that's emergency to removal
emergency repairs any permanent
repairs we cannot do on behalf
of the little clanity so our
efforts with local roses to get
him open and get him running
that been said of for our roads
some of the repairers were
hoping to have a permanent
lasting effect but there's a lot
of cross scenes that these are
even though they look kind of
good they're still temporary
fixes and we're developing plans
to do full repairs at a capacity
to structure that either are
have potential to get him wiped
out or prone to clogging prone
to overtopping those are still
in the work and we're managing
those who was a little more long
term just because we have to go
through our typical planning
design bared construction prices
but with regards to the local
communities
we that the programs that we do
have take with it in addition to
husband provided by both
legislature and through female
as we do have tp funding that
can help and that they can apply
for although I I do think on
because especially in this area
its female you know I would
recommend that they utilize the
state appropriations to perform
the projects get female
reimbursement and that way they
can see their tpf requests for
other projects throughout their
communities.
Madam chair thank you for that
answer
I also just you know there's a
lot of work here there's been a
lot of discussion locally
there's been a lot of discussion
recently about how do we
collaborate time forward on a
lot of these projects and so it
is nice to see you know
different parties here in that
it's not a singular issue that
we have here we're dealing with
roads were dealing with nature
we're dealing with water in so
it's nice to have the support of
all parties um and then just
look forward to working with you
all I see a lot of the what's
needed the future plans as we
get into some of the discussions
later on to you know mitigation
work in future planning um so
that's just.
It's nice to hear the work
that's being done
congratulations on everything
that you've done keeping us up
and running in these areas but
um it's also hopeful to see the
the future work being planned
out just where we need to go in
this area thank you.
Old manager if I may m represent
itself so just just to make
everybody where I know we spoke
yesterday about that too you
know we we are.
Kind of joined at the hip right
now with the national guard with
our cabinet our acting cabinet
secretary is the tag rate of
state and so he does have a sort
team and so we have paired with
the national guard and we do
have capacity at the national
guard that level to help assist
in build capacity and address
those emergency issues within
these affected communities and
so we have reached out to these
variant communities and made
sure that they are fully aware
that that cat that capacity and
capability does flow through d h
s e m in the national guard to
go in and help assist in those
areas where locals you know
don't have that ability or the
capacity because you're dealing
with everything else to actually
come in identify those areas
that are not being addressed in
and have the ability to help us
you know augment that capacity
in and assessed.
Thank you.
Thank you very much
representative lou hunt.
The.
Thank you thank you marine chair
thank you for the presentation
today
i'm gonna ask a few questions
longer lines of
regarding what we're doing in
new mexico for our fair planet
insurance uh manchester
you know if you're a plan is
it's it's for the fair access to
insurance requirements plan it's
a type of state run property
insurance program designed to
provide coverage to homeowners
and businesses you are unable to
obtain insurance intraditional
private market.
And these sounds are often for
two as the insurers have last
resort now the state of new
mexico is trying to
implement a fair affair plan
we are discussing fair later in
the later we are this morning
it's the last presentation I saw
that I just wanted a couple of
questions for them just
regarding in their from their
presentation and if that's okay
it just pay and they can ask
they're not insurance people
would go ahead and do not just
like how the community is is a
responding to those and where
you know where they are with
this.
So.
The in their questions to that
we we need some more actuarial
information so regards to what
you're work isn't being on the
ground and understanding that
from the communities perspective
can you give us any any
information regarding that how
with the quid is coming together
talking about the fair pants and
how that information is being
received and what where they
stand on that matter thank you.
And please keep the standing
doddle because we are having a
full presentation on that madam
chair represent one
understand that it's it very
important
issue we have not heard much or
would communicate much with the
communities about that at the
duty.
Manager representative so
yeah we we but I as our state
forcer will be
presenting later on senate bill
thirty three
some of the some of that bill
that the new language and the
new task force or the additions
to the task force d h s e m is
now part of that task force i'm
working closely with state
forestry understanding doing
some of the risk mapping and
associated with trying to get
the data that is going to be put
forth to address that issue um
we are very well aware of those
issues you know there is there
is one aspect to the hazard
mitigation program that
currently runs out of d h m we
do have the ability to work on
hazardous fields management and
so we do have a number of of
programs or projects under the h
m g p program that talk about
houses feel reduction we're
currently working on uh burying
power lines up in los alamos
county so we're working on in
that sort of lexicon of how that
how to address those things with
these communities thank you.
Thank you around here
thank you represent kids
and is there anyone else who
would like to be added to the
list
okay representatives that I
think you manage her at and
thank you very much
I just have a few quick
questions
on the post fire just this
presentation right here I mean
one of your bullets is the
federal programs are not
structured to address cascading
impacts inherent am asking I
really appreciate the planning
and building the labor
infrastructure and within our
state whether going to the
governments who there are
surrounding states or the
national guard the search
program but are we talking are
we keeping our federal rural
delegation
I know updated on these efforts
and needs as well
manager represented case yes so
the one thing that we currently
do have added on the hermet
speak afghanistan would still
open disaster that was one you
know are our state coordinator
miss alley right and I worked
very hard with region six and
fema to understand that these
cascading impacts will it's not
one instance in time and then it
stops and so we currently have
cascading impacts added on that
disaster we have kind of a
conditional on the salt and self
foreign fire to wear we submit a
project or a late damage in
vintoria assessment on something
that has happened after the fire
had occurred with the supporting
documentation in those have been
looked at in their their being
approved on a case by case basis
but we have definitely made sure
that they are fully aware that
their policy and what that
really speaks to and it was
mentioned yesterday their policy
is written for hurricanes.
Not wildfires and so we've been
working to address that thank
you very much manager that
they're current policy so that
so I do appreciate that we're
becoming we are building our own
infrastructure I moved with the
I can't think of a more
appropriate place than las vegas
to talk about cascading effects
on these natural good tests that
are not
that or night rare now now they
were annual and so I do
appreciate that but keeping our
federal delegation updated so
that we can look at future
policy changes and then I just
have one eight I appreciate also
that you are building that labor
in that knowledge of a structure
I want to know whether or not
you're if dot or or even all
easier of the three agencies up
here do you have a materials
emergency fund
a government is infinitely for
only purchasing materials for
current parts and their
emergencies I want to know
whether or not we have processes
or policies in place or as
legislation are we can address
such a thing so that that we can
have materials on hands for such
emergency needs that we know
we're going to occur on annual
basis thank you
manager though representative so
ish kind of right we we are able
to purchase some equipment under
the management cast associated
with some of these grants from
our female grants and so we have
purchased things like we do have
mobile command units that we can
go and deploy from the state two
local jurisdictions that need
assistance in responding we do
have san bagging machines we've
purchased some equipment but.
We are asking and we just
recently went to the
government's office and talked
through our budget requirements
and so we are asking for that
equipment to be part of our ask
if from the budget side of
things this year or at least
next fiscal year right and so we
do kind of have some of that
equipment on hand at d h s e m
but we don't have
enough or the the the adequate
amount to actually being able to
address everything and so I
think you've seen during this
current eoc activation we're
dealing with multiple issues in
valencia and grant.
Art are resources that we
currently have our thin and so
the only way that we really
address that need is through
declaring at the state level in
opening up that funding
mechanism of executive orders
and being able to push through
that neck and isn't to wear.
It kind of goes against what we
are slated at within the
constitution in our ability at
the h s e m to be able to
respond because we are actually
by statute a response agency we
just don't necessarily have the
full capability and resources to
do so so thank you madame chair
the other two
that's what I want to show
thank you madam chair
representative kit so we do have
material staged throughout the
state just for our typical use
if in a certain area we do not
have material that we all on
hand there are plenty of vendors
throughout the state that we can
get that material
now with funding like a
explained in our presentation we
do utilize our state road fund
so it just comes out about a
normal operating budget to to
get that material now equipment
we have estates throughout the
whole steep when we're dealing
as doctor vase explained about
doing with multiple situations
being spread then we have to
strategize in moving off our
equipment material to a certain
event cause we still have things
going on over here have still
have things going on uh down
with a black phone to check one
and so razz while flighting and
so we sometimes we make a
decision not to move everything
to a certain area to kinda keep
so we're not moving equipment
all over the state as
reinstruments move around the
state so we strategize on that
but with materials we have not
had it terrible issues with
acquiring materials for our
repairs throughout the state
manager from the environment
department perspective
representative it's I didn't
hear that the environment
department what sorry madame
share representative kits from
the environment department
perspective we are less reliant
on materials in terms of
implementing our mission
but any staff time
to support.
Technical assistance that we
provided in emergency situations
does take away from other core
duties of the environment
department we don't have an
emergency response team out of
the drinking one or bureau
we do participate through the
emergency operation center with
the hsm on an emergency response
but those are staff that have
other full time assignments
we do also have I mentioned
yesterday at the rural
infrastructure program which.
Is our most flexible funding
program to help respond to
emergencies
but it's not.
Dedicated to emergency projects
it's available for all types of
products so again any time that
we do have to use that funding
source to respond to emergencies
at crowds out other funding.
And thank you very much for them
sure and thank you for your
responses and I understand that
you know this is a a post
event presentation by you know
how how we for public policy and
thought about emergency is
twenty years ago and later I we
actually know we are going to
have an emergency every single
year now and so that is a
different framework of how we
plan for emergencies and so I
would in I understand that it's
counterintuitive to the how our
government works and so please
if there are policy changes
whether federal or state they
are looking for citizen makes
you more it be able to plan or
rating this I also once again
appreciate that this is a post
event presentation but could you
just briefly tell us where are
your funding or you're planning
strategies in
in mitigating potential
emergencies I know that
representative of horrible
vincent have has been very
active as well as what what are
we doing what is dm what what
are we doing for dealtier other
events of whether it's thinning
the forest or
removing refuge before becomes
full thank you that is our next
presentation
very much
are there any other questions
before I ask when
okay I would like for mr class
could you talk a little bit
about the university arrangement
with private land owners and
what you are doing and what
could be expected around the
state
yes ma'am thank you manager so
how it.
We can't utilize federal dollars
or at least the state dollars
because we're the flow through
and there's a cause share
associated with on privately and
right the anti donation clause
we need an eligible entity to
help organize that and
essentially funnel the money
through to actually address the
need for her house is true
removal rate and sell we've been
trying to come up and so this
this working through changing
the methodology on how we can
analyze and scope out our house
to trees projects because
currently.
Female methodology you have to
actually go out in tag and
individual tree get a giant a
gps location
that's over three hundred and
forty six thousand acres that's
ridiculous and you need an army
of people to do that over
multiple years and so this
methodology was accepted by fema
to be able to expedite it's a
lot it's cost horrible cost
effective and you can do that
and so
that's the one big hole that
we've currently have is that
there's so many hazardous trees
out there if we can find a
public eligible entity like the
university.
To be able to manage that be
this sub recipient on the
project and help organize the
community and land owners to be
able to go through user rights
of entry and be able to utilize
this methodology across the
landscape.
We realize that over that
footprint like the hermit's peak
cafe canyon uh burns car we're
gonna have to do it and chunks
right and so utilizing this burn
severity map in identifying the
most has the most heavily burned
areas and then implementing this
methodology with the university
as the sub recipient and doing
that flow through as how we're
going to try and address some of
the large amounts of hazard
shirt hazardous trees that need
to be removed across this
landscape then people to utilize
and adapt that down in the read
also area
um you know and then over on the
trout if there was anything like
that and so it's really
navigating the lattitudes of the
public assistance program
because ultimately it's a car
share and so behind my question
yeah is whether or not you
intend to work with all the
different universities in the
different arenas or just the
universities that work with
forestation and reforestation
we haven't had any other
conversations with any other
universities the other the other
piece of that is that the force
and water should health
institute his hear house in.
And and so i'm represented
vincent had mentioned you know
getting out there and having
training and people they already
kind of do that for their pro-
the public and so this was just
kind of a natural sort of
mechanism that they've already
got expertise and being out to
organize in the communities
bringing them together and there
to kind of issue these programs
and therefore having a forestry
sort of program it was just a
natural fit in especially where
it's at right here at highlands
we could definitely do that and
start thinking and looking into
that but they don't just work
here in the same again area they
do that and they they're able to
address that all over the state
so it was just me working with
them in safe force you so
closely over the years it was
just natural progression of how
that worked okay I would like to
think all three of you for your
department's efforts and before
coming forward today to uh speak
with us and I hope that you are
keep up the great work that
you're doing we have more floods
and more fires to look forward
to thank you very much while
these gentlemen leave could the
next panel please come to the
table we also invite you the
committee as well as the
audience of I think
representative little provided
donuts from charlie spicken span
and the university has provided
pastries there's plenty so
please help yourself
if you need a little snack along
the way a sugar rush in other
words.
Okay we're going to go in that
order so lorry you're going to
start if you everybody would
please make sure you introduce
yourself put the mike right in
front of you.
You'd need to put the mike rate
in front of you otherwise we
have a little bounce back and
people can't hear.
Thank you
madame chair of committee i'm
more on mcester thank you for
having us here if it's already
we will make one change to that
order and have um matt hotel go
before owen burning we've
prepared our remarks in that
order so it will make sense okay
thank you.
Yeah.
I'm going to talk about the
bills that dislegislature passed
recently and the implementation
and I just want to start with a
thank you because you passed
four bills that are related to
forestry and two memorials and
in this panel will cover one of
the bills and two of the
memorials and so.
The the first of these is house
bill one seventy five and the
the issue there really is
anticipating that we're going to
have declines in federal money
and anticipating economic
volatility in the decade to
come.
But at the same time knowing
that the the scope and severity
of wildfires has been having
really serious impacts on our
communities that are costing the
state billions of dollars as as
you've heard in the prior panel.
Been thinking about house for
one seventy five is designed to
help us be most effective with
the money we have.
Now i'm gonna go to slide number
three and.
On the screen there is a video
that I hope you'll take just
literally ten seconds to watch
and.
So i'm in it's gonna cycle
through a few times in an
explain what you're seeing lower
left screen that is the city of
los angeles the red boundary is
the footprint of the eaten fire
the green are models modeled
buffer zones that were created
by a firm called vibrant planet
that then modeled the fire
behavior under the exact same
conditions were those buffers in
place and you can see that fire
does respind to buffers and
those buffers aren't
linear features of
you know a quarter mile of clear
cut these buffers are very
carefully crafted to fit that
landscape and the vegetation and
type of fire behavior so just
wanted to give you that visual
demonstration this was shown to
the US congress last week and I
thought it was impressive.
As well we did have for some
recursion you just clarify.
The video you just show is that
how it's supposed to work or how
it actually worked so
the it is modeled so it's how
it's supposed to work so the the
outer red boundary of that fire
was shown on there.
That's real and that's real it
wasn't sure so.
You're the videos a
demonstration of what we could
do with buffer.
Not would actually happen madam
chairman representative yes that
was accurate and I actually a
few slides later i'm going to
show you something real.
That's in new mexico.
We did make a request last year
and this was in the governor's
request for funding for mapping
and it to to be able to hire a
firm like vibrant planet or
there are many others out there.
Um that offers services that
didn't happen it wasn't in the
final appropriations however
were very lucky to have some
talented staff who can do a
decent quality of work and what
you're looking at inside for is
the mapping that we've done
since house bill seventy five
was passed.
What we did is we looked for.
Concentrations of communities
state wide we looked are using a
criteria of a hundred structures
per thousand acres we identified
more than six hundred distinct
community areas and then we rang
them based on the fire risk.
Um in the next slide then you
can see a little more detail as
to.
The.
What the community are buffers
could look like the red means
that they are in the top one
hundred out of the six hundred
total communities and the yellow
just simply means those are the
the others and as a staff we are
using the the red communities as
our priority for the expenditure
of the twenty million of special
appropriations that was.
Received.
Looking at slide sex now what
you're looking at here is a
screen capture from in terror
which is a service that the
forestry division has contracted
with for interoperability and
real time fire data this is a
screenshot that was taken on
about the tenth day of the trout
fire and what what is notable
about this is the yellow light
brown and green are all areas
that were previously treated and
you can see how fire will.
Bump right up against those
areas that have reduced fuels
and then in some cases it will
burn around it and
the run that the fire made
toward the member is valley and
toward peanuts altos was
because there were no treatments
to stop it.
So
this is just real time prove
that this concept of using
treated areas to
keep our communities safe is
going to work as we implement
it.
Um that's what I have on house
fill one seventy five I will
quickly cover to the two
memorials so send it more more
to was sponsored by senator
woods it was intended to really
have focused conversation around
utilities the first meeting of
the wildfire study group is
scheduled for tuesday of next
week it will be in the round
house are in room three twenty
six of any of you are interested
in attending or you have
constituents who want to attend
eminerge and the legislative
council services are
collaborating to
staff and facilitate this
wildfire study group we have a
plan then for the the first
meetings agenda is fully laid
out the second meeting will
address gaps that are identified
in the first meeting that will
be on august seventh and then on
october eighth will have the
final meeting where we intend to
come up with policy
recommendations the utilities
are all very enthusiastic about
this process their committee to
showing up and we shall see what
comes from it.
A senate joint memorial one was
sponsored by senator padia are
it is really it's not process
oriented rather it's content
oriented and we now have a draft
report with in number of very
diverse and creative
recommendations for
the forest economy and the
utilization of the small
diameter would that is removed
as well as um all kinds of
industries including
technological
are technology oriented industry
down to courage industry using
products and the recommendations
are going to be presented next
week at the
interim committee on economic
and rural development and
policy.
So now our one more transition
and that is to my next two
presenters you've heard a
talking about the new mexico
reforestation center now for
five years that
are
vision of how we reforest our
burned areas is rooted in our
twenty twenty forest action plan
and in that action plan is
strategy six which is a soup to
nuts strategy for reforesting
burned lands and because of the
expertise of our state
universities new mexico state
university with nursery
capacity.
Highlands university with seed
collection capacity and the
university of new mexico with
mileight and assessment capacity
and then combined with emergency
interest in abilities in
statewide coordination with land
managers and privately and
owners we have now the next two
panelists are going to give you
some updates on where we are
with the new mexico
reforestation center so without
madame chirac I will pass the
microphone to doctor hotel
alright madam chair members of
the committee thanks for the
opportunity to speak with you
today about uh some of the
reforestation challenges we have
here in new mexico and broadly
in the southwest
so
we are
beating
a landscape that's transforming
pretty rapidly from big high
severity burn patches such as
some of the large high spare
burn areas in the hermet speak
cafe canyon footprint one of the
challenges with getting trees
back out on these landscapes is
that most of our dominant
conference species in the
southwest are seed obligate
which means the seeds have to
transfer into the burned area
usually by a wind
species like ponderous
appinemently large seat so
they're only going to move from
the unburned edge and maybe
three hundred feet or so they're
really limited in the distance
at which they can travel into
these burned landscapes so that
really it comes down to us
planting trees on these
landscapes in order to reforest
them in any sort of timely
fashion
the real challenge though is
that if we look across the
southwestern US are seedling
survival rates are really low so
there was a graduate student at
an au and flag staff at that
survey earn patches in arizona
and new mexico looking at
planted seedling survival.
And she found that the average
across the region was twenty
five percent so we're already
facing you know pretty severe
seedling shortages and not many
of them survive when we put them
in the ground and a big part of
that is the that image you see
at the bottom which is the
thermal image from the list
conscious fire so we took that
from a drone with a thermal
camera in august about two years
ago you can see the max
temperatures that are reaching a
hundred and eleven degrees fair
and hide at ground level and
that's above left lethal
temperatures for you know
juvenile trees at basic like
cooks
the cambium it cooks the
conductive tissue and they can't
survive that and so that's what
we're facing in these severely
burned areas once we kill off
the overstory trees the
combination of extreme heat and
drought me in that the chance
that a planted seedling survives
is really quite well
and you know this is AAA
challenge that is a lot of
places across the western US and
this contribute to uh challenges
that we face and what we've
called the reforestation
pipeline and so that's really
the
the supply chain if you will for
reforesting the severely burned
landscapes and so it starts with
uh the collection of seed
in order to build a seed back so
that we have the right seeds to
grow trees from its nursery
practices so how those those
seats are grown germinated it's
out planting so where we put
them on the landscape how
they're planted do we protect
them and then post planting what
sort of maintenance do we have
to do and so a group of us did a
a nationwide analysis actually
and and there are there are
bottlenecks in that pipeline
across the country here in the
southwest we have bottled accent
every single step right so we're
we have a shortage of seed which
is something that we're working
to to fix uh we've got a
shortage of nursery capacity
we've got a shortage of planters
and we've got a shortage of
folks to do post.
Planting maintenance
and so are the the new mexico
reforestation center was really
built around solving this
problem right so there's a
collaboration between highlands
university new mexico state
university uh UNM and emerged
for history and you know we're
really trying to
eliminate these bottlenecks and
so we're doing that by highlands
efforts to stabilish a seed
collection operation in the
state and processing facility
and so part of that involves are
running training programs for
contract climbers who climb the
trees to collect the cones which
are then delivered here to
highlands where their processed
and the seat separated so that
we can begin to build that sea
bank operation
nursery capacity so new mexico
state is leading in that right
and that's at the johnty here
hereington forestry research
center and that's about trying
to understand how we say
challenge seatlings when they're
in the green house so they
invest more in root production
so that there are more drought
tolerant when we put them out
you know it's also about other
uh improving other practices so
the research trying to
understand those
facets and then of course
there's the work that that we've
been doing along the way which
is to to better understand what
factors influence survival out
the field so where to plant
those seatlings so we built a
model to predict the probability
that a seatling survives in a
you know you know basically a
one meter patch so at three free
foot by three foot area across
these burn patches to increase
survival
and then we've got the efforts
once they go in the ground what
can we do
or what can we do is as they go
in the ground to facilitate
their survival and what we can
do afterward to maintain their
survival and that's involved you
know we've got training
operations going lead by
highlands to do
train folks and how to properly
plant see links because that's
an important part to ensuring
they're survival.
So we've really worked to
holistically tackle
tackle the challenges in the
pipeline and that's really the
basis for the n m r c.
And I think one of the one of
the really fascinating and and
really cool things about what
we're doing is that we are
really
have developed a state of the
art approach to using data
science to improve reforestation
outcomes and the idea being that
we want to employ things like
you know drone measurement you
know satellite data uh with
improved training and economic
development fassets in order to
increase the chance that we're
able to reforest these areas and
so the idea behind the work
we're doing is that went we have
a fully developed new mexico
reforestation center and we're
able to produce five million
ceilings a year that we're using
all of the tools that are
disposal in order to have as
many of those five million
seatling survive on the land
scape so that we can start to
dress
the backlog of severely burned
areas that were facing
and it
met yeah i'm gonna pass it to
one now i'm chair
thank you
bit before you go on I just want
to comment to the committee that
between yesterday and today were
identifying many work force
issues and we've already decided
we're going to have the
secretary work for a solutions
come with some of our partners
to talk at a future meeting but
please go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is so and
burning i'm a professor in
mexico state university and
director of the giant hearings
enforced research center.
And today I want to talk about
the reform station needs here in
mexico and I think it's really
important to start with the the
example of the hermes be cafe
fire that footprint was about
three hundred and forty thousand
acres and within that about
eighty three thousand five
hundred acres burned at high
severity and it's these acres
that were targeting for our
reform station efforts and so if
we're looking at how many seat
means we need the plant in in
that footprint of that high
severity area it's about ten
twenty five million seat links.
When we look at the state as a
whole we need about a hundred
and fifty to three hundred and
ninety million seat lanes to
deal with the backlog of refore
station needs.
And at our current seed a
nursery capacities that would
take us five hundred years to
reforce that landscape.
So that's because up and even
have my slides up sorry.
Yet we'll wait for that.
Cause I think that graphs will
be really helpful there thank
you very much apologize.
So
that's because there's a
significant gap in the pipeline
and doctor herto just talk about
the importance of the pipeline
but i'm gonna go through those
missing components within the
pipeline here in new mexico and
it starts receipt and it we do
not have enough seat sir we need
over a hundred times the current
amount that we have and
invertory and that's going to
require us to invest in a seed
collection program as well as
infrastructure for sea
processing it's easy banking
that highlands university's
performing right now
for the nursery we do not have
enough seat links we need about
five million seat leans per year
which is about thirty times the
amount that we currently can
grow so we're going to need more
greenhouse space as for planting
we do not have enough tree
planters so we need to invest in
build a tree planting program
to have that infrastructure help
with our planting efforts and
lastly we need to
work with our post planting
effort so that's typically not
performed and so for us that's
monitoring those reform station
efforts applying treatments to
help improve ceiling survival
and adapt based on what we've
learned from those monitoring
efforts
so how do we address these gaps
that's the role of the new
mexico reforestation center and
we're gonna reiterating a bunch
of messages here but they're
really important so the mission
is not only about the
operational program of seed
collection and banking and
processing growing in the
nursery and planting trees but
it's about the ongoing research
to develop sidesb solutions to
gaps and knowledge along that
entire pipeline and doctor huto
just provided really good
example of state of the art
research that's currently going
on to improve evening survival
additionally we focus on our
education so this is building
graduate and undergraduate
programs.
As well as training
professionals along that entire
pipeline and I want to point out
that the combination of these
activities makes the new mexico
report station center bare
unique compared to any other
program like in the country
so what is the current status of
the new mexican report station
center well we currently have
thirty eight point five million
dollars for phase one
and that is to find the full
design so that full design
includes all the green houses
the head house support buildings
admin buildings are n c program
buildings it also finds the
construction of about twenty
percent of the green house
capacity which is about one
point one million seasons as
well as the headhouse that
supports that greenhouse.
It also finds the equipment and
supplies that supports those
facilities so the timeline for
these activities construction is
anticipated to start in january
of twenty twenty six with our
first crop of sea lanes growing
by the summer of twenty twenty
eight
so what are the next steps for
the new mexican reforestation
center
it's a continuation of the phase
approach with an additional
three phases with these two
estimated to be just over twenty
nine million dollars and will
find the construction equipment
and supplies for an additional
green house at about twenty
seven percent of capacity and a
storage facility
would find just over twenty five
million and construction of of a
green house and admin building
and face for is estimated to be
just over thirty three million
and will be for the construction
equipment and supplies for a
green house see program
buildings and labs so the two
are total additional funding
that's requested is just over
eighty eight million
and I want to make one quick
announcement before I end we are
hosting a forestry field day
event on august twenty second
at the johnty herring to enforce
your research center mode it'll
be from ten to two we are
serving much.
And we will also have really
important in the key partners
there to share information about
certain forestry topics like
force health current research as
well as information about the
new mexico report station center
thank you madam chair
thank you and now or go to a
peter view.
The.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee.
It is with great reflection and
joy that I am here today
for I have testified before this
committee over twenty five years
ago when I was a much younger
and a much thinner district
manager for talk soil and water
conservation district
please forgive me i'm getting
over a cold so if I become
congested and I have to cough
i'm sorry but I am not
contiguous.
May i'm a pedro we heat soy the
thousand when was the as they're
the aus in is to see you that
this lastly las vegas never make
I am called peter
I have been the manager for
telstra and water for twenty
five years.
I'm a product of tower schools
i'm a graduate of new mexico
institute of mining and
technology which has now called
me mexico tech
I am a classically trained
physicist
what I am doing and conservation
who knows
but i've made it my life's work
and as a public employee a proud
staff member serving the
taxpayers of new mexico I am
very grateful to the governments
of new mexico to providing me
with employment that allowed me
to support my family the last
thing about me is i'm raising
six grandkids
at a long story but in short
this new generation sometimes
cap make good decisions so i'm
breaks making sure those kids
have what I had which is a good
middle class background and a
strong work ethic.
I don't know why i'm on this
panel
I think laura had me on here
today to tell you our story in
thousand what we do so I don't
have handouts for you or graphs
or maps I just have a
conversation that I want to have
with members of this committee
love for the land
is something that every new
mexican has in their heart and
thankfully in nineteen thirty
seven the federal administration
created the soil and water
conservation program through the
state standard soil and water
conservation district law
that enabled the government of
new mexico to create soil and
water conservation districts
currently there are forty seven
within the state of new mexico
each in every county or multiple
counties they are staffed by
hard working public employees
and volunteer locally elected
officials that put locally lead
conservation on the ground
and proud to be that part of
that I have served at the
national state and local levels
my experience
is with tribal and native
american outreach
public lands natural resource
policy and unpredictable climate
and i've served in that capacity
at the national level.
Over twenty five years ago
long time with that
matter excuse me
we started the first
conservation cautious program
for thinning on private lands in
the nation in touch in the year
two thousand a gentleman by the
name of anthony benson who's
also the person that mapped the
ground water table in tough
scounding and worked with the
new mexico bureau deology.
To create the occupier mapping
program that the line mexico
legislature passed in two
thousand eighteen his vision and
his mentorship for the care for
the water shed created that
program and we've helped
countless individuals now i'm
not here to heal the forest and
i'm not here to make the land
better i'm here
to make stewards at a land
owners and that is my mission to
keep people on the land to keep
people caring for their land and
to educate them so they can
teach others our program has
been tremendously successful it
is funded in entirely by the
taxpayers of tal scounding
we have taxing authority and we
better make sure that we give
the public their money back
after they've paid their taxes
and services and that's what we
do were a highly independent
district we do not ask for
capital outlet we do not do
anything like that we do our own
thing in touch however I would
like to congratulate the
distinguished gentleman from
lincoln and all terrible country
the honourable mister vincent
for mentioning something that I
wasn't prepared to speak about
but i'm gonna talk about now.
The original conservation
partnership the partnership
between the federal the state
and the local entities which was
created by our ancestors to make
sure that we didn't have anyone
fall through the cracks now the
federal agencies are busy right
now dealing with what they have
to deal with and the state
agency is the only ones that we
can depend on now as well as
local government to get through
this time when we can not depend
on federal funds
that being said we have a strong
partnership in your mexico with
new mexico state forestry and
other entities
those programs are paramount for
the future
of people living in new mexico
with care for the water shed the
rivers and the citizens are this
state.
Lastly before I take any
questions that you want to know
about our program it's a good
program it's done a lot of
accurace
i've helped caught this people
i've taught him how to be
stewards the board is really
good in thousand youth
everything that we do in
thousand tried to engage the
young people and the reason is
is there are future and I think
that they're outlook on the way
the world is today might have
some negativity in it so if we
could provide positive
mentorship through these
programs with engaging grad
students college students
fifth graders is who we focus on
entice we start early
we could
farm the next generation of
conservationists who will take
our place
I was eligible for retirement
several years ago but I cannot
let go I have to return to my
community and I have to buy
service to my friends and
neighbors there is no better
feeling in the world then going
to walmart and having somebody
shake your hand because you
helped him with their land it's
the greatest job in the world so
i'd like to thank you and i'd
like to take questions if
possible specific to the soil
and water conservation program I
am a historian about that
program and if there's any
questions about that partnership
and why it don't work so good
and things like that i'd be
happy to answer those questions
right now madam chair members of
the committee
thank you we're going to wait
for all questions until we
finish the panel but thank you
for your so next week
gel promira
madam chair members of the
committee I too like peter
wonder why i'm here today but I
think I I figured it out along
the way.
Is that i'm able to offer the
picture of how local
conservation gets on the ground
we talk about statewide
initiatives we talk about a
whole lot of other stuff over
the last couple of days but it
takes local government it takes
local leaders local staff to
actually implement that on the
ground and my story today is
going to be a little more in the
weeds and peters as some more
particulars and kind of a chance
to boast about district
accomplishments right we all
like to hear and pet ourselves
on the back a little bit so
I was born in raised in the
motor valley
god's country by the most
beautiful place on earth it's
still is even though the fire
tore through that area I still
love the land i'm drawn to help
the land like peter is a matrain
biologist and chemist by nature
first came the highlands
university thinking I was going
to be a doctor started college
and decided hey eight twelve
years of education just not
gonna cut it so I I ended up
doing a couple of internships in
washington dc doing some dna
finger printing and all bunch
other stuff and eventually
realize that didn't want to live
in the city did not want to sit
in the lab all day so my dad
raised this as conservationist
i've only taken from the land
what you need for today and
leaving for tomorrow that's the
basis of any conservation of a
natural resource and I was
installed in me since I was four
years old
now thirty years later ended up
in conservation maybe didn't
pick that as an original career
path but it has been the most
rewarding experience of my
entire life and I am so glad I
ended up here so many talk a
little bit about what local
forest management looks like
with local public bodies and
unemployees so up I need that
quicker
thank you
so on slightly number two I want
to talk about the function of
the local soil and water
conservation district.
And this is a motto a quote that
has existed for decades and it's
to take available technical
financial and educational
resources whatever their source
and focus or coordinate them so
they meet the leads of the local
land user so multiple right but
it are expertise to lead
collaborative efforts to lead
security of funding to lead on
the ground implementation that's
our saw the water districts
thrive.
On an excellent i'll also
discuss how some of the waters
are very unique entity
we have the statutory authority
to implement work across all
land ownership types with a
proper agreements and
permissions very few entities
across the us have this
authority
and some questions are raised
earlier about who's going to do
what where
how many state departments even
have the authority to expend tax
payer dollar on private land
that's one of the biggest
hurdles in the room we talked
about anti donation clause
yesterday
that limits their ability to get
money on the ground
as does yours dictional
authority and i'll talk a little
bit more about that as as we get
further into my presentation
so we do have the ability to
work pros private public land
local state federal and
including tribal lan as long as
we have those agreements and
permissions in place we can work
pretty much anywhere and private
land is our is our are are
cascali guess we'll call it so
no i'm gonna talk a little bit
about local forest management
from the district perspective
for the last twenty years we've
primarily utilized grant funding
from the united states for a
service any mexico state
forestry the bulk of that
funding came from the forest
service in origin it actually
filtered through state forestry
and eventually landed at our
office and we are able to
implement many projects
the partnership was state for a
street like peter mentioned has
been really robust they provide
a lot of the technical expertise
that the district didn't have at
the time we kind of became that
fiscal agent to be able to get
the money on the ground that
leaves on with private land
owners to get that work done the
next slide is there's a bunch of
numbers in here but we got
agreements going back to two
thousand two through through
twenty twenty one and the
district was able to think four
thousand three hundred and
ninety three acres in that time
frame on private land.
To the tune of three point two
five three million dollars
that's a monumental effort in
and of itself when you got a
staff before
and you have a couple of
foresters in some other folks on
the local state forestry
district office assisting on
that end that's a monumental
effort that pales in comparison
to the size of the fire that we
experienced straight so we know
this is scalable
so the treatment types i'm just
going to go to really quickly
primarily hampaining chains off
for these are the don't know
the branches and everything else
that come off at the thinning
operation will either be chipped
lop and scatter meaning you book
those branches down below me
height and leave on the ground
and all the logs the wood
material has to be hold off site
we do not want to leave
flammable material on the forest
floor that can get that can
actually fuel additional fire
and with pine forests we know
that leaving a bunch of that
material on the ground can
actually increase or lead to
further information a bark meal
so there's multiple reasons why
that needs to be mitigated the
other one we did was defensible
space around homes meaning we
cut back a lot of the vegetation
that's round the homes that
could increase the likelihood of
of homes going up and claims
during a fire and what a lot of
people don't realize is that
when home combusts it's not the
flame they lit the house on fire
it's the members that embedded
on considerable materials
whether it be those pie needles
that are stuck in the gutter
that never nobody ever gets rid
of the seat the really beautiful
ceder shingles on the roof our
beautiful decks that we love so
much are all sources of ignition
in a wildfire and that's really
where the fire catch is not not
in the field it's on the ground
we also did some dinning on
forest and acres
at at a huge scale and you know
there were some projects that
were probably an excess of two
hundred acres within one one
private land owner
so I have a couple of pictures
here I really apologize for the
greeniness of these we got to
understand that some of these
projects are done in the early
two thousand.
And a hypixel cell phone wasn't
here then so we can have to pull
some of these and scat him and
throw him up here so on the left
on the before side you're gonna
see a tremendously overgrown
forest that is very typical in
mexico for us it's so thick in
there you can't walk through it
you can't see through it doctor
and you know like we really
think an industry there's a
healthy forest or anywhere from
thirty to fifty trees breaker
we're finding stocking rates
here locally at over two
thousand trees and account
incredible amount of work that
needs to be done to get these
into compliance or in it where
we can reduce fire on the right
hand side that's a little bit of
an extreme afternoon you know
there are some there's a couple
of living trees in there
it is a sting rather heavily but
if you look in the back of the
picture you can see the same
type of of cannot be covered
that was there before
this is another example during
treatment
so I say doing treatment because
this was a reduction of the
feels everything was knocked
down a lot of the the branches
were locked to size i'm very
still wood material on the on
the site that needs to be hold
out
so the big question is that
these treatments make a
difference in the state's
largest disaster my galley they
did we've seen evidence that
three minutes did positively
alter fire behavior we did some
treatments about around the city
reservoirs back in about ten
years ago that actually dropped
the fire from the canopy back
down honor the floor a burned
through the under story left the
canopy intact it allowed fire
suppression efforts around the
reservoirs to build additional
line to further protect the city
reservoir so it made a a
dramatic difference in that area
there's other treatment sites
out and about where where we saw
the same result
we think that scale drives a lot
of of how this is going to
affect fire behavior but we did
see one property out in the
middle of hill area it was a
fighting or treatment the only
land owner that treated within
like five square miles.
And everything around him got
torched
but on his property i'll be done
but that fire dropped down on
the ground and did what we
expected it to do so small gains
can be hard that really make a a
drastic improvement
it's also important to point out
that some of the treated sights
also experience complete
mortality
I don't know enough to know why
that happened I just know it
happened there's some sites
fired behavior was so erratic
you know that fifteen mile run
that it made at the end of april
took everything that's path
whether it was treated or not
there's nothing anybody could
have done to prevent that
some of the talk a little bit
about challenges on for local
public bodies and others in
getting money on the ground so
funding is number one treatments
are labor intensive and not
cheap I just looked up the yes
the state white price agreement
this morning as I was building
this presentation we're looking
anywhere from a thousand of four
thousand dollars in account for
treatment
crazy
terrain and access to the side
is is is really difficult in
some areas too so we talk that
go scan much of that was
untouched by the fire very high
risk community you got vertical
laws and some of these canadians
were treatment is not feasible
and a big one is land owner by a
new willingness to participate
in this local area many
landowners distrust the
government many land owners will
tell you I do not want the
government on my land telling me
what to do
even after robust educational
programs we still have to get
land owners on board to accept
the treatments that we're
proposing right we can have all
the great plans in the funding
in the world and if people
decide not to put him in place
there for nothing
we also have to scout the right
treatment in the right place so
you know there's areas where
fire breaks our buffers could be
put in place on ridge lines that
give suppression teams the
ability to fire off these lines
to come back fire to actually
slow it down.
There's areas where we could
look at other types of
treatments I know we now need to
lean across across a watershoot
skill
checker boarding sometimes work
usually doesn't we need to work
across all jurors dictional
boundaries to be able to make a
huge impact
how do we as a state accomplish
what needs to be done to reduce
catastrophe fire threat and
subsequent flooding and I choose
my word carefully
cause they do not like to hear
prevent wildfire prevent
flooding they are not
preventable
they are forces of nature but I
think we can reduce their
impacts and they're likelihood
of a courier by smart management
practices so thinning operations
pick you back enough of
representative of incentive they
need anything in yesterday right
agree
they mean operations will need
to take place at a scale that we
have never seen in new mexico or
the west if we're gonna make a
dramatic difference
no one entered to your
organization contactless on a
loan
collaborations and partnerships
are he that's the path forward
for everybody these days
funding
federal funding is questionable
at best you know all our
panelists have talked about this
over the last day or so we don't
know what's gonna happen there
what are some potential
actionable items within the
state in mexico I believe that
increasing funding for forest
management treatments
either through existing
opportunities or the creation of
new opportunities can help drive
the work that needs to happen on
the ground to reduce
some of what's happening out
there I do believe that
increasing funding available to
solve the water conservation
districts
and other land management
agencies with a proven ability
to get work done on the ground
is a viable option.
I also know that there are some
other actionable items that I do
not have written there but I
think we need to take into
consideration especially after
some other questions from panel
penalties this morning and from
the committee
do we need to consider building
capacity within the entities
that do have the authority to
work on private land.
Or do we need to find a
mechanism to the amendment of
policy or law to allow more
entities and state departments
to operate on private land
because with what we have now
the test that's ahead of us
will never be accomplished
we need to find a path forward
and we need to figure this out
together
so i'm coming in to the end of
my presentation now and I think
if we
work on some of these potential
modifications these are the
desired outcomes I hope to have
and that's to reduce
catastrophic fire threat through
mitigation and treatment before
it happens
the idea of reacting to what
nature's giving us is extremely
expensive and while it is
necessary can we do something
beforehand that requires less
intervention on the back and
can a reduction in catastrophic
fire reduced flooding impacts
following fires yes it can
if reducing the risk through
thinning allows suppression
efforts to keep some of these
fire smaller we reduced out that
flooding potential reduction and
catastrophic fire can also
reduce the need to reforest
after fires if we don't have
those cannot be runs that devour
hundred thousand acres we don't
have a need to reforest
so knowing that there are
limitations in funding and
resources
we'd like to implement
treatments in areas where the
highest likelihood of reducing
that catastrophic fire and
flooding impacts
would be a desired outcome we
can't just go through money on
the ground at a problem that's
way bigger than we can take care
of we got to do a strategically
we have partners and state
forestry in other areas that can
help us define those areas
you you support state forestry
and developing that and you're
able to support.
The districts and others that
put that money on the ground I
think we have a excellent
mechanism to start mitigating
this this effort madam chair I
thank you for your ability to
speak to you folks today.
Thank you very much all of you
we have
questions on the list already so
here's what i'm going to do
committee i'm going to start
here and we're going to go
around through this end and then
back over all the way so
if you just would make sure you
are constant of time we're not
putting a time limit but just be
cognisant in the vice chair will
start.
Thank you madame chair just
couple questions and manager for
certain mccurthy I I i'm curious
on the restoration
you know what sort of the the
goal are we are you creating
a force for happened it is our
growing trees for hosting.
Um
what what the what's the angle
the reforestation.
Madame chair and
vice chair.
The end gall is a forest that
provides the myriad of benefits
and
what you mentioned.
But in addition one benefit and
didn't mention which is water
regulation.
And that is one of the essential
rules of forests in our state
it's where the snow pack
accumulates and when it's
exposed.
For line in burned areas uh to
solar radiation we lose a lot of
our snow pack to
to sublimation and.
Are so.
I hope that's a clear enough
answer that it's not timber
production it's not one thing
over another but it's too
do what we can to.
Mitigate
what is going to be the the
natural trend toward what what
foresters would call it type
conversion from forest into
brushfields that don't provide
the same benefits.
From force and do what was that.
Brushfields so
dominated.
Grass.
Okay in the the water supply
occurred to me the but certainly
erosion
you on their revigitors slopes
are you
are you creating a diverse
landscape like you know a
patchwork you know some force
opens and brush is it I think
one of the concerns of course is
not only been the density of the
force but the story new
information of the force leading
to the fire so I I wonder if
you're thinking about that as
you select areas three forced
yeah matter of chair by share
that's a great question I think
one of the interesting things
about our landscapes and the
reason we have the big hot fires
that were having is because
we've gotten rid of that
variability across space by
putting out fires for a real
long time and so one of the
things that we are working on is
planting the forest that we want
growing on this landscape a
hundred years from now right and
so the idea is is that we want
to use are understanding of
where the places on the
landscape are that are a little
bit wetter and a little bit
cooler where we're more likely
to have tree seatling survive
and we want to start building
out that reforestation plan from
there so we're going to focus
our attention on places where
we'll have high survival which
means there's going to be some
areas where you don't want to
try and put baby trees in the
ground because they're just
going to croke right hundred
percent mortality and so as a
a product of that plan in a
product of using that
variability on the landscape
we're going to end up with a
much more diverse for a
structure that's better able to
deal with subsequent fires when
they do occur once those trees
are mature
okay great thank you all very
much.
Thank you you have please just
keep lots to keep going center
scott
thank you madame characters this
question would be for the for
the professors has there any
research under way
with respect to genetics to
create trees that are harder to
burn needless water more
resistant to books or any other
desirable rates
madam chair senator yeah we are
doing research along that entire
pipeline so when we think about
seed we can also talk about
genetics.
So there is research looking at
different seat sources that are
better adapted to these harsh
conditions but it also includes
how we produce those trees in
the nursery so there are certain
conditioning practices that we
can do the nursery to prepare
them for those stresses in the
field and so we're looking at
the entire ray of that pipeline
to get us to that angle of
having an established seed when
and in that future force I hope
that answer your question.
Thank you sir thank you madame
thank you representative about
you so madam chair a little bit
about the seeds I know there's a
great attempt made to collect
seeds from the area they're
going to be grown on because
they have genetically.
Grown over the years to adopt
that area cottonwood from
southern new mexico's not the
same genetically as well mexico
so I have two questions.
Are you guys working.
To utilize the small we have
small diameter plants in the
state we don't have nearly
enough of them and are so one of
the things that small diameter
timber plant can do is utilize
the material out of the standing
operations i'm very familiar
with uh one going over towards
more
very familiar with
one about a red tone there
several of them around one here
in vegas I think that makes uh
mostly firewood
so first question is what are we
doing or what do we need to do
to encourage the small diameter
of timber plants and dating
areas second part of that
question is there is we have
just any normal amount of burned
dead standing timber which is
dangerous and we've already
talked about the liabilities and
you can't be on the back of the
answer for trees going to fall
on it co back a power line of
trees got a fall on it you've
really can't fix your roads or
canals
sake is so.
Ten kg talk about the despite I
am returned france a little
about us timer salvage i've been
told it was like a couple of
years
in there that you were
kind of a deadline to get to
that timber and salwages I know
there are some places making far
wood what's happening around the
state as far as tabor salvage
and the
and I see some hill sides where
the timber seems to be laying
down and in a uniform direction
across the slow to stop the
flooding from
a roading the health side just a
little bit about that aspect we
hadn't heard
about those couple things too
much.
Madame chair if I may address a
question so small diameter
tipper products have always been
an issue right you know the
primary source for our use of
that is for for for firewood
you're in northern new mexico so
I know when when a lot of these
standing operations for started
a lot of the line owners to get
rid of that material we're
giving it away they just allow
other down owners come and pick
it up but we know and recognize
that everything has a market
rate so eventually they were
selling it for ten dollars a
trailer no fifty bucks accord
now you know before the fire got
to a point where people could
afford it either and a lot of it
you sat out there and and route
it away so we know that there's
a lot of timber that needs to be
removed we know there's
possibility for economy down the
road
but until we have everything in
place to be able to produce the
volume of product that's
necessary for that economy to
thrive we're gonna have to
figure it out one project at a
time and to follow up on your
second question representative
chat field so locally we've
already missed the window for
timber salvage a lot of the
ponderous says already rotten in
the middle and and and breaking
off you know typically with
pondero said it's one or two
years and what really made it
difficult is that so many
private land owners were
affected by this a lot of them
were waiting for their
compensation from the claims
office or been instructed to not
touch it on to they received
that compensation because the
prove the burden of proof on the
land owner and what not to be
able to prove that they had the
loss so unfortunately a lot of
the material that's out there is
no longer usable for anything
viable i'm I think you can still
contact fell some of these like
you're mentioning yesterday lay
i'm over on contour ground
contact to slow so some of those
flows but they're inherently
dangerous to to fell right now
and confident sawyers really
need to be brought in to build a
complex that so I hope those
answer your questions are
representative of chapter but.
Locally at least that's that's
what we're experiencing.
The.
Madame chair members of the
committee it also is a question
of access
when I was a young youth growing
up in northern new mexico there
was a some meal in every small
town that employed local people
and provided building products
to the local populous they are
all gone and only a few or left
and it's because of lack of
access to the federal ads due to
over regulation and
environmental policy now I am
not anti environmental I am just
telling you that we have
regulated ourselves into a
corner and we need to use the
partnership and the friendships
and the working together that
we've accomplished throughout
these years to work with our
federal partners to open up the
forests to the people again so
that they can think it and clean
it and keep it
better
so madam chair you folks at the
conservation district or the
true conservation this we thank
you for the job you do.
Thank you mister chair a quick
question
on the recent four station needs
as it was presented we need a
hundred and fifty two three
hundred and ninety million
seatlings
or five million seed links a
year i'm out of curiosity what
is the timeline for a siebelling
I mean from when it's a seed to
the time that it's ready to
plan.
Madam chair representative
from the time that we get the
seed so we're not including you
know the collection which in
itself creates its own
yeah timeline once we have to
see to grow that see lane it
takes about seven to eight
months so it would be done
during that season we would so
in january february
and then plant about seven eight
months after or they can be
prolonged for update a bit of
time in the green house for a
fall planting so it beat in that
same window of time
thank you very much appreciate
that that's it mr chair.
Thank you mister chair I have a
a quick question i'm from
valencia county of course in and
with the desert will complex
complex fire that we just had
all of our fires there it's not
forced it's arabosi and so I
want to know I want to make sure
that that like the middle
program conservative district is
part of a lot of this wildfire
mitigation because every year I
mean these three fires that we
just had were
intentionally set unfortunately
by someone so so it it was a
nominally at that point but
every year we have somewhere
down the middle real grand
valley of fire somewhere in the
busket and and it is so thick
that sometimes are our
first responders have a hard
time getting in there to to to
be able to fight it also like
having them as a part of the the
conversation and then getting in
possibly even removing some of
the species in there because
like the salt certain is
gasoline to a fighter not to
mention that it's evasive to
that whole area anyway and it's
like there's not a reason why we
really like it at all but to be
able to try to mitigate that so
one for conserving our water to
to actually help with them with
the fires is is that part of the
conversation
where it when we're getting to
hopefully dying down some of
these fires madam chair and
representative yes the forestry
division and the mr
work very closely together we
have a master agreement and we
have a number of active projects
if I were to guess on numbers of
acres were talking five hundred
or more acres per year that are
getting send in collaboration
with the m r g c d and we work
jointly i'm deciding which are
the highest priority areas for
treatment
excellent thank you.
Madame chair and think you so
much for that because I know
i've had a conversation and I
know they're having a meeting
coming up here not at the end of
the month that I plan on being
at their unless it is but eight
you know because i'm i'm asking
is it a matter of funding do you
need you know it because because
it's it just um there's a lot of
people in in valencia county
area that are like we've been
trying to fight to get this
things we can even you can't
barely walk through it more or
less get any kind of equipment
and that fuel is just any and
people love to live next to the
river in that's the hazard is
that all those cottonwoods
putting out all that cotton
everywhere that's nice little
fuel tool
so but thank you.
Thank you representative
okay next to a representative of
center cartes anything okay
representative vincent thank you
madame chair
back to what I said in my last
statement lord mccarthy's
another were very fortunate to
have in the state of watched
work I went on I went on a tour
last week in towers and you're
doing good work and
I always want to bring that to
the forefront because you are
noticed I promise you that i'm
seeing it.
And that is one of my priorities
is making sure that we're
finding these forest and
one of the things I want to ask
you was do you I saw your model
on the fire do you have a model
on thinning
and how long does your model go
out and how far behind our we
are we ever going to catch up
that insurance representative
our models are fairly primitive
at the that the state has that
is
an area that we would be very
happy to invest in and in the
meantime
the university of new mexico and
doctor hurt to slab is really
our center of excellence state
wide interest of
university level capacity but
applying it to
right are purposes for planning
there are some strategic
investments we could make to
really up use the technology
that's available that is
currently out of our grasp.
Thank you madame chair and the
reason I ask you that is because
on this panel there are quite a
few appropriators.
And twenty million dollars
sounds like a lot of money is
twenty million dollars really a
drop in the bucket for the
thinning that we have to
accomplish
madam chair and and
representative I really have two
answers to that question from
the perspective of the scale of
the work that needs to be done
twenty million dollars is a drop
in the bucket.
From the perspective of our
current administrative capacity
to handle that amount of money
you're going to i'm telling you
now you're going to find when I
you get to egfc in january that
we have spent a little of it but
not enough and
that was discussed with the lfc
last week as you know.
They came out of chair and.
I just wanted to put that in the
perspective when we're talking
about moneys because when I
first got to the legislature I
was I was just a fireman I
didn't talk about twenty million
dollars I never talked about
twenty million dollars I don't
even think our whole budget for
the city was twenty twenty
million dollars and we we talk
about giving state forestry
twenty million for thinning.
And then we talk about
an acre run it from fifteen
hundred to four thousand dollars
twenty million just don't
stretch very far and that's hard
work and the thing that I was.
Bothered by and towels there's
nobody wants to work and a
minimum that they're paying
their sawyers and the people on
the ground is twenty six bucks
an hour it's good money.
So.
What do we do to get these
people on the ground what do we
do to make sure that you have
the money that you need to move
out and start doing this why do
we need to do to get the
standing.
In a good place where our
insurance companies come back
and people can get insurance and
we don't have to watch people's
houses burned down anymore and
if they do escape the fire then
here comes the floods and they
lose their houses to float so I
appreciate what you guys are
doing and my other my other
comment was to mister vihil and
romero
solan water conservation
districts are under utilised in
my opinion
and your underfunded in my
opinion and I appreciate you
guys and I hope i'm glad you got
to
present today because we don't
use sole and water enough and so
and water their the little
diamonds in the rath because you
can work on private property and
we need to get more people like
you on the ground working on
private property and I know
there's an anti donation and we
we we got to I got to discuss
that in detail with my colleague
representative my matoria as
well as
representative mcqueen
and we might not always agree on
things but
if it's too public benefit i'm
all in and I know that a tight
donation it's it's it's a word
it's a freeze that is this b
and is long as it's saving
people's property and saving
communities i'm all in but I
appreciate you guys I love what
you had to say on stewards and
you guys remind me a lot of
farmers and ranchers there's no
better steward than a farmer to
answer because if they don't
take care of the land
then it may get a provide for on
the following year and
stewardship and youth I loved
what you said thank you manager.
Thank you representative henry
anything
representative major.
Thank you matter thank you
mountain
when I have follow up a little
bit mister vehicle on on
something you said in and follow
up on on
as well represented vincent on
being able to
once again in these communities
find a way to bring the private
sector back to these small
communities those of us who
lived
through the the big
concern in your mexico over the
spot at hour
the spot at our I would I would
say today what's happening in
northern new mexico
is in large degree
to the success that certain
environmental groups had in
highlighting the spotted out
when we have a single species
that
we look at that single species
and we
for whatever reason
priorities that single species
over the people who live in the
communities
we've gone too far with
regulation we've gone too far
with environmentalism if as
we're doing right now and years
of drow
the
nab who are damn now the whole
lake has to release a certain
amount of water all the time
because of a sound warn silvery
miner
which is no different than a
silvery minor
in another river
but because it has a designation
of san juan it's very specific
and we are releasing water out
of that damn
regardless of what the
consequences are to the greater
good but worked just releasing
that water.
Because of one species
down south we've had the
kangaroo mouse
we have got to take back or
mister vehicle this to tear to
your point
there is nobody I know in new
mexico who is anti environment
there is absolutely nobody I
know who doesn't want clean
drinking water does not want
clean air nobody
but that has been how the
argument has been framed
and we don't have the
consequences immediately
but down the road we've got a
situation in charma in mortar in
cuba
where we had a fibrent
million
m forestry effort but today we
have this situation which is as
a tender box
not just hundreds more
ceilings
under the trees which
causes multiple problems
including more drought
conditions because it's just
soaking up that water it's not
naturally going down the way it
should but if you just go down
to the must allow a catch you
reservation and see what happens
when for a station
is done properly
they have industry
a safe community while well well
readosa was burning down the
muscle error was safe.
Aren't r environmental
heartstrings
have got to be tempered
with
looking over there over the hill
over the horizon what is going
to happen if we do this and I
would say we can't ignore the
human element
today if we want to go back in
and get a mill back in charm on
new mexico i'm not sure they
have the work force they've had
to leave.
So I would suggest as part of
your planning and as we're going
for a trend III I heard
mrperiod merrill say that
we have to worry initially uh
just about taking care of the
the issue of uh
of
the threat that's right here I
agree with that we need to take
care of the threat but this plan
I think if we were to start
recruiting people
early start talking to previous
entrepreneurs
I think we could go beyond what
representative incent talked
about the twenty million dollars
if if if if there were more
benefit to the local community
we could we could expand this
but if we're just doing it
within the framework of
government it is limited
and and spending twenty million
dollars i'm sure it's probably
even more than capacity
but if we can
recruit these businesses to to
start again and end up mister
vincent doesn't like this term
but learn the lesson
of
not considering what's going to
happen to the humans
when we implement environmental
policy.
It's got to be temperate a
little bit unfortunately in the
last
thirty years in new mexico
and environmentalist groups and
activists and out of state
environmentalist groups and
activists have had an undo
level of effect on our decision
making a new mexico and now it's
costing us millions and I would
suggest it's going to cost us
billions
over the years and and and has
represented vincent says we
might not be able to overcome
this probably not in my lifetime
this is this is going way beyond
we have many many more years of
dangerous fire season and I
would suggest every member of
this committee
you can't just because it's a
constituent group can't just
automatically
believe everything that the
environmentals are saying
because
they're not in the position of
the people in those communities
they're not the land owners
they're not the home owners who
can't get insurance now and now
we're having to back fill
we we we've got a temper so I I
don't I don't know a single
person
who is against clean air clean
water or a great environment new
mexico is beautiful
not so beautiful when it's burnt
down so I I would suggest I
think we need to put more money
into this and and to the point
that mister vincent mentioned
about my concerns over the anti
donation class if I think if we
change that that's a that's a a
huge problem because every
nonprofit organization is going
to come with your hand out we
just don't have enough money
however when we're talking about
something like
fining
forests
and even when it's on private
property.
I don't think I have as much of
a problem with that because that
is about the greater good of the
community if you have a if we
can protect the the homes and a
wively of the people who live in
the communities were protecting
the community and I I don't III
I think there's a little wiggle
room there with the anti
donation class but I think if we
just do away with the anti
donation clause altogether
there's going to be so many
nonprofit organizations that are
going to have to hand out and
many people are going to fill a
blight to help them out and then
the dollars we have that need to
go to important things like this
there will not be enough money
to go around so thank you madame
chair i've I haven't said
anything the whole time so I was
saving up for this moment that's
fine thank you very much
representative gonzalez and then
senator composed and then are
down this side
thank you madame chair
why not I just appreciate all
the work that you all are doing
so background myself is in my
day job I do work for a non
private stem organization
working in graves came through
twelve and so as such I do a lot
of work in this outdoor
education space and I will see
that there and just being here
nor the new mexico we have this
beautiful full outdoor classroom
around us
very familiar with the work out
of the university with a lot of
them on profits in the area
but I will see that a lot of
this work is happening in this
out of school time space summer
program space and for not
familiar with a lot of the
programs we have rocking out and
youth works working with the
hermet's peak water said
alliance there's a lot of this
great work that is happening but
I guess my thought requestion is
has there ever been any work on
a stateway level talking about
the need for reforestation right
the number of ceilings that are
going to have to be produced the
number of seaters they're going
to have to be worked.
Maybe just as a third about and
now with the change in education
shifts that were having with the
change in graduation
requirements and the focus now
on cte and project based
learning and internships just
throwing it out there that maybe
this is an opportunity to
develop core curriculum to get
into some of these species of of
programs that are wanting to use
agricultural classrooms and I
know here in las vegas and
particular we do have a green
house that's worked out there
are middle school working with
the animals you extension
services
so maybe more of a comment in
that I would really like to see
this developed and I know i've
been out years ago but I have
been out to the motor that the
the the fight and we've had
presentations instead of are a
lot of our kids go out there on
fill trips and it's just
phenomenal work and I know that
it has to be supervised and
unproperly and you know all the
science behind it but I do think
that there is opportunity for
the number of seeds that we're
having to produce the mount of
work and state white not just
here in the north they think we
have a lot of gems up here we
have a lot of organizations here
that have been doing a lot of
this work but as as look as the
goal is a dream I would love to
see some of that m again opening
that opportunity and education
to really develop a good
framework curriculum that could
be utilized to fulfill a lot of
these gaps that we have for a
future reforestation and so I
don't know if that's a question
maybe if any of those have some
insight to that but I would be
whole heart will be invested
into a seeing that be developed
madame chair and representative
thank you for flagging that and
it's great that we're here at
highlands university which has
the only four year degree
program in forestry in the state
and in the selection of the site
at mora.
Up the proximity to highlands
was part of that decision and um
yes everything you said is part
of our goals.
Anything else representative
okay senator compost anything
you remember to madam chair and
of course the members of the
committee to the individuals who
since the answer to have
continued to go ahead and assist
us in these counties where we've
been adversely affected by the
fires and floods.
I just want to think each and
every one of you and this might
just sound more like a platitude
no peace.
But in order for us to move
forward one of the keys is that
we could never give up and so as
we have undertaken if you will
the use of resources the ongoing
ingenuity of the innovations the
pieces that have made a big
difference to each and every one
of us here I can apply to each
and every one of you for your
thoughts your ideas your
sacrifices and most importantly
for the support that you have
offered us not only in terms of
the human power that we've been
able to bring forward but also
with the resources and so we are
going to continue to work to
ensure that those resources are
put to good use unfortunately
they haven't been put to use as
quickly as we would like but
again all the pieces that have
come together definitely are
going to go ahead and read great
fruits for us for the future
one of the last things that I
would like to turn in at all
involved around or youth how are
we going to keep them at home
how do we continue to insure
that as we deal with the
environment either they're gonna
be an important part of what we
deal with in order for us to
move forward as a state and in
particularly here in
northeastern new mexico the
bottom line is that we need to
all have a purpose under the
people on this committee to a
course representatives and
others that have invested their
time and efforts in what the
future of this is going to look
like again I thank you because
our future totally depends on
the ongoing work that we give
and that we bring forward so
again madam chair thank you into
the committee into all those
that are here that are invested
in the future of new mexico
thank you manager thank you
senator representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to our presenters
cd i've seen most of your round
of talk to you had some really
good conversations and peter
amit manager you need to put it
closer to me every year
they all right thank you peter
thank you for being here last
time I saw you was approximately
a year ago and we were up in
quaestor at the chevron
water project they have up there
we had some really
very very good conversations
mint sure I guess some comments
from myself too well in front of
me I have notes of all the
different presentations and
presenters and the things that
they bring the table and the
fact that the matter is
everything that we're talking
about and then we'll have the
next conversation regarding the
insurance but we have put
together really the
other the pieces that we need to
be working on to have a really
holistic
way of of figuring things out I
mean this is
in our integration environmental
stewardship community engagement
traditional digitist knowledge
modern science and policy reform
so we're all here to solve
problems we're all here to come
together my question I guess is
how are or what are the groups
that are coming together with
all these perspectives
to and I know we are as
legislators and I know senator
conferences let a sub committee
and we got policy out of that
subcommittee along with
representative instance and
others and myself attending
those the cell communities but
how are you really
coming together not just here in
northern new mexico of course
where were focused right now but
you know we have the wildfires
that are going on southern new
mexico as well and then of
course
the biggest fires that were
sender in california how are we
putting all that knowledge in
information together to come up
with these these better
solutions and I would just say
as my family is is is from here
in this part of.
The state the investment that we
did I have personally in in my
my values as you know
conservation is environmentalist
i'm hearing this jackson
positioning of those two things
but the trune is for me as the
stewardship of our families and
our communities and our
traditional ways here and we've
really highlighted those things
but we haven't really talked
about how that population has
been affected as far as like
decreasing are we talked about
some of them the the policies
that are inhibited the way of
life up here
but I take this as an all I I
look as a problems over as a
legislator what are the
opportunities which you
mentioned to the opportunities
doctor that you spoke of
what are the opportunities now
that we're changing the pace
because we do have an
opportunity we have to relook we
have to reinvestigate through
the lens of science about the
displacement of
animals of communities you know
there well be I mean that's the
first and from what was placed
imout because
everything's been displaced were
now talking about thinning our
force scientifically we know
that that that works we haven't
talked about grazing I did hear
that at all yet but that's part
of the solution
bringing animals here to take
but those ways of lives of our
of our are of our communities
that have long existed up here
have dwindled and because of
these fires and everything
they've declared it even more so
I just like a little bit of
perspective on that but how are
we coming together to have those
solution based conversations
mountain
locally
madame chair and representative
it's
as you pointed out
the way the people are coming
together in northern new mexico
is not necessarily replicated.
Throughout the state and
unfortunately
every time there is a big
catastrophic fire it results in
level of community cohesion and
working together out of
necessity that then does spill
over into
a better coordination for the
unburned plans but that's really
not the the kind of strategy we
want up since i've been state
forester I was able using
federal funding to put an
additional forester on each of
our six districts with the
charge of being the the spark
plug or coordinator to get the
community discussions that are
needed to pull together diverse
sources of funding and get work
done on the ground and
unfortunately with the state of
the president's skinny budget
for FY twenty six and then
followed up by the details all
of the programs that i've been
using to fund those positions
are zeroed out our delegation is
aware of that
they are not in the majority
however so it's not certain that
we'll be able to maintain those
positions after about two more
years
thank you for that update yeah
please peter.
Madam chair members of the
committee how are we coming
together
I can list example there was a
successful example that we did
in touch with the federal
government and that was the
revision of the carson for us
plan which was just commit
completed about two years ago
now these federal planning
processes are long processes and
in the past with the federal
government had done is it sort
of put all of everybody in the
same room and all they did was
argue
and this time this for a
supervisor a gentleman by the
name of james duran made two
groups and the first group he
made was what was called
statutory created groups.
So he put the asset gaz with the
land grants with the tribes and
with the other statutory created
groups and then he had the
public on a on a separate one
and that was very beneficial
because sometimes the
traditional community values get
lost in a public discussion
and there's other priorities
that are economically driven
that that i'm sort of drown that
out but the success and that was
that at the end of the process.
The original doctrine of
multiple use for the public
lands was accepted again and by
that I mean
multiple produce means
recreation but it also means
remain the us and gathering or
shot it also means getting the
set kill waters it also means
hiking it also means grazing it
also means timber harvest so
that type of multiple use
doctrine is always a useful tool
but you do have to do some
homework with the constituents
to make sure that it does it
turn in to
a non productive coming together
thank you very much
so for my perspective i'm
hearing a little bit of holes
because we're here you know it's
going to take us five hundred
years to to recede reforce
everything but then we have like
we need to be standing the force
so I want it you know I mean in
the future update how are we
combining those two
structural
philosophies I guess at this
point i'm going to call them or
does models I guess is even
better scientifically but also
being having the representation
of our of our communities who
have been the stewards
and windows those fundamental
ways of life have been
diminished in certain ways or
you know they they they're not
full force rather we you know
we're more dangerous and we know
that we should never have those
these prescribed burns during
the windy season and you know
and all the sort of things when
you know we lost we last control
somewhere and now we're really
trying to build this back we
don't want this to ever happen
again but we also have to
overlay that with the climate
change you also have to
understand the droughts we also
have to underland understandable
those things and we know that if
we think as well the data is
going to help with water
conservation as well I mean
these are these are not these
are traditional.
Principles that we knew as
towards but these are also
scientific um measurable
benefits are our outcomes that
we know we could have there is a
for me what i'm hearing or
continue to hear there is a
there is we're still not there
yet and coming together with how
we put that all together because
you're here with the government
we have to help you with those
the policy rise in the federal
government the federal
government federal government
factored the matters we're not
going to have the funding that
we had but I also like to say
the resiliency of the of the
people that live here that are
built these communities we're
not popular stitus and we don't
like to be few that way we're
not here to you know to to crime
bag we have you know we have
pride and that pride has to be
taken into how we all talk into
each other and talk into these
communities that really without
them without the stewardship
that they provided here and and
these areas we were going to
lose and that's why we want to
protect our lands as well but we
also want to develop an economy
of strength which i'm not
hearing at all what is that
economy a strength that is
really going to tribe the
traditional stewardship that
we've once had in a holistic and
dependent on science i'm gonna
say that i'm not afraid we
should be afraid of science we
we need to really overly those
things that's all I have to say
right now but thank you for your
presentations and for your
voices and you the gentleman
think it why asking why you're
here that's why
your voice is very important
thank you.
Very briefly please
so we are that voice
representative lohan the some
water districts are that voice
we are local leadership we bring
that to the table we are
government but we also are
stored to the land so we make
sure we bring that voice to all
these discussions state force
she has a very good program in
though in the watership health
court needing group that meets
monthly cornerly so we are
coming together to discuss the
challenges in the plans moving
forward it's just not always out
in the open so we do we do meet
collaboratively but also having
the opportunity to come and
share this story and and i'll be
very brief madam chair i've had
the opportunity to speak in
towers twice to share our fire
story following hermes speak
afghanian I have offered my
services statewide because we're
also implementing the w p as you
heard about yesterday and many
other things beside force
management I hate personally
will go where I need to go to
help people get started so we
are doing exactly what you're
appointing to were headed in
that direction thank you thank
you madam chair thank you
represent cada thank you madame
chair thank you offer an
excellent presentation and first
dr bernie from mse I think most
of the people in the room now I
represent a distance in south
central new mexico where I
twenty five begins in the
account you know represent them
in campus of animals you so i'm
incredibly proud of the work
that are age experiment and
research centers do twelve
across the state some i've never
been tomorrow to visit the
little baby cheese but I know
when you are
feeling with such urgency the
devastation that was these fires
that the updates I was getting
where about the modest center
and what it took a community
effort just as you all were
moving animals to go to that
center and get see leans knowing
even as the fires were braining
how important the work being
done there was into the future.
So I really appreciated hearing
this update
looking at the phases of what it
means to keep building out the
nmrc just quickly we talk it it
seems very much like the the
funding has been committed so
far almost you're forty million
you have three more phases to go
I don't see here what it means
for ms you to take on and build
out the implementation of the
center and their projects is
this like how is how is your
funding change since this beyond
the build out of the of the
physical center
madam chair representative yes
so the mexico state university
research center and the
the reform station center are
two different entities
so we are a partner to that
organization and we do support
each other but they are
different entities so the inner
c is really about
reforesting the landscape and
putting together with that
mission is which is the
operational side but supporting
research and education and
outreach through the different
programs such as unam in an
issue and highland university
and so in modern that university
will still be there I mean that
that research center will still
operate as a research center on
its own but work in
collaboration with the reform
station center thank you madame
chair that's a bit has your
budget grown I guess that's what
i'm saying like
about that i'm with
what you all are doing that
leaves to us funding at such
high amounts of projects that's
like the n m r c but it comes in
collaboration from the research
you all doing i'm proud the
enemies he's been only on that
what are we doing on the on that
side on the research center side
to continue building out how to
pull us
success like this hopefully.
So are budget we've acquired
some funding to help out with
temporary housing for
professionals and students
but you know it it is a drop in
the bucket compared to what we
really need to do for improving
the research at the center so we
have not acquired you know
significant amount of funding
to support the research we have
acquired funding through in a
self grants and other programs
like that but from the state
it's been quite like I
appreciated someone gave a
shadow to a grad student at an
au that told us the success rate
of the seedlings I imagine that
if we had the right kind of
funding pointed at our hired
institutions here it wouldn't
take us relying on a stay over
to a grad student to figure out
how this work the hundreds of
millions of dollars going into
this work in the future of this
work is is going to land
thinking madam chair and I just
want to ask a follow up question
to mr
again appreciate the the
expertise you are brought here
from the soil water conservation
districts I happened to be on
the tax committee I was really
curious with yours to hear your
statements about how you don't
come to the legislature for
capital outlet but you use the
authority in the tacking taxi
mechanisms you already have to
raise the money you need
what is your tax base what's
your tax rate how much are you
raising to do the work you do in
touch
thank you madame chair.
Madame chair members of the
committee so
are taxing authority goes back
to
nineteen ninety was the first
election that we had where we
put it up to the public to see
if they wanted to fund the
programs at the so conservation
did and they did I and it was a
slim margin of victory
and
the secret to the success of
maintaining that
is that you have to put work or
projects in every neighborhood
you have to put him in everybody
else you have to put them in
every plivale you cannot
concentrate just on one area you
have to spread out the wealth
and that's what we do at the
district and then if we can't
help you monetarily or incentive
we go out to your land and we
make sure that we give you an in
person visit and a consultation
so we're very highly respected
in the county as a government
that is
non regulatory but advises and
puts technical as the
distinguished lady was saying
scientifically based
stewardship.
Out out for the the land owners
and the citizens that we have in
the county the other thing that
we do that's very successful as
we partner with our local
governments were very very very
very close to our county
assessors are county treasurers
and our county clerks as well as
the county commission because as
you all know that is the checks
and balances of local government
as well as our municipality so
those types of things and like I
said before it's their money
let's give it back to them in a
way that's productive
another thing that we have and
and and just so you know in a
historical perspective the four
fathers when they created the so
conservation district back they
recreated those entities to be
prioritization entities to be on
the ground prioritization
entities that knew what was
going on in their local
neighborhoods and we'd be able
to advise the powers that be
where to put resources so that
we could steward
this lovely place that we call
home
thinking matter do you happen to
know how much it raises every
year
so when I first started working
there and only brought in about
a hundred thousand nineteen
ninety since we've had the
generous
real estate community everybody
has moved to tower silver the
last couple of decades and built
real big houses
where probably had about one
point three million a year in
revenue from that but it's only
one mill
and we exclude the municipality
although the members of powerly
is now asking us to run an
election within the town of
touch because they're having a
lot of growing pains and they
need our expertise with regard
to development and natural
research conservation so we're
excluded and the only the rural
residents of the county pay that
tax that's fascinating thank you
think this matter
thank you senders to deal up as.
Thank you thank you I really
appreciated the presentation it
was really uh informative and I
have been tomorrow to see the
facility and it is exciting to
think of the great potential of
this I do want to emphasize the
point of you know buildings are
nothing without the people and
there's and the staffing in the
programs to continue so please
keep us informed so that we can
make sure that we can do
everything we can to make it
successful um I had a question
in this bills on
unrepresentative meet about more
question about the boyscape what
I heard you say was you work
with them or gc um
to help them clear the the
invasive species
you know would help the boss get
become more healthy and less
fire
or more fire resistance
I haven't I guess could you tell
me a little bit about where
that's happened in and because I
I haven't seen it I write on the
board scare I bike on the board
scale might in the hike in the
in the area light and I keep
thinking I wish they would have
a day where people could come
and get firewood and take all
this dry without um III keep you
know thinking there's so many
strategies but i'm not i'm not
seeing it so where is it
better representative that I can
give you an example from
albuquerque just south of just
down by tinkley beach there was
a collaborative effort between
the seed at some water
conservation district and new
mexico division of forestry the
is the bernalio is that the
bernalio district and you know
they used funding and hired
contractors to remove a lot of
invasives and a lot of debt
would
I know about the project because
um my wife sits on the board of
the sudad so want to
conservation district and and I
talked to some of their
forestery folks about.
Has this fuels mitigation but
one of the challenges is and the
reason that would needs to come
out as was mentioned earlier is
that
that you know you're basically
setting up the system with more
hazard in the near term if you
leave that would pile there
and so you know there's a reason
it's not there for collection I
don't know what happens with it
to be honest with you from from
that kind of example but the
contractors are it's written
into their contract to remove it
from the site
I think you could do things like
cause a lot of people need
firewood they opened it up for
you know and organize
people removing it it's a very
were you talking about a very
tiny tiny I mean I don't know if
it's a fire barrier or not but
it's not a it's not a big
stretch in albuquerque and it's
in it it's it's not even near
the house it their houses that
are alongside the boski it's
near a tinkle beach which just
would be
dangerous if there was a fire
there so I am just suggesting I
saw the listeners for ever
cousin and it was three houses
away from I mean her house is
with drenched and pink
fire retardent in the the way it
jumped
it's just shocking their that
area had hadn't been
cleaned up because it's so close
to cars and park the the boss
give right there so I just
really want to emphasize that
because a long the boards get
you know all the way up and down
the real grand there is a lot of
a light of housing and um it's
not which you you know I know
we've been focusing on the on
the big big fires and of course
that's important but the boisk
is at another place it needs
that needs help and I want to
thank you all for your
incredible work and your
incredible conservation it was
interesting where you're talking
about environmentalists I was
like I hadn't thought that
conservation and
environmentalism was so
distinct.
I see them blended you know in
my mind
but I I think it's important to
understand that conservation and
including community in the
solutions is is very very
important but in my mind that's
also environmental stewardship
so thank you very much for your
presentations i've i've very
much enjoyed them thank you
madame chair
thank you senator branch
anything
thank you represent a case I
think you madam chair and and
thank you again I just have two
quick questions
let let's talk about the need
for seeds which was very
surprising to me that we are in
such deficit
could you explain to me where
are we are we as as the vice
here for agricultural water in
the sake year for the house
and I looking at the
agricultural community and my
looking at a government
community in the university
community and my looking for
outer state harvesting where am
I going to meet this mass
need.
Madam chair representative great
question and if we had doctor
josh sloon with this right here
he would be able to speak at
this far better than I can just
make it sure we do have a
literally can we bring him
that I think you are the person.
The.
Man i'm sure representative
cades so to your your question
dc crops occur naturally so we
need locally adapted seed that
our is close to the forests that
need that reforestation work
done as possible because of that
local adaptation so the trick is
that we actually have to wait
for those forests to naturally
produce that seed drop which
might only take once like that
might only be once per decade
and given forest
to actually get that seed we
have a kind of small army of
scouts that identify those crops
state wide every year we monitor
them until their right and then
we employ a combination of
large national contractors as
well as instead partners in in
house staff to do those
collections thank you very much
so that is surprising to me that
we this is there are only avenue
is waiting I know that um as my
children are growing up we have
done projects where we've
received a naturally reseated
areas that have been
hurt by the fire by the bosca
and so please keep entouched to
see if there are any efforts
whether it's through funding or
through community outreach and
being able to identify this
because in the presentation it
was clearing me that we do not
have enough seats federatively
available right now so whatever
read still
and I don't think anybody on the
panel is an attorney but
i'm gonna ask this question on
the less
i've been working for several
years of the large group of
legislators and
members on addressing your anti
the anti donation class so
there are many exceptions that
the state uses we are the only
state.
That has not addressed their
anti donation cars as an all the
western states had one and they
all have some something in it
has addressed it what we have is
decades of exceptions and work
around i'm familiar with them
when it comes to housing when he
comes to the lead of fines when
it comes to
a wide variety of subject
matters how would I identify one
we're doing and water i'm doing
ones that will identify water in
cities so what is the verbiage
you need for this to be able to
create an exception or to be
able to address this as we are
working on this bill.
Madam chair and representative
as you pointed out none of us
are attorneys up during the
session emberds then general
council now deputy cabinet
secretary ben shelton really
delved into this and um perhaps
I might suggest that we follow
up with you with ben involved to
have that conversation thank you
thank you very much madam chair
so I am from what the
constitution uses is does it
serve a public purpose and we
all can agree that this service
of public purpose correct
whether it's privately or
publicly in its service a public
so I feel confident in our path
I just need how do you want to
be self identified so that we
can address that in the bill so
I will reach out spend but if
you have ideas now or in the
future please contact me so that
we can go through that thank
you.
So I think i'm the the public
safety aspect is going to help a
lot because typically when we're
spending graph moneys or any
taxpayer dollar on private land
that always has to be that
kosher and they're often looked
at as a benefit only to the
lander but sees since this is
public safety that burbanks can
be worked in there for the
greater good of the public and I
think that's one one work around
but I get I can offer some more
ideas to you if you'd like
thank you manager thank you
manager thank you representative
yeah thank you venture just
really quickly um I think you
for the presentation I always
love reforestation in which you
do with the seed is amazing
in your when group that really
is about saving the land and
water and not about money so
that is refreshing so thank you
for that in many of us would be
working to try to get you the
funding you need will keep
trying for that so in senate
joint memorial one the
reforestation in the economic
development to expedite
reforestation force restoration
are you looking at other
companies that develop the
timber industry like would
pellets or pep pet later or
valuated products and that can
help fill the gap of the song
bills in the state
madam cheron representative yes
I didn't come today prepared to
talk about the myriad of
recommendations that are in the
draft report that my staff
prepared that I just got to read
late last week
I will say there is
there are plans under way for a
large scale biomass conference
this fall and in our
recommendations what we focused
on is not so much identifying
the specific industries but
rather the policies that could
incentivise those industries to.
Be developed in place and that's
what I think will be bringing to
the legislature starting next
week but beyond that as well.
Thank you one more question
manager so a couple times it was
mentioned that only twenty five
percent of the ceilings were
taking so what do you have a
reason possibly why or what are
you doing to fix it
better chair representative so
really what it is as it's about
heat and drought so we place
those sealings out and you know
they're suffering conditions
that they just can't survive in
there you know that the juvenile
trees have a real narrow
tolerance that they're tell
environmental conditions they
can tolerate compared to you
know large mature trees and so
we're just exceeding that
tolerance and we can mitigate
that by finding locations where
were where they're climatically
buffered so you know at broad
example would be north slopes
right there more shaded it's
cooler.
The eight mention I remember
when we went down there senator
but you talked about trying to
get ceilings that would become
resilient so they could handle
it is that still in the process.
Better chair representative yet
so not only can we mitigate
through looking for the rate
sites but we can do things in
the nursery to condition they
receive lanes so that they can
tolerate certain levels but
really you know it's this
intersection of it all
and our goal is you know not a
hundred percent that would be
ideal but even in some of the
best places there's some
struggle so
are benchmark is twenty five
percent right now we've got to
be able to break that and I
think that we're already showing
that in our research through
the rate see that we select
through the nurse reproduction
that we do
as as well as the site selection
so that combination is really
the key
thank you for you.
Thank you committee members and
thank you for the entire panel I
have one question that we can do
offline
I was a googling whether or not
seeds can propagate seeds and
first i've just got a rigmarole
about plant to see your create
more seeds but then I got into
rysons so i'd like to discuss
this later so that we can move
on to next topic but thank you
all for being here today we
appreciate you very much and we
will move on to our next topic
so if the next group of
panelists would come up
laura mccurthy ellis keen is
always.
And um yes they see you duly
rushman a rockman miles conway
candrosakarius.
So committee members
we we are late but this is an
important topic so we're going
to see if we can get it
accomplished in an hour and a
half which would mean staying a
little later but that also means
looking at the time we spend not
remarks so if each of you would
keep your remarks to about eight
minutes
that were helped get to the
questions that i'm sure
committee members have so are we
going to go in order was okay so
we start with laura please and
introduce yourself as you
proceed
madam chair and committee and
form a car they the stick
forester and i'm definitely not
going to use eight minutes i'm
going to go really fast for
these slides.
Ah I want to think the chair
though are in particular for
being the sponsor of senate ball
thirty three and my comments are
about the implementation of the
senate bill thirty three we have
convened the fireplanning task
forced with the new members are
including uh misrackman whose
with us today is one of our new
members and we have already
started the work on mapping on
standards on uh assisting local
government with implementation
and we're having conversations
around certification around and
grant guidelines I guess I need
I might need to click her
other wives why now I I think
that's already been discussed in
you can enjoy the visuals are
unfortunately new mexico gets a
little up with various colors of
red.
For the the fireplanning task
force because of the work that
are that were undertaking in
mapping standards and
communications and because
there's so much expertise in our
state we have formed subgroups
that are are involving all kinds
of expertise that are not
represented on the task force
itself and we're doing that in
compliance with the open
meetings act and running it as
much as a collaborative state
wide effort as we can possibly
accomplish we are using the
mapping that I shared in the
prior panel for a second purpose
and that image that you see
there on the right that looks
rather like a spider web is
about flame links and the
transfer of wildfire from the
community are from the natural
area into the community
and my final slide there is just
to show you that we are in
conversations with the insurance
institute for business and home
safety about adopting their
standards which will require an
m o a between our organizations
I were not sure which state
agency it might be the office of
superintendent of insurance
that's actually signs the m a
and there is a contingent of
staff from
construction industries division
osi emerged and the state fire
marson's office who were all
going next week to the ibh
headquarters are to continue
these discussions in person
without madam chair I will pass
it to the superintendent
thank you laura and supreme
court
I need to see.
Madame chair committee members I
thank you for having us here
today
I want to thank you
from
up i'm sorry i'm else keen i'm
superintendent of insurance
matter chair and committee
members I will also not use the
full eight minutes I hope
and I will i'm not going to be
using slides and but i'd have
presented a presentation that I
think all of you have and I will
be referring to the numbers
there are
first start this is an update of
what's been going on with the
fair plan are I want to share
with you that after seeing the
devastation from the wildfire
and floods and real joseph my
primary concern over the last
year has been to have as many
citizens have access to
insurance as possible
that's why I was eyes supported
b eighty one which was designed
to increase residential on
commercial coverage limits are
required mitigation and
modernized the fair plan
governance osi also supported a
another bill that unfortunately
didn't get past speed to fifteen
that was designed to provide
coverage for property loss
caused by the flooding that
often follows a while fire we
hope we can gain your support
for similar legislation in the
next session today the fair plan
is being operated as a low
income program not as a market
of last resort or residual
market as envisioned when the
program was originally created
in nineteen sixty nine the fair
plan through the government
committee has met the needs of
new mexico from many many years
however since twenty twenty
three new mexico has experiences
you've heard again and again
today catastrophic hail and
wildfire evidence and the
insurance industry reacted
strongly with the draft drastic
increase in home owner and
business policy cancellations
and non renewals that's on side
three and you can see over a.
The number of years we have
listed there they were over ten
thousand
cancellations and non renewals
and if you look more closely you
can see are they
well they're largely focused in
areas that are considered high
wildfire risks lincoln county
the number was four hundred
fifty five percent increase and
otero if I could still see I was
for my eyes I apologize
was forty four forty four
percent so
we really do have an insurance
access crisis I think in new
mexico.
At
so
the new this new environment has
required the fair plan to be a
true market of less resort with
increased policy limits and
wildfire mitigation as well as
the government committee with
access to expertise and
catastrophic risk actual science
and finance let's explore you
know we'd like to explore other
options to provide insurance in
low in low into come communities
we're willing to work with the
legislature to find ways to do
that but right now I think
because of the emergency we need
many many new mexico counties
require a more access to
insurance than is traditionally
been available for the past year
osi has requested the fair
planet governing committee to a
doctor holistic approach in
response to the rear dust or
wildfires when I first went to
the fair plan board in august we
were talking about a residential
property limits of one million
with compromised I in the
legislation to seven hundred
fifty thousand we wanted
commercial commercial property
limits to five million now we're
asking for two million currently
they're one million we need
actual justified premium rates
the insurance code requires
residual market rates to be
actually sound are with actually
sound rates they might have
avoided the industry assessment
of tat million in twenty twenty
four when the plan had an
adequate reserves to pay for the
that year's hail and wildfire
claims
we've also talked about
mitigation are we've been
working closely with ibh s and I
think you're going to get a
wonderful presentation from at
the person sitting next to me
who did run ibhers about
mitigation and how it can help
reduce the risk of wildfires and
we'd like our fairpen policy
holders to
move into.
A mitigated areas and that we
were hoping we've received a a
grand of ten million were hoping
to use that to help at the low
income policy holders and the
fair plan do the mitigation we
think this will also allow them
to get back into the open market
right now the we have two
companies are giving discounts
for mitigation according to
pretty closely to the ibhs
standards.
I want to just go back to a
residual market a residual
market is supposed to be a
market of last resort it's
established to provide access to
insurance when policy holders
are unable to obtain coverage in
the open market both when they
come in and often times um
residual markets typically
require the policy to go out
every few years to see if there
is an open market option for
them osi also are up requested
the government committee provide
a members with any expertise as
we mentioned earlier actually
catastrophic wrist and finance
at the may government committee
meeting guy carpenter presented
the state of the insurance
market to the committee and we
also had the general council of
h s
playing the mitigation standards
that we think would be very
helpful there has although there
has been some movement by the
governing committee to add a
second consumer advocate I still
think we have a long way to go
to have a comprehensive program
I am I have requested or aside
to call a government committee
meeting for july seventh next
monday so we can continue these
discussions again I want to
thank you and at the legislature
for the ten million dollars
appropriation to a lower grad
program to support the cost of
mitigation for low income policy
holders in the fair plan and
also the two million dollars
appropriation for a fire
insurance market stud- study
thank you.
Thank you very much and next
week
julie and how do you stay your
last embrokment
rochman right right okay
formal introduction
thank you madame
madame chairman survives chair
members of the committee of good
afternoon my name is july
rochman and before retiring and
moving to new mexico in twenty
nineteen I was the seat you the
insurance institute for business
and home safety for more than a
decade
okay
abhs is a nonprofit applied
research organization holy
supported by the property
insurance industry its mission
is to identify and promote
effective ways to eliminate or
reduce property damage in other
losses for natural hazards today
on behalf of ibh and the
property insurance industry i'm
here to support your efforts to
better protect you mexicans
against wildfire through
implementation of the weldfire
prepared act
gives me both through ibhs and
on their own property insurers
of all sizes have been working
very hard to effectively reduce
risk and better protect
individual structures across the
US including here in new mexico
fortunately when those efforts
are successful policyholders
insurers and vulnerable
communities all benefit i've
just has used both rigorous
laboratory research and reams of
data from decades of post
catastrophe field research to
develop a series of workable
residential
end commercial building science
based guidelines that can apply
to both new and existing
structures and that's very
important that we're talking
about existing structures as
well
the strong building signs
foundation is why many states
are choosing I be to standards
as the basis for mitigation
programs targeting hurricanes
high wind tale and wildfire
since welfare next structures
through embers which was
discussed during the prior
panels radiant heat and direct
flame contact ibh studies and
works to develop counter
measures for all three risks
well I don't want to minimize
radio heat and long flames.
It is windbow and embers that
are the most dangerous threat to
homes in fact research shows
that when a single family home
is ignited by imbers there's a
ninety percent chance of total
loss
members are also the leading
cause of home ignitions members
can travel for miles on the wind
and then land honor near a home
far from where firefighters are
actually battling the main fire
ignition happens when members
land on things like piled pine
needles at the foundation of a
home or gathered in roof valleys
on top of the home members also
you can get inside a house
through windows that are broken
by heat exposure or through
exterior vents they then catch
onto drapes or furnishings and
they burn the homes from the
inside out.
So I be just prioritizes
research about how to defend
against embers last month based
on recent research I b h s
updated their wildfire prepared
home standard established and
twenty twenty two wildfire
prepared home gives home owner's
immediate steps that they can
take to better protect their
property
it is the first well for
mitigation program enabling
homeowners to earn a formal
designation by completing a set
of science based actions to
address vulnerable parts of
their home including the roof
other specific building features
and systems and their
surroundings the designation is
currently only available in
californian organ however I bhs
is committed to standing up a
program here in new mexico as
part of the wildfire parade act
implementation I b h takes a
symptom systems based approach
and has two designation levels
the base level offers a set of
fundamental mitigation measures
to protect against embers and to
reduce the risk of fire
spreading to the house from the
surrounding area the plus level
builds upon the base lower
requirements while adding
enhanced protection against
direct flame contact and radiant
heat home orders can get started
any time by reviewing the I p h
s how to prepare my home
checklist which outlines
required set of actions such as
maintaining defensible space and
upgrading key building features
to help produce the chance of
home ignition some action simply
require sweat equity others are
more costly once a designation
is achieved home owners maintain
a three year designation by
submitting annual reviews to
verify ongoing landscaping
maintenance so the property
continues to comply with
property requirements I be h s
is also updated the standard to
address common home owner
questions about medication
requirements including
installing flame and imp
resistance and ensuring a five
foot wide non combustible zone
immediately surrounding the home
which is absolutely essential
other updates include clear
definitions of designation
levels timelines in eligibility
requirements a new section to
address prepared mister red flag
warnings and extended absences
from hope.
A revised checklist to assist
home owners with how to complete
the required mitigation steps to
achieve a designation is also
included in all hs standards we
stressed the need for an initial
objective evaluation of the
structure strength and
vulnerabilities along with third
party confirmation that any
mitigation work was done
correctly it is this evaluation
in confirmatory process that
gives insurance underwriters the
confidence they need to make
coverage more available and more
affordable for policyholders who
improve their risk profiles it's
also important to know that
while the icc the international
code council does have while
then fire related guidance in
their twenty twenty four
international law land urban
interface code that only applies
to new construction and just
substantially rebuilt a
construction after an event
unfortunately new construction
can price is only about two
percent of the built environment
so dealing with existing homes
is essential to and retrifiting
them is essential to making sure
that we're securing the built
environment in a much shorter
period of time while keeping
homes from being destroyed by
fires certainly our main goal we
should know that there are other
parts of the wildfire prepared
home value proposition and they
include a family living in a
mitigated home is less likely to
be displaced for months or even
years when wildfire has come to
their area things that can't be
insured like memories are the
marks on a door post noting how
tall your kids are grandkids are
are much better protected
homeowners have more peace of
mind if in when they have to
evacuate and we want them to
evacuate when told the do so
they'll have much more
confidence their home may have a
chance of standing when they
return and finally trash heading
to landfills is substantially
reduced if homes aren't burned
down and become basically trash
before closing I want to note
that is a new mexican for the
rest of my life and someone
who's worked on natural
disasters for decades I feel the
pain of those directly impacted
by wildfires.
All over our state including the
ones that are burning today as
we sit here sadly climate change
in other factors are increasing
the risk of wealth our damage
and populated areas in addition
rebuilding costs building
materials and labor continue to
rise and those factors are
reflected in the cost of
insurance but let me be clear
individual property insurers do
want to do business in new
mexico
in fact insurers and I b h would
like to see new mexico become a
model for other wildfire
bulnerable states we would love
to see new mexico's market
become as robust and competitive
as those in alabama along the
north carolina coast have become
after implementation of our
hurricane standards madame chair
mister vice chair members of the
committee I appreciate that
we're coming to the end of a
very long couple of days so all
and by remarks here i'd be happy
to answer any questions you may
have
great thank you very much miles
please
thank you
I only have one slide
my name's miles kind way so I am
the ceo of the new mexico home
builders association or part of
the federation of the national
association home builders one
point four million members
fourteen hundred locals across
the nation our mission in the
nutshell is housing
opportunities for all so i'm
really pleased madam chair
members of the committee to
appear before you and just try
to unpack for you the the the
price tag of all this and kind
of what especially existing home
owners
are confronted with when
contemplating upgrading their
properties to meet
and to achieve an ibhs
certification so that their
insurance company will stay at
the table with them will not
cancel their policy exactly I
think madam chair members of the
committee you're all very wear
this becomes inequity issue if a
property owner in new mexico a
working person.
Cannot afford these mitigation
measures they can not get
property insurance they are
required through their mortgage
to have property insurance
they're forced to sell if
they're forced to sell their
force to sell to a cash buyer at
a diminished rate of their
property value and so the work
that is before this committee is
so very important to figure out
how we can set the standards and
and strike this balance which it
shows on the sheet here you know
you know the balances between
affordability fire resiliency
and insurability so as you can
see on the top of my little
colorful chart here the vast
amount of new mexico homes are
are existing housing stock over
sixty seven percent of them must
remain else work constructed pre
nineteen ninety nine really with
fire resiliency in mind during
those years
and as i'll go through some of
the price tax here new
construction kind of a piece of
cake we can build homes that are
more fire resilient
zoning in terms of how to
prevent structure to structure
fire gets a little bit more
complicated you have a fighter
marshall and perhaps I think a b
h s is premium standard of sixty
feet between structures doesn't
jibe with housing affordability
at all in fact we'd like to put
house is even closer together
than ten feet together to see
you can put more houses on a
piece of land to achieve housing
affordability and then of course
when you do that you you can get
more houses on a piece of land
and then increase the housing of
force for ability
but structure to structure fires
become more of an issue i'll all
impact a few of the
fact towards that i've pulled
from the head waters
head waters economics this was a
this is a study
where they took up an average
twenty five hundred square foot
home in montana.
And they applied some of the
tier one and here too ibhs
building standards to that to
that structure to determine what
kind of costs were talking about
here so so i'll run through
those really quickly and then
i'll end with just how the state
of new mexico can take the lead
and
so
landscaping and that for that
the cleaning up the yard the non
combustable materials on the
property taking care of the
trees
putting a fire proof fence any
fencing that contacts your house
that's like a fuse to your house
in a wildfire none of that's
controlled by building codes and
so the state and to a certain
extent the local jurisdictions
are gonna have to act to
overrule in some cases house you
know how he's love coyote
fencing in order care of fences
it's matched sticking up in the
air leading a wild fire directly
to your house so I mean that's
something for your legislative
analysts to figure out how to
handle that issue
so landscaping costs you might
save for an average twenty five
hundred square foot in the
property maybe twenty five
hundred dollar investment to
kind of mitigate the landscaping
around that home to improve the
decking to be a fire fireproof
decking covering the understory
of the dexo embers as we
discussed that our casting for
miles across the desert not
going underneath that deck that
can be that can be thousand two
thousand dollar investment
the roof that's a big one a roof
with the class a roofing
structure will run about twenty
seven percent higher than a
typical roof good news here for
everybody it's really hard to
buy non class a fire rated
materials in new mexico or just
building roofs that way and so
that is kind of already beeped
into most of the pricing of
homes.
But roofing structure a
different matter is it's how you
put the components together that
matters how you deal with your
your venting your software it's
your crickets how the roofing
goes on what the underlayment is
one of my great members a
talk to me about it they were at
that moment with their client in
tow ski valley were there
deciding do we go with the
classes roofing or do we order
we save a few bucks they went
with classes roofing it had a
more fireproof membering
underneath the underneath the
the pro panel
actually he was a tar single
roof and it there was a fire a
bunch of pinels blue on it and
that and it it burned and burned
but it didn't burn through the
underlying at the fire
department got there in time and
it extinguished the fire so it's
an effective method to mitigate
structure to structure fire and
safe structures
window package this is another
pricey item two pain windows
that's great not everybody out
and rural new mexico hasn't but
they're pretty much the industry
standard tempered glass
two pain windows they won't
shatter and big heat
those can be a little price
you're adding maybe twenty seven
percent to the window package of
a home
glass skylights obviously
plastic skylights as a just
invitations for an emberded
melton through and
as I mention the non combustible
fencing this is something that
the construction industries I
think is sort of struggling to
work with the legislature new to
how do we come up with those
rules to say whatever fences
against the house is fire proof
you don't create a wick so all
in all I mean these mitigation
member
numbers for upgrading existing
housing stock are are for middle
and I think the the concept and
the idea of creating a fund.
To help your lower income new
mexicans
make these mitigation measures
on their home qualify for fire
ready certificate from ibetch
and get their insurance in
company back to the table to
sell them a policy will be
really important to consider
i'll just mention just a few of
the other list of items that are
associated as contemplated for
you know how the state of new
mexico can take the lead I think
on your your paper hand out this
black old section there's a
space between the lee and the d
madam chair representative in
senator from lee county I
apologize this was not meant to
say how the state of mexico can
take the learning democrat
that was that space should have
not been in there as thanks for
my joke
so i've says I stayed creating a
statewide program in support of
retro fits to prevent
displacement of working new
mexicans lowering coming to
mexicans absolutely key we've
talked a lot about the mapping
today I think we need to have
consistent mapping especially
across the
the state including the overlaps
of home rule districts if afa
santa fe counties allowed to
make its own map and it buts up
against real reba county and
they have a different map and
we're talking about an ember
that can fly two miles well
what's the community buffers
owned there you know who who
gets to decide what map were
working from so I think that i'm
really happy the state forester
carthe is working on that
mapping and hopefully it's
adopted consistently across
every jurisdiction of the state
we talked a lot about the
certifications for the training
a work force for wildfire
retrieve it upgrade projects
somebody mentioned youth works
eventually that's a santa fe
youth kind of
group we're gonna be looking at
the soil and conservation
district private sector partners
you're going to need.
A subsidies small army to head
out there to these communities
that forced her mccarthy and her
team is identifying to mitigate
the properties take care of the
trees and and clean them up
it's going to be a state it's
going to be a state project to
establish the zoning set backs
and again the fencing as I
mentioned
building codes don't touch
fencing hoa's have a lot to say
about what kind of fencing you
need
we want to recognize that the
newly developable lands are
largely in this wild land
interface zone so really
important to get this right and
not stall out your construction
and housing economy
finally I think we've talked a
little bit about make mitigating
impacts on the state's fair plan
if you if you think there's
going to be a lot of new
mexicans really interested in a
fair plan that can cover their
home valuation up to seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
you are correct because it's
getting and so we really need to
insurance industry be selling
that plan and have tools to keep
it affordable and that might
mean rate changes on other
properties so they can stay
viable as a and i'll let my
insurance colleagues handle that
one but and finally we talked a
little bit about it and i'm glad
to hear it this we need the
state's gonna have to establish
protocols for how we handle the
individual property rights when
establishing the criteria for
these fire safe communities
these community buffer zones it
was at one of the task force
meetings and I think it came up
at like what happens if a if if
if joe who owns a lot of
property in that community
buffers own says no hell no no
way you're not going to cut down
my ponderous or then my trees
here
that's that's a problem for for
kind of achieving our our goal
here of protectors community so
once again thanks for your time.
Balancing affordability fire
resiliency insurability we
appreciate it we want yell to
appreciate the effects of
constructing costs on new and
existing homes versus the
affordability and conflict
between higher density housing
which we all say we need for
affordability and that's ideal
separation in the space between
housing that we want to achieve
for to prevent structure to
structure fire thank you for
your time madame chairman.
Thank you very much and next
candra.
Least our by introducing
yourself madam chair members of
the committee my name is counter
sacrifice I am the chair of the
governing committee of the new
mexico fair plan
before you have a presentation
that will give you the history
in overview of the pair plan
that we have currently in new
mexico as stated earlier the
fair plan was created and
nineteen sixty nine and it was
created through legislation and
to create a program for
insurance like they say a blast
resort for people that could not
get insurance in the standard
insurance market
the program is is administered
by a new mexico property
insurance so they oversee the
issuing of policies and payment
premiums and claims for our
policy holders.
The the plan is not.
So agents are not appointed
through the plan they applicants
can have a representative or an
insurance agent of their choice
to act on their behalf so we can
go to any agent that is licensed
through the state in new mexico
to acquire this specific home
owner's policy
they write policies that are
owner occupied intended occupied
we do offer coverage for mobile
homes and manufactured homes
there is no coverage for big
dwellings and they do cover
commercial property
the policies are written on a dp
one form which is an actual cash
actual cash value form.
The coverage is that you you
will see and the slides will
show you the coverage is that
the plan insurers again so you
can have the fire only policy or
you can elect two purchase
extended coverage it does not
cover any water damage theft
liability no order and sublower
earth movement as your
traditional home on our policies
do.
Our rates and our assessments to
the plan so all our rates are
subject to prior approval of the
superintendent of insurance
office our member insurers are
subject to assessment from any
shortfalls in the fun to run the
n I p I p program the
assessments I will add are not
passed on down two hour policy
holders
in mexico property insurance
program yes we have had three
assessments in the past two
years and this was due to the
significant lost you to hell
damage and wildfires.
Currently our coverage limits we
write three hundred three
hundred fifty thousand for
residential coverage those are
in protected areas of protection
classes one through seven those
have like four time responding
fire department unprotected is
at two hundred and twenty five
thousand commercial limits are
at one million we did have a
period of time from june first
twenty twenty five to june
twenty twenty twenty five that
the residential coverage limits
were at seven hundred and fifty
thousand based on a provisional
approval of the superintendent
of insurance that provisional
approval was not made permanent
therefore coverages have now
reverted back to the standard of
three hundred and fifty thousand
and two hundred and twenty five
and a million for commercial.
Lastly I do want to point out
as a superintendent did state
there is a meeting that is
scheduled for monday um she has
asked for some additional
information the governing
committee has submitted a
counter proposal which wouldn't
include your address the
commercial coverage limits
mitigation the governing
committee and the residual
insurance market lastly on your
last page is contact information
for the executive a director
that administers you mexico
property insurance program she
was unavailable today but if you
have any further questions you
can reach out to her or reach
out to any of the governing
committee members thank you
great thank you very much
so far we're starting unless we
have representative clean
representatives in since
representative blue hung and
representative little
anyone else okay can solace
sedia locals.
Anybody else
okay so let's start mr my sure.
Thinking about her
so
very interesting presentations
on the span all very interesting
presentations today appreciate
it
that the sort of you know
hardening of
resential areas and especially
how they are ties to insurance I
think it's really interesting
and really important I just want
to make a comment about the fair
plan legislation I know we have
two of the sponsors
here with us today's other forty
hearing from them
the senator worth is not with us
today that legislation your pass
the senate for I think with one
distant invoice and we're
ceiling through and they came to
house judiciary and i'm on the
house just hearing and they
was my belief that just it
wasn't quite ready and we were
debating it and it was is
getting allowed to be and
you know people were concerned
and it was my expectation that
the
the bills can get rolled meaning
we weren't going to take a vote
and the sponsorship were gonna
continue to work on it
and then suddenly there was a
tibling motion
and tabling motions are
debatable and there is a vote
and it was table and that was
not my expectation then I voted
against the table
I personally
I get nervous where in the same
mexico gets into the insurance
business I think there are
protections built into the
existing pair plan I think it's
ready for an evolution
i'm interested in what the
specifics are last year in this
committee in our final meeting
and see in the fee before the
session
we are
had some presentations of draft
legislation and and I would hope
that we have
something to look at before the
session so like the first time.
I had looked at that bill was in
the waining days of a sixty day
session when they came house
judiciary I had talked to some
of the
people the fact that some of the
people involved at that time and
that was hopeful but I think
this is the kind of thing that
really
calls out for work on the intern
I don't remember exactly it's
been a while now what the the
second points were
I would say one thing i'm
interested in is center worth
said
when it was regionally enacted
it was at
three fifty year to fifty or
whether it was and it's just you
know that was in the sixties and
you know just based on inflation
and should be at such in such a
level now I don't think that was
actually accurate I think it's
it's stepped up a couple times
over the years but I haven't
been able to get good
information on what those
different steps have been I
actually asked
or law librarian in the
legislature if they could port
that information and they can
find and they usually find
everything so that's how the
balls and what the protections
are and when it should be
this is important in new mexico
and I I look forward to that to
that coming back
and i'll be interested to help
up make you mention
thank you representative densen.
Thank you madame chair
this is a subject that very near
a dear to me because i've
watched a watched my folks
lose so much and I want to give
you a a snapshot of what it
looks like to me and
super tended cane you mentioned
earlier that one of your
priorities was insurance in rid
or so how how was that one of
your priorities.
Manner chair represented the
instant what one of my
priorities is when I came to the
fair the governing committee in
august in response actually to
your letter which brought us the
attention to the limits on the
fair plan when you requested
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars increase I went to the
fair planet and I think we
needed more to be honest some
again because I was seeing all
the cancellations the non
renewals and other places aside
from your delicious and that was
the beginning of the of my focus
on the fair plan again it was
your letter that really got my
office focused and also the
visit to read or so after the
fire it looked like a moonscape
it was and then also to see the
flood damage there was another
reason why we were looking to
get its called approximate cars
issue per to get flooding
covered which invariably follow
the wildfires
thank you thank you madame chair
so then it we're going to fast
forward and we're going to go to
the session
and I needed to do anything in
everything that I could to bring
insurance back to my community
because i'm gonna give you an
example mister man he told me
that I could I could tell the
story and i'll make it real
quick
the only thing that he has isn't
as a pickup and a pretty nice
house that's his retirement he's
been counciled he can't get
insurance and he said every time
I leave my house it's not a good
feeling because that's all I
have right there and if it burns
down I have done
he had one boy his boy passed
away and he has no other family
over and over and over I get
these stories and we can set her
and talk about the fair plan all
we want but when you see people.
Come to your house meet you for
a coffee cry I don't know what
i'm gonna do the bank's going to
take my house what do I do don't
worry
i'm working to get something
done and we did we worked
diligently
I go to the service
we start senate bill eighty one
senate bill eighty one I felt
like
madame chair that
whenever I met with the
superintendent
I was I I was furious with the
fair board
over what I was told
but madame chair that wouldn't
entirely correct
so that's why I signed on to
senate bill eighty one
for me
I make sure that I find out the
whole truth
so like I contacted the fair
board in it was not the whole
truth I saw the documentation
and I was given half trues
and the more I dig into this the
more I looked the more it looks
like a power ground to me
this fair plan boards been
established since nineteen sixty
nine the fair people
the directors are the board
itself i've done a really good
job I do a lot of things yes it
was mainly four hour
local low income policy holders
but sometimes we have to do
what's right and when you have a
young family that has two or
three kids both parents work and
we have something devastating
that happens in red also the
link in county area hermit's
peak caf canyon and that's where
synergon's allison I got
together is we know the people
that are on the ground we know
the people that need to do that
need the assistance.
So the more I read into this
bill all I got laser hyper
focused on was getting these
policies done to wear in brido
so you don't get much for three
hundred fifty thousand you get
twelve hundred square feet and
it's gonna be something that was
built in the fifty sixty
seventies whatever so we needed
that the working class people
have between three hundred and
seven fifty that's what I needed
well then it comes to light that
we don't even really need
legislation for this we need to
let the board work and we need
that let them in act just seven
hundred and fifty thousand
because they have the authority
to do that with the blessing of
the superintendent of insurance
all the more I read into this
and the more I read into bills.
Super ten k you know you wanted
some
you wanted a new board and you
wanted to kind of being charged
of the board
and then I start seeing what's
really starting to happen well
after I got finished with the
board
they they enacted the seven
hundred fifty thousand with your
signature
and mountain chair members of
the committee
and ladies and gentlemen
super tinicane wouldn't sign and
she held senate bill eighty one
hostage
in my opinion
and wow while that signature was
being held hostage my folks
didn't have no insurance
mr man got to leave his property
every day not knowing what was
going to happen
then something happened during
the after the session
and you signed off till due
twentieth
so
man of chairman and
super tinicane when when you're
signature became invalid on the
twentieth white why on the
twentieth
madam chair represented them
some can I just
correct the record a little bit
oh I signed the conditional
approval during the session it
took the
fairplane board so it was like I
think march eighth
and it was conditional to the
twentieth uh pretty much with
the support of senator worth as
we were doing this to compromise
I lowered the amount to seven
fifty m I did the conditional
approval
I I had been working with the
board.
Since the session trying to have
needed i've had meetings with
them i've caused one board
meeting I brought ibh to
explain the litigation because
as I sat there I said i'm living
this every day listening to ibh
s
and my fellow commissioners and
how we could do litigation I
wanted to share that with them I
also ask I can't print you to
come in and share the pressures
of the insurance market and why
people were having the
cancellations a non renewal so
they could as hear it some of
the things that I was hearing I
made a conditional up because we
thought that frankly SB eighty
one would have gone effective on
june twentieth
it's it's true that
I had gotten a counter proposal
from
in a letter from
chair
okay
i'm zakoria but that was
received june nineteenth we were
closed june nineteenth and I
really wanted to have I want to
have a board meeting shortly
thereafter uh we asked for a
board meeting july third but
they weren't available that's
why we're having it
july seventh I think I am very
anxious about getting commercial
coverages up to two million
because I saw in read or so how
those businesses were so hurt
and how much they needed
insurance I understand read also
is seven hundred fifty thousand
frankly i've been seeing non
renewals and cancellations in
other areas that are even higher
again where's this first some of
these people their retirees they
come here and their home is
there only asset and again just
like I think you mentioned you
are someone here mentioned you
can lose your mortgage if you
can't keep insurance and there
again have been a lot of
cancellations so i'm looking
this at this certainly moved by
read also in your letter
initially but also seeing the
broader problem not just and
read it also and in other areas.
Thank you madame chair but it is
true that you withdrawn your
signature on the twentieth and
right now with all the fires
going on with all the
people getting canceled they can
not get fair plan insurance up
to the seven hundred fifty mark
like they need so representative
and i'd like to ask a clear if
buying question
so what I understand is that the
original
order expired june twentieth
there's that correct correct m
from what I understand you just
said that the board is going to
be meeting july seventh
and the cheers sitting here and
is the board going to be
considering what was originally
post
madame
in regards to the june twentieth
effect of day and the extension
to make their approval of the
subut hundred and fifty coverage
limits that we have actually
have requested i'm for numerous
times the last notation was the
notice that the superintendent
receive where we respectfully
asked to make the seven hundred
and fifty limits permanent and
that was received on june
nineteenth of the fact that I
was out of the office so I took
time away from my family
emergency to go ahead and send
that email out to her
but we still have not had any
formal response we did also
submit at the same time the
counter proposals to the buyed
line by laws and guidelines
requests that she had and we
still have not yet to receive
any response back
representatives that you still
have the floor
thank you madame chair and
that's that's exactly what I
want to hear appreciate you get
that clarified because
from what i'm seeing
madame chair and and super
tendent cane it looks like
you've got your heels dog in
pretty deep and there it doesn't
look like there's going to be a
compromise and i'm.
I'm asking for a compromise so
that my people are not punished
new mexicans are not honest they
need insurance and they don't
need it they need it today they
need it yesterday some of our
people can't even come home
and you know in in my mind
madame chair whenever i'm laying
in there at night and i'm
getting ready to go to sleep my
wheels are just sitting there
spinning.
We all take our houses for
granted we all have the
insurance we all feel pretty
good if something goes wrong
then they're all cable we still
got people stuck in texas that
can't come back we've got people
there are councils about right
now that have an asset and the
thing that goes through their
mind when they're trying to go
to sleep at night is what am I
going to do about my mortgage.
Am I going to do this represent
a vincent you told me that you
fix this.
Well I did
until the does signature
signature was withdrawn now you
can't you don't get no insurance
now because now we have to go
back to cynical eighty one
which represent me queen I will
not be sponsored again because
that's the last thing that we
need on the books is another
when we have a perfectly good
board
that could work with our
superintendent and try to find a
compromise to where one person
or the board doesn't have total
control everything is a
compromise and mountain chair
i've learned how to comprise
better anybody I I don't get my
way around here very often
I really don't
and more times than often you
know I I don't get my way
but I still compromise and i've
still able to get five bills
this time passed and the
governor signed them with
democrats because I did
compromise
it's not all or nothing folks
it's just not we have to come to
a table like ladies and
gentlemen and not let people get
honest.
Thank you
thank you nexus representative
lukon then representative little
then represent a good sellers
and center city locus
great thank you very much I
appreciate the discourse today
and sometimes
just listening to this what's
going on right now sometimes
it's not very easy when you're
negotiated with the board and
sometimes you have to leverage
legislation I understand that
i've actually witnessed and seen
some of that and so I just but I
appreciate this discourse the
information everything coming
forward the questions I have and
I just want to say thank you to
mr
miles about the he's bringing up
the house I did have legislation
working with those I it didn't
get through either
madame chair it was sp two
twenty
and it was a dressing the
fencing and and other things are
that the house have it got
strong support it just didn't
make it out of the senate but
we're going to try again I think
we need to actually have a
better collaborative and I like
to just put that out there and I
love this this panel that we
have because we are bringing
about the issues and I I just
want to say i'd like to work to
really adapt that legislation
into something a little more for
because I think there were some
missing pieces or i'd like to
really look at that again and
see where we can come to
negotiate that i'd also so my
questions for
regard to my questions that I
had set madam chair there with
me.
So
in regards to
actuarial information and and as
it's it can expand this
conversation so I guess the
schools are why is it why is
that so important to where we're
are we with that because I think
this is a piece of information
we need to address manager.
Madam chair representative
the reason you need adultly
sound
rates is to really have
sufficient reserves to pay the
claims and
his in the last few years at
this my chief actually looked at
the fair plan rates they were
twenty percent below market and
we want we would like them to
get up to market so that we
don't have the crisis that they
had and haven't to get us an
assessment that quickly after
the readosefire I I think
they've their plans taken are
very important step because they
have assessed the industry I
think it's around eighteen
million eye between the session
and now in order to have the
backstop to have enough reserves
for the seven the increase to
seven hundred fifty thousand
we would like to have the
similar conversation are on an
increase for the
for the commercial properties as
well and i've asked the the
governing committee the chair to
work with guy carpenter to come
back with an amount that they
would need to raise that as much
so I think that would be part of
the conversation on next monday
thank you I appreciate that I
think we need to to integrate
that and part of how we're
looking at the fair plan and
we're we're we're going with it
and what is the community
mitigation and and and the
impact on individual homes right
now
well I madam ch as by
mr h
representative I think of what
we're talking about mitigation
is why i'm so happy that duly
rockman is here and on our task
force because she was the headed
by b h s we're talking about ib
just standards and we're talking
about the lower standard not the
higher one where you have to do
the new windows but really to
have
the basic pieces have the five.
Feet at a they college zero
space so you nothing flamible
and to have a class a roof and
also to which was probably the
cheapest thing to do is have
screens on your events so when
those members come flying
through the air they don't go in
the events I don't know I was I
was you know glued to the
television during the la fires
and I I don't know if you notice
that the the firefighters were
saying when we know where in the
next house it's going to go up
because we can see the smoke
coming out events because the
emperors got in there so those
are the three main things that I
think are are part of what we're
doing I would also want to say
that working with the test force
and with with lower and her
people and and the fire marshals
are we've got the fire marshals
are going to be trained to help
individual home owners do the do
the inspection and understand
what they have to do to get
there
homes up to meet the idh
certification thank you for that
permission chair are just two
more questions is the insurance
industry adopting mitigation
chair
message your chair
representatives are ibhs is
funded by the insurance industry
and up at as I said we're seeing
not just in new mexico but in
oregon and some other states on
the wildfire side they are using
the I b h s standards to
provide discounts to home owners
when they apply for insurance
I think my parents may my fellow
panelists might be able to add
some more information that's
okay thank you please.
Mrs terror representative so
insurers
we do business based on
individual structures we don't
insure community we insure a
structure and in every state
where I b h s standards have
been adopted either by force of
law as part of the building
codes in new jurisdiction or is
a voluntary standard
the industry has gone in to the
superintendent or her equivalent
in every state and said okay
this will help with both
availability and affordability
some states have chosen to
mandate credits at a certain
level for each type of
mitigation achieved in some
cases the industry has acted
more voluntarily I will tell you
that the industry and in general
is very strongly supportive of
mitigation you can see it and
things like underwriters
laboratories which you're all
familiar with consumer
electronics that's the
underwriter in u l is an
insurance term gives because the
insurance and is used to run
rate the insurance institute for
highway safety that crashed
desktours where I also used to
work
in our goal is to reduce risk as
much as possible and then to
ensure what is left so that's
the approach that we take on
structures on vehicles on
products on services let's
reduce the risk profile as much
as possible because that's in
everybody's best interest and
then we'll talk about covering
what is left having said that
nothing is fire proof nothing is
hurricane proof so we're trying
to find scientifically based
steps that people can take again
some of it is as simple as
clearing out five feet around
your property some of it as the
gentleman to my right indicate
it is more expensive however if
you look at things like windows
there also if you get door pain
timber glass windows they're
also terrific for energy
efficiency
the roof is your number one line
of defense for any hazard
whether it's wind water fire
defends against all those things
and is far expenses are
concerned we're really talking
about the five feet closest to
the house not the whole fence.
So i'd be happy to answer any
questions today or after today
about different mitigation
efforts but I will come back to
your question to say the
insurance industry broadly fully
and completely has embraced
mitigation I appreciate that
thank you I mean again
broadening this conversation and
understanding all those pieces
and really kind of looking at
where there's
savings around in in and cost
efficiencies do we start with
our local governments in
ordinances are doing moving to
state
legislation or do we work the
report those are all part of the
conversations you don't have to
comment on that I think it's
just part of us knowing that
there are we can't implement
those things all the time as I
too is allegedly myself and I
see others as well my last
question there is
so I guess you answered it
because the insurance is between
policies
to rebuild I mean it's as a
whole
clab of effort mountain and mr
chair.
So let me remind you one person
can have their mike on a time
thank you
madame chair representatives
the insurance industry
has gone back but various very
sporadically I understand two
companies are writing up in read
elsewhere now all state and usa
but I I think I totally agree
with representative in some
there probably is a real need
for their plan policies up there
it's typical that the industry
once there's AAA large
catastrophe they don't write for
a while and then they come back
and again why were truck why
what are the things where we
want to work on is mitigation in
the fair plan so hopefully we'll
get the industry back in these
areas could quicker
thank you miss that's please.
Madam chair
i'd like to make a a statement
or give some information over to
representative loohon in regards
to the actually question of the
actual rates so superintendent
cane stated that yes they did
come to the governing committee
stating that we were twenty
percent under
market value and the on the
rates so we did utilize our
carpenter as recommended by the
superintendent of insurance
when it came back and the chief
factuary looked today the actual
rate increased that would need
to take place is a little over
ten percent
so we have been speaking with
the cheap actuary in regards to
where the rate should be and
that is the topic of discussion
that we were looking at putting
on our agenda for our october
meeting as the policy holders
will cycle through the second
rate increase that they just had
so we have actually a better
sense of where that rate needs
to be taken.
Manager and representative you
asked about zoning and I just I
want to update all of you that
yesterday
had our first meeting with a
representative of the new
mexican league of zoning
officials and we talked about
some of the possible options i'd
not necessarily requiring
legislation are possible and
made a plan to bring materials
to the annual meeting of the new
mexico league of zoning
officials in october
thank you very much here I just
want to the the clear path is to
take the easiest power easiest
path that way we're not you know
we're not getting too much in
the weird or anything but I do
know that it there are so much
going on and the research that I
was as it was a comparative
analysis with what's going on in
california to be quite honest
with you there are there there
are the mounts that they give or
are higher with their fair plans
and I was just looking at a lot
of the you know those
differences they've been in
there's a lot of similarities
but there are a lot of
differences and I think we you
know as you have these meetings
please bring those out I think
we need to really adapt and I I
support representative vincent
sent to unlike we need to get
back up to that seven fifty
amount that we we are just um
but give us easiest path so we
can support you and if we do
need legislation and then you
know let us know why thank you
thank you observed next week of
representative I just remind
our members and our penalists
were running bit so if you could
keep your questions here answers
brief thanks
thank you mister chair think you
are for your presentations I
have one follow a question for
missus sterles is
thank you for the presentation
you provided and the material
that you made available to us
made at the closed.
You at the close of your
presentation you referred to
an
an additional listing that you
didn't have in here but she made
reference to them and like about
five to seven points and i'm
just wondering if we might
request a cappy of those I think
it would be helpful for us to
have to be able to refer to
those and
if it doesn't take if you can
briefly run down what they were
I have been trying to take notes
but I missed that when I just
couldn't keep up with that but
my request is is a matter of
insurer if that list of those
bullet points could be provided
for everybody that would be
really helpful.
The.
Madame chair representative
little guests I do have copies
available for you of the
documentation that has been
submitted on the counter
proposal to superintendent of
insurance office
and let me just clarify madam
chair then those were that's the
list that you were giving us at
the very end of your person
madam chair representative
little yes that is correct thank
you thank you madame chair.
The.
Thank you represent them except
we have percent it's also.
Thank you mr vice share thank
you committee it won't be rate
any other points that have
already gone on but you know as
you know oranges here in just
setting the background a little
bit differently for for this
area for the hermes peak have
kenyan fire I know where there
are some stats presented
particularly on page three of
the report about non renewals
here in in our area
um we didn't maybe have the
highest percentage of non
renewals because many of our
individuals here that were
displaced had no insurance to
begin with in so right now the
situation that we are in is many
of our land owners that have
been burned out they've had a
total loss while still waiting
for a female reimbursement are
still in the process where they
can't sell their land they can't
build on their land and they are
unable to get a mortgage on a
new home so then where where do
we go from here and so with that
being said the original
legislation called for you know
money for a backstart changes to
the board as well as that
increase in coverage and all
things aside I think a lot of
the fields got money but going
forward here I know there was
this talk of this upcoming july
meeting in the updates presented
the information presented the
talk was on commercial insurance
and yes that is very parent also
but my my my big ask is to to
consider a compromise the
legislation occurred just
because it was needed by knowing
the increase of limits and what
can happen between the board and
between the supervised antenna
insurance to come up with that
permanent increase insurance
will allow for us to do business
is normal for our people to be
able to get back into holmes so
while anything on the background
is happening about board you
know reconvigoration while
anything has happening in the
background about backstops or
what night I just ask all the
parties involved to please
consider what was at the heart
of this legislation and to
really think of this meeting
that you are having or that
increase in coverage.
Because it's needed it only
extended to june many of our
people still here in this area
three years later are still not
in a position to where they have
anything a dollar so they're not
even able to take advantage of
those increase in rates for the
period that it occurred in so
that is just my ask not a
question no longer that but
whole heartedly consider the
compromise and what that means
even if that means giving up
positioning on both sides to
come to compromise in the middle
for those increase limits that
are much needed for our state
thank you madame chair
representative gonzalez I would
just like to add that yes the
governing committee has um
requested of the superintendent
to go ahead and give us the
permanent approval of the seven
hundred and fifty thousand
dollars limit so that we can
continue to issue policies to
get people back into their homes
at insurance while we continue
to work on the other outline
issues that she would like to
have addressed.
They he representative centers
the other.
Thank you I just have a quick I
mean just about the fair plan
and how many people have
participated in the fair plan in
participate madam mister chair.
I have also.
Yeah.
I think.
Madame chair mr bice chairman
senators the alopers so
currently we have seven thousand
seven hundred and one policy
holders across the state in june
during the period that we were
able to write coverage limits up
to seven hundred and fifty
thousand we wrote a hundred and
fifty nine policies
in the month of june and then
the new business up to seven
hundred and fifty thousand we
had nineteen people plus the
holders thank you mister chair
and
with the solvency look like
given has many people are
participating
currently our last this estimate
was fifteen million dollars that
we don't not look like we are in
a position where we will be and
and insolvency in the event of a
loss
thank you mister chair.
Thank you center you know true
off your mike any further
questions from the committee
reps monthly
thank you mister now mister
chair.
Just want to refoll up a little
bit on representative of
vincence discussion
and I have got to say
that bill would not have gotten
any republican support if it
were not for
representative insense
advocacy within our caucus
I had very strong reservations
of
anyone asking
essentially for a new board.
That's
not able
in my mind it was the same as if
the request would have been to
disolve the board and put all of
the authority under the office
of the superintendent of
insurance
the boards is there for a reason
and
it's I I hate to do to hate this
about myself on that particular
bill in that was I don't want to
vote for it I do not like that
bill but we had a communities
both here and in read also
that were
crying for help
and I think it's appalling that
today they're still crying for
help
the reason that we have
different branches the reason we
have boards the reason we have a
separation of powers
is because a government that
actually reaches a compromise is
usually the best government
and what when we
when I see
any what looks like a
consolidation of power to any
one entity I really have a hard
time with that that just means
whoever is there can make
decisions and only have to have
minimal improvement approval
from those of us around and in
other
government
officers so III just want to
reiterate I don't believe that
this bill I think it needed the
republican votes
and they will not have on this
next year
so I suggest that the board and
the super ten of insurance work
together quickly to remedy this
and not wait for what was is
some sort of a hope of a redo of
what is in place right now
because.
I don't think it's coming thank
you mister chair
thank you material or absolute
henry briefly.
I apologize mister chair i'll
make it very quick I just want
to make sure in my head I
understand what i've heard so
i'm walking away from here I can
continue to think about this we
knew that the date was the
twentieth is that right we knew
that from the session
and we waited until after the
twentieth to have a meeting to
fix the problem that we knew was
coming on the twentieth that did
I hear that right
madam chair
representative henry no we did
have a meeting on june twelfth
and at which point we did ask
again for a permanent approval
of the seven hundred and fifty
that did not happen we had again
the the issues that she has at
hand that she wants to have
addressed so then we submitted
on june nineteen again I was out
of town a letter requesting that
she make those approved the
approval permanent.
Madam check chair
represented it you have to pull
the closer social
speed eighty one was only
introduced because I had been
trying to work with the board to
increase that number to seven
hundred fifty thousand
from august till december and
there was no action in so far as
the idea that it was a power
grab I the way that the board
was gonna be constructed in sp
eighty one was that the
legislature and the governor
would pick the board members not
me
and some of that was because we
had been looking at other states
to see how that they format at
the board and they were in some
of the other states mostly
colorado which is the more
recent ones are the industry
didn't have a majority of the of
the membership and that we were
also looking for expertise it
was not going to be controlled
by the office at the
superintendent.
Mr chair
thank you for that I guess where
what I really want to understand
is if you want them permanently
at seven fifty why have we not
got them to seven fifty to this
point if we knew the twentieth
was going to be the end date and
I guess the reason i'm asking
the question as i've heard
redulsa and loss last very guess
in all these areas one of the
areas I was born and raised in
his cloud craft so it's becoming
very personal to me because I
know friends and family members
that they're they have been
invited to be canceled so so
they're not getting renewed on
her on a on a pretty rapid basis
and I think what representative
vincent said is the story that I
can very much relate with
because it's my dad's story he's
terrified to leave the house now
because he couldn't get
insurance because he was
canceled luckily he fit into
that little window because we've
been working super hard on it to
get that that seven hundred and
fifty but now we've got a lot of
folks that are trying to sell
their homes and can't because
they can't get insured so
they're stuck a lot of folks
trying to buy homes and can't
because they can't get insurance
in stock so I would like to know
how quick since we knew the
twentieth was coming what is it
going to take for this seven
hundred fifty to be put back in
place and how quickly can we get
this result
madam chair representative
that's why I didn't get the
response from the
from the government committee
until june nineteenth and I
immediately the next day tried
to set down a notice for a board
meeting so we could all sit
together
there was a compromise in in
what I had offered there was
there was a
movement on the government
committee to addict consumer
advocates the board again I
think the issue of mitigation
and
the commercial or something we
should discuss and I was hoping
it would be july third night
july seventh
so mister chairman can we expect
this to be resolved I mean.
You don't get as as represent
vincent has pointed out we don't
need legislation to solve this
and get this back to a seven
hundred and fifty at what point
are we able to start getting the
citizens of new mexico the
insurance they need so that they
can feel comfortable with the
homes they are
madam chair representative as I
said I didn't start out looking
for legislation I started out
opening the board with approved
the increase in october november
last year and a there was no
movement so that that was the
only reason I went in with sp
eighty one and the only they
moved to seven fifty a day after
we got through the finance
committee so
i'm i'm willing to work with
anyone
madam chair representative henry
just to give you a little bit a
background yes we did receive
arm request in august it wasn't
until november that we received
a brand proposal from the office
of superintendent which we could
move forward and december the
board matt and we move forward
with getting our analysis wasn't
something that the board felt
let's increase the limits at
seven hundred and fifty without
knowing what the fine financial
impact to the plan was going to
be so during the process of
senator bill eighty one and
legislation we were able to get
our analysis back and we were
able to submit request to
increase those limits.
Mister chairman to be my last
question I promised because I
don't know what that's going to
get where I wanted to go anyway
so we do have these guard rails
in place now it feels like we we
feel like we're we're not
insolving if if it in event
happened so
when can we expect us to get
together as a group and get this
resolved
madam chair representative for
henry we do have a meeting
scheduled for monday on the
seventh
you know the superintendent has
caught that meeting we again
have asked let's go ahead and
give us the permanent approval
of the seven hundred and fifty
limits so we can continue to
write business for the mexicans
and continue to work on the
other issues as well.
Thank you
and thank you members of the
panel I I think there's clearly
worth to be done but it sounds
like
their discussions which is good
I if we don't need legislation
to me you know sometimes we run
legislation to bring people to
the table
regardless of your eat mean
could be either side
so if we can move forward
without that all the better
thank you very much sure
penalties
we we've run a little long we
still have public comment
we don't have anyone online who
has signed up for public comment
is there anyone in the audience
is there anyone the audience who
would like to make a comment
yeah
even though I think it's anyone
I i'm not seen anyone so I get
turned back over to the chair
thank you for everybody who
attended in the audience all the
panelists the committee members
we will be in august we will be
in last crucials for two days
and a half a day and all my
gordo beat visiting the
desalanization plant and
serror is arranging all of that
so we will see you in another
months this meeting is a direct.
