And tackle, excuse me, um, first
up, Jesse Debell, executive
director of the New Mexico
Wildlife Federation.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Mr.
Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you all for
enduring so much time with me
here over the course of the last
two days. Um very excited to
discuss this topic though,
because this is a topic that's,
that's really near and dear to
my heart. I'm gonna start off
with a very short story, uh,
about a good friend of mine by
the name of Tyler Sladen. Tyler
lives here at Albert, well, in
New Mexico. He lives in
Albuquerque, but he's one of the
nation's highest regarded
falconers. Um, for those
unfamiliar, a falconer is
somebody who
who hunts small game generally
with the help of a of a raptor,
either a hawk, an eagle, or a
falcon.
And it requires an immense
amount of commitment, immense
amount of time, and so I, I've
never had either enough of
either of those to become a
falconer myself, but I've had
the opportunity to go out with
Tyler and to spend time with him
and his birds pursuing upland
game. Uh, a couple of years ago,
Tyler had an Olomato Falcon, and
that falcon ingested some meat
from a black-tailed jackrabbit,
and that jack rabbit at some
time earlier in its life had
been shot.
by a shotgun containing lead
pellets and this Alomato falcon
ingested two of those 7.5 lead
pellets, um, in the jackrabbit
meat that it was consuming. And
that led to fatal lead
poisoning, and I had the
opportunity to witness this
falcon die a horrific death as a
result of the lead poisoning
that resulted from the ingestion
of those two lead pellets.
And the reason it led is so
harmful to birds is because
their digestive system is, is
uniquely different than than
most other animals and and
mammals in particular. So if I
was to ingest, let's just say,
uh a lead split shot fishing
weight. If I was to swallow
that, what would likely happen
is it would pretty quickly pass
through my system and probably
not result in elevated lead
levels in my blood. But when a
bird ingests fragments of lead,
it doesn't have to necessarily
be a pellet from a shotgun. It
could be a lead fragment from
Of a bullet when a bird ingests
that, it goes into their
gizzard, like a bird, birds
don't chew their food, right?
They have beaks and they swallow
their food whole and that food
then goes into the gizzard,
which is typically filled with
gravel, and as that gizzard uses
the gravel to grind up the
bird's food, what they've
ingested, but when a piece of
lead is mistaken for a piece of
gravel by the bird's digestive
system, and that lead then lives
in the gizzard. The lead is
being used to grind down the
food that the bird's consuming.
And ultimately the lead gets
entirely absorbed into the
system of the bird and is
oftentimes fatal, which uh was
actually one of the, the primary
cause of the near extinction of
the California condor was lead
poisoning and so the the human
and mammal digestive systems are
very different than bird
digestive systems, and I just
wanted to make that clear. So
getting into the issue now of of
lead bullets, I'll say that the
New Mexico Wildlife Federation
is a proud member of the North
American
non-led partnership. Uh, this is
a partnership that's led
originally by the Peregrine
Foundation, and what we do in
the North American non-L
Partnership is provide education
because we believe strongly that
it's critical for the hunting
community in particular to
voluntarily choose non-toxic
ammunition in all of their
hunting endeavors. So whether
I'm hunting small game with a
shotgun or large game with a
rifle, it's critical as Hunter.
who pride ourselves in being
conservationists that we choose
non-toxic ammunition, and I'm
going to get a little bit more
into that. The reason voluntary
is so critical because it's not
realistic to ban lead
ammunition. Because for so much
of the sporting events, so, so
much of the, the, um,
Recreational shooting but not
hunting is done with lead
ammunition. If I was going to go
out and shoot a box, shoot a
sporting clays competition, you
know, like clay pigeons, uh,
which I often do. I'm going to
use at least 120 shotgun shells
in one round of sporting Clay's
competition. Lead is very
inexpensive. The, the same
shotgun shells that I would use
to hunt turkeys are going to
cost 10 times as much as what I
would use for a sporting place
competition, but my limit on
spring turkeys is 2 gobblers.
So I'm only going to use two
shotgun shells throughout the
entire spring turkey season
typically. So, while, while
nontoxic ammunition is more
expensive than lead. It's not
cost prohibitive when we're
talking about using it in a
hunting scenario because they're
so few bullets or shotgun shells
needed in hunting compared to in
uh shooting sports.
So, the other issue with trying
to legislate a ban on lead
bullets is that it's almost
impossible to enforce because
most lead core bullets are
copper jacketed. So if I was an
officer with New Mexico
Department of Game and Fish, and
I encountered a hunter in the
field and wanted to inspect his
bullets. There would be no way
for me to tell if it had lead in
it or not without me cutting the
actual bullet in half and taking
a cross section, I would have no
way to know. And you all might
be aware already that for
waterfowl hunting,
Non-toxic ammunition is already
required and has been for many
years. Um, one of the things
that's different is in a shotgun
shell situation what a game
warden would do from an
enforcement standpoint is use a
magnet. If a magnet would stick
to the shotgun shell, then we
know we're not using lead
because lead wouldn't stick to a
magnet. But again, in a, in a
rifle bullet that same test
doesn't work. Um,
One of the things that's really
helping us as we promote the
voluntary use of nontoxic
ammunition is the fact that the
technology and the metals that
are being used currently on
those bullets are proving
superior performance over lead.
So originally when we started
this conversation, there was a
lot of people who were concerned
about the performance of the
projectile and the truth is the
performance of non-toxic bullet
choices today perform better
than lead ammunition in almost
every case.
Uh, going back to the education
piece. Well, let me, let me just
say one thing I'd like to see,
and this is not a request of
legislators, but I would like to
see the New Mexico Department of
Game and Fish become an official
member of the North American
Non-LE Partnership. Uh, and, and
I'm making that request directly
of Director Sloan to become a
membership of the North American
Non-L Partnership. It costs no
money. There's no, we heard
yesterday about the crisis, the
financial crisis at the agency.
This doesn't cost any money, but
that
Partnership shows a true proven
commitment to educating the
public. Again, it's, it's not
it's not regulations, it's
education. The next thing I'd
like to see is I'd like to see
this education incorporated into
every hunter safety course that
takes place in the state of New
Mexico. Uh, in hunter safety,
one of the things we're taught
is to know your target and
what's beyond. That's a, it's a
critical lesson for new hunters
to learn, and it's a critical
lesson for anybody who would be
Handling a firearm to
understand. But if I was taking
aim, just say through a rifle
scope on a pronghorn out on the
prairie, and behind that
pronghorn in the potential path
of my bullet is a golden eagle,
say, perched on the ground
behind the pronghorn in a hunter
safety class that would be
identified as a don't shoot
situation because if your bullet
penetrates through the
pronghorn, you have the
potential of killing that golden
eagle, and no hunter wants to
kill something.
That was not their intended
prey. No hunter that I'm that I
know of has an interest in
killing an unintended target.
But when we're using lead core
ammunition. When we shoot that
pronghorn that let fragments
throughout the body cavity of
that animal. And then it's
typical for hunters to leave the
rails of the animal in the
field. And normally those would
be a valuable food source for
our scavengers. Normally that
would be a huge benefit to the
vultures and to the ravens and
to the eagles, and
The hawks to all of the
scavengers, but when there's
lead fragments in that gut pile,
for lack of a better term, when
there's lead fragments in that,
it's really no different than
taking the shot at the pronghorn
with the golden eagle perched in
the background. We're not being
cognizant of what's beyond the
target that we're intending to
harvest. So I really appreciate
you all uh providing me with the
opportunity, Mr. Chairman and
committee members to share with
you kind of my testimonial about
why it's so important that the
hunting.
community chooses non-lead
ammunition, and I just, uh,
encourage you to continue to
support the proactive education
that will lead to this as a
voluntary choice by the sporting
community in New Mexico. Thank
you very much.
Thank you for that. Next up with
Dan Roper in Mexico program lead
Trout Unlimited.
Uh, good afternoon, committee
members for the record, Dan
Roper with Trot Unlimited, uh,
Trot Unlimited is a nationwide
conservation organization with a
mission to care for and recover
rivers and streams so that our
children can experience the joy
of wild and native trout and
salmon. Uh, while we are a
conservation organization,
fishing is an important part of
our, of our culture. Uh, many of
our members have come into
conservation through fishing,
and most of our members today
still love to fish.
A concern over lead fishing
tackle has been on our radar for
some time. The invitation to
join you today has really caused
us to take a closer look at the
issue here in New Mexico and in
in New Mexico context.
Uh, I'd like to start with just
a few basics, so we're all on
the same page. So first, the
terminology, uh, when I say
fishing tackle, uh, I'm simply
referring to the equipment used
to catch fish below the water.
Uh, that takes weighted
material, and because of its
relatively low cost and density
led has long been the material
of choice in fishing tackle and
it's still widely used today.
Uh, however, alternatives do
exist, especially in fly
fishing, uh, anglers that mostly
fish on rivers and streams, for
example.
May not be using any lead
products at all today. Uh, and
in fact, many fly fishing stores
have moved beyond carrying lead
weights and other materials, and
that's because there are
alternatives like tungsten that
are widely available and
actually perform better in many
applications. However, most
outdoor retailers or big box
stores, you will still find lead
tackle for sale. Uh, the reason
this matters is Mr. Dubell
pointed out is that lead is
dangerous to both people and
wildlife. We've known this for a
long time that there's no
safe level of lead for humans.
Uh, it's also well documented
that lead fishing tackle does
harm wildlife too, primarily
waterfowl and birds of prey, and
that's typically from lead
poisoning, from the consumption
of small lead fishing weights.
Uh, the examples are prevalent
and they're prevalent enough to
suggest that while we don't have
great data in New Mexico, we
know this is an issue here and
probably the closer we look, the
more uh cases we would find.
In preparing these remarks
similar to Jesse, uh, I was
reminded of a story I know of a
local fishing guide in Questa,
who once rescued a bald eagle
from the bottom of the Rio
Grande Gorge, that also had lead
poisoning. Uh, in this case,
it's actually more of a uh a
positive story that bald eagle
was treated with chelation
therapy. It was released on the
Rio Grande Gorge Bridge, and as
far as we know, uh, that eagle
flew away and survived.
Uh, because fishing tackle is so
often lost in the water and
under the right conditions, lead
is water soluble. I think a
logical question is what are the
impacts of lead on water
quality. Uh, to my knowledge,
there isn't great research
documenting water quality
impairments from lead fishing,
at least not yet. Uh, this is
somewhat surprising, I think,
when you consider that people
are out on lakes and rivers, uh,
losing fishing tackle every
single day. And I think we can
safely assume that at the bottom
of many of our rivers.
And lakes there is lead being
accumulated, but we are not
actually seeing that showing up
in the data, at least not yet.
Uh, it's my understanding that
there's currently only one
stream in the state listed as
impaired for lead by the New
Mexico Environment department
that stream is in the Meris
River basin. I would point out,
however, that, uh, enemy D's
ability to, to have a more
robust water quality monitoring
program is limited by funding by
the legislature, uh, recently
tried Unlimited.
And some of our partners have
begun asking the state to invest
more in water quality monitoring
so that we have better data at
hand.
In response to concerns about
fishing tackle, uh, states seem
to have responded in two
primarily ways, two primary
ways. The first is through
education campaigns, and the
second is through very targeted
regulations.
Minnesota, for example, the fire
on the screen that I think you
might have in front of you, uh,
as they get the lead out, excuse
me, educational program aimed at
reducing the prevalence of
lead-based fishing tackle across
the state. Uh, this program
shares information about the
risk of lead to wildlife and
safe alternatives that exist.
It's distributed samples of
non-lead products to anglers,
and it's created displays of
lead-free tackle at retail
stores for the public.
Uh, I shared the handout really
just to show how how simple some
of these things are that we
could start doing.
There are 6 states I'm aware of
that actually banned the sale or
use of very specific types of
lead fishing tackle. These bands
focus on the size or weight of
the products, and they are
intended specifically to limit
ingestion by waterfowl. These
are primarily northeastern
states, New York and the state
of Washington. I would point out
that no states have banned lead
fishing tackle entirely and the
impacts of that would be pretty
significant on the industry. Uh,
so based on all this, uh, I'd
like to offer a few
recommendations.
For this committee. The first is
that we should be promoting the
use of non-lead alternatives to
hunters and anglers and
educating the public on why this
matters. Uh, I think we share,
uh Mr. De Bell's interest in
seeing New Mexico be more
proactive on this front. I'm not
aware of any such effort in New
Mexico to date. Uh, I agree that
New Mexico Department of Game
and Fish could be the logical
agency to lead such an effort,
ideally with with funding
specific to this from the
legislature. And then finally,
and importantly, I think Angler
would respond very favorably to
such a campaign. A second
suggestion that could help with
some of our data gaps is to
consider funding wildlife
rehabilitation centers to test
and document cases of lead
toxicity. Uh, when suspected in
Waterfowl and birds of prey. Uh,
this is perhaps the best way to
determine if wildlife is being
impacted and as I understand it,
many of our wildlife
rehabilitation centers just
senators just aren't equipped to
do this, uh, to do this testing
routinely.
And finally, the legislature or
the game commission could
consider regulations as other
states have done, targeting very
specific types of fishing tackle
associated with lead toxicity
and wildlife. Uh, such an
approach should be based on good
science. It should be tailored
to instances where we can say
confidently that wildlife are at
risk and safe alternatives
exist.
Finally, uh, just in closing,
I'd like to to say that, you
know, people fish because they
enjoy being in nature and being
around birds and waterfowl is a
huge part of that experience. I
think that's why many anglers
have already transitioned to
non-lead alternatives and others
would be willing to do so. Uh,
I'd also note this is but one of
many concerns among our members
when it comes to the
environment, climate change,
wildfire, actually keeping water
in our rivers where people fish,
uh, improve.
habitat and of course increasing
revenue for the department. Uh,
these issues are top of mind
among many in the Angling
community.
However, the lead issue is, is
also one that deserves our
attention. I, I think a state
funded campaign to encourage the
use of non-lead alternatives is
inappropriate and an easy thing
to do, and it's something that
Trout Unlimited would support.
Uh, I was also asked to share
with the committee that Audubon
Southwest, who can't be here
today, would also be in support
of such a campaign and with
that, um, thank you and happy to
answer questions.
Thank you, members of the
committee, Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation
to both of you.
Um, very enlightened and very
giving us a lot of information,
education wise, um, so, for
example, on the river if there's
a lead hook.
You know, how many years does it
take to not do any harm?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, uh,
that's a good question, and I
don't think we, I don't think
we've actually looked very
closely at that. I can tell you
there are a number of factors
that, uh, for instance, impact
the solubility of lead in, in,
in water. So whether it's kind
of leaching out into the water
into the environment and one of
those factors is pH. Uh, it also
depends on, on factors like does
that, does that fishing hook,
does that fishing weight just
get buried in the sediment and
maybe exist in in more of a a
constant.
Is there perhaps a, a steel
casing around that lead weight
that would prevent it from
corroding um as quickly. So
there are these different
factors at play, but I, you
know, to be honest, I, I don't
think we have a great answer to
that.
OK, thank you for that response.
So with the same thing applied
to metal, just regular metal.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, if we
are still, um, if we're talking
about fishing tackle, uh,
specifically, um, there are
various alternatives available,
everything from tungsten to zinc
to steel, um, and I think one of
the important things to note is
that not all of those
alternatives are actually that
much better for the environment
or for waterfowl, for instance,
uh, there's some research saying
that zinc maybe isn't a great
when it comes to, you know, lead
poisoning and wildlife. Maybe
zinc isn't actually a great
alternative.
But tungsten is. Uh, again, I
think, uh, you know, with the,
with the literature literature
shows with the research shows as
we have not actually been
looking at this very closely.
Um, you know, I spent most of
this week trying to dive into
the scientific literature and
some of these things that you
you'd think there are answers
to, uh, they're, they're either
hard to find or they're just not
out there yet.
Yeah, very well, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
The nurse Felix.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So, um,
gentlemen, I'm hearing that you
both think that this should be,
um, voluntary since the
lead or the, you know, the
bullets, the fishing tackle,
etc. can travel across many
state lines.
Is that correct?
I'll speak to the, to the
hunting side and I'll let Dan
speak more to the fishing side.
Uh, I, I think the reason it
needs to be voluntary.
is because I, I feel like, well,
for one thing, we're making a
lot of progress in that front
and we're getting people to make
that choice and they're making
it enthusiastically, but because
it's, it would be so difficult
to enforce regulations, I don't
think it's feasible to outlaw
lead ammunition entirely because
we heard a lot yesterday about
conservation funding and, and
where that money is coming from
is the Pittman Robertson Act. I
heard that mentioned numerous
times yesterday. That's an
excise tax on sale on firearms
and ammunition.
So just as an example, if I was
to go on a deer hunt, I would
probably use one bullet for an
entire year, my entire deer
season, I would likely use one
bullet because I pride myself on
being proficient. But if I was
to go out to spend an afternoon
at the shooting range, just
recreationally shooting, not
exaggerating. I could go through
a 1000 rounds of ammunition in a
single day. And so the, the
recreational shooting is
providing 1000 times more
financial.
Contribution to conservation
than what I was doing as a deer
hunter, so it's kind of an
interesting thing, recreational
shooting provides so many
conservation dollars, but lead
is so inexpensive that I could
go to the range and shoot 1000
rounds, and it would be
affordable for me. I could not
do that with a nontoxic bullet
choice. So I don't think it's
feasible to outlaw lead and as
long as lead is legal, let's
just say we were to outlaw it
for hunting purposes, you know,
that that's something that we
could do, uh, as I mentioned in
the presentation, I think it
would be.
extremely difficult to enforce.
There would be so many ways that
people who wanted to get away
with not complying, would be
able to and probably not get
caught. And so rather than allow
that defensive mindset to take
place rather than to promote
that, uh, defiant attitude,
we're just showing people that
the non-lead alternatives
perform better first of all, and
there's so much better for the
environment, and we're finding a
really great response from the
sporting community.
Hunters are really embracing
this and, and they're, they're,
they're coming on board with the
Don Le choice already, so we
feel like, uh, legislating
against it would, uh, would
perhaps cause us to lose some of
the momentum that we're gaining
currently, uh, in, in the effort
to get people to make this
decision voluntarily. So I don't
know that it has so much to do
about crossing state lines. I
think it's more of a strategy to
get as many hunters as possible
using nontoxic ammunition.
and Mr. Chair, Senator, I guess
the only thing I would add to
that is I think sometimes it's,
it's just where you start,
right? And I think the fact that
we have done little to nothing
really as a state to promote the
use of non-lead alternatives to
date. Uh, it's why, why don't we
start there, right? Um, why
don't we make a targeted
investment to reduce the
prevalence of of lead, fishing
tackle and and lead ammunition
in New Mexico where it makes
sense and so that, you know, I
think that is a good starting
spot and
Perhaps we consider other
actions down the road.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, are you
So I'm assuming you would like
some action to be taken.
So let's go to the education
factor.
Um,
Would you suggest?
Um,
A small study or would you uh
suggest an education campaign
that goes out of a specific
department to do PSAs and work
with the public on this issue?
Um, again, I'll, I'll just
reference the hunting side of,
of this discussion, uh, Mr.
Chair, and Madam Vice Chair,
committee members, I think that
the hunter safety program in New
Mexico and across the country is
incredibly effective. And one of
the things that we're finding is
that when we get new hunters,
and that's typically who's
taking hunter safety, a lot of
youth, but they're not all
youth, but new hunters are
generally who's taking hunter
safety courses. If you get them
choosing non-toxic ammunition
from day one.
It's super easy because they're
not set in their ways. If I talk
to a, a 65 year old hunter who's
been shooting Noler partition
bullets, their entire hunting
life and try to convince them
that they should switch. It's a
much more difficult
conversation. And those people
are going to be in the field.
For fewer years to come anyway,
so targeting new hunters,
younger hunters really makes a
lot of sense. And our hunter's
education program is so
effective in this curriculum
exists already. All we have to
do is incorporate it into every
single hunter safety class in
the state, and I think that's a
really easy lift. It's not a
challenging thing to do, and I
think it will make a dramatic
impact in the future. So from a
hunting standpoint, that's my
recommendation.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I might
add to that that um sometimes we
come before you with very
specific policies, legislation,
things we're asking you to do, I
think this presentation as I
conceived it was more, let's
talk about this issue. Um, let's
look at the data and and perhaps
this is the beginning of a
conversation and, and we'll see
where this leads. I, I, I made a
joke at dinner last night to
someone that I, I think I might
have found myself something else
I have to work on now, and I
think.
I think that's certainly true. I
think Jesse and I will be
talking more about this. I think
we'll be engaging the, the game
commission and the department to
see where that interest is, but,
but we're still kind of on the,
the, you know, the early side of
this one and we don't yet have
those specifics uh for the
committee. Does that, is that
fair, Jesse? Yeah, yeah, uh, Mr.
Chair and committee members, I
think what, what Dan said is
spot on.
gentlemen. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, um, Senator, um, I, I
just
I had a question to you uh for
Jesse. Um, you know, I
appreciate the distinction
between target shooting and
hunting. Uh, never thought about
that before. It's pretty
interesting. Um, do you have
concerned, I guess I maybe I
have concern that a lot of
target shooting is not done at
approved ranges that it's side
of the road, it's Caja del Rio.
It's someone's backyard and that
we're, we're introducing lead
into the environment that way.
Uh, Mr. Chair, committee
members, I, I am concerned about
that. In fact, you know, I have
a home in the East Mountains and
there's a, uh, we call it a
wildcat shooting range. It's a
BLM piece of land that a lot of
people go on recreationally
shoot on and the studies were
recently done, soil samples were
taken and studies were done in
the levels of lead in the soil
on that particular site are
very, very high. So I, while I
do have concerns of that, the
potential for that lead to be
ingested by wildlife,
particularly birds of prey.
is minimal compared to when we
have small lead fragments that
are actually embedded in the
animal's food source where
they're they're they're
ingesting that uh through the
process of feeding. Um, so while
I am very concerned about it, I
don't think it's nearly as
threatening to our wildlife as
as using lead in a hunting
situation.
OK, well, thank you very much.
Uh, that was interesting, uh,
and I wish you luck, uh, working
with the Department of Game and
Fish.
OK.
Thank you. Thank you.
Our next panel is E Klein and
Animal Welfare Trust Fund.
Uh, if those panelists could
come forward.
be speaking specifically
Jackline.
OK, so we're um
We have 4 panelists.
I see one. I know 2 are on Zoom,
Mr. Chair, the other
co-panelists in person has just
come in and
She'll be coming to the table.
OK, uh, I think we're ready, um.
Uh, first up we have Jessica
Johnson Shelton.
With animal protection in
Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Vice
Chair and committee members. Um,
thank you for having me back
again today, uh, for the record,
I'm Jessica Shelton with Animal
Protection Voters. I'm the
senior program and policy
strategist, and, um, we're here
to talk about, uh, something a
little bit different. I know the
focus of the today and yesterday
has been a lot on wildlife and
natural resources, um, but, uh,
as committee members, you also
have purview over other animal
issues and
Including dogs, cats, and
horses, and so that is our focus
today on how we can help
infrastructure for those animals
and the New Mexicans who care
about those animals.
So,
um, uh, next slide, Tom.
Um, I'll start just trying to,
uh, paint a picture of the lay
of the land. So there is no
single statewide entity that is
responsible for overseeing the
welfare and population
management of dogs, cats, and
horses. Um, there's pieces of it
that are spread across different
agencies and boards. Um, we have
a little over 40 dog and cat
shelters across the state that
are either operated by local
governments or their nonprofits
that contract.
With local governments to
provide animal sheltering
services and they're usually uh
limited to serve their local
area, taking a stray animals
and, uh, animals surrendered by
previous families or animals
seized from cruelty situations
on the horse and equine side, so
other equines would be donkeys
and mules. Um, there are
currently 12 nonprofit
organizations that are
registered with the state and
regulated by the Livestock
board, and they serve
Uh,
larger regional areas, um, and
that includes taking a stray
animals that are captured from
the livestock board and, um,
animals seized by law
enforcement.
Many of these facilities, as you
can imagine, I'm sure you all
have, have experienced it in
your own, uh, neighborhoods and
read the news headlines that,
um, they're operating at or
sometimes overcapacity right
now. Um, and of course, one of
the outcomes of that is that we
are seeing, um, higher rates of
euthanasia for dogs and cats,
higher rates of equine animals,
uh, not being able to be placed
with the rescue organization
And so they go to auction, um,
which creates an opportunity for
them to fall into the horse
slaughter pipeline. Um, many of
the facilities, uh, some are,
um, struggling to comply with
minimum standards for their
facility and, uh, care. Um, and
in order to decrease the number
of animals coming into these
facilities, there are programs,
but those programs are
chronically underfunded. There
are several areas of the state
that don't have any animal
control or animal shelter, uh,
infrastructure.
Um, I believe Tows County is one
of those right now. Um,
Next slide.
So the the reason why this is
important is, of course, the
government has an important
governmental interest in the
welfare of animals, but it also
has a direct impact on the
welfare of people. And so this
image here just shows that when
we invest in animal welfare,
there are ways that that helps
people. Um, it helps ranchers by
reducing livestock depredation.
It helps our children walking
around in our neighborhoods when
there's fewer loose dogs that
might attack them or.
bite them. Uh, we had, when we
have educated, um, New Mexicans,
then uh they're caring for their
animals and they're less,
there's less strain on law
enforcement and the court
system. Social emotional
benefits for children as they
learn about the humane care of
animals. Um, just a moment ago,
Representative Armstrong, uh,
mentioned to me that devastating
hurricane that that's hit the
southeast of of the US and it
reminds me of the one of the
watershed moments of Hurricane
Katrina.
And, um, at that time, there was
really no infrastructure and a
lack of recognition in allowing
for animals to be evacuated from
natural disasters, and that led
to more people, uh, in that
hurricane refusing to leave
their animals and they stayed
and they died. Um, so this is
really important to care for our
animals, um, because it also
helps people. Next slide.
So our focus today, what we
wanted to talk to you about what
the legislature can do is invest
in the long term to strengthen
our state's infrastructure for
dogs, cats, and horses. And so
we have two proposals. One is to
create an animal welfare trust
fund to benefit um sheltering
and programs for dogs and cats,
and the other is an equine
welfare trust fund to benefit
horses and other equines. Next
slide.
Um, so first, the animal welfare
Trust Fund as, uh, we have
conceived of it thus far, there
would be two components created
one, a trust fund and the other
being an expendable fund to go
with it. Um, the trust fund
would be managed by the state
investment council, um, or
perhaps the state treasurer
where, you know, in
conversations with, um,
legislators and legislative
council on the best path
forward.
Um, and we'd like to see, given
the need, we'd like to see at
least a $300 million seed
investment into that trust fund.
Um, the animal welfare grant
fund, um, it's again, we don't
have a current central state
animal welfare agency right now.
And so we are looking to perhaps
the Department of Finance and
administration, um, uh, to help
administer the grant fund to
eligible entities for eligible
uh projects. This slide talks
about who those eligible
entities would be basically a
state and local governments,
governments and nonprofit
organizations. Grant funding
could be used for um
infrastructure projects, um,
vehicles, equipment, and
supplies for things like spay
neuter clinics, um, efforts to
mitigate threats to public
safety and livestock, um,
strengthening our local
government's ability to
investigate and respond to
reports of animal cruelty,
providing assistance for low
income families to be able to
care for their animals. And,
humane education and outreach
programs.
Next slide.
For the equine welfare Trust
Fund, um,
We're still talking about two
components, but one of them
already exists. So what's what
still um need to be created as
the trust fund portion, um,
we're imagining a similar
structure with the state
Investment council, um, managing
the trust fund, um, and, uh,
given the need, we would ask for
at least a $20,000 appropriation
to that trust fund. Um, the
grant fund, uh, already exists.
There is an equine shelter
rescue fund that is currently
administered by the New Mexico
Livestock Board. And so there
are laws and rules that dictate
right now how um those funds are
to be dispersed. The eligible
entities for that fund are the
12 um currently 12 registered
horse and equine shelters in the
state and, um, the funds are to
be used for things like feeding
the horses in their facility
providing veterinary care.
Um, and other costs of
sheltering those animals. Next
slide.
So as we have entered into
discussions about this idea, I
think, um, and I'm sure this is
something that many legislators
have have seen before that there
are often questions about the
legality of um any given idea.
And so I just wanted to address
some of those um questions and
concerns that we've heard
upfront. Um, so one question has
been, you know, does this pose a
conflict of interest if an
agency, uh, regulates
while also administering a grant
program to support those
entities. Um, we're not aware of
anything that says that that is
a conflict of interest. I think
there are many entities in state
government that both regulate
and support a given industry or
entity.
Um, we also, uh, know that, you
know, the New Mexico Livestock
Board has um been um faced with
some challenges with the
inspection of public Records
Act. Um, there are, um, I will
say, uh fervent uh individual
citizens out there, uh, fervent
about their public records
requests. Um, and it's been
difficult for the livestock
board to
Handle that, um, with our
current staff capacity, we're
told. Um
And of course we understand and
are empathetic to that. Um, but
at the same time, we are not
aware of any precedent that says
that a state agency should not
carry out their statutory duties
because, um, they're struggling
to handle the, the documents and
records that are produced
through that work. And so, you
know, we hope that, um, what,
uh, perhaps the legislature can
look at as supporting them in
handling the IPRA request and
allowing them to carry out their
duties to administer.
the fund, um, and finally, um,
As there often is with a grant
program ideas. There are
questions about the
anti-donation clause. The next
few slides, I have some
information on that, um, and I,
you know, don't want to take up
too much time. I will just say
that, you know, we have looked
closely at the anti-donation
clause, and we have recognized
that there are two avenues that
make it very clear that in the
situations that we're talking
about, where um a state agency
can offer grants in exchange for
service.
to nonprofit organizations to
carry out public programs, um,
to the benefit of the state and
its citizens, that has been
deemed to be fully
constitutional and not in
violation of the anti-donation
clause. So I cite a few um on
the next slide, uh, or next
couple slides, uh, Tom, um,
there's a list of a few recent
advisory opinions from the state
ethics commission. I can also,
um, share some other, uh,
attorney generals.
opinions and then on the next
slide after this, there's just a
list of other examples of state
programs where grant funds are
given to nonprofits or other
private individuals.
So with that, um, with the final
slide, just the conclusion, um,
that our state, um, our local
governments and nonprofits and
and tribal partners are really
desperate for more help with
infrastructure to care for our
dogs, cats, and equines. Um, and
so we, uh, urge your support for
these proposals and are happy to
answer any questions. Thank you.
Thank you for that. Next up we
have Stacey Voss with.
Lots of different organizations.
Why don't you introduce
yourself?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
having me today. Um, I apologize
for not being there in person,
but I am in Farmington at the
moment. Um, but thank you so
much again for having me. My
name is Stacy Boss, and I am the
animal welfare director for the
Farmington Regional Animal
Shelter, as well as the chair
for the animal shelter committee
that serves underneath the New
Mexico Board of Veterinary
Medicine, and finally, I'm part
of a coalition of animal shelter
directors from across the state.
So with all that said, I like to
think that I have a pretty good
perspective on the state of
animal welfare and the shelters
in our state.
Animal shelters are
unfortunately understaffed,
underfunded.
Overcapacity, dilapidated,
overwhelmed, and often ignored.
Um, we have a true
overpopulation issue in our
state. The national average of
shelter animal intakes is 66
animals per 1000 people, but New
Mexico has an average shelter
intake of 117 animals per 1000
people, according to statistics
released by the best Friends
Animal Society.
So to give you a little bit of
perspective on those numbers,
when I speak to colleagues
across the country, most
shelters that have the same
annual intake as Farmington,
which is about 5000 animals
annually, are serving
communities of 500,000 people or
more. Well we serve a community
of only 120,000, and we are not
the only count shelter in our
county.
The numbers of animals entering
shelters in our states is simply
staggering.
Even areas in the state with
newer facilities are quickly
filled and overwhelmed with the
number of animals coming through
their doors.
Older shelters are held together
with duct tape, glue, and
ingenuity are not held together
at all.
The majority of shelters in the
state cannot meet the
state-mandated minimum shelters
for standards, let alone the
recommend recommended standards
simply because they lack the
resources to fix, update or
upgrade their kennel areas.
But it is more than animal
housing that needs to be
addressed. Shelters need access
to storage areas, refrigeration
for vaccines and medications,
isolation areas for sick
animals, proper ventilation,
acceptable drainage, secured
outdoor areas for animal
enrichment and perhaps one of
the most overlooked factors is
that animal shelters need to be
a welcoming place for their
community members.
One of the most common arguments
I hear against funding for
animal shelters is that the
money should be spent on human
issues such as children and
veterans.
And I can casually say that
human issues and animal issues
are one and the same.
There is not an animal in crisis
that does not have a human in
crisis behind it.
Almost all cases of neglect,
cruelty, or even owners needing
to surrender their pets are
perpetuated by human issues,
including economic hardship,
mental health, affordable
housing, and access to health
care and other services.
The significance of the
human-animal bond cannot be
overstated. Scientific research
tells us that the human-animal
bond can boost mental and
physical health for humans. It
does so by alleviating anxiety,
reducing depression.
Buffering against stress, as
well as increasing physical
activity.
By helping preserve the
human-animal bond and assisting
owners in keeping their pets, we
actually did decrease the cost
to taxpayers.
It can cost upwards of $200 just
to bring an animal into the
shelter with overhead, staff
time, vaccines, and medications,
and then there's the daily cost
that's associated with caring
for the animal.
In contrast, giving somebody
facing financial hardship, a $50
bag of food may mean that they
get to keep their animal, and
the animal never enters the
shelter system, thereby saving
taxpayers' money.
Wherever we can, we should be
fighting to preserve the
human-animal bond rather than
severing it.
Not only is it more cost
effective, the animal gets to
stay with its human, and it's
not in danger of losing its life
simply because there's no room
at the shelter.
Animal welfare trust fund
addresses several needs of
humans and animals in our state.
The funds for facilities are
desperately needed to bring
shelters into compliance with
the minimum standards.
Funds for vehicles, equipment,
and the like are also needed.
Field officers need reliable and
humane transportation for
themselves and the animals to
increase safety to the officers
to the public, and as well as
the animals.
Reducing shelter intake and
mitigating threats to public
safety, often includes outreach
to the community.
Doing so requires staff time,
bandwidth, and resources to be
able to be seen as a community
resource center and not just a
dog pound.
Animal welfare trust fund will
empower shelters to achieve the
goal of being elevated in their
communities and seen as an
asset.
Thank you so much for your
attention today and allowing me
the opportunity to share the
pressing issues facing animal
shelters across New Mexico.
As I've outlined, we are
grappling with significant
overpopulation crisis compounded
by insufficient resources and
infrastructure that simply
cannot meet the needs of our
communities or the animals we
serve.
The statistics reveal a stark
reality. New Mexico shelters are
overwhelmed, operating far
beyond their capacity, often in
facilities that are inadequate
or in disrepair.
The issue of animal welfare is
intrinsically tied to the
well-being of our communities.
The struggles faced by animals
often mirror the challenges
faced by the humans who care for
them.
Animal welfare trust fund
presents a vital opportunity for
change and addressing these
issues is merely a matter of
compassion is a smart investment
for our state's overall health
and safety.
Thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. Next up.
Herman with the Sky Mountain
Wild Horse Sanctuary.
Good afternoon, Chair McQueen,
Vice Chair Sephonics, members of
the committee. What if we get
this right?
What if together the New Mexico
legislature, our communities,
our tribal nations, state
agencies, and our equine
organizations, secure health for
our equines, our environment,
and balance for the future.
As Jessica said, New Mexico
already has a strong network of
equine rescues and
sanctuariesies that are
inspected annually and licensed
by the New Mexico Livestock
Board. New Mexico is also
leading the country in
innovation for on range, wild
horse and free roaming horse
management through science,
technology, and field
strategies.
A snapshot of what some of this
work looks like is in your
handout on page one.
This mayor and her foe were
rounded up by the livestock
board from degraded range with
11 other free roaming horses
last fall near Albuquerque.
As many of us here know, when
horses look this poor, that
means the range looks this poor
as well.
Several of the 12 licensed
equine rescue organizations work
together to take in all 13 of
these starving free roaming
horses, and this may in full
plus one additional mayor came
to Sky Mountain Wild Horse
Sanctuary.
After 2 months of daily care and
vetting our
our vet recommended we euthanize
this mayor.
She was in pain from problems
with her hooves, and he was
concerned about the cost of more
treatment and future suffering.
It was a justifiable option.
We decided we'd give her back
her freedom.
That she deserved to roam free
on range with actual grass, with
gramma grass, and another family
band of her own, even if it was
just one day, one day of freedom
before we had to euthanize her.
That's what we decided. We
vetted aggressively and she was
turned out on the sanctuary with
her full and her new family band
in December of last year.
Her deprivation was severe. It's
not that unusual.
When we can intervene earlier,
many of these wild horses we
take in can go right on out in
the sanctuary and the range
wherever they come from is in
better shape for it.
I understand that all of us here
hold very differing perspectives
on animal welfare.
And that to some of us here
today, investing the time and
the money it took to save this
one horse's life is impractical
at best.
I invite us to respect multiple
perspectives and to look at the
larger view that addressing the
suffering of animals and
preventing degradation of our
environment are highly
worthwhile investments. This is
the common ground we can work
together from.
Starvation is a long cruel
death, and we help horse and
horses and range recover
exponentially faster when we
have more resources at Sky
Mountain Wild Horse Sanctuary
today. We are living climate
change every day as are so many
of our New Mexicans who are tied
to the land, the equine welfare
Trust Fund is an investment for
today, for tomorrow, and for our
next generations for healthy
horses.
And for healthy range.
We ask you to fund the trust
fund to build on the strong
foundation and the work that is
already underway for equines and
environment in our state.
The picture on page 2 is
lightning, the same mayor.
In sanctuary today, she made it.
She's thriving on healthy range
with her her family band and all
wildlife who share the land, and
you're always welcome to visit
and see what healthy sanctuary
land and healthy wild horses
look like. I appreciate your
time today and your service to
New Mexico. Thank you to all who
are working for New Mexico's
animals and our environment.
Thank you very much. Our last
panelist is Linda Garland,
director of the Mixa Livestock
Board.
There
Good afternoon. Can you hear me
OK?
Yes.
OK.
So, first of all, I'd like to
apologize for not being there in
person, but thank you for the
opportunity to talk in regards
to this trust fund this
afternoon.
Um, a couple of things that I
would like to clarify right off
the bat. We did not gather any
wild free roaming horses. We
have absolutely no jurisdiction
over those animals, those
equines, um, the courts have
determined that we have
absolutely no jurisdiction. We
do not touch them in any way,
shape or form. I'm not sure
which horses she was previously
referring to, but they could not
have been wild free roaming
horses.
The other thing is, um,
So
I would just like to remind the
panel that um these horse
rescues are privately owned.
They are not an extension of any
function in New Mexico Livestock
Board does or has ever done. We
are not range managers. We do
not gather any type of
livestock. We are here to
control movement to determine
ownership and control disease.
So, the argument about um
anti-donation is still
Out there. I'm being advised by
my legal counsel that this is
anti-dation.
By using public funds to pay for
a private industry.
The other thing is, um,
As you all probably remember
graciously, the legislature
passed a bill a couple of years
ago to give all the horse
rescues, uh, first rider refusal
on the stray animals that we do
pick up. Since that time, only 2
horses have gone through a
public auction site. The rescues
have managed and I, I will say I
give them kudos for that because
there has been a situation where
we did have a large number of
horses that we had to intake and
the horse rescues took all of
those horse.
So I, I think they are doing a
really good job under the new
state law that was given to them
under the legislature.
Again, I want to remind the
panel, if you would please, this
is not, these worst rescues are
not a function of the New Mexico
Livestock Board. This board has
never taken ownership or
permanent care of any animal,
any form of livestock ever. Our,
our duty is to determine
ownership, and if that cannot be
determined, they are processed
or are strays.
In the matter of of IRA, we are
not trying to circumvent our
statutory um
Requirements there. I just would
like to remind everybody that
these horse rescues are
privately owned again, but if
they start receiving large sums
of public funds, they will
become subject to IPRA.
And so that puts an extra burden
on all of them and the
taxpayers' dollars. It opens
them up for lawsuits through the
IPRA.
And so that is one thing that we
are very conscious of. We do
have a large number of um
advocates.
That are consistentlying through
us, and I will say that our
agency is used as a model by
other agencies. We are very,
very effective and our IPR we by
no means try to circumvent our
responsibilities there.
But it does open these rescues
to that responsibility.
So as far as grants, um, that is
under the horse.
Um,
77,230 equine rescue and
retirement facility that is
mentioned here, but again,
though they are not an extension
of anything that we do.
I, I did some research on this
trust fund myself. Um, the best
guidance that I have offered out
to Animal protection is that
maybe this grown in Mexico
program that the governor is
interested in and that just be
monitored through the New Mexico
CO, if that's what the
legislature so desires.
So with that, I stand for any
questions. Thank you.
For that, um, going to the
committee first up we have
Senator Worth.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation, um, just a
couple of questions first about
the trust funds, um, we did have
a presentation yesterday on the
land of enchantment, Legacy fun,
and I think this is kind of
modeled on the same concept, but
I want to be sure. So one fund's
gonna have an initial corpus of
20,000 30 million is the idea
that it basically that this is a
fund that's gonna continue in
perpetuity with a spin-off each
year similar.
To Land of Enchantment Legacy
Fund.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator Ware,
thank you for that question. Um,
that is our hope, as you know,
we are, um, again talking with
uh legislative sponsors and
potential sponsors and getting
guidance from legislative
council services that, you know,
hopefully, we can have a corpus
that is sustained over time and
perhaps even grows as there are
annual distributions from that
amount. So yes, we're looking
for, uh, funds in perpetuity,
ideally.
And so Mr. Chair, I just, I
think it's really important that
you structure this in that
fashion. So we don't have a fund
that's just getting spent down,
um, with a 5% spinoff. It's
$1000 a year on the $200 million
fund and 1.5, but of course, if
it's invested right, that can
grow. We can also put more money
into it, so just some thoughts
on that. Uh, I, I'm very
sensitive, Mr. Chair, to the, to
the IPRA issue and appreciate.
Miss Garland flagging that we've
had presentations on that before
from Livestock Board, and it's
quite frankly it's something we
heard in courts of corrections.
There's going to be another IPRA
bill trying to rein this in
because it's really gotten out
of control. So I just want to
acknowledge that that is a
legitimate issue. It's not a
reason though, in my opinion.
To not move forward with
something like this. I just
think it's incumbent on us as
policymakers to address that
statute and then quite frankly,
get the resources to our state
agencies to be able to comply so
that we, the purpose of IPRA is
being served, uh, just final
thing, I do want to talk a
little bit about anti-dation,
uh, because I do think that that
often gets thrown out there as
a, as a red herring and I
shouldn't say.
Red herring is it can be a red
herring, but it gets thrown out,
there's a reason not to do
something. Yesterday during the
presentation on the Land of
Enchantment Fund, we heard a
whole range of different
beneficiaries of different funds
and some of those are
individuals, farmers, uh, stream
owners and different, uh,
different entities like that,
nonprofits certainly, um, I
think the nonprofit piece, it's
pretty straightforward. We do
that all the time when we have
needs that are not being met by
State agencies, we contract with
nonprofits to make that happen.
I don't have a problem with
that. I do want to understand
though the existing statute, and
I was looking at it,
uh, this is for the equine
shelter rescue fund created in
2013, and I guess my question,
uh, first, perhaps for you, Ms.
Shelton, and then maybe to Ms.
Garland, the way I'm reading
that fund, it basically is
already the purpose is.
For
to distribute.
Uh, funds to equine rescue and
retirement facilities registered
by the board.
So again, and this was done in
2013, so am I correct that that
we, we already have the language
statutorily to do what's.
Being proposed by this bigger
fund which I think is going to
work in collaboration with this
and maybe Ms. Shelton first and
then, uh, yield to Miss Garland.
Uh yes, Mr. Chair and Senator
Worth, yes, so the, the grant,
the grant fund, the expenditure
fund of the equine welfare Trust
fund idea does already exist, as
you said, it was created about a
decade ago. Um, and so the, um,
that structure is already in
place and it currently receives
funds from a, um, uh, tax
checkoff donation process which
brings in a little bit of money
every year, really not a lot.
Um, and then
And there have been occasional
one-time appropriations from the
legis legislature that has fed
money into that fund. And so the
Livestock Board has already
previously
made grants to equine rescues,
and I, I, you know, appreciate
her saying that the, the these
are nonprofits that aren't part
of, they're not an extension of
the livestock board, but the
livestock board very clearly has
statutory duties set out where
they are required to inspect.
And license the rescues
according to standards, and that
they are to administer this
grant fund to support the
shelters. Mr. Chair and Ms
Garland, I guess my question, I
got the sense from Ms. Garland
from your comments that, that
just felt like something new
that the board was being asked
to do, which it doesn't do
already, and I guess the way I
read the statute since 2013, the
board actually has had this
responsibility and we're
expanding on it. Am I missing
something?
So, Mr. Chair, Senator Worth,
this is.
Our stance that I think that the
language in 77232 is very clear
that the fund consists of
appropriations, gifts, grants,
donations, and amounts um
through that tax.
Donation.
F. So our stance is that it's,
we feel it's a conflict of
interest that we manage a
multi-million dollar fund and
then distribute that out. Like
with special appropriations that
were given to us through this
fund. It was very specific
amounts and it was very specific
that it went to funneled through
us and it went to the horse
shelters.
But I, there's no language in
this um statute for a trust
fund.
And we, we feel that's a
conflict of interest because
Um, how do, how do you manage a
multi-million dollar fund and
also say we're gonna shut you
down because you're not
complying with what uh we
regulate over you. I'm not sure
where that line is.
And I, I am concerned that trust
is not specified in this
language.
So I guess that.
My, my.
Concern.
What echo in here. Uh, my
concern with that though is that
right now we could put $200
million into the equine shelter
rescue fund as it currently
exists, and you'd be required by
law to follow what what that
fund does. I, I, I'm just not
buying that argument and that's
kind of a policy argument, and
that's what we'll debate during
the session, um, I just think
the, um,
You know, the uh not the idea of
this being an anti-donation
violation. Um, I just don't, I
just don't see it and.
Again, I, I, I'm encouraged by
this. I think it's an important,
this is, this is a moment, Mr.
Chair, you talked about it
yesterday. We've got this huge
bucket of non-recurring
resources and being able to set
up these funds and have, in
effect, create a recurring
revenue stream using the
non-recurring money. That was
the beauty of the Land of
Enchantment Fund and other
funds, and that's what you're
doing here. And I really hope
that we move forward with it,
and I think the, the bigger
issue for me is going to be
working through the Senator
Woods and Representative
Armstrong and the finance
committees because they're going
to be jugging all these
different requests and we're
seeing more and more requests
for funds. Uh, so that's what I
have, uh, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
just for clarification within
the trust funds, it almost
sounds like, will that be a new
board?
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator
Gonzalez, thank you for that
question. So, um, there we would
need to, the legislature would
need to select what entity will
do the disbursements of the
funds for the dog and cat animal
welfare trust fund. Um, for the
equine, the horse side, um, we
have identified that the
livestock board already
administers a grant fund that,
uh, distributes funding to those
equine.
Shelters. So we won't need uh
that um we won't need a new
board for that, for the dogs and
cats, you know, we, what we're
discussing is perhaps the
Department of Finance and
Administration. Um, it would,
you know, I would love to have
further conversations with
legislators to talk about
creating a state agency, a new
state agency or board that, um,
really comprehensively oversees
important animal welfare issues,
but I know that's a
That's a whole other can of
worms and nut to crack and all
those things.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and um
Thank you for your response, but
um,
I, I think it's really important
because um.
The the state investment
council, they'll do what we ask
them, you know, whatever is in
place. So I think it's very
careful to have a good
beginning, you know, the
direction that it's going to
take. So I think uh some thought
really has to be given to this.
No, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Gonzalez. Um,
I had a couple.
Thoughts and questions. Um,
First off, on the, on the
anti-donation issue, uh, I, I
don't.
I don't see it as a violation of
the anti-donation clause. That
being said, I would not use the
word grant.
I would provide funds to an
agency with the expectation that
they contract for services.
And you can achieve the same
thing.
And it's a fee for service
arrangement.
You'd have the same scope of
work that you would have in a
grant. And maybe that's how
Grants have been interpreted not
to be a violation of the
anti-donation clause.
Looking at the legal reality
that it's um you uh a
nonprofit's being given money to
perform certain work.
But in my mind, Grant is a red
flag, and it's unnecessary.
So I simply would not use the
word grant, you know, and I
think all these agencies, he
just used to it all the time.
They don't have the FTEs to do
the work themselves. They have
funding, they contract with uh
nonprofit and for-profit
companies to do do that work.
And that's what I think we
should be looking at.
Um, I don't understand the
conflict of interest argument at
all, um.
I think, um, contracting with
rescue facilities and regulating
those same rescue facilities.
Dovetails nicely.
Like if the facility isn't
meeting basic standards, they
don't get a contract.
That seems pretty
straightforward to me.
Um, I, I do, uh, we talked about
this yesterday. I, you know, I
like the idea of setting up
these funds and trying to, I
think Chairman Small talks about
it in terms of creating uh
turning uh now money into future
money, something like that.
And I, I appreciate that, um.
Uh, so, so I think this is
definitely a candidate for that.
Um, I'm also, um,
You know, I'm concerned about
the role of the livestock board
and uh Jo Garland, I think
you're still on with us. Um, my
understanding is that um,
You know, I, there's some,
there's some sticky issues here
in New Mexico that different
agencies don't want to get stuck
with, um, horses are a difficult
issue, especially free roaming
horses. Um, we had legislation,
uh, Senator Woods will probably
remember this legislation, worse
legislation, uh, two years ago
passed the Senate
overwhelmingly.
Uh, that addressed free roaming
horses did not solve the free
roaming horse issue, but dressed
it in a meaningful and
constructive way. Unfortunately,
that legislation got hung up in
the house, but the Mexico
Livestock Board was a partner in
that legislation. Um, and
Director Garland, I understand
that the livestock boards no
longer interested in being a
partner in similar legislation,
is that correct? No, that's not
correct.
OK.
I had heard otherwise, um, this,
this to me is, is similar, the
fund, um, and I had some
thoughts about combining the two
equine and other dogs and cats,
um, but, you know, looking at
the administration, I could see
why that might not be a good
idea. Um, but like administering
this fund is
To me, the kind of thing that I
would like to see the livestock
board.
Um, step up and do.
Partly because we don't really
have an alternative.
I mean, if, if it's not the
livestock board, it's unclear to
me who who would do it.
Um, so director Garland, uh, to
the extent that your council has
uh anti-donation concerns. I
think we should talk about that.
Uh, I'm not sure that, um,
Uh, a, a private whether
nonprofit or for-profit entity
contracting with a government
agency becomes subject to IPRA.
I don't know about that. I know
there's litigation uh with the
University of New Mexico, like
booster athletic booster club
that was getting a lot of money.
I didn't really follow that, um,
but I, you know, you know, these
are things that are not um.
Uh, there are issues to be
addressed. They're not, um, dead
ends.
I mean, I think we can work our
way through this.
Um, so, Director Garland, I hope
that we can have further
conversations about both the the
equine the trust fund and also
uh that uh free roaming horse
legislation and um, you know,
part of it is, I heard Director
Garland say they don't take
custody of animals, and I get
that, right? I mean, horses are
difficult, um, and so the the
free roaming horse legislation,
um, didn't uh charge them with
doing that. It was a more
Limited role of certifying
experts, much like they
currently register equine
facilities. So again, similar to
what they're already doing.
Um, any further questions from
the committee?
OK.
Senator Woods. I, I was gonna be
completely quiet.
But
Right now, the livestock board
How they come in contact with
horses today is through
investigation of animal cruelty
Act.
And those are the horses that
they turn over to the, the
equine shelters is those horses
that have been picked up due to
some animal cruelty issue. And
so the, the free range horses
that we're talking about is two
different subjects altogether as
to what's going on today.
Senator Woods, um, I don't think
they're so separate. Uh, I think
a lot of the free range horses
have been dumped. So it's um
closely related to animal
cruelty rather than just.
The horse you can't care for,
and you leave it in a corral and
don't feed it. Instead of doing
that, you just take it to one of
the existing herds and you let
it go and let it fend for
itself. So those are, those are
kind of related issues.
I'm not an attorney.
Sure, but
There's a judge down in Lincoln
County.
That made that distinction.
And
Mm
I think that's where it's coming
from. If we want to change the
law.
We have to change that law. I
understand what you're saying
about a dumped horse.
And, and it's much like a dump.
Dog or any other animal that's
dumped.
That happens and I agree with
you 100%, but
Until we come up with a
different law than on the books
today.
The livestock board is, is
investigates animal cruelty
laws.
And those are the animals that
come into the shelters. The,
the, the free range horses, they
don't have the, the lawful right
to pick those animals up.
Uh, um, according to the judge.
Lincoln County.
And
I'm, I'm a poor one to quote
law, as you know, but that's the
way I understood it and that's
why I kept trying to, to run
legislation to, to do something
about the terrible abuse to the
land and the horses that we're
seeing happen. That that's,
that's the crime of the deal.
It's, it's the land also we talk
about.
Abuse
That land is abused also.
But another day for another
story, Mr. Chair, thank you.
So Senator Woods, if I may, um,
the, the free roaming horse
legislation from 2 years ago,
uh, if I recall correctly, you
amended it on the Senate floor.
You offered an amendment which
was adopted and then you voted
for it after your amendment was
adopted. Um, so it, it, uh, I, I
think the livestock port is
sensitive, very sensitive about
this issue.
Because they've been sued and
they lost in court.
Um, the existing statute on the
books has language about um
doing DNA tests to determine
whether or not free roaming
horses are uh Spanish colonial
Mustangs and um there's all
sorts of stuff in the existing
law. There's an agency named to
administer that that was
apparently never consulted. It's
like a museum or something. It's
really crazy, um.
There's no there's no uh DNA.
Baseline.
Yeah, and, and most of these
sources are interbred anyway.
So the existing statute is
unworkable, and I agree with
you.
That that needs to be changed.
So we keep, uh, we've tried to
change it in the past. We made,
we made good process progress
two years ago, and I, you know,
I expect that to come back in
the next session.
And I would love your support.
Certainly, read your bill and,
and try to support you. I had no
luck getting it out of the
house, so and I've made several
passes at it, so we'll see what
happens.
OK. Um, if there's no further
questions, uh, you know, thank
you all very much uh for the
presentation.
Here our last panel of the day
is the true mind proposal and
protecting that propicuous
watershed. Ralphie Hill and Dan
Roper.
OK.
So gentlemen, um, you have the
unenviable position of being
last on a long agenda, you can
tell our ranks have thinned
somewhat.
Um, so we nevertheless look
forward to your presentation,
um.
Uh, I, one thing we, we were
sort of chatting about this
ahead of time and we'd love to
know what's going on with the
Toro mine, uh, would also be
interested in knowing, uh, what
you think the legislature, uh,
how they should be involved.
So, uh, first up, we have, uh,
Ralphie Hill with uh New Mexico
wild.
You gotta push the little
button.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee members, I appreciate
you having us here in front of
you guys to up here in Questar,
such a beautiful drive coming up
north, um, so it's kind of a
nice little treat. So I
appreciate it and thank you guys
for everything you do in support
of our state, so thank you. Um
yeah, we're here to give you an
update on the Terero mine
progress up in the Upper Pecos
watershed Association, um, just
to give you a little recap and
history of
What's occurring in the area in
2019, an Australian-based mining
corporation filed some mining
claims in the Pecos area,
probably around 20 some mining
claims compassing an area of
about 400 acres in the Jones
Hill area, which is in the Upper
Pecos watershed along Indian
Creek, so, um, mining has been
done in Pecos in the past and
since the late 1800s and the
Late 1920s through the 1930s, it
was mined pretty heavily up in
Terrero and um
Since then, the community and
the river have continued to see
problems um because there was no
cleanup for decades, um, after
in the 90s, there was some
reclamation going on costing the
state of Mexico over $23 million
at that time.
There was some large storm
events and some of that waste
material from those piles, um,
cause some drainage, acid
drainage into the river, killing
off about 90,000 fish. So that
was in the early 90s. I created
quite the impact on Pecos. Um,
we continue to experience acid
drainage today. Um, water
testing going on by Amigos
Bravos and um Sierra Club and
other volunteers, um, getting
baseline after we
went out and got outstanding
national resource water
protections for the area and
some tributaries and wetlands,
um, in response to Mexico's
request to do exploratory
drilling in the area. So, um,
the community still impacted by
a lot of this acid drainage, the
upper reaches of the ecos serve
so many communities all the way
down agricultural, traditional
historic communities, um, these
are.
Very sacred and um special sites
to Sikuya, which are the heme
are now in hemes Pueblo
descendants of Pecos, and also
um Tesuque pueblo, there's also
been interest from Garia Apache
being that that was, you know,
more, a lot of the higher area
and that area was a lot of their
hunting grounds, so there's a
lot of um
Re to protect this area. So
after we received that 2019
public notice, we formed a
coalition. Um, I got together
with New Mexico Wild the Upper
Pecos Watershed Association and
others to form a a coalition of
diverse partners. It's a locally
led coalition, so Upper Pecos
Watershed Association, the, the
lead nonprofit on it, um, my
farm and um.
Um, it also was a petitioner for
the outstanding National
Resource Water protections. So
this coalition started with
about 30 some coalition um
different organizations right
now we're about 5 that work
constantly every week we're
meeting every other week, every
month. I mean, we have every
other week and every month we
have steering committee
meetings, administrative
withdrawal meetings. So in this
process, we decided to throw
some roadblocks.
been that the mining Act of 1872
is outdated and allows them to
do such. So, um, during the
Santa Fe Forest plan revision.
There's the area called the
Thompson Peak Recommended
Wilderness Area. So during
COVID, Mexico expanded to over
200 mining claims in this area,
um, on the upper reaches of
Dalton Canyon when there's
native trout, critical Mexican
spotted owl habitat. So in the
past, it was, you know, a lot of
the community and the.
Tension between the traditional
communities, the conservation
community, environmental
community, but we were all able
to come around this single issue
and realize that our water is at
stake, so, um.
We
Worked with Senator Heinrich,
Senator Lujan, our congressional
delegation, Ledro Fernandez and
Stansbury as well to introduce
legislation in Congress. So, um,
the Pecos watershed Protection
Act was introduced by Senator
Heinrich Lujan and um currently
it's gone through the first
committee, which received markup
and has been added as amendment
to the NDAA. So right now it's
currently sitting there, um,
hopefully they're doing.
Negotiations. I just came from
DC in um October October 2
months ago. I'm thinking of the
flights in October we're doing.
I saw you and I picking flights.
So, um, earlier this month, we
went um to DC with Echo and we
were seeking support from the
Congressional Hispanic Caucus,
so we're pretty close to getting
that support. Um, the Bills
pretty much um be negotiated
right now where that goes, um,
there's a.
There might be a public lands
package. We don't know. There's
still a lot of uncertainties
what's happening in DC until
maybe after the elections, but
we're also working on an
administrative withdrawal of the
minerals in the Pecos watershed.
So that map that you have in
front of you shows um what we're
doing. These are basically the
rim of the Romaa all the way up
to through Chesapeakes, uh, the
Pecos Wilderness areas, um, all
the way to the um Pecos Las
Vegas kind of watershed sites.
So as they expanded to these
other mining claims, um, there
could be potential impacts we
don't know, but it's so close to
the Santa Fe Municipal
watershed. We don't know if they
were to get do mining, how that
would impact the other side
because we don't know how the
aquifers flow underground.
So we've been pretty successful
in um getting tons of community
support. This is like.
We haven't really had any
people come forward. There was
one lady in the beginning that
came forward that the mine had
come forward in the first public
meeting of the Forest Service
and um but other than that, this
has been totally one-sided as
far as the community's
concerned. Nobody wants it
outdoor recreation provides uh
uh a lot of what the community
needs as far as what's
contributed to the local
economy. Most of the people in
Pecos do work in Santa Fe, uh,
mining has
been uh
A source of income and mining in
that canyon if anybody's ever
been up the Pecos Canyon would
be chaos, uh, mining trucks
coming down. I, they would have
to.
Um, the infrastructure have to
be put into to make an operation
even exist would be impossible,
um, in our.
In our view, without damaging
much of the natural resources.
So as of where we're at now,
we're working with BLN National
Forest Service. I'll let Dan
talk more to the specifics of
the administrative withdrawal,
but we've been doing this for
quite some time now, but where
we've moved quite uh.
Far ahead from where we were
last year, um, in making sure
that this is a priority within
our, our, our state and our
leadership in Congress, which it
is, and which they said so, so
our admin withdrawal, um, we're
waiting to see what happens with
that. We're working with the
commissioner of Public lands to
also do a moratorium within the
the federal withdrawal on state
lands, um, we've looked into
what's been done there. There's
not much done other than close
to I-2.
5 on those state lands have been
used for um road repairs along I
25 years and years ago, um,
there's a nickel mine up towards
the north, um, eastern corner of
this, um, that's over on the
Galenas Watershed or Tecolote
watershed area, but um we're
currently trying to make sure
we're not going to impact any
rock gathering any, um, of that
type of work that goes on in the
in the valley below Pecos.
So, um, right now with the
Forest Service, they haven't
heard in over a year from Co
Mexico. The EA has to be um done
still and released on the
original exploration permit that
they're requesting and um
because of the Hermit's peak
Calf Canyon fire, it's really
set the Santa Fe National Forest
back. They don't have the
resources, so, um, they haven't
had any interaction in over a
year. We don't know if that's
good or bad silence, but that's
where we're at with Coex.
Mexico, um, they haven't done
any outreach to the community
whatsoever than the original um
public meeting, you would think
that they would come and meet
with the coalition, talk to us
on what their plans are, but
they really haven't. But if you
look at their website on New
World Resources, which some of
our stuff leads to, um, you'll
see that they do have, you know,
a lot in there for their
investors and massive plans and,
and so on and so forth. So um we
can also and I can provide you,
Sarah, with um um
The links to those exact to and
you can provide community
members on what their plans are
for Pecos and what they're
selling to to their um
investors, so, um, with that,
I'll pass it over to Dan and let
Dan talk more about the
administrative withdrawal.
Uh, thank you, Ralph. Mr. Chair,
committee members, uh, yes, I do
recognize I'm your last speaker
on a Friday. Uh, if you have 5
more minutes, I will tell you a
little bit about our perspective
on this mine, the administrative
mineral withdrawal in the works
and then leave you with a few
higher level uh comments on, I
think this, this moment we're in
when it comes to mineral
production and this push to a
clean energy economy and some of
the implications that perhaps
this this committee wants to be
thinking about going forward.
Uh, so for us this mining
proposal was really concerning
for a few reasons, not least of
which the Pecos River is really
only recently recovered from
from a history of mining in the
near designation of a Superfund
site, uh, the river has
recovered in many ways and it's
a thriving trout fishery again
today. In fact, it's the 2nd
most popular place to fish in
New Mexico, uh, for rivers, uh,
other than, uh, second only to
the San Juan. Uh, it's also the
site of one of New Mexico's
newest state parks. I would
describe
It as one of those places uh
from an outdoor recreation
standpoint, that's a bit of a
shining star. It is a very
popular place, so popular in
fact, uh, that many people avoid
it on summer weekends because,
because it is that popular. Uh,
and for us, that's exactly the
wrong place to think about it,
inserting a new mind, uh, in the
mix. It's also important, uh,
because it's a focal area for
re-establishing populations of
Rio Grande cutthroat trout,
which is New Mexico's state fish
and a species of conservation.
Yesterday you heard discussion
about the importance of
preventing ESA listings, and
this is one place where that
work is actively taking place
today. Uh, I want to make, I
guess a quick statement, you
know, we're not an anti-mining
organization. Uh, I think
sometimes you speak out against
the mind and someone thinks so
they're anti-mining, you know,
that's certainly not how we
think of ourselves. Uh, we
recognize the role mine mineral
resources play in our everyday
lives and the role they'll play
in our transition to a clean
energy.
economy. Uh, we also recognize
and are comfortable saying that
some places are just
inappropriate uh for minds, uh,
even in the mining industry, uh,
we've talked to people who will
tell you that yes, this is the
wrong spot for this kind of
mining operation. Uh, the one of
the tools, uh, Ralph mentioned
that many of us are pursuing
right now to prevent more mining
in the watershed as an
administrative mineral
withdrawal.
Responding to, to proposals like
this, uh, as a community is
difficult because we, we do this
in the context of federal mining
laws that were written not long
after the Civil War ended. In
fact, we deal, I think many of
you know this with a with a
mining law from 1872. Uh, but
one of the tools at our disposal
is an administrative mineral
withdrawal, and that's I wanted
to focus a bit on that today.
Uh, for several years, local
advocates, tribal
representatives, elected
officials have all been asking
the Biden administration to move
forward.
With such a proposal for the
ecos, uh, under our federal
mining laws, most of our public
lands, even lands in steep
forested watersheds, uh, like
headwaters of the Pecost, the
headwaters of the Red River, uh,
they're open to mining as a
valid use. What a mineral jar
does is, is res is, is basically
takes back uh those lands and,
and puts them off limits to
mining, and it's typically done
to protect other resources that
people care about, whether it's
a popular outdoor recreation
area, whether they're important.
Cultural sites, whether there's
endangered species there. Uh,
the proposal being considered is
for 1,650,000 acres. It's
everything in the watershed
upstream of I-25. I would note
this is not retroactive, so in
theory, a proposal like the one
from New World Resources, uh
does still have a path forward,
but the withdrawal puts other
lands in the watershed off
limits. Uh, this is a proposal
that's been gaining traction and
I, and I do hope uh we'll, we'll
learn some news in the future,
um.
Uh, about maybe hitting a
milestone with that.
But I wanted to end with some
higher level remarks, um, you
know, about this moment we're
in, I think in many ways this is
a crux moment for the future of
mining in New Mexico and
elsewhere in the nation, and,
and I think not many of us know
what's coming. The, the future
demand associated, uh, the
future demand for mineral
resources for everything from
electric vehicles and charging
stations to wind and solar
farms. Uh, it, it's immense and
it's unprecedented. And I think
it means we all need to be.
about where these resources come
from and how does it impact the
things and the places we care
about.
getting this right, I think
there's a growing recognition
it's going to take action by
Congress, but permitting mines
is also a state level issue.
I think what the Pecos
illustrates is that is the
importance of ensuring the state
has the ability to say no to the
wrong mine in the wrong place.
If you ask the Forest Service,
they will often tell you they
feel like their hands are tied
even to minds that they think
are a bad idea or that that
people widely agree are a bad
idea.
You know, the, the Pecos
presents this example of this
mind that really no one wants
very, very few people want. I
mean, we hear from almost no one
in the local community, uh, that
people want this mine. Many
people agree it's the wrong
place and yet that May that mine
does have a path forward. Uh,
it's very reasonable to assume
New Mexico is going to play a
part in the push to develop more
mineral resources. And I would
say what we're not very good at
yet as a society is, is ensuring
that across the board that's
done.
Responsibly and that's done in
the right places. I don't know
how it comes about, but I, I do
think a more robust conversation
about what the transition to a
clean energy economy means for
mining in New Mexico is needed
to ensure we have the proper
protections in place for
communities like the village of
Pecos, uh, and that concludes my
remarks and I'm happy to answer
any questions. Thank you.
Thank you gentlemen, um,
questions from the committee.
I see Senator Woods waving at
me, but
A thinner.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And that's my concern. We, we
want to go to a more electric
society, a more, um,
Electronic
type society that's going to
take a lot more rare earth
metals.
And where are they going to come
from? If we want to have some
kind of environmental say over
this stuff.
If we want to be responsible.
Some of those need to come from
within the United States because
we're the only ones that can be
responsible for the
environmental consequences here
and to think that we'll just buy
them from out of nation.
And we're OK.
It's kind of hypocritical.
So I'm not saying this is the
place.
But I am saying that we should
have a policy in place to know
if we're going to try to
transition.
To a different way of doing
things, we should also be
responsible for finding those
elements within our state.
And figuring out how to mind
them within our state
responsible. So just my
thoughts, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Felix.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, this
issue of moving to um electric
is a conundrum, um, I do think
that as Senator Sher points out
to me, do we want it done in
Other countries where there's no
child labor laws or do we want
it done here? I think the issue
here is that the uh we have a
mining law that was uh
established too long ago at the
federal level and that it needs
a lot of update. So I think that
that's one thing that.
We, the legislature could
support, not that.
Anything is happening in
Congress right now. But I do
believe that we could uh lend
our voices to saying.
The mining laws need to be
changed. The second issue that I
would like to bring to
everybody's attention is this
community has already been hit
once.
The clean up in the Trero area
from past mining, uh, it was a
super fun uh site. It did
receive state money.
And uh as well, and it continues
to contaminate waters, and many
of the people of our state do go
to that area to camp and to
fish.
And as I know, several
legislators go up in that area.
So
Whether or not a community
should be hit a second time.
Because of how it affects its
water and its economy is
something that is of great
concern to me.
I do believe that mining for
minerals is a conundrum.
But I do think changing the
mining law, uh, at the federal
level and then protecting a
community from going through the
same experience it's already had
is something we should um
consider as we look all over the
state, not just at the Pecos.
But that's all, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Armstrong. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
a conundrum is a really good
word for it because, uh, you
know, I have a super fun side in
my district and it's not from a
mind.
It's from other industry.
From a battery making plant.
Um, unfortunately, we still
haven't gotten any Superfund
money for that.
So, you know, we look at who
regulates mines.
Uh, you know,
M nerd, Osha, I can name a lot.
We can talk about the economic
development we can talk about uh
the water that is used in
mining.
Uh, we can talk about a lot of
things, but the one question I
have for you.
I.
Where is the right place?
Because every single time I know
there's a mine in another one in
my district, a copper mine that
has been unable to be opened for
over 20 years.
So the grand question is, where
is the right place?
And I don't think you have an
answer for that. I understand
why you're saying this is not
the right place, but ultimately,
where is the right place and
we're talking about if we don't
do this, if we don't mind.
We're talking about inflation.
We're talking about the climate
change that we want to, you
know, keep.
Lots of copper in an electric
vehicle.
Um, so, ultimate question, the,
the $100 million dollar
question.
is where is the right place and
uh it's always not in my
backyard.
So, not really a question, but
just a, just a comment. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
So there's Fix on that point.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Representative
Armstrong for that comment. I
was, um,
At the um CSU West Conference
and I actually moderated a
panel, um, and part of it was on
hydrogen. And what they were
talking about is how many years
a hydrogen, um,
Plant, a hydrogen source of
energy takes to develop, but
they talked about the
controversy around that, and
they suggested um that in the
states that have hydrogen
projects, they go out and seek
communities that want to do it.
And help the community see the
benefit to them if they choose
to do it and so in the few
states that are working on this,
there aren't a lot of states,
but in a few states that are
working on this, that's been the
um
the proposal in the past that
some of these private companies
are taking.
Whether or not that would work
in our state. I'm not sure, but
it was an idea that came through
at the conference. That's all.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Real quick, Mr. Chairman, uh,
you know, we, we have um
entities that are against a lot
of things in the state of New
Mexico. We have them against a
soccer field, so where is the
soccer stadium gonna go? Where's
the mine gonna go? Where's the
horse sanctuary gonna go and so
I really think that um as, as a
New Mexicans, we've got to find
a way to move forward, and I
want people to keep in mind.
When you are operating a mine.
The uh licensing and the
regulations and the restrictions
and the inspections are
tremendous. And I'm speaking
from experience. My husband and
I have a mine, uh, we make big
rocks into little rocks. It's a
crusher.
But the regulations.
Um, there, there's a lot of
rules to follow and of course we
want to follow the rules. Just
tell us what the rules are.
We'll follow them. Um, and we
own the property that the mine
is on, so it's a, it's a real
conundrum.
But I think that we've really
got to get together and say.
Where?
And and be willing to not just
whine about not having any
money, not having any jobs in
our communities, not having
things in our communities, but
not in my backyard at the same
time, and I'm not for it or
against it. I'm just making a
statement. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong. So, you know, I'm
sensitive to the concern that
We want noxious uses to be
somewhere else. Um, the, the not
in my backyard, um, impulse, uh,
you know, it can be detrimental,
it can also be beneficial. Um,
you know, it's the old bumper
sticker that was popular, which
said, think globally, uh.
Think globally and act locally,
like we should be concerned
about what happens, uh, uh,
nearby, and, and, and we should
be aware of incompatible uses.
Like if this is an area we're
trying to develop for outdoor
recreation, um, this line may be
incompatible with that other
economical. So that's a uh
something to think about. Um, I
just had one question, um, um,
Mr. Ropper, uh, you, you said
something to the
of,
um states should be able to say
no, and I
I'm just curious what does this,
how does the state say no to a
federal project?
Uh, Mr. Chair, that's a great
question, and to be honest with
you, that is a little bit uh of
the specifics of the New Mexico
mining laws, for instance, are a
little bit above my level of
expertise. Um, but I think the
reason I made the comments, the
reason I mentioned that is
because what we see in the ecos
is a situation where the federal
government doesn't seem to be
able to say no. So then people
like Ralph, others in that
community, you know, it's been
over 5 years and people are
still fighting that effort.
with no guarantee that it
doesn't move forward. And so,
The, the status quo isn't really
working then, right? And so I
think.
I guess I, I make the comment to
suggest that maybe as a state
we, we look at how the state can
say no to the wrong mine in the
wrong place, keeping in mind
Representative Armstrong's
comment about, well,
If not, if not there, then
where? Uh, but I think what you
see in the Pecos is, is just
overwhelmingly we can agree it's
not the right place. I mean the
headwaters of our second longest
river, a place that's already
been impacted once, and where
it's, it's just unanimous that
nobody wants this mine. Uh,
that's, it's a different dynamic
that plays, plays out in other
places where often it's some
people are for it, some people
are against it, but in this
case, nobody wants it, and yet
we can't, we can't shut it down,
right? So does 5 years turn into
10, uh, what happens? And so I,
I guess I, I phrase it more as a
suggestion of of perhaps we need
to take a look at what other
tools are at our disposal or
what, what authorities might
might the state uh, you know,
put in place or, or, or what
policies might the state put in
place to make it easier to say
no to minds like this.
OK, thank you for that. And
finally, um, there was recently
a mineral withdrawal down at the
Buffalo Tract down near
Placidas, you're probably aware
of that,
the Buffalo track so named, not
because they were buffalo, but
because on map it kind of looked
like a buffalo, um, and I think
it took them 25 years to get
that to happen. And then the
withdrawal was for, it was
temporary. It's 50 years. Uh, so
it's not, it's not a permanent
solution.
Um, so I, uh, yeah, it's, it's,
it's a lot of work. So thank you
gentlemen, for your
presentation. Uh, we appreciate
it.
Oh, Mr. Vehill.
Um, to representative
Armstrong's comment,
I agree wholeheartedly what she
said, I'm guilty. I have
minerals, minerals, minerals, my
TVs. I'm a consumer and um
sometimes I like to buy the
newest phone and where there's
lots of us that, you know, are
guilty of that. But I think as a
state we need to sit down and
stakeholders and learn to talk
and play well. I mean, it's been
doing with the legacy fund. We
haven't gotten too much into
talking with extractive
industries, water,
environmental.
Conservation groups, but I think
Chevron's kind of headed in the
right direction and bringing
water talks together, um, even
though there may be some opposed
by what Chevron's up to what
others are up to, but at least
they're at the table, um, with
traditional community, others,
so we can start these talks,
start these talks as
communities. Where is it right?
Where isn't it right? Um,
because, you know, I, I don't
want to be guilty of not in
that, not in my backyard either,
cause, um, that's not how we
want.
play as well because we
understand, uh, um, what, what,
what happens in the world when
we're extracting from other
places, but um I think we have
to really collectively think how
we create more awareness so
we're not so wasteful, um,
hopefully our younger generation
will, will see that and then as
we move forward, learning to sit
down, work together and actually
plan because there's a saying
that I always sits with me, um,
very well and always in my head.
We're not a people.
That plan to fail, maybe some of
us are we might plan to fail,
but we're people that failed to
plan.
And if we're not sitting down
and planning and mapping out
this state and figuring out,
well, what's
What is doable? Where are, where
are these resources? Where might
M come in? Where is it? and then
have those discussions because
if we don't start those and
teach our our next generation,
um, how to play well with each
other, and I think we're going
to just continue with the same
old story of, um, like what
you're talking about. So I think
as a state, I think most of us
in the state get along pretty
well and being able to sit down
and talk with each other across.
We may not agree on everything,
but I think that we have an
opportunity in this state to
Continue working as coalitions
of people that come from
different um areas of interest.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you very much. So we
have one final item on our
agenda and it's public comic.
Uh, I'm told that there's no one
signed up.
For in-person public comment,
uh, he went in the audience now,
sing none, um, if you're on Zoom
and you would like to make
public comment, uh, you need to
raise your hand on Zoom.
And Tom will tell us if anyone
raises their hand, we'll give
them just a minute or two.
Not seeing anyone, OK. Uh, well,
thank you all, um, uh, the
audience is sick with us, the
legislators that stuck with us,
