Good meeting yesterday
apologize for missing most of it
I would like to thank center
staff for chairing yesterday I
really appreciate that
this morning we have breakfast
provided in our breakfast
sponsors are american act credit
dairy farmers of america dear
producers of new mexico risk of
calibrate association maximum
chilly association the message
of farm and lifestyle bureau and
mister wolverson makes you
association customation
districts mister federal lands
council the message canceled out
fitters and guides and protect
agriculture now
and we have a ton of burritos up
here way more than we have uh
legislators so I don't know if
there's maybe we could pass we
put some back there if anyone
you want to grab a burrito
could we like move some of those
just so they'll have to walk all
the way back here so we have
with tons of readers so please
help yourself
we had a nice dinner last night
thank you to uh friends of
postcodel patchy national
wildlife refuge was the sponsor
the dinner
and there is actually a dinner
tonight uh for anyone who still
around starting at six o'clock
being hosted by the president of
new mexico tech um so for
members who are still around
there's near here tonight at six
o'clock
in the one other little
housekeeping I am I want to
cover is we have public comment
at three fifteen today uh
assuming we're on schedule which
I hope to be and I very
heard from a number of people to
intend to speak a public comment
so I encourage all the
legislators to stick around the
republic coming because I think
we're going to get a lot
sometimes we have very little
some possible have any and all
that thing today we're going to
get a lot
and you know public comments
always a little tricky because
we tend to put it last because
it makes sense.
You know the here the public
comment after we've heard of the
presentations not before we've
heard the presentations so we
tend to put it last but going
last on the second day
people get tired and a lot of
people trickle out and so it's
it's sort of a
difficult to to make sure also
here in focused on public
comment I haven't really figured
out do that better
so I encourage everyone's sick
around for public comment at
three fifteen
any questions comments
announcements from mr chair
understanding I think that
representative it's a very happy
year here because yesterday he
thought I was not treating the
men fairly on the committee and
I see a not over there too so I
know that they're they're glad
you're back
but i'm glad to be here although
I I miss uh I don't know I send
her woods isn't here
oh i'm sorry so center center
with things I treat him unfairly
but I I enjoy my your actual
center would
so best wishes to him
anything else from the committee
okay so our first
first presentation this morning
is surface water permanent and
water call the act revisions
generally we just go in the in
the order that you appear on the
agenda unless the panels would
like to go on a different order
but first up we would have shown
the women
good morning mr chair members of
the committee my name is shally
lemon and i'm the bureau chief
for the surface water quality
bureau at the new mexico
environment department and i'm
here today to provide some
background and update you are on
the department's efforts to
develop a surface wider quality
discharge permitting per program
and thank you for inviting the
department to discuss this
important topic with the
committee today.
So to begin surface water
quality protections do exist a
new mexico under both the
federal clean water act and the
new mexico water quality act the
clean water act establishes the
basic structure for regulating
discharges a gluten into waters
at the united states and
regulating quality standards for
surface waters the clean water
act aims to prevent reduce and
eliminate collision in the
nation's water in order to
restore and maintain the
chemical physical and biological
integrity of the nation's waters
this includes making it illegal
to discharge pollutants into
waters of the united states
without a permit the clean water
act aims to achieve why to call
the batteries both fishable and
swimming and require states and
authorized tribes to report on
the status of their waters every
two years and revise their water
quality standards every three
years and both of these
processes require public input
the new mexico water quality act
establishes the water quality
control commission as the state
water pollution control agency
that's giving the commission
authority to manage water
quality in our state I know the
clean water act a state water
pollution control agency means
the state agency designated by
the governor as having
responsibility for enforcing
state laws rebating to a
batement of pollution including
protecting water quality for a
design needed users preventing
reducing and a beating water
pollution and surface and
groundwaters and the wider
quality act authorizes the
commission to adopt regulations
first surface water discharges
so why are we developing a
surface water discharge
permanent program now well on
may twenty fifth twenty twenty
three the us supreme court
issued their opinion and sacket
versus epa and the court how
that the relatively permanent
test.
Is the task that should be used
to determine federal
jurisdiction and that the clean
water act only applies to
relatively permanent standing or
continuously following bodies of
water and adjacent watlands and
interest date like some ponds
must have it continuous surface
connection with a traditional
available water on august twenty
eighth twenty twenty three epa
and the army core of engineers
issued a new definition of
waters of the US which is known
as the conforming rule that is
consistent with the socket
decision and that new role
became effective on september
eighth twenty twenty three so
we're now living with that new
rock.
Currently water said the united
states means traditionally
in available waters and
territorial seas and interstate
waters and parliaments of these
waters tributaries to these
waters adjacent what lands and
additional interest date like
sometimes tributaries wetlands
and lakes and pounds must be
relatively permanent standing or
continuously flowing baddies of
water and a jason watland's
leaks and parts must have that
continuous surface connection to
a water defined and number one
through three on the slide in
new mexico a definition of
surface waters of the state or
swaps as we effectively call it
in my bureau is more inclusive
than what that federal waters
are the US definition
encompasses and and it includes
lakes rivers streams including
intermittent and a femeral
streams might flat sand flat
swetlins lose per part halls
went matters piolakes resource
and natural pounds and it also
includes all tributaries of
these waters including a j cent
wetlands any man made bodies of
water that were originally
created and a surface water of
the state or resulted and then
i'm parameter of a service water
of the state and any waters of
the us at aren't covered under
the definition that I just
described.
So a narrower definition of
waters of the us from the sacket
decision results in the alley
femerals and a good number of
other waters noted on the slide
being excluded from federal
clean water act protections in
our state we're watching to see
what the federal agencies will
decide regarding intermittent
streams but we definitely
consider them at risk of losing
protection
in addition many perannial
streams and rivers are in new
mexico or interrupted so there
on the surface then they go
subservice then they pop up
again further downstream and
there on the surface again and
those interrupted streams do not
have a continuous surface
connection so they may no longer
be subject to clean water act
protections under the new
definition what we do know is
that all types of surface waters
and new mexico both would and
swarts contribute flow to other
surface waters recharge
occupiers provide water for
drinking irrigation agriculture
recreation industry fish and
wild buy ecosystem maintenance
and other purposes so with
surface water quality permitting
program it will be very
difficult for new mexico to
protect surface waters of the
state from contamination and
degradation.
So the scope
is proposing to two is proposing
to do two things related to the
surface water quality permanent
program that first is to seek
authorization to run the federal
national pluton discharge
elimination system program or
the ninties program or npds that
doesn't roll after my tongue so
i'm going to say nipties and the
second thing is to create a
surface water discharge
permitting program for surface
waters at the state that will
regulate point source discharges
and discharges have dredged and
filled materials into surface
waters of this day the state
program will be similar to the
federal programs but adapted to
address new mexico specific
issues and the program does not
apply to tribal waters but media
will be responses to tribal
concerns and ensure that
permanent discharges do not
adversely affect tribal water
quality programs.
So the department is using a
surface water advisory panel are
or swap convert composed up a
variety of state holders across
new mexico to provide technical
information practical
considerations and policy
perspectives relate relevant to
adopting an implementing a
surface water quality state
permitting program the swap is
also going to and form the
department's development of
legislation and rules for
consideration by the water
quality control commission and
swap meetings are scheduled to
take place from august through
november we actually had our
first swap meeting on august
nineteenth and those meetings
are going to be before the
formal rollmaking process occurs
because it's informing that
we'll making process the rule
making will include opportunity
for a public participation and
comment and the department will
post updates on the swap process
on the website node noted on
this.
So here's a basic outline or
timeline of their surface water
quality permanent program
development and implementation
you'll notice that the surface
water advisory panel kicked off
this month like I mention and
runs through november then lead
department is working on
legislation that we're working
on two things the adoption of a
nipty statute and water quality
act amendments i'll go into
those and a little bit of detail
and a further side
where anticipating that are rule
making will go before the
commission to request or will
making and the rule making more
occur next year in the winter of
twenty twenty five it just takes
a long time
and
in twenty twenty six the water
quality control commission well
deliberate that hearing make a
decision a dark and approve the
water quality standards and then
will work on staffing training
guidance and outrage to the
regulated community actually
that's occurring from now until
twenty twenty six an initial
program of the state program
will be and calendar year twenty
twenty seven and we will also
submit a formal request to epa
for nipties delegation after the
role making because we need to
have the statute and rules
established and a funding source
the clarified in order to submit
the application.
So currently
this slide shows
brief program update of what
enemy d has done with the funds
that have been appropriate to
the department to develop and
implement and administer a state
surface water discharge
permitting program with that
funding and media has created a
state permit program team and
the surface water quality bureau
we've hired three staff to begin
developing the program we hired
a contract lawyer to assist with
draft statute and rules we hired
a contractor to assist the
department with program
development and also to serve as
an expert witness for future
will making we hired a
facilitator to help with the
advisory panel and we initiated
the surface water advisory panel
process and hired a contractor
to develop an permitting
database for both surface and
groundwater permits and will be
creating 3 4 positions in this
fiscal year to continue program
development.
This provides an estimated
program cast and revenue options
i'm stamping resources resource
estimates for a full permitting
program that's for nifty program
and estate permitting program
required the retention of the
existing ten staff we have ten
staff currently that work on
point source discharges with epa
plus an additional twenty five
to forty staff and depending on
the application of the program
that would include
administrative staff compliance
permitting enforcement staff
data management and an attorney
is financial hr staff so
we're not just looking at
technical staff but every
staff member who supports the
program the projected costs of
the surface water permitting
programmer estimated to be six
to nine million dollars per year
at program the charity once
we've fully implemented the
program likely to be and fiscal
year twenty twenty eight or
later because it's going to take
a phase implementation to reach
that final goal i'm funding of a
state lead program includes
several options fees and which
it could be a hundred percent
fee based it could be a hundred
percent legislative
appropriations through the
general fund or it could be a
mix of those two and that fee
structure.
Will be set through a rule
making with public notice and
comment so we're working with a
swap to figure out what that
approach might be.
And learn more there's an email
address you can send us directly
for surface water quality
permitting program we have a
website dedicated to program
development and we also have
that advisory panel website
where we will be posting updates
on what's happening with the
swap
and then finally am our the
department's twenty twenty five
legislative priorities as always
we asked that you support the
executive back budget
recommendation for the
environment department in the
twenty twenty five legislative
session were currently
developing our fiscal year
twenty twenty six budget request
and will submit that at the
start of september and we'd be
happy to come back to the
committee to discuss that
request later this year
the department is working with
the governor's office and some
potential legislative proposals
for the twenty twenty five
session that includes a nipty
statute to provide state
authority for the federal
nipties program or what's not as
primacy and and that must be
consistent with federal
regulations in order for epay to
approve the program were also
looking at some water quality
act update
and advancing recommendations
from governor lou congression's
fifty year water action plan to
support water reso clean up
contaminated brown water sites
and to create a state surface
water discharge permanent
program so with that I will pass
it to rachel for further
discussion.
Mr chair members of the
committee I want to thank you
for the opportunity to speak
here this morning my name is
regional con and i'm the deputy
director of amigos brothers were
a statewide water state white
organization that works to
protect and restore the waters
of new mexico.
Earlier this year the
legislature put funding towards
the development of a surface
water permitting program I would
like to thank you all for your
dedicator dedication and
commitment to clean water in
addition I would also like to
acknowledge and thank the
environment department service
water quality bureau cheap lemon
and her team have been working
hard as we just heard to figure
out the details of the new
mexico surface water permitting
program and we appreciate their
efforts.
Earlier this year amigos rabos
working with partners including
st mary's just special or
wetland and gis experts created
maps to show the waters better
at risk in the week of the
sacket vspa supreme court
decision this mapping exercise
shows that over ninety five
percent of new mexico streams
and eighty eight percent of new
mexico's watlands are at risk
the map here on the right of the
slide shows the protected waters
and blue and the at risk waters
and ran as you can see there is
a lot of red
we created static maps as well
as an interactive mapping
dashboard where you can soom and
the different parts of the state
and see on this map actually you
can't see the wetlands and
because they're smaller and
covered with all the red but
it's on the interactive mapping
dashboard you can zoom in and
see that protection status of
the of wetlands as well as
streams
I want to note that this mapping
is not a jurisdictional
determination there are still a
lot of uncertainty about how the
sacked decision will be
implemented this mapping is
based on a worst case scenario
interpretation in terms of
potential loss of protections in
the wake of sacket.
This next slide shows assumed in
image from the interactive
mapping dashboard and that I
just was talking about and this
is of the real grandday as it
flows through alva cookie the
blue line is the real grandday
itself
and the red lines are smile
tributary channels the red and
green green polygarn shapes are
wetlands blue and green or
waters that continue to still be
protected under the clean water
act and all the red both the
lines and the polygans are
waters that are now at risk as
you can see from the map the
real grand itself continues to
be protected along with
immediately adjacent wetlands
that have continuously flowing
connections to the river while a
smaller side channels and
wetlands are in in red and at
risk
you're on the rate as a picture
taken at this map location it's
a picture of the white house
council and environmental
quality chair mallery standing
with new mexico stay holders
with the rio grandday in the
background this picture was
taken during chair malaria's
recent visit to new mexico to
highlight the white houses fresh
water challenge initiative and
to learn about how the loss of
federal clean water protections
are impacting communities.
This next slide shows another
resumed in image from the
interactive mapping dashboard
this is a map of the command she
and real costia rivers at
watersheds and it shows those
two rivers several tributaries
and wetland complexes throughout
the what that section of the
waterstand
a couple of pictures of the
mapped area with with errors
showing where those pictures
were taken are shown on the rate
as you can see the whole water
said is in red and is most
likely no longer protected by
the clean water act because it
the real costier the community
creek flows into the real
costier and the real cost yeah
flows to the real grand but it
doesn't flow continuously it
drives up for a stretch before
it hits the rio ground
the real christian commanding
creek are some of new mexico's
premier fly fishing locations
the real costier and command you
creek flow through the buyer
that are an area that is home to
the states largest alcured
and where drawing a tag is
considered a once in a lifetime
hunting opportunity millions of
state and federal dollars have
been spent on restoration in
this area including fish
restoration projects to restore
the real grand cut threat
travel.
So what is this loss of clean
water out coverage mean for our
state
and it isn't good hotskipped to
the chase where one of only
three states that does not rate
point source discharge permits
and stad re rely on the federal
government to write these
permits if waters aren't
federally protected it means
that federal permits can't be
issued it means new mexico water
quality and all the users I am
the state that depends on clean
water are threatened by
unregulated discharges into our
state matters
I didn't want to give a little
brief overview and I I apologize
I think this light is not in the
hand out on our is not it is in
the hand out but it's not in
your arm in the slide hand out
it's in the separate hand out
but I thought it might be useful
to provide you know overview of
the two main types of clean
water permits clean moderate
permits
and these are point source
permits is is the one on the top
and pointing to the pipes coming
and just charging into the river
these are permits that control
the discharges of pollutions
from district discrete
conveyances such as from pipes
and tunnels into surface waters
and this includes just charges
from wastewater treatment
facilities and factories
national pollutant elimination
system
are n p d s so it shelley said
nipties permits our point source
permits for waters of the of the
us
then then another type of permit
is a dread and fill permit
sometimes referred to us four or
four permanents these are
permits that regulate the
removing are adding of materials
to wetland's legs rivers and
streams filled materials include
standard and gravel.
So in the wake of supreme court
decisions that have weakened
federal protections there are
several way spondor treatment
plans in new mexico where
federal discharge permits have
been discontinued because of
this loss of federal protections
I had some of these these plan
facilities are listed on the
slide this means that these
facilities no longer have a
surface water permit that
requires effort limits for and
monitoring of discharges into of
bluetooths into our surface
waters into our state surface
waters
in addition dredge and filled
permits including those that
protect white lens are no longer
required in close basins
isolated wetlands of femeral
streams many interest
intermittence dreams and
potentially even some perannial
streams.
The last of federal protections
in the lack of estate program
result in serious impacts to new
mexico's waters and communities
including impacts to flows and
water quality last of federal
protections and the lack of the
steep program also means that
communities have less avenues
for input into proposed projects
and less west check points and
safeguards on on these proposed
harmful projects are potentially
harmful project.
All of this lead to new mexico's
rivers being listed earlier this
year as the some of the most
endangered rivers in the country
and this line shows some of the
media coverage this listing
generated across the country and
here in our state
I want to note actually that
there's this meeting media
coverage also
highlighted the action at the
state is taking such as
yourselves with putting funding
towards the development of a
surface water permitting program
in the actions of the the
governor and administration for
building this program so while
it listed the
I rivers as being the most
endangered it also highlighted
the actions that the state is
taking to address that threat.
So with our partners we have put
together a story map which can
be found at nm water start or
this includes maps quotes videos
and highlights various impacts
of and solutions to the last of
this bad role clean water
protection I have included a
couple of the quote cards here
from the story map of various
new mexicans speaking about the
importance of creating a surface
water permitting program and
protecting our states water
quality
please visit the story map it
and i'm water start or to to see
more of these story quotes and
at this quote cards as well as
videos a various new mexicans
talking about the importance of
taking a steps to protect our
states water quality through the
development of a service water
permitting program.
More more quote cards here.
So the goal as jelly mentioned
in her presentation there are
two program components needed as
part of the state service water
quality permanent program these
two components are represented
by the top and bottom bullets of
their slide the first component
is obtaining primacy to
implement the national political
discharge elimination system
also known as the nipties are in
pds program this program
regulates the discharge of point
source pollutants into waters of
the united states this as as
shally mentioned will require
state legislation to obtain and
we understand that any medias
working on this primacy
legislation to be proposed in
the twenty twenty five session
the second component of the
program is developing a new
state premiding program to fill
the gaps left by the us supreme
court sacket vs epa decision to
regulate the discharge of
pollutants including both points
or as discharges and dredge and
failed discharges into waters of
the state that are no longer
waters of the us this component
of the program will require
limited amendments to the water
quality act and and we
understand anid as working on
developing this legislation with
input from the surface water
advisory panel and I also
understand that that legislation
will be proposed in the twenty
twenty five session
I want to know that any dears
not proposing to take obtain
authority to implement the four
or four of the dredge and fell
permitting for it for wad for
discharges our dreaded fill
discharges and activities in two
waters of the us they are only
looking at developing a program
for regulating dredge and fill
activities in waters of the
state that aren't waters of the
us so one way to look at it is
you have waters of the US and
media is going to be issuing
permits or the goal is for me.
To issue permits for point
sources so those nps permits
into waters of the US
but for waters of the us for
judge and fill activities the US
army core of engineers will
continue to issue those permits
for all our other waters the
ninety six percent of our state
waters that are are the up to
ninety six percent of our state
waters that are no longer waters
of the us the state is the
gallers for the state to issue
both the point source permits
and the dredge and fill permits
for those waters.
Socially i've already covered
most of this and I just copied
the timeline that and then you
do you have on their on their
web page I encourage you to
check out the the service water
quality permitting web page any
days were page and there's they
have a specific swap service
water advisory panel web page as
well and this timeline is found
up there
so the next steps I include the
condeaning of the surface water
advisory panel as shelly
mentioned we had the first
meeting occurred last week there
was a room for a stake holders
from all across the state from
all different interests
in addition there's the plan to
conduct an administrative rule
making and late twenty twenty
five to adopt the regulations
for a program and as they
mention their plans for two
pieces of legislation the
primacy legislation and the
water quality and act amendments
these two pieces of legislation
are necessary for the
development of the service what
a permanent program and I or due
to support them
in conclusion I again want to
thank you as new mexico
lawmakers for allocating funding
towards the development of a
surface water permitting program
none of the work conducted today
or the next steps I just outline
would be possible without their
support thank you.
Mr chair and members of the kid
sing you tomorrow now home and
book on yeah minor connection
with the dog and solves good
morning my name is dog and zolas
and i'm from sound and clear a
problem my table need mission
mean lake and it's a description
of when the sun hits the wider
and it looks like it sparkling
and my name has always given me
a deep connection to water in
importance in our new mexican
way of life
I currently work for the new
mexico secure association as a
community planner and government
specialist which was allowed me
to work for the water in the
land that has stand in mexicans
for many generations
i've my battery's degree in
anthropology and my master's
degree in community regional
planning from the university of
new mexico
where are double concentrated in
physical planning and indigenous
planning and specifically
focusing on natural resource
management
I currently serve on the surface
water advisory panel for the in
the mexical environment
department that is responsible
for providing committee and pot
on the state wide surface wider
permitting program
and the second community
irrigation system that draws
water from small mountain
streams well and springs and
larger rivers to water our crops
and to provide clean waters
chuck communities a sick is not
are not just water convenient
systems but are the blood lines
of new mexican communities and
have been around since before
new mexico is part of the united
states
a secure feed our communities
helped to sustain the desk not
urbans along it's banks deliver
clean water and play a central
role in our traditions and
culture here in the mexico
the water that flows to your
secure is considered to be
secret and use in many secret
rights which means that this
water needs to be clean for that
no one be become ill from
contaminated water
today a second political
subdivision to the state and
their commissioners are tests
with maintaining the systems and
ensuring that they flow with
clean water
the new mexico sec association
is a non profit organization
that works.
Provide technologies and i'd
advocate for over a seven
hundred a second in committee
ditches and protecting a
traditional ways of life
this is why creating a surface
wider permitting program through
legislation for npds or the
national pollution and discharge
illegal nation system through
primacy and revisions to the
water quality act is so
important to new mexican and a
secure communities to the
various us supreme court
decisions new mexico has lost
many of the protections that we
once had
this has the potential to have
devastating impacts on new
mexicans who rely on cleaning
the secure water to make ends
meet and to put healthy food on
the table
how will the loss of federal
protections on adjacent water
ways impact your secure
communities when you think about
a wider shed it starts in the
clouds collects and the
mountains runs down the various
wider ways and into the
mainstand of the river which
then feeds their secures and our
families
all of this my femeral and
intermittent streams that may
only flow during spring run off
and in the month soon season are
part of the holistic system that
feeds their seconds
when these smaller stands be
concluded the polluted water
closed downstream interact
communities contaminating our
water that feeds our crops farms
branches and cattle that we all
rely on for survival
on top of this a significant
number of secure debit from
smaller wider ways they never
reach bigger waterways such as
the rio grand or the packless
river
the smaller streams springs and
wet lands that mean no longer be
protected by the clean water
acts our need of protection so
that we can continue to start
water and feed our seconds with
clean water
for point source discharges we
need to create a state primitive
program that protect these types
of waterways for problem
pollution.
For judge and few activities we
also need to create a state
permanently program to protect
these waterways from degradation
if whitland that is upstream
from an assector is filled in
the system will lose its ability
to start water which places
water rights at risk
that same system will also lose
its natural bility to filter out
any pollutions or settlement
that will flow downstream
once it is filled in that system
will discharge an influx of
setting it into downstream as
secure this could produce a
similar situation that occurred
on the rear tramma on june
nineteenth of this year was many
assectors being filled in with
settlement and increasing the
potential for flash flooding
events
thus increasing the number of
potential natural disasters
which would require more state
in federal funds to provide the
necessary disastrous assistance
where at a point in time where
we have the ability to create a
state wide surface wider a
permanently program that is
placed based and that centers
the needs of my mexicans while
also protecting our widers and
developing a program we should
include allowances for the
normal operation maintenance and
repairs of a sackers and firms
so that we are meeting the needs
of our communities while also
uploading up holding our
responsibility to provide our
people with clean water we need
to protect clean water while
meeting the needs of our
communities and showing that we
meet the needs of our tribes for
those seconds land grants and
other new mexican users
thank you so much with respect I
want to think the chair and
members of the committee and I
also have a hand out for you all
just to highlight some of the
needs and concerns as a secure
and traditional communities
thank you
okay thank you very much going
to the committee for subsenator
standards
thank you mr chair
I think I have questions for
everybody but i'll try to be
brief yesterday to ask everybody
time.
So i'll try to time myself
first of all shelly
in this pretences some comments
that reach on me too but
i'm a little concerned about
regulations versus statute lots
of times
mister chair
departments or individuals ask
us to put funding into the
budget for a specific purpose
without setting the policy in
statute and I think that rates
on slide six and slight fourteen
you identified that as
potentials but shelley could you
tell me what the department is
planning to do
of course vice chair and chair
and members of the committee
are planned is what recharge can
suggested which is and I believe
what I also covered which is to
develop a primacy program for
point source discharges under
the federal nipties program
to control pluton discharges two
waters of the united states
excuse me I wasn't clear okay I
guess I am asking specifically
mister chair what it is you're
gonna ask in twenty twenty five
legislatively
and is and if you're referring
to what you're talking about
that's great I just need to
clarify for the audience in the
records
that is a great clarification
for the twenty twenty five
legislative session we will need
a
pds statute to authorize the
state to administer that federal
program so that's going to be in
and of itself it's own statue
and and it basically while meg
or require the federal you know
look at the federal requirements
and that's what.
We will reference in that
statute
we will also need for the steep
program for surface waters of
the state beyond waters that the
us
we will need some water quality
act amendments to help give us
authority for that program right
now you know it says the
commission can develop but
discharge permitting program a
lot of their water quality act
references individual permits
not general permits general
permits are for it a
classification of discharge the
like contract construction storm
water and and so that general
permit authority isn't clear in
the water quality act at this
moment so we may need to add
some language to provide some
clarity on what
we will need for a program
because we definitely want to be
able to issue general permits
for those types of activities
that have similar appointments
similar activities and not go
through the rdus individual
permit public noticing and
requirements that are needed for
individual permits okay so
mister chair you're going to be
coming back to this committee
before the end of the interim
with a
prototype or draft of the
legislation and just briefly
because I want to ask you
certainly a vice chair we are
working with the surface water
advisory panel to look at that
and are september meeting I
believe we're looking at some of
the
nippies statute i'm not sure
we can certainly come back and
provide more information later
thank you I think that's up to
the chair when gets on the
agenda but I I do know we're
going to consider request so
so mr chairman be dollar there
is seeking is downstream from
wastewater treatment plans that
are currently being a.
Affected and damaging their
waters
mr chair in vice chair
currently we do not know of any
currently been affected from
tests but there is a big
potential in this future for a
sack is to be impacted by points
or discharge
and if we don't make a system
then we're putting a lot of
these seconds at risk so misread
you're working with the
department to include that those
comments in that planning in
whatever regulations in statute
they're going to come forward
with mr chairman by share
currently we are in the swap
and to what degree this is just
they're not looking for
consensus they're looking to
provide community and put and we
hope that they will take into
considerate into consideration
of the second needs and wishes
than once and so that we can
continue to protect our waters
thank you very much in mr chair
I think I was turning myself I
did five to six minutes thank
you.
Thank you I appreciate that next
upgrade firbs have armstrong
thank you mister chair and thank
you for your presentation I have
several different questions but
I just want to start with when
you speak and acronyms and you
speak and dread and fell some of
the committee medicares may not
know what that is just a heads
up you might want to educate
some of us
I know what it is but some of us
may not
one of the questions I had was
for missus lemon lemon
the construction you answered
because I was curious if it was
going to be included in all of
these rules and regulations of
the surface waters of the state
and I wondered who sits on the
panel on the surface water
advisory panel and what is that
how is that made up
mr chair and representative we
have I believe twenty six or
twenty seven members on the
surface water advisory panel the
membership is listed on our
website but it includes
representation from industries
from environmental organizations
from a sake yes from agriculture
so we and oil and gas we have a
really broad representation we
issued a notice to serve on the
surface water advisory panel and
so people submitted their
letters of interest and we
selected twenty six or twenty
seven to participate on the
surface water advisory panel
based on their knowledge and um
area of expertise and
involvement in the surface water
party in the state for that I
will i'll look up those members
I was just curious and then when
it comes to your legislative
priorities I was curious why
your asking for non recurring
funding requests.
And then also
on your fines are your fees are
you all able to find
so for the first part for mr
chair and representative for the
non recording those special
appropriations we typically have
just a kick start things we do
have some funding set aside for
a program development right
right now from the last
legislative session and so
there may be additional anime
special appropriations that i'm
that's not specific to this
program but for department
priorities
i'm
the second part what was your
second question the second part
is are you able to find
a mr chair representative yes we
will be able to find so
currently if we have enforcement
actions and we have issued
enforcement actions under our
state regulations that money
goes back to the general fund
and in the water quality act we
are allowed to find and we have
a penalty policy already
established okay thank you for
that I just
some some fine
fines have been used to fund
positions and I just don't think
we should encourage
finding so that we keep
employees so i'm glad to hear
not glad to hear about fines but
glad to know it goes back to the
general fund the other
question I have is
does does any of any of you
sitting at the panel does this
include stock tanks and dirt
tanks
on ranches would they have to
get a permit to put one in and
would they have to get a permit
to clean it
mr chair representative that's
something will be discussing in
the advisory panel.
Are exclusions are exemptions
from this program and you know
currently there are exemptions
under the clean water act of
federal nipties program I don't
anticipate any of those
exemptions changing we may need
new mexico specific exemptions
and clarity on that so right now
a wouldn't anticipate that
happening especially center same
man made body of water that was
not in a if it was not in a
previous surface water of the
state and if it was created in a
surface water of the state
that's something we would need
to consider and evaluate and
figure out as that you know with
the advisory panel thank you for
that I hope all the ranchers and
industry is listening to that
because
alone I believe we have eighty
stock tanks on our branch so
then I wanted to go to
miscarn really quickly on your
interactive map I can't get it
to work on my phone and I did
bring my ipad so I want to look
at that but I also
am concerned about I mean I live
here
there's no water there
and so I am curious how is it
read when there's there is
there's there's we have no
streams we have no
riparian areas we have no
natural spring water whatsoever
maybe in a few areas but not in
this rant not in this place
right here so can you explain
that where this came from yes mr
chair representative these are
all types of surface waters so
they're a femeral channel is
better only flow and response to
rain events those are royals in
a female channel that's
intermittent waters as as shelly
mentioned our waters that have
flow that
are intermittent in nature that
sometimes slow sometimes don't
because above the below.
The the water table and then per
annual waterwares and one thing
to keep the mind is with the map
it is it's on the scale of
answer the wines are waited
it's hard on if you go to the
interactive map i'm some
apologize that you're not able
to upload it on your phone i've
actually been having some
connectivity issues here on my
phone so maybe you'll have more
success even on your phone
in a different place but
definitely on your computer the
if you the zoomed out version
which is what this is a picture
of has all of those streams
would heavy weighted lines and
so when you do man you'll see
that there isn't very many
when you zoom into the
particular area but it is
picking up some of those dry
it's picking up all of those
there's dry a femeral channels
as well as the channels that
have water in the morning and
the reason it does that is
because if something is is
dumped into an a family drainage
in a royal and it rains those
pollutants are washed down into
the streams and downstream and
can impact our our communities
our farms are are our ranches
and
are wildlife and recreation
thank you for that and one last
just mainly up a statement is
you know everyone knows about
the rear doors or fire right now
and and the fires in the in
northern new mexico and if we
don't log it and grades it and
management manage it the same
thing is gonna keep ham
happening we're gonna spend a
hundred million dollars in
northern new mexico a hundred
million dollars and in southern
new mexico because once it's
once it burns it's like a slight
of ice it's like glass so all
that material goes down into
those streams we talked about
the dregging of the streams in
read also and they have they
have to get permits for that
they have to be cannot.
Screen it and reuse it they have
to take it to a waste site
because it might have some kind
of contaminant in it which i'm
i'm okay with but guess what it
all happened because of the fire
so and tell we like I said
grease
log manage it it's going to keep
happening and we could put could
have two hundred million dollars
into that and possibly mitigated
some of that so thank you mister
chairman.
Thank you for armstrong we have
about twenty minutes left we
have four people on the list
with five people on the so if
you could keep your question
short next step we have centers
to deal with us.
Thank you mr chair I just have a
couple of of brief questions
what is the relationship of
polluted surface water to the
underlying agree first
mr chair and senator
it it depends on the stream
system a lot of our stream
systems are what's known as
losing streams and so the water
is following but then it goes
underground so if those
pollutions can mobilise with the
water and go underground it can
contaminate the ground letter
resource
there are areas where it's a
gaining stream so the stream is
receiving ground water and
increasing stream flow and sell
any pollutants in the ground
water can then come up into the
surface water so there's
definitely a connection between
ground and surface water
resources
i've always felt it was weird
that we separated so sharply
regulation of surface water from
groundwater because of of what
you said and I was glad I just
looked at the list and it looks
like you have people from the
state engineers office and and
it's it's really important and
then just very briefly you said
an mpdes statute was one of the
things you're looking for
where does that mean
i'm just just just to be clear
mister chair senator and nps
statute gives the state
authority to administer the
federal program because it's a
federal program under the clean
water act so it's authorizing us
to administer that program as
the state of new mexico
just implementing with the
federal government does not
inviting the federal government
to do it thank you I wasn't
clear where that meant thank you
mister chair appreciate it
thank you centered except
represent matthews.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you panel for the presentation
how many of these permits had
been issued in the state prior
to the sacket decision or were
existing at the time it is that
sacked decision.
Mr chair representative there
are approximately a little over
a hundred and ten individual
permits point source discharge
permits and a approximately
it three thousand two forty five
hundred general permits and the
reason there's a range is
because some of those are
temporal so their time dependent
is like construction so a
permanent is issued for a
constructions dorm water but the
construction ends and then the
permit goes away so it's it's
about four thousand on average
general permits
thank you mister chair
and
the decision said the certain
permits are no longer required
did that mean that those permits
were no longer in force
then had been issued it in in
your interpretation of the
decision
mr chair representative so if a
federal permit is no longer
required it can not be enforced
upon under the clean water act
not to say that the state cannot
take action under the water
quality act and our surface
water quality regulations I
mentioned before our surface was
quality bureau has taken
enforcement on certain cases but
it's hard because we don't have
a permanent program and a permit
issued that they're in violation
thank you and mr chair
do we have any immediate ganger
of harm to our clean water as a
result of the decision
that you are aware of.
Or is fine if you like mr chair
mr chair representative it's
it's definitely I don't know if
it's like an emergency situation
like a wildfire but you take the
wildfires for example
if there are not federal permits
that are required then you know
there's nothing that is
regulating the removal of those
contaminants that have burned
and so that's problematic and in
rude or so and i'm with the
hermets peak cap canyon there
were
federal dregen filled permits
that were issued by the core for
those emergency actions but in
our
I mean you know those things
some of those things occur
naturally but in access it can
impact the the stream system so
it can create problems and cause
more flooding or you know change
the stream dynamic so it gets a
lot of energy when there's water
and there and it floods
downstream community is so
it's
our waters are at risk and like
miscon said in over ninety five
percent of our waters are at
risk right now it's
contamination
mr chair
is shelly thank you for that
answer I
would i'm trying to get a sense
of is is this happening in our
state and is there something we
should be doing more quickly if
if it's possible to react in
what we're doing because it
sounds to me like it's a
substantial risk that there's
people out there doing whatever
they want to do
and we may not even know that
they're doing it because there's
no requirement for a permit in
my incorrect
mr chair representative of no
you are not incorrect and on my
slide I had the list of waste
one or treatment plants that no
longer have to have a permit to
control those discharges and so
that's a that's until I guess I
would slightly different
response then then this lemon is
that I do think that it's a and
it's happening right now and
it's it's an emergency
which is why the you know we
have taken as a state taking
action to fund the development
of a program and I think that
were the state is moving quite
quickly at this point I mean
developing a whole program takes
a lot of time in the timeline
that the that chilly shared on
her side I think is a pretty
aggressive timeline I hope that
we can stick to it
stick to that timeline and
developing a program and
beginning to get.
These these discharges
regulated so but in the meantime
so the other part of your
question I do think that there
needs to be short term
protections and actions and the
environment department does do
some of those with enforcement
actions the problem is without a
primiting program you have to
wait until after the
contamination has occurred you
don't it to then do enforcement
for violations instead of having
a program in place to prevent
that contamination from
happening in the first place and
so that's pretty expensive for
the state to do to do those
enforcement actions and but we
hope that that the environment
department will put resources
towards that in the interim
period
mister chairman and rachel and
shelly if reserve athies could
you wrap up
i'm sorry we're running short of
time okay this my last question
is there anyway that for example
cities or counties can legislate
in the interam to prevent this
harm until the state legislature
meets and can pass the
legislation you need that's my
last question.
Mr chair representative
i'm not sure
I will say that the department
like surface water quality
bureau works with our ground
water quality bureau because a
lot of the systems that this
strange pollutions also have
groundwater discharge permits we
have a permanent program for
groundwater i'm so we're we're
coordinating with ground monitor
in those cases like silver city
at ramar cloud craft to put
surface wider protections in
there where we can
so we're trying to figure out
where to continue to protect
waters within the department and
also use enforcement you know we
don't like to be reactive I want
to be proactive
and so building a program takes
time i'm you know i'm not sure
about I would think with county
ordinances or city ordinances it
would be people who are pushing
dirt or maneuver to the streamer
into the royal and that type of
action and enforcement could
take place at the city county
web all we get complaints about
that we work with city council I
earn city and county
representative so there are
little things and that people
can do about waste and
discharges into
the the stream system in your in
your water.
Thank you we have it eight
minutes left in four on the list
so that means you get a question
or two and the panel could keep
their answers brief as well
represents her any other
thinking mr chairman and thank
you for the presentation i'll be
quick so part of mine had been
talked about
i'm worried about complaints and
enforcement use you have on page
ten that mislement the thirty
five to fifty fd's for a
permitting compliance
enforcement data management ends
boarding
Are not following the clean
error so you have since we have
very little way to enforce this
you have a big job in in making
sure that this that industry
follows these rules or at least
tries to so do you have any fd's
do you need more money for ftes
for compliance and inspection
enforcement action
mr chair representative I agree
with you it is important you
know you can have the
regulations and they don't mean
anything of people are not in
compliance so
that number could go up
depending on their application
of the program where trying to
be realistic knowing limited
state resources and
and
what we can do but we do
said a schedule for
complaints inspections so we
once we have the program we will
have a consistent schedule and
visit different sites every year
visit large sites every year or
so there there is a plan for
that type of development and
then enforcing on the bad actors
who aren't in compliance is
definitely important
mr chairman you also have to
remember we have a lot of money
right now and that water is so
important and making sure we
have clean water for every area
so i'm hoping you keep pushing
and on it and I see so there's
view of us here we will help you
so um just keep pushing thank
you
thank you observe reserve keys
briefly I think you missed her
and thank you very much
representative study on a she
took the bulk of my questions
and so I very much appreciate
that I I guess mostly is the
statement is that I am night sad
to see penalties I am tired of
state regulations with no teeth
and no audit process and no
follow up so please continue to
communicate back to this
community.
Committee are when you are
needing funding how are the
audits going is once a year
enough
and and what are those that
those are the results that we
want to be able to see
let's start making regulations
with our follow up and
compliance and so thank you very
much
my forty six seconds mister
chair just shown off here
the care represents tomorrow can
you do forty six seconds thank
you mr chair I don't know if i'm
that first but
miss lemon my concerns are
we're gonna vote on this to give
you the power and authority to
to enforce this
how do we know
what you're going to be
enforcing are their federal
rules are laws already that
you're going to write rules for
or are you gonna make up your
own rules according to the
state.
Thank you mr chair
representative there are both
federal rules and
with their nippies program and
then we will also have state
rules that you state permanent
rule role making to define the
program and what we would
enforce upon what what it means
to be on compliance or out of
complete so missed share and
misleading so then
we don't know what those rules
are
so
it's got to be hard for us to
decide whether we really want to
vote for this unless we know
what the rules are in place or
are you going to bring this the
rules before the session
mr chair representative first we
need statue to
give us authority for that role
making and then we will develop
rules for
consistent with that statute so
it's a two part process at the
the roadmaking
is are the details that nation
will said the program the statue
provides the broad umbrella and
authority to so that's where the
committee thank you
thank you for that thank you
mischarge and end up mislemon so
that those are my concerns
exactly is is how can we vote on
something to give you the power
and authority
to do this if we really don't
know what we're imposing on the
people of the state of new
mexico which we all want to
clean water well want to keep
our surface waters so you've
clean not contaminated and
everything else but it's it's
hard the sale for me is hard to
underto understand why is it is
this pretty common
for your office to do work this
way on these things
mr chair representative while
this is the first time i'm
developing a permanent program
so
I have.
I don't know if we typically do
it this way by
the the nipties statute is for
the federal program that's been
around for fifty years as long
as the clean minor act has been
in existence
and their state program will be
that you know that's why we have
a surprise water advisory panel
to work out details and figure
out you know listen to our
stakeholders figure out what the
program is going to look like
when examptions what's going to
be permanented what's not
and what those permits you know
general permits versus ended
visual permits so that
that is a formal rolemaking
process when we have the nuts
and bolts that is a public
participation and public
opportunity for a public comment
so that goes through it on
public process
that the loss and the statue
goes through the state
legislature to give us the
authority to develop the walls
right in you can you can
understand my concerns I think
that mister chair thank you
thank you for your presentation
presenters
thank you representatives more
charges are couple quick
questions for staff
legislation coming in twenty
twenty five so
this committee will consider
legislation and it's november
meeting that's november twenty
fifth and twenty sixth that's
thanksgiving week
I strongly encourage you to have
legislation in front of us at
that time this might not be
considered for endorsement
probably won't be cause I think
it's completely the potentially
controversial
um
the administration
has a really bad habit of
showing up to the legislature
with legislation that's a moving
target weaker to into a session
and I know you've been talking
about public safety i'm talking
about complex environmental
legislation that doesn't get
past because it's not ready for
us.
When we start the session so my
plan is and you know for the
committee and and for the panel
and for audience my plan is to
consider legislation in november
that doesn't have to be the same
legislation that gets introduced
I would consider that meeting
sort of a first committee
meeting where we I hope for us
to review legislation as
comments
ask questions provide comments
provide criticisms and you may
be come back in the session with
the second draft but
it's been really frustrating the
past several years that
you know committees get asked to
pass legislation in the sale
don't worry will fix it in the
next committee and that's that's
not the process we're going to
follow
them so november is your your
target date
and separately i'm I am
interested
because it comes up in other
contexts about the definition of
a femeral and airmented
because I
i'm trying to understand how we
define those terms if you have
exists I mean III know the
common definition of a female
and intermittent I know what the
words mean i'm sure is how they
apply to the landscape of new
mexico because I think the
parking lot in albertsons is an
airmented street yeah you get a
thunderstorm in that thing flow
so you're what what exactly is
the scope of the female and
intermittent and if it's
if it's complicated the answer
you know you're walking there
email me after the committee
mr chair that's a great question
we do have a higher protocol
that we use to this out a
federal intermittent prenia
classifications it's not always
black and weight.
But we use that to evaluate
stream systems to know that
we're applying to rate water
quality standards so if it's
unknown
umm we will go out there it's a
quick assessment of the stream
and other a reach of the stream
and we can figure out if it's a
femeral internet in our prenia
the the details of that we look
at a bunch of different
indicators so there's it's not
like a bright line you know
here's here's
best you know if it's flows only
ninety five percent of the time
then it's or it doesn't flow
ninety five percent of the time
then it's a federal we don't
have strict cut offs we look at
other things like vegetation you
know a quadic life you know if
there's bugs or shells in the
stream that we can or dry lg
like there was water now there's
not so
we use that to evaluate streams
okay okay that's
current earth it's not
easily boiled down so thanks for
that
thank you all for your
presentations I I think that was
a really useful
our next panel
is regional water planning
in this the panel is good join
us at the front
we'll get going.
Sentation.
Okay
welcome
thank you
we'll just get rid into it for
step we have I see director can
I rosely wait
thank you mr chair panel good
morning pleasure to be with you
all again
we do have a set of slides which
is not what on the screen right
now although i've never got to
that and just a moment
there we go perfect
again my name is rising i'm the
director of the new mexico in
receipt stream commission i'm
gonna be presenting our slides
together with sarah fox are
senior water planner whose
stepping in for andrew urban
andrews actually here in the
audience but we've had a lot of
conversation lately about
growing the water work force and
i'm really excited to be handing
off these kinds of presentations
to other staff with great
expertise so i'm excited to have
zero present the bulk of our
presentation today i'm gonna
make just a few brief opening
comments hand off to her and
then she'll hand back to me
briefly at the end of our
portion of the panel before we
go on to our fellow panelists
and very excited to be
presenting to you all today and
update on the water security
planning act and then very
appreciative to the legislature
including bicyers to finish for
hoping to carry this bill in the
twenty twenty three legislative
session so as they think you all
know the water security planning
act passed unanimously in the
twenty twenty three session it's
a centrally rewrite of new
mexico's regional water planning
statute
and in my mind this work
regional water planning
potentially is one of the most
important things moving related
to water in the state of new
mexico it is and I hope it will
become the framework for us to
address all of the challenges
were confronting on almost every
panel during this.
This two day meeting I think it
can be the framework and which
we support communities across
the state I am getting out in
front of the challenges
associated with climate change
it can be the framework in which
all of the various state federal
local entities come to the table
to craft solutions it can be
what helps us are comply with
our compacts it can be how we
prepare for and respond to force
fires and post pirate flooding
it can really address all of the
needs across the state if
implemented correctly and that
is our aim and what we're here
to present on today I also think
it's critical to know you know
specific concern and mentioned
yesterday thoughts about our ad
community and a rule rural
communities I think it's very
important that those not get
left behind i'm and that's part
of what we're eaming to do
through this process there is
going to talk about the in
particular the bright outreach
that we've done to think through
how to shape this the last
statute passed in nineteen
eighty seven and was in place
for decades we felt strongly
that we wanted to get this right
and get it right with lots of
public input so we're were
embarking on and sarah will
describe a long process of
collecting that information and
formulating the rules and
guidelines called for under the
act
I also want to just highlight in
peril to doing that effort of
crafting what this future of
regional water planning will
look like we recognize that
there are certain areas of the
state that have very urgent need
so we are not waiting to help
those communities address those
issues including the work in the
lower real grand i'm headed to
meetings later this week with
some of my fellow panels
yesterday submit the barn
council and others in the lorio
grand to have discussions about
the solutions needed to to
implement in the lower real
grand so just to say those
things are happening in parallel
and then also in parallel we're
doing a lot of work.
Thinking through the statute
calls on this state to support
future planning regions with the
best available science data and
models in the panel after this
panel you'll hear from dc
timmons here at new mexico
tacket in the offer for a
mapping program we're working
with them on teeing up the
appropriate data related to our
auction first help support
planning in the next fews that
come so there's multiple things
happening in parallel
it's important to note that this
effort is distinct but related
to the other planning work I
didn't receive stream commission
including implementation of the
governor's fifty year water
action plan which you heard
about yesterday that plan calls
for us to implement this
planning work i'm and also our
statewater plan update and
review process or or team
completed the last review of the
state water plan in twenty
twenty three sept and that
review called for this work as
well um last day we just see as
water water scarcity increases
water quality becomes
increasingly important and so
therefore we are continuing to
collaborate and the process of
the water policy and
infrastructure task for is
really kicked off enhanced
coordination and collaboration
across the state agencies it's
great to hear the update from an
med that you just heard and
clearly that continual our
coordination and and
collaboration across the state
agencies is super important and
with that i'm going to hand off
to server to go through our
sides think zero
things have thank you mr chair
and the committee I think you go
to the next slide please
interest
never mind sorry about that
so the water security planning
act was passed unanimously by
the legislature in twenty twenty
three and there's some very
important updates about the
statute first it's aim to
transform and reimbigurate
regional water planning across
new mexico it requires as direct
arises why alluded to.
To be built on scientific
integrity with the best
available science date and
models it's aimed at supporting
implementation through
prioritization of projects and
activities I mean incorporates
all existing planning efforts
it's grounded in state water law
and it is informed by an
advisory council taking to
account the tribal sovereignty
and tribal water rates and needs
of travel communities more on
that later and as part of the
legislation legislative
legislation that was passed we
at the planning program are
required to report out to
you all on an annual basis to
this is our first report out
over the implementation process
if you if you pulled just a
little closer we can hear about
that
so this is a side that I think
many people will be familiar
with essentially it this is a
graph out of the leaper had
report that was compiled by the
new mexico department of geology
mineral resources which really
sets the stage of why this
planning at work is very
important we can see on the
graph these essentially are
the average temperatures on an
annual basis with dickator
averages as as the horizontal
bars and the same information
presented in precipitation so
we're expecting to see an
increase of at least five to
seven degrees parent high over
the next coming fifty years with
our precipitation to continuing
to beat variable and so people
like oh that's not a big problem
well as it gets hotter everybody
gets thirst year for me to
plants to the atmosphere so the
water we get will not go as far
in addition
new mexico has been the
beneficiary of new technology of
drilling are in the grand
schuman things this doesn't seem
like a super new technology but
when we think about a lot of our
ground water resources these
have never been tapped so on the
screen here you can see can the
proliferation of ground water
wells across our state i'm think
it's very important contacts
were thinking about planning for
the.
Future
one thing we're striving for and
a lot of this planning work is
to shift the conversation from a
budgetary analogy of supplied
demand into this balance analogy
bouncing our water availability
with our water and need and we
find that it's much easier to
talk about solutions when we're
framing it as striking balance
in continuing to maintain
balance then really focusing on
a lot of supplies side solutions
just because everyone's a little
bit familiar with economics
as mentioned in parallel with
the year on with the outrage
that we did this summer we are
also setting up the water
security tribal advisory council
known as west we're in the we
are working on the working
committee which is a smaller
group of people who have been
brought together to set up a
more long term committee of how
we will be incorporating trouble
so i've rented into this ongoing
planning report and we're hoping
to have that tribal advisory
council set up this far
so as part of this legislation
we have to promotate rules and
adapt guidelines that give
essentially a roadmap for how we
will complete regional water
planning going forward as part
of this process and in mind with
the statute we wanted to focus
our
rules and guidelines and make
sure that they are represented
in maxican state ways as part of
this process we went on a road
show this spring in summer to
sixteen of the previous regional
water planning regions and had a
open house event at each one of
these regions including right
here at new mexico attack on
july twenty second
with a series of
stations and open-ended
questions that were developed
with an interest in
interdisciplinary team at isc to
get out what new mexicans value
about their water and a lot of
important questions that we are
considering to do for the
development of um this new
further implementation of this
act.
So it really appreciate everyone
who came out the summer to
either this in person event or
we also had a version of this
online that was available for
about june third until august
eighteenth so what does that
engagement look like so on the
screen here we can kind of see
our engagement efforts by the
numbers things i'd like to drive
your attention to we had over
seven hundred people come in
participate in an online in the
imperson events across our state
which was really great to see
with an additional over thousand
people who projected paid it
online with addition have been
working to make sure we are
getting the word out as best as
we possibly can with seventy
advertisements in either
newspapers and or the radio in
addition we had just six six
newspaper stories about the
events from different price who
came along at two one of our
events I got to be on the radio
a couple times which is pretty
exciting to me and in addition
we have over three thousand
subscriber strong newsletter
which is updated about buy
monthly now with information on
this implementation in addition
to putting out informational
blogs really trying to build a
trusted resource for water arm
water planning going forward
our next step so we have closed
out the in person open house
events and online open house
events or working with the
contractor to develop feedback
and the development of pre draft
rules and guidelines which we
will expect to be taking the
rest of this fall to early
winter we will then go forward
with a pre draft rules and
guidelines public comment period
ahead of the official rural
promotation process which will
occur after that public period
and a kind of adjustment of the
rules and gadlines and with that
i'm gonna hear the fact to
director the way
thank you so much sir
I guess I would just re
emphasize bef.
For this coming legislative
session you all will see the
draft rules and guidelines that
are based on all of this
extensive public input more very
much looking forward to your
input on those rules and
guidelines and again we want a
shape of process that's really
effective in confronting all of
the solution the challenges that
were facing
in addition I would highlight
obviously this effort is going
to require funding it's
something were currently working
on with the gov's office in
terms of funding for this effort
anything it's worth considering
you know some other states like
colorado have recording
allocation of funding to their
planning regions for those
regions to then distribute based
on the planning process in
colorado sarah has actually
spent quite a quite a lot of
time studying different water
planning processes and other
western states and that's been
really helpful to learn from
those examples I also want to
take a moment to think those of
you on the committee who
participated in the in house in
person open house events it was
great to see many of you there
and then last I wanted to
highlight I mentioned earlier
that we're working in parallel
to standing up this future of
regional water planning we're
working specifically with
certain regions that have urgent
need like the lower real grand
eastern new mexico etc one of
those is southwest new mexico
and I want to just take this
opportunity to get a
update on the new mexico unit
fund you have a another hand out
so I think you all are familiar
under arizona water settlements
act interstate stream commission
is administering funding through
that act that the state received
for water supply projects are in
southwest new mexico that's
called the new mexico unit fun
it has around a hundred and
eight million dollars in it are
in the twenty twenty one
legislators session the
legislature passed.
House bill two hundred which
tasked in our state stream
commission with working with
water trustword to stand up a
process by which we can allocate
that funding were well under way
and that process with water
trust forward are we completed
last month listening sessions
also in the four counties that
are eligible to receive this
funding caterolity dogo and
grant counties we were had in
person are listening sessions
there were poised with water
trust forward to open for
applications for funding for
planning and design projects
this fall and there is on this
hand out there's an opportunity
and encouragement for people to
comment on the proposed policy
for this pilot funding cycle
that will be this year that I
just mentioned the window for
commenting on that is through
the end of this week so I
encourage you all if you have
thoughts on that process to wen
the the policy document we're
asking for feedback on is
related specifically to the
pilots they call this year and
again that's limited to funding
for planning and design but
we're also working with water
trust board on a funding cycle
for a twenty twenty five that
would fund a much broader range
of projects including
construction so excited to
report that that process is
under away and we're very much
looking forward to hoping get
that funding on the ground in
southwest new mexico and with
that I think will conclude our
comments and look forward to
hearing from our fellow
panelists thank you.
Thank you for that next step
here.
Good morning mister chairman and
members of the committee thank
you very much for the
opportunity to be here my name
is pologosia and i'm the
executive director of the new
mexico a second association and
I first wanted to thank you for
your support of water planning
and thank you senators to finish
for being a sponsor and others
who have supported this effort
this is really important for new
mexico's water future and I also
wanted to acknowledge the
legislature supported the water
data act which is going to I
think and and the apple from
apping which is going to
dovetail really well with water
planning
the new mexico a second
association as a statewide non
profit and we provide technical
assistance education and we also
do policy advocacy for a second
throughout this day there are
over seven hundred a seconds
across the state and twenty
three different accounties.
This this image shows you how a
second and essence our next
tension of the river they're the
ribbons of green that go
along our rivers where a sick is
divert water and irrigate a
small acridges of land they rely
on surface water is that
seasonal most of them don't have
storage and what are planning
still the important to us
because a seconds are
there they're important to stay
colders and we are
we play a major role in one or
management at the local level in
fact one thing that that's
really
striking to me is that a second
actually managed most of the non
indian surface water rights in
their respective basins and
that's that's a really big deal
a second also have to
collaborate with neighbors for
example a second thing ndw case
up insure the same
service area so they actually
overlap a second neighbor with
publishing sometimes shared the
same diversion structures and
and usually share this same
stream system um hs you need and
they have century sold customs
of water management and water
sharing in fact I like to think
of water sharing as a very
ancient form of water planning
because the marth onlines would
have to gather at the stream
traditionally and they decide
among themselves
in a water short system how
they're going to divide water in
a particular year looking at no
pack and and making decisions
collectively about that
so to me that's a very long
history of water planning
a second importantly also have
the ability to deny or approve
water transfers
this is a picture of my dad with
the john it's more you have from
efforts say and
this is an infrastructure
project that was just completed
so and for that you know why do
planning happens at the hyper
local level.
You have a handful of local
leaders that elected in each
other secure their all autonomes
they all make their own
decisions on how to allocate
water internally and then how to
share water across the stream
why don't plan to give us an
opportunity to address
it a range of issues all the
same time at with various day
and importantly some of the
owners we care about the mother
watershed health and that's
important to everybody that's
out the source of all over our
water groundwater and across
work concerned with water
transfers how those effective
secures infrastructure projects
adapting to draw in water
scarcity because of climate
change as well as a disasters
and as as many of you no
disasters have taken a very big
tall in a second since
mostly since twenty two out of
the seven hundred and seconds we
have about a hundred and fifty
to two hundred that are in some
phase of disaster response and
recovery right now in new mexico
so it should give us the urgency
around how we're we're doing
dealing with disasters but I do
think what are plenty can help
us with that but most
importantly water planning helps
us protect water for future
generations
as I mentioned waters are of a
seconds or interconnected it's a
surface and groundwater
we're interconnected with their
mutual domestics their
neighboring problems towns and
events of divisions or the
neighbors and a lot of many
domestic well owners in a rural
areas
water should important twice as
well as architects that sustain
our river and importantly a
second actually contribute to
acre for recharge
that are approached to the
regional water planning
processes to to work with our
regional asset associations and
most of the state a seconds are
organized into regional
associations that the water
should and base and level
they taken on very a different.
A leadership rolls including a
dudication and other things
legal defense advocacy but we're
really going to position those
regional associations to be
actively engaged in a regional
wider planning they're they're
concerns range from water rates
and water supply but also
threats to their continuity so
are our plan is to be building
capacity at that at that
regional level this map shows
where those regional
associations are located across
the state there's
close to thirty of them and
there are different stages of
organization the red ones show
where there's a sick is impacted
by post fire flooding right now
so they're their
a lot of the sick is dealing
with a lot of things all at once
there's a second enter to the
purporational water planning
will have different strategies
one of them is a water planning
working group to work with iscan
and
how we're going to engage in the
process to it to give and put it
on the roadmaking and also to
advise on a guidebook for a
second
also decision support tools
one thing that that is different
that we haven't done before is
that we're working with any mess
you water resources research
institute on decision support
tools and that's developing
models helping us with data sets
and training modules to build
capacity at the local level and
help people make good decisions
at the guide book that were
developing oil will be on how to
get representation at that
regional level how interpret
data make a decisions and to
engage respectfully and
effectively with a neighboring
community so that we can have
good outcomes and then capacity
building through training our
facilitation and supporting
engagement with a second other
state holders
one thing that's very important
that I want to highlight for us
policy makers is that i'd
because the seconds are
volunteer
governed.
And they're an underserved rural
communities it's going to be a
challenge for for them to
participate and if in terms of
funny regional water planets
important to build agency
capacity and we also want to
thank you for that because the
issue now has a as you can see a
plan team which is the biggest
planning team in history
in the issue so that's a good
start but communities need
capacity and one one feature
that was part of the previous
regional water planning model
with the communities applied for
for for funds to to engage in
the process and and it would be
helpful to community some
building capacity such as a
secure girl water systems like
bill conner will talk about
where communities are need need
i'm staffing support to a ten
meeting to prepare research
summaries and to be consistent
in their participation because
this is a lot it's can be a long
process and it can be hard for
volunteers to sustain that
of course adequately planning is
c and also creating
opportunities to leverage
federal funding and these last
two handouts just give you some
a quick glance at our
thinking about the regional
water planning guide for a
second that we're doing with
weary this is our draft table a
contents and diagram with a
decision support tool that we're
doing with weary on their drop
resiliency project and are with
that mrperiod chair i'll turn it
over to the next panelist.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name's billed
connor i'm exactly director of
new mexico rural water
association
I want to thank you for giving
me the opportunity to come visit
with you folks a little bit
today
about the very important issue
of of
regional water planning and end
uh and to hopefully enlighten
you a little bit on some of the
issues
with the smaller communities
and small rural water systems
and and getting them involved in
this process and
and helping increase the
effectiveness I believe in and
the the validity of of the
entire process
there are approximately a
thousand fifty five public water
systems in the state of new
mexico
of that a little over eighty
percent serve populations of
five hundred or less
and some of those go down to
very very small populations that
they serve so
but basically you're virtually
all all of the systems that
serve populations of five
hundred or less have volunteer
boards
that that run these systems and
the
charged with keeping up with
what the the regulations are
what the testing schedules are
meetings such as
is hannahs but on and the ic it
but on
around the state four regional
water planning in that type of
thing
so it's it's unlike the second
association the public water
systems do not have regional
organizations.
That work on on a smaller basis
scattered around the state so
it's a little more difficult to
get the
public water systems involved in
this process especially when you
get down to the very small
systems
there are some of that some of
the reasons for that is is
because they are volunteer many
of a more if it's during the
week often times they can't get
off of work to go you know to
something like this
often times that they don't
necessarily hear about the
meeting and tell after the
meetings over
because of of the
the ever changing
contact information for the
various small communities as
words change and his operators
change then contact information
for those communities change as
well often times that does not
get changed necessarily
honest on the state's records
and doesn't get changed on our
records except annually unless
somebody calls us and tells us
that we've had a board meeting
and
this is our new contact
information so
we try to stay on top of it as
best we can but it's an ever
changing
ever moving target to try to
stay up on so
doing what we can and and and
we're willing to work anyway we
can do to spread the word of
these meetings and and the
among the systems are
particularly the very small
systems to ensure they're
activity in their involvement in
these meetings
another issue that we have or
some of the systems and and
small systems particularly.
Is
that historically they have not
been very well heard
in these processes and eight I
think they've been kind of to a
certain extent run over by the
larger larger systems and and
larger groups advocating for for
water and
you know in their various areas
of interest
so which also makes it more
difficult to get folks involved
you know coming to these
meetings because they thank some
of them think that they won't be
heard
we keep
a telling them that if you if
you go and you keep speaking you
will be heard you know if you
just have to keep keep going and
keep pushing it keep speaking
but nonetheless that has become
an issue over the years as well
so it's something that we try to
to counter as much as we can
our meetings with m& n our
contact
distributing information too
though
it's very important
extremely important that this
small groups such as their
psyches tribes
public water systems mutual
domestics co ops private
energies all all of the folks
that utilize water the agon
industry all the folks that
utilise water and and the
many of these folks that have
not really gotten is deeply
involved in this process as as
they should have over the years
it's very important that they do
get involved and get drawn into
it
they represent a huge part of
the state and a huge
amount of requirement for water
within the state among the very
small you know.
Energies
it's it's important not just
from from being heard in these
meetings and and
and having their input
taken into account hopefully
added into some of the processes
and procedures that are put
together
through this process but it's
also important because in these
meetings they bring up things
like infrastructure needs and
talk about what they need to do
as far as infrastructure goes
with them
in the coming years ahead
when it comes time for them to
go
turn into a nocipian and start
applying for a funding it's very
helpful for these communities
makes a big difference for them
if if that as actually started
within the regional water
planning process if it's not it
you know within that process
that they have been expressing a
need for this that helps move
them up and give them more
exposure when
the limited amount of phones are
being determined who's going to
get up so it's very it's very
important from that stamp as
well
i'm gonna start babbling I
appreciate you'll having me here
today I appreciate the option to
visit about the small regional
systems I appreciate all the
work that that hanner and her
crew of done and in this respect
and and the and the work that
they've done keeping in mind
they they smaller
energies that utilize water
throughout the state so
with that i'm going to yield
back to you mister chairman
thank you and thank you all for
your presentation you're going
to want to turn your michael
unless you're talking yep thank
you for that we'll go to the
committee only one on the list
of far reps with keys.
Anyone else on the committee
represents a center city
olivers.
You're just putting me on the
list you said you only had went
so
all right thank you and so
excited about the planning
effort and so clad that this is
moving forward it's it's really
a
needed it has been needed for
some quite some time
I was wondering about the
meetings that you've had around
the state mister chair did you
do these meetings include the
idea of cleaning home
cleaning brian water or produced
water was that did that those
issues come up either by the
department enter by the public
comments
aren't messaging saturday
the meetings are really focused
on
some of these more structural
questions are like who are your
neighbors what do you consider
is your water region what do you
value about water we did have
comments related to brackish
water and produced with a
special we were out in hobs
at the meeting but they weren't
the mean focus of the questions
that were asked at the open
house meetings
so what were the the would
suggest to the questions that
were asked at these engagement
meetings
we should turn senator they were
focused it was set up in a a
series of stations who what
where when why are really trying
to both act as a figuring out
where new mexicans what do they
value about their water of this
list of nine things what's the
most three most important ones
were do you like to have the
state focused on
who should be empowered to do
regional planning could you
consider your neighbors it's not
our intention to try as we
redraw these regional water
planning regions we are really
going to try not to you know cut
up any community at if as best
we can so it's really focus on
getting some structural ideas of
the who the words what should we
be tackling with regional
planning by what a thing should
be be focused on in addition to
some.
Online only portions which were
we can just recommend that in
the weeds caution so things of
house should state agencies
collaborate because that is
something we need to make a
guide by nine but not
necessarily everybody is gonna
have an opinion on that that
some of them were online only
up but we also had open and did
opportunities for people to
provide feedback about whatever
they would like we've heard I
know we just are now processing
some of the results there is you
can get least a four page paper
on bracket shwatter that was
submitted to us along with a
couple of other general
statements that we are applying
into the development of the
roles and guidelines as you best
as we see that thank you and mr
chair what will be the outcome
of all of this process what do
you envision will end up seeing
after all of this mr sharing
sender we are anticipating
having three reports kind of in
very slows of detail so the
first report is what we've been
calling the engagement report so
that is essentially what we
asked what we heard how did we
will they just kind of brought
court out what we heard this
summer what questions were asked
who was there what where's the
ads where do they look like in
the newspaper etc the second
report is a recommendations
report are focusing on items
that I see should be considering
in the development of rules and
guidelines and then that third
report is the summary report
which is a really boiled down
version intended for the use by
the legislature and the public
thank you center representatives
I think you chair
thank you again think you get
for your presentation thank you
for the open house it was lovely
was a really interesting way to
be able to get feedback know
that some of my fellow
colleagues I was able to pass
out your postcards
I wanted to ask you a couple
things hannah you said.
Oh we're going to be presenting
rules and guidelines to soon
understand that and I asked that
I say this and all the
committees I serve on
I appreciate knowing the rules
and guidelines but I want to
know how are you insuring
compliance how often are you
auditing how many fts are you
using what is the process how
are you bringing that data back
from that so that's important
to me as we move forward and
miss garcia you said that the
sake associations are offering
technical assistance with
technical assistance include
great writing
mister chair and I represent
kids or technical assistance is
mainly focused on governance so
we assist a second worth by lies
and infrastructure planning and
to the extent that
infrastructure planning includes
applications for funding we do
that so we'll do the capitally
requests or
applications to their second
community ditch infrastructure
find at the interest eastern
commission but it's it's pretty
limited to ray specialised form
of fundraising specific to a
second infrastructure
and I appreciate that mr chair
and I think you must garcia I
would just ask since we have a
thousand and fifty five water
systems in the state of new
mexico and eighty percent or
served for five hundred or less
book ups
I do feel like the sake
associations or water shared so
what at whatever they are they
are in need of
administrative supports and so
i'd love to know how can we as
legislaters be able to do that I
know that last twenty twenty
four we were able to have some
funding to provide like federal
green rating technical
assistance for water groups.
And also some steak matching
funds for those federal dollars
by how I feel like the since we
have so many water systems some
sort of mo or I mean I want to
know from you what do you want
because you can be a subject to
expert about water but not know
how to write by laws and to
communicate back to your
individuals or how to
communicate with to them when
only some of them have internet
and some of them don't an inner
these are administrative skills
or technical rating skills
things that are outside the
subject expert of a bean water
experts that they are and so
i'm please provide a some
information on how we can get
these groups to partner to be
able to support each other in
this type of so that they can
make sure that their voices are
heard for the same out of
funding for people with twenty
five hundred book ups and so
thank you thank you mister
chairman.
Okay any further questions from
the committee
we do
so I I guess we're gonna in this
pale early thank you very much
for your presentations our next
panel is is scheduled to start
for a half hour so we're gonna
go ahead and take a fifteen
minute break I would like to
start the next panel early
if we could that would be that
would be good tried to schedule
a political break here before we
