Is there anybody in the audience
who wish to make a public
comment.
Okay so come on up john.
Just have a seat not get
everybody back.
Okay come many members were
going to get started and we had
no public comments identified
online and we have no public
comment here in the audience so
we're going to move ahead to our
one o'clock presentation which
is we are eight minutes early
so I think serious you went away
to people in the slobby
also.
And anybody who has not eaten we
have a ton of food please help
yourself.
Yet they'll turn rid.
So we'd like to once again thank
my cocontana from lunch and
center composed thank you very
much we are going to go ahead
and get started with our one
o'clock presentation since we
have our percentages here and
the majority of our committee
and that way will have planning
time for questions
so please go ahead
okay good afternoon madame
chairman my name is john t
romero and the wrap and white
rights director with the office
this the engineer and for those
of you that don't know what rap
stands for the wraps the water
resource allocation program it's
a largest of the four programs
within the office of the state
engineer
so I have with me today
to shield chartery is a
professional engineer and is my
damn safety manager he'll be
presenting on the mexico downs
and give an update on them and
specifically on dams in northern
new mexico and we also have with
us the state engineering
lizander centus here somewhere
i'm sure
she's here
and I want to specifically thank
this body the legislature for
the support and funding over the
years we really appreciate it
and that's the really supported
us there's much more to be done
as you will see in here in the
presentation
will be available for questions
after the presentation as well
so mine those questions up I
thank you very much and I will
pass it to
shield
thank you john
manager and members of the
committee
thank you for your inviting us
here this afternoon
this is my first time that the
building in front of
you is speaking
I present the opportunity
I have a kind of you know pretty
land they hand out
bad.
I wanted to give you information
so i'm going to go over another
quickly over a lot of the slice
i'm not going to read the slides
and will focus move on to the
notice dams that interest this
afternoon so with that let's get
to start it
I have my presentation and I
have two parks the first first
time of the predentive that is
basically in overview
of the dams
and how what the status of the
downside around this day what we
are looking at and then we'll
move into the northeast new
mexico
I would establish our designer
statement
our views on is a future where
all downsides have we work
towards that business every day.
So the
one question that comes up all
the time is where do we find
information about damage
and so i'm saying here on slide
for
the deliveries are national
inventory of damps that's
publicly available and way
provide information to that
website on animal basis
and you can go to that website
and click on the county that you
are interested on interested in
and you can click on the
specific downs as well as any
time that you are interested in
the website will provide the
basic information about the
damps who answered how to all
the damages
what is the stories capacity and
such
so it's it's a really kind of
good quick way to get
information about dams around
the state and not just in our
instead but also nationally all
the downside listed there
I check their website a while
back and there are about four
hundred three dams in national
inventory of downs in new mexico
out of those seventy two percent
out of state regulated damps the
average is of the damage is
sixty four years.
Damps are normally designed for
fifty year design life so we
have already on average we have
already seen that design life
the next slide on number five we
have
by charges there swinging down
on receiving new mexico as we
can see they are twenty five
percent of the dams in new
mexico our federally owned and
operated
the restaurant is still just
it's not dams and within that
the local government entities on
about forty one percent the
misery of the dams followed by a
private entities is that on a
pure damps and there are two
agencies that on dams in that
could category the given
department of given fees
meditate of them there's one
damn that is only operated by uh
I assume
on the purpose by chart can see
that the military of the dams
that we have about half fifty
percent of the dams in our
justice and our drive floor
control damps we are obviously
dry stepped the rest fifty
percent are water stores dams
out of those military of them
are it against a now when it
comes to water stores down the
doors are multiple persons many
of them I want to purpose dams
so this are the primary purposes
that I listed there
moving around to slide six
week classified damage into
different categories best on the
hazard so the highest categories
high that's when if the damn is
to breg it can't cause loss of
life
significant and low they don't
have potential to cause loss of
life but there may be loss of
property and environment of
damage.
Moving on to slide number seven
we also classified dams into
three different rating so when
we inspect dams
we read those dams into three
port different categories
the satisfactory and fair
usually indicated that the damps
are in compliance with all the
regulatory requirements and
there are no issues who are and
satisfactory are the wars that
indicate that there are some
issues the difference between
poor and satisfactories that
ported a dam's we still have
time to plan and fix those dams
what as on unsatisfactory it
becomes urgent situation that
requires immediate attention
that's the difference between
those poor and answer this
factory
if you look at slight aid
that is that's a business slide
so that sorts of the dams we
have in our sister son along
with the hazard class and the
condition rating
so I have tried to master color
code there so greenish
satisfactory
yellow is fair condition rated
themselves the red are poor and
unsatisfactory and you can see a
lot of rates there
so about sixty sixty five
percent of the dams in our
sticks on our
poor or unsatisfactory
so the next questions becomes
why do we have so many different
some dams
they this seems really bad.
I have tried to
come up with some reasons behind
after looking at the our
inventive so number one is the
is of the damps as I mentioned
earlier average ages sixty four
years that's awful lot of time
where could go to start
deteriorating your metally star
scoring and thinks of that
nature the second one is the
change in engineering and
constructive technology I mean
when the damage were
constructive fifty years a
hundred years ago we had
completely different technology
some of those technologies were
no longer use
so that that causes none of
those dams to become deficient
and add an illustrators on I
have
provided in slide number eleven
this is a big slide and I do not
expect anyone to lead or
understand that but the bottom
line is showing is how
technology has changed over the
years and you ran the dams that
were designed and constructed
thirty years ago
have can have like filter design
in the damn that may no longer
be a meeting the current
requirements that's how fast to
go losing changes.
The other actors continue to
differ that if he senses a lack
of design
fifty years hundred years ago
when the downshot designed is
requirements were different
back dan we don't have much
designed documents to so how
those dams were designed or
constructed
and not knowing that then pursus
in a difficult situation to
understand what we have going
there of those downs
the fourth one is the hazard
this is where lot of the downs
as we know where constructive
design and constructed to
protect farmlands
but over the years lot of
developments have to conflict
below those dams making those
dams I hazard potential
they are protecting harms now
businesses and so the
requirements that the doubts
were designed for originally no
longer and met you know so
that that makes them deficient
number five is a lack of routine
maintenance and repair believe
it or not this is the biggest
silence lot of the dams don't
receive routine mention and and
prepare for various reasons and
one of the reasons could be just
lack of resources
for the damn owners.
So the next better we have is
while these difficulties is
article of nice
how come on our damage to dance
and fillers
so slide number fourteen comes
from
the stand for the university
they have a program called
national performance of games
they track all the failures and
inside and in the u united
states and that chart saws there
as you can see
the number of dams that are
feeling each year in the ness
and is not slowing down
on averages about ten dams
trails each year
in our country
in new mexico
i'm looking at slide number
fifteen in new mexico these are
some of the incidents that are
more resent
that I could come up with
quickly we don't have a good
tracking system
and i'm but working to fix that
but these are the
letters damn instead as that we
have had in new mexico
right here some damn last year
over top by two feet and now
that damage designed to overtop
but this was a student on
usually
we had jeweller damn
in ross villa last october and
III go into that little bit more
into next lights slide number
seventeen
on october nineteen
almost six inches of ran
within six hours
and that was more than half a
year worth of ran in that
courier of time caused massive
flooding as you all are aware
we have to do.
I'm sort of proud
and two of them
came pretty close to breaching
so they said the photos there on
slide eighteen through twenty
one so some of those damages
that extensive damage in the
spill was
due our draw site two actually
over topped us
as these dams without a still
trying to repair them and still
not repaired uh and as we know
any storms are coming so this is
this downside and carry a
situation and these are there
was that keep us aware at night.
The question next button becomes
all these difficult times being
repaired or rehabilitated.
And we are we had many of the
dams are getting repaired and
the habilitated in paris is
judges light number twenty three
list some of the dams that are
in the work right now and do our
draw downside listed there at
the bottom again our cs is
helping with the design
under the emergency water said
repair program
and it's it's a still in design
fees
so that brings us to the damned
in northeast new mexico.
I would like to start with power
leg down by look down against
santa rosa I had so only an
operator by santa rosa city of
santa rosa
there's a
damn improvement works
it's been long time coming but
this project my finally
it went into construction
and this is spring accent
construction right now this
project is funded with the
article
and with some mistake fund as
well
the cost estimate is about nine
million dollars right now but I
we will spend all that per money
on this one
the constructs the construction
is expected to be completed by
november of the next year
the another project that's in
the work is peterson down which
is right here in las vegas peter
sandam supplies what are to the
city of last megas this is over
hundred year old damn
and a concrete is determinating
and all that
you have
that the project is granted
panel design first
the the conservative just
finished with the side
investigation and the design is
expected to be completed by
spring nest next year
and with this project I have
also listed if there are state
funds
at as to them I have provided
those funding and amounts in my
slight
i'd like to move on to the
similar and sitton
this is the damn
in similar situation or which
drinking water or the billions
of similar on
this damn we we just finished.
The uh
design alternatives report
and
it's it's a moving into the
panel design fears but why we
were getting ready to move into
the panel design fairs
we discovered avoid was a
contractor bringing some
maintenance work at this point
where
and on their fast their
discovered last way under this
bill was lapse and they spilled
was decising at the time it
really
created an urgent situation we
were gonna keen
so we have put together a team
with cities made
that that that are going to uh
investigate this situation next
week there is schedule to
start in the business and next
week
and then we'll have to come up
with a repair plan for that and
repair that so that you know
because the design process
itself dex longer you know so
they all do have projects we're
talking about it takes many many
years what is to have projects
to reality realize the detailed
design process itself takes
anywhere from two to three years
and so we we don't have the
construction funds for this
project yet
you know we are helping them
with this dead what we have and
to come up with the design and
investigations
then we have some projects that
were completely recently
bradner damn
that you have project was
completely in twenty nineteen
and I have also listed their the
some of the appropriate assigns
that
under that project there is not
if you send some out at this
time right now that informed
compliance.
And back in service.
The next one on slide twenty
nine we have more philip damn
the lease letter funded that you
have worked for that damn and
that you have to have literation
was completed in twenty twenty
where the backman was repaired
and the dilapidated
interview structured there was a
place with a new one uh the the
damage in full compliance
there's no issues at the time at
this time.
Then we have some projects that
need some intense
on slight thirty I have listed
here even as damn
this is a very large astructure
it's a
on operated by given fees
there are some issues with the
dams
number one is asing itself also
over hundred years old concrete
is deterred in
the get system as you can see in
the picture there there those
are outdated there are several
gates that are not operating the
get housing itself has to do and
it did
there are some turnovers that
are blocked
and then we have some concerns
about
is cowing out the rock at the
downstream to area of the damn
if the damn ever speed that
could destabilize the damn so
those are some of the concerns
that we have for that it is and
this damage returned to being
poor condition some preliminary
work where completed couple
years ago but they have not made
any measure headway at this
point.
Slide number thirty one lists
let money adam
this is a damn near correct
border that is on an operate
advice if they have at all
and this damn has seriously in a
required experience
the damn can get over topped
with one in five hundred chances
which is
very high for a high header damn
of this size and that that that
is a metal concern we have a
spell where right over the
embankment and that has some
boyd and some integrity issues
it's it's a never a good idea to
have a spill with right over
this embackment but back in the
days
this type of design was
acceptable.
So some preliminary works have
been done there but there is
large lot of work to be done
still and the the cost will be
pretty expensive you know
estimating upwards of twenty
five million dollars for that
project
slide number thirty two
this is studied right here in in
last megas
and this damage the owner is
listed
listed on or is a story project
water users to socialism
the damn itself is is fine or
there are some
concerns with the damn is some
solution to concerns
due to eliminated using meter
readings
there's also some rosen that has
happened uh
you know on the dastine slow
that needs to be addressed and
some routine maintenance issues
that is a highway that uh runs
over the damn
that also get some internet
issues.
The next one is your damn slide
number thirty three in quaker
county this is one of the
largest damning hour justice and
it's only an upgraded by the
distant stream commission the
damage and satisfactory
condition
there are some items though
needing accent which is concrete
repair in spite of an outlet
works repair I assume hazard
attend engineering forms
to address all those issues
there was an interest on
coincidence damn
promo committee members
acquisites damn is a federal
damn it's only an updated by
army courts of engineers
we don't track this down.
So the next I think where i've
listed some finding of
opportunities here
there are some per funds that I
have listed I recall and our cs
and female
we did receive human phoned last
year
for and under the high hazard
put himself down to have grant
about three million dollars that
requests thirty five percent
local match
which
we are using the is that why do
you have funds for that local
match
and I have proposed four dams
product projects under that
program we are still waiting to
hear back from female and for
their approval.
And then instead funds your
familiar with that
um
one thing I have not I feel to
list there is the new mexico
fund uh new mexico mass fund
and then I have listed some of
the level is statewide damn to
have phones
that uh
we we receive from less lesser
and the downside to bure has
been managing.
And with that thing where really
for any questions
thank you
thank you for some
representative some more
representative chat feel.
Representative garcia
others
okay and i'll have the question
so let's start with
representatives of morrow please
thank you madame chair thank you
for the presentation.
Doctor
so
one one of the I think I
understand why we don't have all
the dams in the state right that
she didn't report on every
single damn and but I was
courious as to fort some or damn
in what's going on with that
damn if if things have just
halted because of issues that
came up in in the construction
of it or or everything still
going and and and we have.
Resolve the issues that were at
hand with with getting the work
started at fourteen
am sure.
Manager
everybody to do some
for some are damn is not
initiative
so I believe it's a european
climate and
the bureau program is and
probably handles that
the downs that are not in our
six we usually don't track them
with so we do not have any
information
thank you for that and thank you
very.
Thank you representative
chatfield.
Thank you madame chair medicare
you know damned in new mexico or
funny creatures their own by a
variety of people there built in
with a variety of structures in
their ownership is structured in
a variety of ways conscious for
instance consciously the day I
belong to the army core of
engineers the water belongs to
the archaeologation district but
the land underneath the late
belongs to the local ranchers
and the army court of engineers
just simply as a right to fill
so you it's
like save the other damage in my
areas are utter and it's belong
to that it belongs to the
interstate stream commission and
we all know the water belongs to
the downstream
communities of eastern new
mexico
being put into the to the
eastern new mexico where utility
authority pipeline
my question to you
comes from my attendance that I
saw conservation meeting
not too long ago and the light
of the members on the board were
young folks
they received a letter
giving them instructions to what
to do with their dams and
they're like what they are
one hundred percent of the board
did not know that they own two
dams
probably the only person in the
room if there are probably two
of us that know that there was
that is that district own dams
we had been out there and
inspected some problems
yours back whenever there was
extensive rainfall and flooding
so
the attempt to
rectify any problem on these
smaller dams easy these are a
flood control down to catch the
water and then they release it.
In a smaller
stream so that it doesn't do
damage downstream when they
began to look for an engineer
this is back years ago not
recently
to look at the day i'm in cfa
actually the
volume of water there was being
released and had caused out the
concrete porter with them to
vibrate in the dirt in the damn
to seller CNN engineering
inspect that the found could not
find funding to do that they
could not find an engineer that
was qualified or willing maybe
qualified but not willing to
take the response ability of all
it finding the report saying
that they are
took a nobody wants to do that
because the
quiet responsibility so can you
talk to us a little bit about
where to get help for funding on
these smaller downs and where to
find an engineer what engineer
would be qualified to go out and
not get a small
float control down on a so
conservation this owned by a
sole conservation history most
of home have probably never seen
it it was built in the thirties
four days back when those
district for being initiated.
Thank you for that question
the past part of the question
and and commentary I would agree
with you that we have a lot of
dams that are multiple
interests
damn right here is an example of
we have one owner but there are
so many other stick holders that
are
that have interest in that
damage is a war and we have that
situation for all method dams
especially as tourist dams
when it comes to
the floor control dams
I would gather that the downside
talking about would likely
designed and constructed my
natural resources conservation
services or swell conservative
services back in the days so
there are still around there do
provide assistance to some of
those dams
the damn owner needs to ask the
natural resources conservative
service for assistance
and there may be able to provide
the missus stands usually the
investigation and design is
funded by them
is the construction daughter
that request matching
so I I would suggest that
if the swan water consumers and
district can **** to that only
sources conservatives and
services and see what assistance
they can provide
that that's one of the new the
other new is the steadfand and I
would say that
the members of the committee is
are more familiar with their
ster funds than me thank you.
Wednesday one last question it
does a state engineers office or
any other agency have an
estimate of what I caused to put
our damns and good working order
in the state of new mexico I
know there's better or run made
it down a time or two what's
what's the what's the need.
I had a number I I don't have
top of my head but it's in
tens of billions of dollars
if we were to fix all our
difficult dams as you saw
in in my presentation
about
more than that yeah yeah what we
we have about sixty sixty five
percent dams that are ready to
poor
order on satisfactory that's
awful lot of dams
this projects are very expensive
anyhow project that we are
touching
my up in in multiple million
some dops
and so it's it's a it's a an
issue and we are trying to
figure out one of the things
that the
way we are trying to do in the
bureau is to price
so we have been working on that
before
to see how we can't bright eyes
best on the risks best on the
condition of the damn and well
down to the top day and top
twenty downs and hand on your
that way
thank you
thank you
representative chapter
manager
I I just say you know I put a
number here for him I said three
hundred million question mark
and he said way more than that
so it's
probably
billions two addressed every
damned efficient in the state of
new mexico yeah mountain
representative chat for
and he started done by so see a
son of the stead damn safety
officials.
I can get the information to you
on that they have looked at
nationally as to what it would
cost to repair and you have
little difficult dams for the
congress and they also broke
that number down by state and we
can provide that information
so many sure we might not be
able to do it today that we can
roll up our sleeves and start at
the top of the listen start
shrink in it like manager.
Thank you very much
representative garcia
thank you manager and thank you
presenters
I have a question on the
compressed thought them
the language committee was up in
the
san antonio the real colorado
langrade
which we call the question
and we had the actually madam
chair to tour
the damn
again twelve ten twelve years
ago
so at that at the touring of the
damn
one some of the problems madam
chair was the leakage
and I know that senator carlos
is narrows kind of draw a
different funding initiatives to
kind of take care of the problem
is with that damn
what is the status of that damn
and how those problems being
corrected madame chair.
Manager to gasia
correspondent is look at it on
and see and land slight
so
half of the damn is looking at
it on bedrock but the other half
of the damn and the reservoir is
returned by instant land slide
it's a very poor us
and so that down the dicks quite
a bit even if the damages not
deciding there is a lot of
separate that happens around the
damn through that insient
landslide we have looked at that
there is not much we can do on
that unless we like the entire
reserve work which is not
practical
in terms of some of the repair
and mention that site terms
that that's going to occur time
to time and uh unfortunately
we we we can't provide
the instead grants for the
routine repair and mention once
items
so
the owner as a owner or
compressed on dates and the
deeds this would be able to come
up with the routine maintenance
and work.
Thank you manager for that
summary
there is
an issue in terms of the second
on the taco lottery language
which the colorado is just me
about twenty miles
south of here
tried before you get to romania
or passed on the rogers are
going north and
the name recommended was there
about a eight years ago
and I six to eight years ago
more like a
what transpired their madam
chair was that the the real the
color day
changed course
and in the matter of changing
course madame chair it
it diverted flow
to the computer of the aseca
so
so the headgate the main
headgate interest in the
diversion gate was not able to
access the flow of the natural
floor of the real because the
real changed course
so one of the strategies back
them and i'm sure it was to see
if there could build a padam
could be built to restore that
flow back to the
diversion gate
the second I don't know if
they are saying string
commission was aware of that if
you guys have been working with
the land grant on there
just what what is your
relationship to that issue if
any manager
madam chair representative
garcia I was not aware of this
but I can look into it and get
back to you a lot of times that
they can do the executive.
Can within a hundred feet
without a permit they can go
upstream to reestablish their
point a diversion or their
diversion down they can do that
and they have to go further
probably a permit would be
needed and they can just file a
permit with us
to move that point of version
sometimes some are seconds have
chosen to draw wealth at a cost
as the alternate point of
diversion so they can use the
well or with the effect of
whatever is available we've seen
that happened in other places
that in the state with some my
seconds have done that where the
river has scoured and gone lower
and there
had gate is actually higher and
attainable they can get water so
there are some options for them
but I will look into this
situation by chance to know the
name of the second.
Madam chair not on fan
I can look at that area check
with my district let me manage
your let me have your contact
information at three guys you're
doing the pressure taking and
i'll try to kind of get some
other leadership of the language
to
have a heads up that you'll be
contacting them sure
lastly manager is
the issue with conscious damn
you know is one and raised and
took them carry which is right
between you damn courtesy
so you know you kind of kids
when we were high school and
these were kind of our
playgrounds
both dams and
they were welcomed
not a tourist especially texans
coming with a big boat in their
yards and kind of taking
advantage of our water systems
which was good because their
presence manager presented
economic development in small
communities like logan to come
carry in our and and conscious
damn itself and
and you know manager
conscious damage really
fallen in this repair
you know the camp grounds are
just
following the part there's no
maintenance you know
and that damn provided a lot
economic development for the
smoking surrounding communities
to unemployment and
you know I wonder if there are
some
some collaboration joint power
agreement where the state
management share and the us core
of engineers could go into some
partnership.
To wear the state the cannot
take over maintenance or some of
these camp grounds camp size the
bathrooms etcetera etcetera
because there are real disrepair
and it's add because every major
holiday all the people from
doing carrying
going to countries damn and have
their easter ing hardson this
are that and now any nights
those campsites are just not
tolerable and insurer
so even though it's owned by the
fares
uniting the status step up in
tried our partnership in terms
of
taking the ownership of the lack
of elapidation because it's the
community surrounding
the damn and the state itself
that is only losing out because
of the neglect you know and
you know those are those are fun
times
you know we do our swimming door
fishing and after we had a
couple of years and in the world
teenagers and that the legally
able to drink we got raised hell
with the taxes and tax and
tourists just attack sense
because we had this historical
animal touch texans you know
because of what they created
here in the early days but
so I don't know if that's
something that you say three
commission can can look into in
terms of partnering with some of
these dams that are
owned not by the state or state
entities but by the fans and how
we can kind of improve them
on and and and what rolled is it
legislature have and maybe
making that happen manager
so I pose those questions to you
madame chair representative
garcia that sounds a great idea
I think the state parks are
probably be a better entity
state agency that could partner
with maybe I see and the feds um
maybe game and fish.
In combination with the state
parks but and I see that might
be something that could be
possible um maybe we can pose
that to our issue commissioner
director hannah wisely.
Thank you manager that I had
thank you I have represented
cadana anyone else
thank you matter
thank you go ahead
I really appreciate this
presentation and certainly I was
curious about much of what you
shared and the implications for
the district we represent
in recent years though I and
imagine most in this room have
heard of lot about climate river
in the damage what it meant in
california to actually take dams
down and
return rivers a restore river is
both to the native and tribal
communities that survived and
had relationships with those
waters and also just to echo
systems so for me understanding
that there's billions at stake
here the premise and assumption
in these president this
presentation was all these dams
repair I was just wondering if
you got any brief comments like
have we evaluated what the
purpose and functionality of
these dams is moving forward and
are all these downs necessary
thank you manager.
Manager repair terrible
and we are aware of that it's a
national movement not just in
california with washington and
even if it's caused
a lot of the damns are being
removed
from environmental reasons and
other reasons
in new mexico
we're a little bit defense
situation
where there's a dry state and
we've had a hour reserve words
that we have
blood of the dams as a sort
earlier we have should be
percent of the dams are from
control dams and those dams
normally still dry
and they protect homes so those
dams are very difficult to
remove at all they are
protecting purposes downstream
in terms of why I store is dams
i'm not sure we are at this
point where
we see any of the doubts we have
in new mexico
that
we can let go at this point
however there may be some
difference and
if nobody's diverting any water
that just being a barrier in
this dreams and nobody is
maintaining those dams they may
be the warns
that can be removed to remove
the barrier from streams and
there is american reward um
american river
which is general graduation that
works with the states that are
interested in removing the damps
and the help out with all the
studies and approach that needs
to be taken thank you.
Thank you very much my questions
are up
more general first of all when
there are repeat situations with
the same damn
and i'm looking at your report
the potential south perimeter
damn is listed a couple times
the altodam is listed a couple
of times what could be done to a
boy we know there's going to be
flooding or problems in certain
areas but what could be done so
that we don't have a repeat do
we need to totally.
Rebuild the damn do we need to
the birth the channel what what
could we do.
Madam chair that depends on the
situation
the protest down that immense
earned
those downs were constructed
many years ago
and they did not go through any
permitting process
we came to know about those
downs through complaints that we
received from instead land
office
just a few years ago
and said those dams nobody knows
no that is not a courts of how
they were designed and
constructed so they kept having
this use with a good thing about
those dams is that interviewed
but as has been pretty good
about repairing those they
repair go back and repair right
away
not the perfect situation and
it's it's a kind of patchwork
and we have tried to pursue them
to do the fix as in an
incremental in incrementally
interactive manner but this is a
private entity and it costs a
lot of money
the day the mine needs to be an
operation and the market
and if you know dictates their
cast floor so all those comes
into play I mean we can require
we can easily
orders and so forth but
did I mean they have some
interest in doing that I think
they just one of those that they
fixed one sex on and then you
know
the break happens in the other
six
it's one of those issues
in terms of some other dams
that's listed there are like
altogether
this is an older structure.
That gillians of red also
acquired
a couple years ago
and so this time is not designed
up to their standard event when
the bill is required that so
that so this is a situation
where they're looking into
it studying and see what would
be the long term picses they
have received some funding from
water trust board in the last
cycle so there trying to look
into that in general I would say
it really comes down to
you know if we look at our
enforcement
there we have limitation
forcement ability.
You know the damn owners we have
we have several listed engineer
ordered in place right now
for decades and a lot of the
damn owners are not doing
anything to comply coming to
compliance and we don't have a
lot of tools at our hand to
really waste the damn owner at
this point and I would like john
to add onto that
madam chair it was a bill in the
last legislative session the
enforcement bill that we were
pushing and we almost got
through and the senate floor in
had it gone through
we would know where the past
both houses and governor would
have signed it
that would have given us more
tools to be able to do
enforcement and issues such as
this
app so mister remember you're
saying that there was a bill
that got to its final place yes
you remember that number
may be the same engineer might
remember the sponsor the sponsor
was a senator composed on the
senate side and on the house
side it was a representative
from tow serious
or tests yeah.
Was it representative joseph
centers
no it was
a female from towers christine
so I just wanted to have some
context so my second question
for you all is
when there is work done on a
damn
with water
being held for our state
buy it but the work is being
done by the federal government
bureau of reclamation what is
our relationship to working with
them.
I'm thinking about bottom or any
other ones that
it's crucial to our water and
our weather water settlements
madam chair are we certainly
coordinate with them could
obviously we can't store as much
water and and bottle now because
of the construction so there's
got to be a lot of coordination
between the feds the state
albuquerque authority all the
entities that use that water so
there's a lot of coordination
that does take place
and looking for other storage
areas
okay so going back to the
comment that you just made about
the bill that got to the last
moment was or would it have been
an unfunded mandate.
They enforcement bill no not at
all manager
and there were the entity didn't
have the funds
what make me be for the entity
but it was the bill would give
us more tools and it was a
deterrent for some entities like
well drillers and other illegal
water users to use water because
sometimes what we encounter is
they would illegal will hear
users would just ask us or
what's the class started by
insurer check for whatever the
costs of doing their normal
business this bill added I think
it was two thousand three
thousand dollars per day from
the day we informed them you're
doing something illegal
so that was the deterrent it
gave that gave us those tools so
that we could stop illegal water
usage and we're seeing a lot of
illegal wider usage with
canaba's use when they say
they're
holling water and they get their
license to rld and then they
start may revert to using their
domestic well or some other
illegal source and water for the
canada so we've seen a lot of
illegal water use and it takes
us a lot of resources to
research it and to be out in the
field and and then once we find
something getting the attorneys
involved too got a court with
somebody and enforce
this illegal water usage so it
takes us a lot of resources so
we were hoping that we can get
this bill through it gives us
more tools similar to what new
mexico environment tas right now
i'd increase the penalties and
those penalty start immediately
when we inform them of illegal
use so with it was a deterrent
in it almost made it through the
senate floor in this the state
engineer was really working on
it till the last minute to try
to get it through and we just
can get a vote on senate
florida.
Thank you very much any last
question.
It was house filled three forty
eight so thank you very much for
coming today and for your
presentation and you're
willingness to answer our
questions thank you
thank you thank you and we have
a guest with this could you
reduce your soft representative
can sell sorry
hello everybody representative
anything
else here for house district
seventy thank you for having me
as a guest today I definitely
just wanted to come in for the
community conversations this
afternoon tomorrow think you're
so much
thank you
okay so we are running
a little bit of schedule.
And we have almost everyone
except for the mayor
so why don't we stand in place
in the room around the stand up
we need to wait for one more
percent
eat some more food but if you
eat food then you won't be
hungry tonight we do have a
sponsored dinner
this evening charlie's from five
thirty to seven thirty
the event it is sponsored by the
sake you association live social
associated date loss sake yes
delta day mortar that a second
deadline eastla a sake year day
son who say the real day last
gain as the sake association the
cow creek basin and the court of
a development so you are welcome
to join us this evening at five
thirty a charlie
so borg
just move around in the room
have a seat we're waiting for
one more person.
Okay as we we prepare for our
afternoon.
As we prepare for this afternoon
if any of the audience is not
lunch we have a lot of food you
are welcome to
take part of it and come on up
we're already
now we just lost.
Okay so we are on the
presentation
hermes p caf kenyan fire
recovery and funding status and
I think we're going to go in
order of the presentation
everybody
if you are going to have side
conversations with you please go
to that corner
excuse me
if you're going to have side
conversations go to that fire
corner please
you are.
Okay so we're start with
emailing then alley than jeremy
then david the mayor again so
please proceed hi good afternoon
tear members of the committee
i'm emily hila I work for the
legislative finance committee
real quick I want to see the
audience we have asked the
debits and who is our
environmental analysts we also
have socially in my room honest
who is the director of the local
government division of the
department of finance and
administration as well as henry
ball that is who's the director
of legislative affairs idea
but you all have in front of you
is this item right here it says
key hearing issues water and
natural resources committee
update you can see the of c logo
in the right hand criteria
but you all have in front of you
it's very brief update it's only
three pages long what you have
is just the history of where
fire recovery funding started
all walking all through those
processes in just my moment with
some updates and a word amounts
for hermes peaking california
via recovery as well as for
these sort in south work fires
on the next period you have some
reimbursement updates are we did
get updated information from dfe
late last
evening and so we can follow up
with any changes that might be
in this report that I didn't
make it and lastly we have a
list of legislation that you all
legislate your past in the
governor signed pertaining two
wild fire preparation and
response
so to walk you all through
more in depth about the
reimbursement process after the
hermit's peak cafe can be in
fire which is the largest fire
and state history you all is a
legislator appropriate a hundred
million dollars to the
department of financial
administration the acts as zero
interest loans
the federal emergency management
agency female had agreed to
approve certain projects which
you see before you and said okay
we will reimburse these projects
however what you all did by
passing cynical six and that
hundred million dollars state
general fun appropriate and you
all provided zero interest
loans.
For cash flow for these
political subdivisions to be
able to have the funding one
hand to address the road repairs
cover repairs
which would then get reimbursed
by female and then repair to
these states general fun
senigal county is the only
entity that has been repaid by
female so far and if they has
replenished that funding around
seven hundred thousand back into
the general phones however what
we are seeing with the hermet's
peak caf can you fire recovery
funding is that there has been
slow progress with a dressing
the projects this is due to a
couple of different things but
of c staff have heard during
sight visits last year to the
hermes peak damage is that
consequent disasters such as
flooding into breed of cause
significant issues to address
the projects that are in front
of you
the language in the bill for
senate bill six for hermes the
cafcanian may not have addressed
and covered these additional
projects out of needed to
address road and corporate
repairs i'm sure you'll hear
that from the mayor plus eagers
and a little bit and
then this is sort of similar
moving on to peach too with the
salt in southwork fires we've
heard similar
concerns from linking county
where there was issues with
debris removal which is why they
haven't been able to fully
utilize the funding that you
will appropriate at last year
and so
with that chair members of the
committee that just sort of a
brief overview I can go into any
specific questions that you may
have regarding the funding
stream and how that works
with that I would like to turn
it over to the secretary alley
right.
Thank you thank you very much
secretary secretary we have you
as secretary
so i'm i'm definitely excuse me
mail i'm deputy secretary but
i'm also the state director so
i'm i'm the equivalent to
females or the counterpart that
that talks consistently the
female thank you very much for
explaining them go ahead
a good good afternoon members of
the committee my name is allie
rei am the debt state director
and the cabinet secretary for
department of homeland security
emergency management so very
much like what emily said we
assist efa and executing these
dollars and making sure that
they hit the street
this is a very unique project I
will tell you every time that we
go to the hill and we talk to
our counterparts at other states
this is something that has never
been done before and in fact
when we got done presenting this
at the last
evident that I went to many
folks had a lot of questions
about this because they're
seeing the same shuggles across
the entire country the federal
dollars are reimbursement
program which means that the
funds have to be spent first
before female will reimburse the
dollars based on actual costs
that are spent and so you see a
lot of communities across the
country that never recover
because they don't have the
dollars to be able to put the
work on to the ground and get
things fully completed you'll
see you have projects done in
and so then therefore they get
hit again with another disaster
or administration changes and
they just they never recovered
as far as the communities that
you see here emily is correct
and i'm sure the mayor will talk
about it as well as that
one of the things that we are
trying to get female to
understand and they've actually
been very progressive on this
disaster is cascading impacts
off of a fire so typically when
female declares an emergency
it's for a start and a stop on
an incident period so think
about a hurry hurricane comes
through it impacts the community
and it turns around and it's
gone back out fire wild fire and
any kind of impact off of a wild
fire are very unique they're
they're not like a hurricane you
don't see a hurricane turn
around and c.
Come back in typically I mean I
say that now we're in hurricane
season watch an area get hit
twice and i'll feel really bad
but you you don't see the
impacts like you do offer a wild
fire it rains on the burn scar
two to three four miles away and
you start seeing and that come
back down off of the mountain a
couple hours later and i'm sure
the mayor can attest it comes
down like a thick chocolate milk
shake that brings everything
down and it's passed with them
one of the things though that we
are very fortunate on this event
and you also see on the reader
so event is adding those impacts
back into the disaster so
currently right now the incident
period for both of those are
those situations both hermes
path canyon and the salt in
south pork fires have an open
incident period of folks can
still acquire damages that occur
as we're seeing all these months
in rains come through
we're working closely with the
enter to use to make sure that
those damages are accounted for
we call them late damage and
ventory events we come back
through for an incident identify
what's going on get a project
rewritten so that way we can
start making sure that we count
for those damages and that way
the community doesn't lose out
on the funding if they had
already put
work on the ground or if they
were preparing to put work on
the ground it's already counted
for
one of things I would be
remissing saying is we are
actually currently activated so
the stadius use currently
activated right now to a level
wine which is our highest level
of activation we're fully
staffed with almost every single
state agency sitting within my
usa and more actively responding
to impacts that are impacting
actually quite a few of your
communities around the table so
travels county and and re and
roswell reado so masquelaro and
now of course you see the
impacts occurring and grant
county offers a trout fire and
valencia counting off of cotton
one and cotton to fires were
still actively assisting the
community up here in fact I have
a swift water rescue team.
That is currently stage in the
area in preparation for any kind
of flooding that may occur in
this area so
new mexico's unique and you
don't stop getting disasters and
we have it for the last three
years but a lot of our disasters
are just re occurring events
that are coming off of the old
burned scarce and so we're
trying to get female to really
understand what those impacts
look like holistically so that
we we can apply recovery a
mitigation efforts holistically
i'm sure many of your curious
about what what is the future a
few what are we looking out what
is what is our current day and
each and I wish I had better
answers for you other than I
don't know
a couple of things that give me
helpful minus the comments that
are made by the current
administration secretary is what
is currently getting proposed in
both the house in the senate for
funding so right now the white
house both put in funding for
what we call the draft the
disaster really fund which finds
the events that you see
occurring across our state so I
am hopeful since they are
agreeing to put money back in it
it means that the disaster
really fund isn't going anywhere
i'm hopeful that we're seeing
disasters being approved across
the nation even as we speak
which means why would you prove
a disaster for federal funding
if you if you had any plans i've
completely removing the
administration
my assumption and I know what
assuming does
is that female is probably going
to go away is the name and we
will see a new administration
come back out with a different
name and very much of a
different approach hopefully a
more steam streamlined more
flexible less bureaucratic
approach so that way things like
what we see offer of the hermes
yet off of reading so fires can
be really accepted and and a
better.
Recovery a better mitigation
efforts can be put into place
cause things such as water shed
mitigation and restoration are
not included in the current
email approach we're having to
kind of peace smell together
programs to make sure that we're
addressing the entire water shed
so then that way these
communities can recover
so I will I will stop there
because i'm sure you guys have a
ton of questions and I still
have two more panelists that are
going to speak but we are very
happy to answer any questions
you may have whether it's
regarding the future female or
some of the things that we're
seeing or even the dollar
amounts that we have already
allocated with your systems with
the fame
thank you and next jeremy
manager
hi my name's doctor jeremy class
I am the bureau chief of
mitigation recovery at d h s e m
and I also serve as ali's deputy
state coordinating officer on
the disasters that we currently
have new mexico
I also serve to lead the state
recovery and mitigation missions
across the all of these fires in
the post fire sort of situation
as ali was talking about that's
what i'm kind of working in
leading working with other
states across the region and
starting to actually try and
build some resiliency across the
state new mexico and our region
to start addressing these post
fire impacts that were seeing as
we know you know we've we've had
some of the worst wildfires to
hit our state and obviously
we've been working really
diligently with fema and our
cooperating partners at the
federal state level to make sure
that we are building alliance to
be able to address these post
fire sort of situations I will
be talking in prison to you
tomorrow morning at nine am on
more of the like kind of the
programs and some of the that
directions that were going some
of the things that were doing in
the innovative programs that
were starting to implement one
of the big things is trying to.
Assess and get the field for
sort of a post fire program here
at the state new mexico
obviously that is going to be
needing some funding on an it's
gonna need all of your
assistance in helping that vice
chair
you had asked about what where
the dot female dollars if female
kinda goes away and it's
obviously going to fall back
towards the state we're starting
to kind of lean forward and try
to build that sort of program
and kind of outline exactly what
it would take for the state new
mexico to stand up aby no
recovery program we already have
to disaster assistance program
run at the state level so those
instances in disasters that
don't meet the federal level we
initiate out of dhcm we have
that program in itself but it's
purely funded by executive order
dollars and we don't get
reimbursement there obviously
some of the legislation that
we've passed especially senate
bill thirty one is going to be
addressing some of that that
state revolving disaster loan
fund that we're working on it
implementing now i'm sure you
all have questions on that we
can speak more to that but
that's what we're trying to
stand up and actually address
here at the state level so if
female dollars do go away we do
have the ability as a state to
respond to these these wildfires
in this post fire impacts and
i'll pass it to the mirror
thank you and mayor if you can
give us your perspective looking
adam chair members of the
committee again welcome to add
to you know some of the
discussion that we had this
morning this morning's panel
I I do want to see is allian and
you know here the panel is
beside me you know this
cascading events you know within
the community that not only the
city of las vegas was send me
gill and mortar counties are
induring and also the coops as
the cascading events that were
having to endure and I think
it's you know
working with female closely in
and dhm you know collaboratively
to let them know.
What what we're dealing with you
know we know through females you
know the public assistance you
know the
emergency work and permanent
work and you know some of the
hurdles that were having to you
know to deal with
you know it it's it's a burden
but we continue to work through
that and I know we'll have you
know more discussion but I do
want to again you know thank you
guys for all the work that you
guys have done in providing
funding through s you know SB
six and and the other funding
mechanisms that you have done
because like I mentioned in in
speaking with colleagues across
the nation mayors you know how
that have endured
disasters you know were were one
step ahead you know that then
some states are so
i'll leave it at then I know
there's going to be more
discussion you know I I know
unfortunately you know you know
we deal with you know most of
our
our issues are pertaining to the
water the water shared
you know mitigation flooding we
don't you know we have some but
you know that as far as I know
culburts were going to probably
be discussion but again you know
we're we're having to deal with
those cascading events that you
know I I know first for instance
and we give county put in half a
million dollars basically got
wiped out you know with with the
with one of the rainstorms so
there's a lot that we're having
to basically
unfortunately learn and in and
grow in working with the hsemb
together
you know there's there's a lot
of stuff I mean positive things
that were doing but overcoming
the
overcoming
the cascading events is a
difficult time sometimes
frustrating things that we have
to to deal with and I think
minimum more discussion will
that will have those i'm sure
questions will rise from that
but leave it at that thank you
madame chair
thank you okay so far I have a
representative of check the old
and representative of vincent
anyone else
okay i'll have a couple of
questions at the end so let's
start with representative
chapter.
Thank you
for my question maybe
anthropologist hearing issues
immediately after the fire
actually they were still finding
the fire
there was a delegation set from
lfc
committee and we met with the
delegation from washington dc
met with the city the county the
various local agencies and asked
what it took to get the ball
roll on to fix this problem and
the answer was a hundred million
we took that message back to you
set up a to the governor and
together we have appropriate a
hundred million to
be totally reimbursed by the
federal government it was
guaranteed they took
responsibility for the fire said
they would
appropriate the phones but
you know
the local folks needed it now
rather than later and we all
know how slowly the wheels turn
in dc so
brought a hundred million to the
ground here my question is how
much of that got used and how
much of it has been reimbursed
by
our federal government.
Chair representative chat fields
if you look on people's one you
can see what the outline of the
awards are for that hundred
million for the hermet speak
cafe and then moving to page two
under senate bill six
reimbursement status updates
that's going to be in the black
boards you will see that as of
july twenty twenty four send me
all county is the only entity
that has received female
reimbursements and that is in
the amount of seven hundred and
three thousand six hundred and
twenty six dollars in seventy
cents to the general plans
the last update that we got from
the department of homeland
security and emergency
management as well as the
depending on finance and
administration
none of the other entity is that
where it worked it have spent
any of the funding
so much here I guess I read that
so set the seven hundred and
thirty three thousand
I mean we're
when do we think we're gonna get
the rest of the harder and
merely in a not just has it not
been put on the ground or the is
the fed slower paying us what
what do we need to do to to make
it work.
Madame chair representative chat
filled so
what I think is occurring is
that there is a concern that if
funding was spent that there is
a likelihood that the federal
government may not reimburse
which is not what we're seeing
but I think that there's just a
hesitancy to potentially misuse
your funding and have and I say
misuse as in putting it on the
brown and haven't washed away
and six months so misuse is
probably a wrong wrong
terminology to use but maybe
just a hesitant to waste that
money so we're working very
closely with these entities to
reassure them that if the
funding is spent but it's not
going to be a waste that in fact
it shows the federal government
that more dollars are needed in
this community so we're actually
i'm doing we clean meetings by
weekly excuse me by weekly
meetings with all of the
jurisdictions listed on the list
to really help facilitate
working through white projects
can be completed and how to
quickly put that dollars onto
the ground one of the ones I
know we had a really good
conversation with moderate
county probably three months ago
four months ago and the way that
the application was originally
written day felt a concern about
maybe spending the dollars the
cross all projects that they
were approved for and so we went
back with them and d f and re
wrote the way that we had that
agreement outlined so that way
they felt comfortable kind of
flexing those dollars across our
project so for instance let's
say that you need to get a
coverage died and you also have
a road that needs to be repaired
but the coverage is going to
take six months to get in go
ahead and move the dollars that
you would spend on that covered
onto the road get the road
finalized and then we'll work
with you to get reimbursement so
that way when it's time to
purchase that covered in six
months you have the dollars back
in your package.
Instead of sitting on money
waiting on that cover to be
available to be purchased let's
go ahead and spend that money
let's get it the money on the
ground and then we'll work with
you to get the dollars back into
your pocket so you can buy that
cover later on does that does
that help kind of answer that
question or is there still
so many it does you know what
what i'm looking for is an
update because when I don't read
what's on this paper it looks
like it's a my new amount of
what we appropriate so I do I
understand that the department
homeland security is overseeing
this
partner you have a list of
projects that are probably
qualify and you're not having
any trouble getting reimbursed
by the federal government once
you sort out the appropriate
projects and do them
that correct
thank you chair.
Thank you representative vincent
thank you madame chair and thank
you presenters dot com I don't
know why you pin for a female
person
I guess when you were in when
you were in miscolleral we had
the stake holders meeting I
think it was because you were
dressed like am I associated you
will came in I apologize for
that i'm doing that
secondly I don't know
my my questioning is along the
same line says representative
chat field
so during the fifty six special
that we had we got a hundred
million
and
I keep hearing that my county
has not drawn down on any of
that money true or false
man chair representative it.
You are correct.
I am correct in state they have
not drawn down on any of that
money can I ask why
I don't want to put your sorry I
don't I I really wish I had any
answer we're trying really hard
to facilitate that conversation
I wish I had a better answer
thank you
madame chair that's what I was
talking about this morning I
don't know if it's the
bureaucracy the red table not
knowing how to draw down on this
money
I would like to see a conceived
service from your department go
and live in lincoln motor
wherever so that they can
navigate they need to understand
how to navigate this because
the people in the people in
leaky county I know as well as
the people and modern and
everywhere else that house fires
there is the want they're the
ones that get punished for this
they want things to happen and
they they see us moving at a
snail's pace and it's so
frustrating and you know just
like you were given that example
on the road versus the cover
some people are not forward
thinkers like that and they
think there's this big part of
money
and we need to if if this cover
it's going to cost six hundred
bucks then we need to go ahead
and replace the culver and take
the six hundred and now we only
have this sum
and
then you know we
hear a lot of the elected
officials talking about and we
weren't having stakeholders
meetings and now that it's kinda
started to drift away
if that covert needs to be fixed
it needs a project works correct
you do the project worksheet.
You send it after the female
person or if if they're send it
off to the state the state gets
it approved and then that is
approved so go ahead and fix it
correct and then whenever your
contractor gives you a bill for
it how do we get him pay
monetary
madam chair representative and
since the person when I answer
your address your first question
so I actually do have folks who
live in the community so every
single applicant so currently
like right now the village over
your dosell and link encounter
have their own folks who live in
the community meet with them
daily or mean with their
contractors daily to help move
these projects along and I can I
can happily turn those names
over to use of you would like to
have conversations while you're
back home weekend coordinate as
that as well so just kind of an
example so what I county has
twenty projects that have been
written they are in the public
assistance cue their valued app
forty five million dollars they
have an additional eleven
projects valued at eighteen
million dollars that have been
out allocated obligated so they
have the capability of finishing
those eleven projects and
getting that eighteen million
dollars back into their pocket
the work just has to be done or
or the work is done I just need
the documentation proving that
the work has been completed
same as a galaxy miguel has
forty projects valued at seventy
nine million dollars they have
an additional eleven projects
valued at thirty six million
dollars that have been obligated
I just I just need the
documentation I just need the
work to be done and and
something that I really want to
put it into perspective for
everyone so female has a
threshold they have a small
project threshold in a large
project threshold anything over
a million dollars is considered
a large project so let's say you
have a road that is sitting at
one point one million dollars
and that's what we estimated the
road would cost to repair but
over the course of the lifetime
of you fixing that road it
actually cost you to.
Two million dollars we all know
inflation occurs the cover costs
a little bit more gravel costs a
little bit more getting a
contractor to come out maybe the
taxes have increased female
reimburses you based on actual
cost so the communities aren't
stuck at the one point one if
they prove that they have two
million dollars at two point
five million dollars in its
account for and a crude cars
that fit the scope of work and
are not outrageous so they
didn't go down and buy you know
the goal plated concrete it's
going to go on the roads will
reimburse you for that
so I think that there's a
hesitant and see that they feel
like they're stuck at that one
point one even though it's
actually based on costs one of
the other things to do that
we're doing large projects is
that let's say you have hired a
contractor the contractor costs
you four hundred million dollars
excuse me that's a lot they cost
you forty thousand dollars
if you can show that you have
pay that contractor the forty
thousand dollars turn in the
receipt over to me and i'll pay
the forty thousand dollars I
don't need the project
completely to be closed out
completed ready to go people to
drive back on it the work to be
you know I just I just need
documentation so I we can ship
away at a large project piece by
peace to be able to get that
money kind of rotated back out
into their dollars they don't
feel like they're out before you
know hundred million dollars
that a project
they can matter chair and think
your
soul
if the money is not being drawn
down on whose pay in the bills
and the second part of my
question is
if they haven't drawn down on it
and they're paying the bills can
they still be a reimbursed for
me to be one
madam chair representative and
said I don't know who's paying
the bills I would assume that if
they are doing the work that
either they're paying the bills.
Or the work hasn't been started
so there's no bills to incorrect
now I know that there are
certain situations where you're
aware that work has been
completed but if they have the
bills they just need to turn it
over and we'll we'll reimburse
some for it
and then I do have an update
later for you regarding our
conversation that we had the
other day.
They came out of chair I i'll go
ahead
so I I do want that I think that
ali probably hit it spot on it
sometimes I think we as local
governments are hesitant and
want to make sure that you know
whatever we're spending that it
is going to be reimburseable so
that you know that that does
play a part as far as you know
we're paying the bills you know
we have had a lot of work done
anything that's where we need to
deal you know the city of las
vegas I also speak on an unart
behalf is that we need to do a
better job as working more
closely with the hsem and making
sure that we get those and it's
good to know that you know we
could partially you know even if
something's not fully funded I
mean fully
completed that we could start
you know drawing down on that
story I think
number one is hesitancy because
I know as a us elected officials
we got to make sure that
anything that we're spending
we're doing it right and we want
to want to get caught to where
it was a not reimburseable so
there is some handed at some
tendencies being too cautious
and I I think that's you know
one of one of our issues within
the city of las vegas again you
know
I know this doesn't read
pertained to pa but you know the
city of last vegas for received
ninety eight million dollars for
water system water water
treatment plant you know we've
been very cautious on that
because we have one opportunity
to get this right and one time
only
you know that there was you know
a planning design on the system
that you know based off of had
we
had we built that system and it
been operational when we had our
cascading event of flooding
event of june of last year that
system would not have worked for
us all in a were been I guess
you see sometimes too
overcautious but again when you
have that type of money you want
to make sure you do things right
and that I think i'd rather take
the burden of we're taking were
taking maybe a little bit longer
what we need to but we're doing
things right and we don't want
to get color we spent a hundred
and forty million.
And we weren't able to come out
of a situation that we ex-
experienced in june so there is
some some
in the mountain I would check
representatives and if I may add
the last in the live sea staff
which was myself in deputy
director john courtney talked
with linking county specifically
was in december and I think a
lot of the concern of why they
haven't access those hospital
when funds is because of the
debris flows those consequent
disasters and the funding that
was allocated through a house
bill one didn't cover the debris
flows and I think there was also
what we heard from your county
is that where does the money
come from then to do what the
rest and savings there's a lot
of moving pieces as deputy
secretary alia and the mayor
have been talking about there's
just
an goes back to her
representative chat fields
question it if the hundred
million is enough what we're
hearing from the local
government side is that that
might not be
sufficient
I just want to talk that thank
you to
thank you madame chair and you
know in that in that wording in
house bill wine that's the stuff
that makes me frustrated how do
you clean up and how do you
replace something if you can't
handle the debris sole
i'll take full credit of that me
and two other legislators are
with their names out of it
but now the county in the
village is there to shoulder all
the cost betty right so
they're not probably going to be
reimbursed for the debris
removal
matter representative they they
actually will and and I will
tell you to the state actually
is the one who contracted a
debris removal company so we did
it to take that burden off the
local entity so we're doing
right of way pick up private
property debris removal
water way debris removal and now
we're doing we're sisting not in
rcs with some of their debris
removal as well so all of the
impacts that are.
Occurring that you know we saw
out at the race track all that
was taken up by the states it
packs the state's dollars
I
think that the county did
attempt or is in the process of
having their own contractor do
some of the debris removal but
we have not seen the
re imbursements are the receipts
for it the state was willing to
come and do that debris removal
and the county chose to go with
their own consultant which is
fine it is totally fine and
we're happy to chat them through
how we move through on that and
but we haven't seen we don't
know progress is occurred
because we haven't seen
reimbursement or receipts that
progress is actually occurred
now if there was anything you
wanted add on madame chair
represents an
it just worked through a
reversion and for our emergency
ppdr contract and went for
another seventeen million to add
on for a right of way down there
and are doing our ppd our
mission so all of that stuff is
getting reimbursed and we are
just waiting on those receipts
and been working with the
village and the county for all
of that that worked to be
completed
thinking out of chair and so
you're telling me that the
county and the village will not
be on the hook for all that
money
that's what I wanted to hear
out of chair I guess you know
just just trying to navigate a
lot of this stuff
it's a lot and when
we missed my whole rant this
morning about lessons learned we
always talk about lessons learn
but do we really learn our
lessons and when we have a deep
read for our hot washer chance
or whatever you want to call it
I hope that
other places I don't want there
to be any more fires were
working on mitigation right now
and we're working on some
thinning stuff to protect our
our villages and towns and
cities
but some of the.
Lessons that we have learned
from water from leaking county
I I really hope that that the
next victim if there is one it's
able to see what we did wrong so
that they don't have to recreate
the will they can get things
move and way faster I want
people to do better than we do
because when you have a disaster
the quicker you can get it done
and get it over with the most
forward the better the whole
community is and then
the more at lags the more people
get frustrated and the more
emails come through my and you
almost get inendated because
when people have a complaint
they don't they want till they
want you to
they want to respond to
and everybody deserves a
response so it might take a
little while and i'm not being
lacks of easy it just takes me a
while to respond
to manager
madam chair if you don't mind
i'd like to to comment on that
as well so representative one of
the things to I want to clarify
so if the county or the village
hired their own contractor to do
other debris removal they are on
the hook for that now everything
that I have listed we are taking
care of so let's say that the
county I don't know what is it
clear county roads on their own
and they didn't want us to say
they are on the hook for that
that that portion but we can
talk a little bit more offline
and kind of you know rephrases
but one of the things too you
talked about learning lessons so
recently grant county had the
trout fire it is all of in the
healer most of it was on federal
for service land it started
encroaching interstate and
private land one of the things
that we learned from your fires
unfortunately is that we don't
get out there quick enough to
identify how much debris would
be coming down off the mountain
we were very progressive on
this.
Fire and started using very
preliminary data to map how bad
the burn wise for the trouble
fire and do a burn severity
overlay over their burned scar
and then also see what the
potential for cubic yardage of
debris flow coming off of this
so we could see where the worst
burn was go ahead and mobilize
the national guard engineers up
there to start removing some of
that debris off the mountain
before water started before we
started having one soon season
and then see that to brief flow
down that was very progressive
but I will tell you that the
data was very basic that the the
information that we had and the
layers were very basic but at
least gave us a good starting
point to get out there and
remove some of that debris we
were really waiting on the bear
report which is the help me
burned area
burned area
bar bear it's it's some by the
forest servers they come out and
they actually do a full blown
assessment but that takes weeks
after a fire is completed so not
even we we did the assessment
while the fire was still ongoing
up now is appropriate now but it
gave us a starting point that we
had never had on your fire on
the hermes afternoon fire and
it's something that will
implement for unfortunately not
where if but when the next fire
occurs.
Thank you very much now on to
center scott then represent a
person
thank you.
Okay
how much of the one hundred
million dollars that was
authorized in twenty twenty
three has been deployed.
Madam chairs and her scote
the communities who have been
given the dollar see you can see
that the outline between more
same agail and city of last
vegas link in county and I
apologize what's the other one
villager do so
all those dollars are in their
bank account they have the money
okay
that's what i'm for
everyone say of the hundred
million dollars
and chair in presenters that was
authorized
we have spared.
Seven hundred thousand dollars
appropriately reimbursed
is that act madam chair senator
scott you are correct
so the communities that have
received dollars have only spent
seven hundred and thirty three
thousand dollars
these were a mergency
there were appropriate in twenty
twenty three were now into
twenty twenty five
who it was responsible for
deploying
t s moneys and why have they
suppose I should ask madam chair
of the mayor.
Madam chair representative on
that question I know the city
last biggest we received about
twenty one million of that
you know of a big portion that
there was one of the
authorizations was debris clean
up
the other portion was about five
point six million I think for a
temporary water treatment system
which that's
actually app at the treatment
plant that's because there were
specifically needed because of
the turbinity that we were
enduring our current system was
unable to basically filter the
water and I think we're pretty
close and I don't want to put
anybody on the spider but I
think we're close to getting
that project completed to get it
funded so that's we're looking
at roughly almost four million
dollars alone for that that once
that gets reimbursed and
I I know a portion of that I
mean all of that will be
reimbursed back to the senate
bill six funding
so projects are
getting done but they just have
been reimbursed work has been
so mad and chairing there it's
been represented that the phones
have been expenditure
ployed their original purpose
and application for
reimbursement has not been made
is that the representation
I
to answer that I think more
information needs to be
submitted I nine off you know in
speaking on our behalf more
information needs to be
submitted to dhcm in order to to
complete those reimbursements
from fumer to two of the state.
It did I
can I see that correctly
madam chair center scott what I
would say is if the work has
been completed dhm has not seen
the documentation in order to
pass it along to female to get
reimbursement completed
at this time we are not aware of
there's a few projects that we
are aware of progress being made
but no completion does that I
feel like that's still probably
doesn't answer your question
though
we are not we are not seeing any
trick progress.
Madam chair
it sounds like
an as it sounds like the problem
is with the deployment of those
resources yet the money spent on
is that current stake
madam chair center scott I would
say I would say yes
thank you and thank you madame
chair.
I think thank you I think it's
it
I think the deployment
and the draw downs are two
different things
are yes and maybe that the
distinction is not being made
here
you went
briefly explain that so many
chair
when their application is
submitted dfa reviews the
project along with dhs em to
make sure that the dollars are
an eligible expense meaning that
fema has already approved the
project female saying this
project is good to go you are
within scope you have the
capability of doing it spend the
dollars and we will reimburse me
when we get that application in
we see how much the project
costs most of the time the
applicant submits how much they
are requesting so for example
i'll give an example I was just
talking to
less by toyota from same again
more electric company currently
right now he was looking at
putting in an application and
for the new
soon as cinnamo thirty one side
there's a lot of center bills
out there they're all start
running together he's looking to
put an application in for senate
bill thirty one we sat down and
chatted just a few minutes ago
and I said listen you have a
project that is eligible for
around fifteen million dollars I
think it's like fifteen to
seventy million dollars put the
application in for that lettuce
review it it is an eligible
application is already giving
you the green light for it let's
get you some money into your
bank account so you can start
the work of removing hazardous
trees off of the power line so
that way you're folks don't have
to go out every time that
there's a wind of it and keep
removing all those hazard
streets there removes whenever
the the work is occurring excuse
me before the event happens and
and that way you can get that
money so as soon as he puts in
the application we confirm with
the face we say the project is
good dfa then signs off on the
project hsm signed off on the
project.
And we release those fines to
more same again electric for
them to complete the work now I
don't have the capability of
hiring the contractor or doing
the work myself even though some
days I wish I did I
imminent trusting that the
application completes the work
to their best ability
so I hope that that example
helped that as soon as I turn
the money over to more same
again electric it is less job to
get out there and start removing
those hazardous trees with the
amount of money that he's been
yet nap keeper might the entire
project to remove hazard shoes
as estimated currently like
three hundred million dollars so
of course less can't complete
all of the hazardous tree
removal with a seventy million a
project cost three hundred
million but what I expect him to
do and what I hope to do unless
if you're in the room i'm not
trying to throw him under the
bus because he is not getting
any of those money
less than he he picks a section
that he sees the most impacts
already occurring maybe the most
hazardous trees are already
hitting lines maybe it's a line
that that services a lot of
homes already and he just goes
through and he uses at seventy
million dollars to clean out
those streets he comes back to
dhm he gives us the application
or he gives us the receipts of
spending that seventeen million
dollars dhm then works with fema
dick at the reimbursement done
and unless it's eligible to come
back to the sun a bill thirty
one and ask for more money if he
needs more money to get the work
completed
I will tell you even less was
sitting out there right now and
he said I have four million
dollars that i've already
incurred as a permit less give
me the receipts let's get you
reimbursed for that four million
dollars so that way you're not
out those those dollars so III
just just need work to be done
or started.
Thank you for that
representative garcia
think amount here thank you
panel
very intriguing
you know you guys have been a
mainly dealing with parcel
subdivisions in terms of
recovery and projects
but
You guys
have data
your terms of all the finance
that have been filed by property
owners
regarding for just compensation
for the damage and destruction
that was caused by the caf
cannon and would speak fire
not only there
but the number of filings but
also madam chair in terms of
how many of those filings have
been settled
and not only that and this is
probably confidential you don't
have an information
but those that have been settled
what was it the determinant
settlement fund
and also a well that filings
manager what is the combined
total then I figure manager that
it's in the billions
I know I threw out a number of
questions when I think you can
kind of sort of mouth and
address each one specifically
manager
some madam chair representative
garcia so I have a couple of
figures for you I don't think
they get as green as what you
are requesting and I will be
honest as much as the state
kicks and screams to ask for the
same information that you are
requesting the claims office
honestly hides behind policy and
refuses to turn over the
documentation so currently right
now hermes peak caf kenyan has
congress is appropriate at five
point four billion dollars for
them to release
a total of forty seven percent
of the claim funds has been
reported paid to date now the
problem is is I don't know if
that means because you can get a
claim paid on line items so
let's say that an applicant has
time I line items the claims
office could pay five of those
line items and the other five
could still be on hold and not
getting paid so.
When I say report it as pata
date
but that number could be skewed
a little bit
eighteen thousand eight hundred
claims valued at two point six
billion has been reported paid
to date so what it stay in is
that they have paid out two
point six billion over eighteen
eight hundred claims and to
break that down a little bit
more eight hundred and ninety
two million has been paid out
and more county and one point
six billion has been paid out
and saying the gal county so
currently right now that is the
most amount of data that the
claims office will will give to
me and I know jeremy it sounds
like he must add something on
today a manager represented
garcia so I I do want to make
sure that we make a clear
distinction about female what we
are manage as far as females
concerned and then what the
claims office is is concerned
right so everything that we're
talking about that were with the
cynical six and the HB one
funding and are revolving sp
thirty one that is going to be
implemented that is under the
stafford act right and so that
was developed that was passed in
nineteen seventy eight that's
female that's public assistance
all that sort of stuff for
critical infrastructure and
repair
the claims office was set up and
appropriated by congress for the
hermit's peak cafe can you
disaster it is not held by or
under statute of the staff red
act therefore it is not within
the state's perview to manage
the claims office we are only
getting second hand reporting
information and that's all the
information that alley was able
to provide to you we don't have
any insight we don't manage
claims we don't manage to pay
out that is not under the
state's perview what is is the
stafford act in the regular
female
you know staff for that side of
things and so I just want to
make that a clear distinction
this is purely.
We don't have a lot of insight
and while we have advocated and
tried to get as much information
out of the claims office as we
possibly can we have barriers
and we've been trying to pull
that information we do get brief
from time to time but that's the
only information that we have
available and that's all that
alley could provide to to you
thank you for that matter that
sound very helpful
so if you
made him chair the state entity
is unable to get any more
information
from the feds and the claim
offers and their claims offers
then I would take that to me
that we as legislators would
have the same difficulty getting
quick from action you know so a
few guys on the the hair boots
on the ground you know and we've
got wings in the air you know
aren't able to get that data
then
more than likely we would we
don't have the power in the
authority to kind of pull it
down either but I do appreciate
managed share the data that you
did provide in is more helpful
and goes as a good perspective
in terms of what is going on
with still have to do themselves
at the federal level with the
private property thanks again
for your presentation thank you
manager
thank you
thank you representatives in
further questions from the
committee.
Rips in the sky for second
thank you chairman just one
quick question
is is there any gain
from the entity holding that
money.
Not spend.
Who's benefiting
from the delay and the
deployment of those
revenues if anyone
madam chair senator scott if you
don't mind can I cost to sell
you matter out as up from dfe.
The.
Good afternoon by chair members
of committee center scat my name
is to silly matter matter
scenario the local government
division director at dfa
that is a
complicated question for a
various reasons we can go into
when the money is distributed
from the state to these local
entities what they decide to do
there and after if is up to that
local entity as you know we are
a state that operates
fundamentally on autonomy and
our own elected officials within
those areas each local
government has their own
resolutions and processes in
place that dictate where they
decide to put that money from
the dfa perspective what we can
say explicitly is when the state
gives them money to that local
entity that local entity such as
mortar account modern county or
the city of las vegas can then
go and have a commission meeting
amongst themselves to determine
where they intend to put those
funds what we have seen is those
funds have been put in two
interest bearing accounts such
as the local government
investment poor to which they do
make money in keeping the funds
there however what the games are
or what the intent is is not
something that the state can
speak to that is something that
needs to be taken between
whatever that political
subdivision is and and how they
determine where and when to put
that money so to answer plainly
yes interests can be gamed
however that is up to the
autonomy of that local
government mister.
Okay so mister chairman
see if I can die just that they
entertain the is currently in
possession of those
some strines allocated
on no interest basis is that
the state is not requesting
interest in return for holding
that money that local entity has
received the money and may
potentially be gaining interests
from their own accounts
and general lady that I just
heard that those monies or in
interest
madam chair and center scott
every entity I cannot confirm
you can look that in their audit
specifically to see where they
parked that money in those
accounts
for the most recent example with
modern county that they have put
that in the local government
investment poor it's up to that
local government what investment
if they choose to do that and
where they will put it into we
cannot speak to wear that money
is but do they have that option
yes.
Three four five point spread on
hundred million box is a pretty
good revenue
thank you mister chairman.
Thank you center scott and I
called you represent
although it's I heard
alternatives
any further questions from the
committee
so seeing none err thank you
very much to the panel
make a closing comment
madam chair one of the things
that I would love to bring
attention to the committee is
the changes that we are going to
see specifically for a
department of homeland security
in the coming months to coming
years with a federal government
and one of the things that I
want to make you all aware of is
that the agencies specifically
department of homely and
security emergency management
has really never seen an
increase to their budget in the
last ten years so we have stayed
up at base operating budget for
an extended amount of time in
the last three years we have
received three federal
declarations and we're
potentially working on our
fourth one right now with the
flooding and fires that are
occurring on trout one of the
things I would I would love to
just kind of put out there as we
head into the next couple of
months and even into the next
year is i'm at capacity
and I will tell you right now
and and i'm pretty sure that
represent a vincent can and test
this when you call me I pick up
the phone when you ask for
something out of my staff we go
and we are always there to help
where I mean we're activated
twenty four seven right now but
we are getting to the point
where we are stretched extremely
then extremely fed I am staffed
currently right now at eighty
four eighty five folks and my
eoc takes roughly about twenty
eight thirty people just and run
the eoc that doesn't include the
other state agencies coming in
to help us but it in the
meantime we try to still provide
the same services we try to be
able to still help with recovery
at the same time we are doing
response so I just would love to
kind of put that in as we move
forward that we we are at the
point where we I mean we're rack
capacity
in fact.
The little governor called me
two saturdays ago and he was
like hey ali you know I have a
question traffickers going on
i'm so sorry to bother you on a
saturday and he paused and he
was like wait do you even get a
saturday off and I said not no
so I I do not and it's not it
i'm not complaining I love what
I do I love my job but if you
were wanting to hsm the staff to
continue on you're going to
start seeing burn out if we're a
functioning at the way that we
currently are so I appreciate
that think you madame chair
well I think that one of the
things I start starting is that
once the
reconciliation is finished in
washington probably in the fall
that we could have a report on
how it affects some of our own
state agencies and what work
load will become heavier here
etc so thank you for bringing
that to our attention thank you
all for being here today.
So we are fifteen minutes ahead
of time do we have everybody
here jones armstrong joe
martinez and travel smart tunes.
What
else
not
not to use.
Okay.
Okay members this
presentation is on drinking
water systems impacted by fire
floods
and welcome to our committee so
let's go and order jonas arm
strong leicester.
Thank you very much members and
have to pull that rate in front
of you we've had trouble hearing
at home thank you
great
thank you all for having us here
today i'm joined start from the
director of the water protection
division at the environment
department with me is joe
martinez our drinking water
bureau chief will be sharing the
presentation today and and
responses to your questions.
You have our slide show in front
of you
it is twelve slides
you know we try to wow you all
ask us here to talk about a
drought fire and flood impacts
on water systems generally we
appreciate the obvious impacts
to the local area that they've
been dealing with over the years
saw a presentation starts with
updates on major recent fire
events and post fire flooding in
last biggest and modern areas
and also in the rudour so area
then will follow up with some
themes on how local water
systems generally can better
prepare for and respond to
disaster emergencies and while
end with some recommendations
for how the legislature could
help out.
Starting my presentation on
slight to
both the last vegas and rid or
so areas or heavily impacted by
fires especially their drinking
water systems
major portions of both water
sheds were earned treatment
plants were spared but that
doesn't mean that those
treatment plants weren't
impacted by the incredibly
degraded water quality for their
source water.
Both systems during the fires
were really heroic and how they
protected their systems staff
slept at the water plants worked
around the clock as the fires
burned around them rude also
staff even drove up in a
dangerous situation to turn off
a chlorine gas at one of their
treatment plates uh likely
saving lives
then without power
they put their own lives at risk
in order to protect their
communities and that is
absolutely commendable
both systems like I said have
had difficulty treating their
water after the flooding
fortunately rudolso also has
access to ground water which
helps them in that situation the
surface water is impaired last
vegas is unfortunate to not have
that secondary resource.
The debris flows that can come
from post firefooting that's
what makes traditional treatment
difficult and plants can
struggle but if plants are
properly maintained and operated
and chemical treatments adjusted
they largely can deal with those
situations
in las vegas obviously we had
the hermes beek in cafcain and
fire and i'm on slight three now
also thank you
that far was massive as previous
presenters today have said the
biggest and state history
burning three hundred forty one
thousand acres
including the water shed the
gain as river water shed it
supplies the city
that lead to erosion settlement
run off and in one event alone
the area got four inches rent
two hours which over flowed
reservoirs caused evacuations of
people living down stream of
those dams
and you know resulting in water
restrictions closures on
businesses and lots of other
unfortunate outcomes that
required delivery of portable
water from outside of the system
also where the city contracted
for seventy trucks to come with
water from louisiana to
supplement the system supplied
that wasn't there
differences in outwater
chemistry of that source water
from louisiana caused additional
complications on the treatment
system
the system has worked over the
last few years with the
environment department to
install a pre treatment unit
that's now being used to help
with this post fire recovery and
treatment
moving on the side for
talking about rudo so a little
bit there were two fires down
there both sparked by lightning
last year it was a smaller burn
twenty five thousand acres and
soon after there were.
Floods and you can see on the
slide there is one news coverage
of those events dramatic
flooding in that community
the one truman system was
heavily impacted but
it was
like we said earlier really well
protected
the flooding was
drastic in terms of damage to
property and risk to life
water rescues of people talked a
hundred and sixty in one day and
two hundred homes
were lost to flooding in
addition to the fire impacts
moving on to slide
to
water system recovery in both of
these communities
rido so has
provided a dashboard showing how
to bring is being removed out
infrastructures being rebuilt
how female assistance programs
are
working in that community.
In las vegas
but it's sorry on the router so
the system right now is stable
they have productive flood
response and real time alerts
in las vegas the city continues
to operate its system with ganus
river water and brandener damn
as it stuck as a storage
both are still contaminated with
debris and have high tribidity
and delays in the water
treatment
this is lead again to
restrictions for the city
and as the previous panel
mentioned there is some feam of
funding available for the city
to over all their water system.
The current infrastructure
though obviously means very
fragile there's lots of leaks
there are look there's low
pressure there comes up and
there some ongoing treatment
challenges that i'm sure mister
martinez can can speak to.
There are long standing
infrastructure issues that
precede the fire to you know
managing and water system is
expensive and hard and takes a
lot of dedication and work line
breaks freezing pipes age and
components those are can
complicate the cities efforts to
provide safe and reliable
drinking water
now moving on to slide six
maybe why are there some
differences and how these
communities have recovered so
rido so has a larger tax base
they had recently updated their
treatment plant fortunately
before the fires hit they had
experience with fires in their
area that they knew their plant
was direct at risk it actually
had wooden sighting probably
would have burned down if they
hadn't replaced it are updated
and so they were fortunate in
that situation they also enroude
also head invested and you know
while trains are fight operators
and had really strong expertise
to operate their system over the
years
they modern as their plant they
made informational improvements
over time as you should when
you're maintaining opera and
operating a water system
last biggest is in a different
situation in terms of
a resources much less in terms
of debt capacity to take on
loans dish issue bonds to do
that necessary maintenance
they so without those resources
they've long struggled to keep
up are the flooding really
exactly those issues after the
fire.
Additionally
whereas redo so had it record of
kind of managing with the
emergencies as they came last
biggest practice a lot of the
time that we had seen from the
enemy d was to shut off the
water system when the worst is a
situations of high tribidity
so they hadn't really built up
that experience to deal with the
post fireflooding and a brief
and what they might have to do
in terms of adjusting their
treatment process so some
learning in the moment had to
happen
right now last biggest is
designing a new plan with the
funding you just short about in
the previous presentation I
should absolutely help address
long term infrastructure
operational challenges and
but infrastructure is not just
it right you need the invest in
infrastructure which also need
to invest in the operators to I
operate keep it to utilize and
infrastructure and to make sure
that it is maintained in a way
that can help you insurer
reliable and safe tracking
water.
Some of the zoom required to
pass side seven some images of
some recovery projects to slide
eight
because it's not just the
routers a lot of biggest
municipal systems that were
dealing with a fire and post
fireflooding in these areas rudo
so downs as it's own system and
has additional infrastructure in
place to protect itself and
neighborhoods
there are a lot of mutual
domestics in these areas
obviously that are impacted and
we work to help especially in
water and semi gal counties and
it's not just the water drinking
water systems that are impacted
there are secures they have been
in the completely plugged from
post fire to bring in we at the
environment department are
trying to help them have all
that.
I'm moving on to side nine on
some themes
that are
you know applicable beyond just
my speakers and read or so
infrastructure fragility is
something we see a lot and i'm
sure you won't see in your
districts around the state where
aging systems just haven't been
investigated invested in over
time and so they're really
vulnerable to these cascading
failures and compounding
emergencies they can happen
rude or so is an example of how
informative investments can
really set you up over time to
be in a better situation when
these emergencies arise.
Accident change my slide in my
notes.
And these events are getting
worse and happening more rate
you'll have drought as a theme
on our topic are an underneath
end of today
but it's more than drought were
projected in the next fifty
years to have twenty five
percent less water due to rising
temperatures and they're
resulting ratification
it's not just a drought where we
can come back and we were going
to have more water in the long
run we know the ts emergency
events are going to become more
prevalent and that we as a state
need to do more to be ready for
them.
What we do happen please right
now are a range of funding
programs at the environment
department to help communities
when they experience disasters
or you know alternatively
proactively want to take steps
to invest so that they are ready
for it for when disasters do
happen
we have a couple really
affordable loan programs that
the clean water revolving on
phoned and the drinking water
revolving loan fund
we work with mfa who actually
runs the drinking water fund but
we do the initial application
process those are less than one
percent interest loans over
thirty years for communities to
improve water and waste water
systems including protecting
source water
we also have a restoration
program which can protect source
water and that is
less infrastructure focused in
more in stream project focus to
address things like tripidity
and heat and other water quality
impacts.
That obviously are tied to
drinking water source water
lastly we have the rural
infrastructure program which is
our most flexible program and
really helpful in emergency
situations because
it's a brand and loan program
and we can if we get all the
paperwork in line get a
agreement out the door in six to
eight weeks we can even work to
start supporting projects before
we have all of the documents in
all of their own agreements
executed
you all have done a lot to set
up the environment department
with resources to help your
communities and we would happily
help you understand them or work
with a community representatives
and officials to access our
funding programs
now there are their ways that
community water systems can
improve their resilience and
preparation for emergencies
regional station is a great way
not just through physical
connection but through
shared support of administration
and operations those were really
streamlined that that the
process to regionalize was
really streamlined by you all of
the legislature a couple years
ago with senate bill one
system can now
work on their own timelines
outside of the legislative
session to get together and
share resources and actually
join governing bodies to become
more resilient
previously they had to get an
entire new law passed to do that
you can also use problems like
the rural infrastructure program
to invest in natural
infrastructure like I said sorry
the the river storage program to
invest in nature infrastructure
the one trust board has bonding
to do work like that
does stick forestry division has
watership protection
there either.
It are there they even nature
based solutions that are
eligible for female funding that
communities could take more
advantage of to improve their
resilience
lastly every community should
have an emergency preparation
this plan
but many do not so we would
encourage you all to work with
your local governments and state
agencies to get those in place
lastly on site twelve is some
high level recommendations for
you all as legislators and
including expanding the match
fund that's been a great
resource for communities to be
able to access other funding
sources like those and programs
I described earlier
we can also prioritise equity
and funding making sure that
system small systems are secured
from communities have access to
planning branch capacity
building funding that will allow
them to better handle these
emergencies.
Lastly continuing to invest in
data and monitoring is really
important
to help not only the state as a
whole
communities individually to be
better prepared I said lastly
but but with my bureau chief
next me i'd be remissed not
highlighting the last bullet
here on the slide
that you know the drink wanted
bureau does a tunnel work every
day to support communities
through technical assistance in
capacity building
and you know that there are a
number of ways that we could use
increased investments to develop
a stronger operator work force
in new mexico entered you know
do more technical managerial and
financial assistance for for
your euros water systems so
that's what we have today from
the environment department at
least from me I would defer to
your chief martinez if he has
anything to add before
strategist from the city thank
you madame chair thank you jonas
just take a wood what jone is
stated you know we are trying to
work with communities so
throughout the state we are
responding to two emergencies
nearly on the on a weekly basis
so we we do a lot of work out in
the communities one thing that
we do want to try and work on in
the future is like like johna
said is investing operators get
more operators into the career
field get them better trained at
that way they can
respond to the the growing
emergencies in the growing needs
of communities so thank you very
much.
Thank you travis
good afternoon manager members
of the committee and estimated
yes I want to thank you goes for
scheduled this meeting here
that's I guess and I want to
welcome you and the other
members of the committee and who
have taken your time to be here
the resilience of crisis and
safeguarding last thing is
taking water and an error fire
flood end drop
you're gonna have to pull the
mike directly in front of you so
that we can
my name is service martinez on
the utilities director for a
serious las vegas thank you for
giving me the opportunity to
speak out today about whatever
most critical challenges to the
city and many other rule and
every communities and your
mexico that we're off easy the
increasing vulnerability of our
tricky water systems due to
wildfires flooding and drow
levy survived
what is often taken for granted
clean reliable drinking water
which is a foundation of public
health economic stability and
community resilient in las vegas
like many other communities
across the state we have spend
decades building maintaining an
operating complex water
infrastructure to make sure the
foundation is strong but over
these past few years that
foundation has been shaken the
aftermath of the hermes be
calculating a fire and twenty
twenty two the hermes be cafe
cannot fire the largest wildfire
to make scores history ran over
three hundred and forty thousand
eight in our water said it's
impacts or not just immediate
but it's been long lasting
when the rains came after the
fire our water said can no
longer fact function as a
natural filter ashed a break in
tablets port into the gain as
river which is I primary water
source our dream and plant was
in design to handle that kind of
tribidity or chemical overload
and it's been pushed beyond its
limits
we've had to scramble by
deploying pretry meant traders.
Modifying our chemical feed
systems and at times considering
alternatives sources we have
worked closely with new mexico
environment department army
corps of engineers federal
emergency management agencies
national research conservation
officer state engineers
environment protection agency
and local partners but we all
know it's clear our system is
not built for these kind of
disasters
the thread of the floods will
follow the fire is an equally
dangerous threat which is a non
going event we face today
without recover without stable
soils even water strain fall
events turn into flash boats the
city of las vegas resident wars
were impacted with contamination
and arranting structures are
filter rates and even our clear
was experienced sentiment
overload
in one instance floody knocked
out an entire water actually my
plate
was essential infrastructure
that had been an operation for
decades in that moment we were
operating with half of achieving
capacity putting the ability to
meet daily water demands are
risk
the financial impact has been
stagred emergency repairs bypass
systems additional labor our
budget is not designed for these
kind of cascading events and
what's the real cost
the answer to its created for a
residence businesses hospitals
and scores
the drought it's a consistent
pressure constant pressure even
before the fires and floods we
were in a grip of long term
drought drown has weakened our
ecosystems it has shinker
reservoirs and it makes forest
more vulnerable to fire it also
changes our water chemistry and
increases our concentrations of
naturally a cream minerals
making dream more difficult and
more expensive
enlarged they guess we were like
heavily on surface water from
the gain as the during the
drought does slows drop to
unsustainable levels that forced
us to explore alternate water
options and consider
conservation mandates.
A string both our economy and
our residents
drought fire and flood are no
longer separate events unless
they guess they're all
interconnected crisis and our
water system has to be caught in
the middle of all of them what
we've learned and what we must
do
I hear three reasons of what's
we have learned one we must
water nice and for the fire
water influence structure our
system was built for twentieth
century the thread said we now
face to man twenty first century
solutions fire hard and
facilities with silly and pre
treatment systems and adaptive
intake designs we are working on
those as we speak number two we
need sustained and flexible
funding emergency dollars help
in the moment but we also need
proactive investment and
planning redundancy work force
development and equipment one
time grants are really helpful
but without long term support
we're always one storm away from
a crisis
number three local knowledge
must be at the table we know our
system we know our watership we
know our people top down
solutions must include local
voices engineers and operators
to communities that rely on
these systems every day
advice for other communities
facing similar crisis
number one start planning for a
disaster before it happens don't
wait for a fire flood now your
systems weak points filter bands
chemical feed palms feed systems
storages build contingency plans
now preposition emergency
contracts and assess how fast
you can mobilise temporary
treatment units or back up water
sources to protect your
watership your water said like
critical influence structure
your forest and water shared is
your treatment barrier if it is
damaged you're entire system as
a risk work with federal and
steep partners in investor
forest dealing.
You rose in controls post fire
recovery and not just do it
after the disaster these are
things we have learned leave
built strong relationships with
state and federal agencies get
to know your contacts at any
medium corps of engineer and
local legislatures in an
emergency the speed and trust of
these relationships make a
difference we were successful
here and last week is because we
weren't consistent communication
asking for help and offering
solutions and if you don't
believe me as the guys here to
the left because they would get
matter me on a friday when I had
called in an emergency
number for push for resilient
and from structure funding not
just emergency relief emergency
funds are reactionary what are
needed our flexible forward
looking forward for upgrades
that make fire systems and floor
resilient pre tremendous
alternative interest remote
monitoring and operator training
tell your story
other communities won't act
until they see the real cost of
do nothing sure what you've got
through meat your neighbors your
neighboring cities host regional
water meetings test if I want
possible we all need to make
water public safety priority the
bottom line is you don't build a
resilient steering the storm you
build it before any defended
after I hope is that
what happened in las vegas can
serve both as a warning and a
roadmap and a closing I want to
be clear to the city last vegas
has been tested in ways we've
never anticipated but we have
never backed down our team has
worked tiresly to keep the water
flowing to floor fire and
drought they are part of our
dealers but can be done but we
can do this along.
And all I asked from the
committee really
is to help us advocate for rear
creek state level infrastructure
funding for rural water systems
include fireflood resilience
gradscoring and legislature
priorities support the workforce
trading and rejection critical
for operations and how fun water
said protection and post fire
restoration for water
infrastructure I want to think
you matter woman and members of
the committee in this team guess
for your time your servicing a
partnership i'm happy to take
any questions
thank you very much before we go
to the first person on the list
which is representative so there
others who want to be put on the
list.
Okay I have represented
representative garcia
anyone else
okay let's start represented
thank you chair and thank you
for your presentation
although it's a sad presentation
i'm looking at your final slide
recommendations I understand the
expansion and you want to go
matching ponds there is
sources imaging funds but I can
understand
expanding that required climate
are you it is their plans to
require climate impact risk
assessment is there plans for
ads asking the capital outlay or
in each between
and
are you hiring a third party
what are the plans for that
climate and i'm gonna go through
these so that's one of the
question investment data and
monitoring I know that all of
new mexico is desperate for
giants mapping we're trying to
put in brand new water
infrastructure and we're digging
up current one we didn't even
know existed so what what is
your ask or what is the
communities ask especially here
in las vegas for that
and then I think my biggest
question out of all these is
increased oversight and
accountability and local
government funding and projects
what kind of increase oversight
and accountability do you want
to state legislator thank you
representative kids i'll take
that last one first
increased investments in
oversight and accountability in
the government funding and
projects would look like
but that would look like his at
least for the environment
department's perspective would
be additional resources.
In the drinking water bureau to
support systems on their project
implementation and operation of
their systems are also in our
construction programs bureau
where were really spread then in
terms of
technical staff to help systems
manage their projects that they
get funded through either
capital outlay the clean water
revolving fund or the
rural infrastructure program
that I mentioned earlier we have
regardless of the amount of
funding that comes in
to support new projects through
those programs
especially capital outlay we we
don't get
an equivalent or any increase in
terms of operational funding for
to increase our staff to handle
that increase workload right now
we have something like almost
two hundred projects per
technical staff person in our
construction programs bureau on
it thank you madame chair says
let me just go back to the so I
I believe i'm a legislator that
carry the drinking water find
and so it's a very modest
request and it's based on
approved projects so how will
you be requesting a larger
amount for the snack session
representative totally
understand that question we are
developing our budget requests
now already over the summer i'd
be premature for me to commit to
what's going to be in that
request but at least from a high
level from the division and
representing our bureaus
increased staffing for a
technical assistance and for
project management would be
essential in thank you matter
chairs so yes and the increase
of oversight and out
accountability it sounds to me
like you are looking to increase
the monitoring capability is
which is an operational.
Things so will this be
reflective in
your budget recount requests
manager representative
respectfully it is just too
early for me to speak to that in
its
i've not the one who makes the
final call on what our budget
request is
and there are a lot of competing
priorities across the department
that have to come in to
consideration
we will have future we will have
our budget request ready soon
I know in the last two years the
chair and vice chair have asked
us to come in in november and
give a presentation on what our
budget request is and i'm sure
we'd be happy to do that again
and thank you very much manager
and yes I understand that it is
an appropriate they're on july
first to ask you for what is
your budget request but I am
asking do you have plans if you
were saying this is your
recommendation what is your
department doing to make sure
this recommendation is at least
available for us to be able to
look proof
if this is going to be a
priority as and it is in your
top but five priorities here of
recommendations is that we would
increase oversight and ordered
in capabilities with in the
department I would hope to be
able to see that when I see the
budget request thank you.
Thank you represent case
representative garcia.
Thank you madame chair
thank you presenters on
and thank you mr martinez for
the very eloquent time
presentation kind of real
holistic kind of touch on all
the basis
I kinda goes counter to
you know
to some of the issues address
star
in
the hand out by.
Mr arms from
and I just kind of wanna
get a good sense of
what's not happening and what is
happening
and I guess one question in
particular is this
ninety eight million dollars
of a hundred forty million
dollars grant that female game
to the city of las vegas for a
new
treatment facility and a pre
treatment facility and
and I gather that that hasn't
been completed yet
in the and out
mr and strong states that the
city continues to struggle with
compliance issues and has been a
shooting administrator
compliance order with penalties
so mister martinez arm.
What is that all about
and manager
and who is
on the administrator complaints
order who is
imposing that administrative
compliance order.
Thank you madame chairman
representative garcia
the enemy drinking water bureau
overseas compliance are or has
a historically overseen
complaints for public water
systems across the state part of
that oversight
is issuing administrative
compliance orders when there are
issues of non compliance like
with the city of last vegas has
experienced over the past few
years so are bureau is the one
that that issue that
administrative order with
penalties and that those
penalties amounted to about two
hundred and seventy thousand
dollars or so.
Matter share representatives
yeah yes the administrative
order was to the past compliance
order that the sale last very
good
now as far as moving forward for
that
past year the city of us figures
have struggled with the
cascading events of flooding but
in the in the maintenance speak
into that we've also done a lot
of upgrades to the facility and
are the process of new upgrades
to the facility now speaking on
moving forward to a new water
treatment plant and all that we
need to get our water tremendous
platform upgraded and stable
before we can get to that future
so as it goes right now the city
last biggest has
now finished projects such as
its track back system where
completing our skater units were
in the middle right now of
starting our rehabilitation on
our filter bids which is all
operational and stuff and we're
hoping with these upgrades we
can satisfy the administrative
of order that has been
stolen the city of las vegas for
past complaints issues that we
bad.
I think thank you a manager
thank you mister martinez for
that clarity
you know what i've seen that in
terms of line my twenty eight
years in the legislature is that
sometimes we find real a needy
initiatives
the thing is that many times
manager when we fund these real
media initiatives the entities
that are receiving the funding
don't have capacity to implement
the funding
by way of technical people by
way of experts you know
and
that can move along the process
manager but the can also move
along the construction aspect of
the project
and I don't know if that's been
the issue with last week as if
it's been kind of a work force
issue but considering man
insurer the enormous impact that
you have in your water system
because of a natural disaster
with the flowers with the fire
in the flooding you know I think
it be the responsibility of
state entities to step up
and help provide the mechanism
chair to insure that that they
can call team
is on the ground for the
capacity fully and empowered in
terms of carrying out the task
before it in this particular
case the new treatment plan
in the pretry met plan you know
and mancher and if the state
entity in this case environment
department
you know
makes reference to their lack of
work force that that's why
they're unable to kind of
fulfillers these initiatives
then it's up to the department
to contract out with private
tick.
And get the job down that way
but there should be no reason
what so ever that we're still
here in the dawn trying to
implement a program where the
funding is available and we're
still not able to kind of
complete it
so to me that's real frustrating
and I can see that frustration
amount
a hundred times
the city of of the sweaters in
the new particular mission
martinez is the director of the
utilities department you know
but I don't think you should
burn a lot of that frustration I
think a lot of it lies with the
department and the entities of
the state to make sure they were
looking at this picture
holistically and not just
dumping it on your shoulders to
burn the whole process
you know and I think maybe
that's why you guys are even
moving forward but still that
came behind the apart in a lot
of instances manager
madam chair representative
so i've been as far as the city
goes i've been the director the
last year then slasts me I
couldn't speak for the city of
last I guess whatever has become
at the past but been able to
work with the drinking water
bureau day in a day out three
times a week on emphasis of what
we can do with our water to my
plan moving forward and what
makes the best way of most
efficiency moving forward with
they don't really give us to do
this or do that but they give us
a lot of advice moving forward
every have taken that advice and
we've hired out third parties
we've got with i've got with
finance we were able to
rearrange budget to make sure
that all the major
infrastructure not water
treatment plan is being upgraded
and as it goes to your knowledge
the major these gets upgraded
and then it just falls down to
the mediocre things.
Of the water to the plan to keep
up with all of these cascading
events and stuff so I mean I
can't really say much to that
because they have been a
beneficial they have optus
outside.
Well thank you for that the
manager and the and I kinda
really have this sense of
urgency on your partners and
working
in our and and I want to apply
for that and in your
presentation you were real
horristy the way you present it
the reality of your situation
the facts and what you have
before you will in terms of the
task still to complete but I
think the department still needs
to step up on our
in terms of dealing with these
situations matter matter
that are rural overwhelming for
local governments that don't
have a passive done her
mechanism
you know don't have those
infrastructure complete in on
the kind of really fulfilled
what's at hand in terms of
honor to move forward with your
water system so I don't know if
the department was just the kind
of reflect on some like immense
but you're you're free to or not
respond now i'd absolutely like
to respond representative of the
amount of chair you know
appreciate mister martinez
mentioning it the multiple
weekly meetings that we have
with last biggest water system
we are always available to
provide technical assistance and
support two systems in their
normal operations or in
emergency response
we are limited both in terms of
the intent of our programs and
the funding provided to support
that intent a to that assistance
we are a regulator in addition
to being a technical assistance
provider and there are conflicts
of interest that can arise if we
cross the line into becoming the
operator of the systems they are
independent units of government
that are responsible under state
and federal law to provide safe
reliable tricking water to
their.
Residents and we will do
everything we can to help them
do that on the front end we will
also hold them accountable when
they fail to do that on the back
and
we
have some technical assistance
programs internally at an med
you are also phoned fantastic
technology assistance providers
through some funding to the
department of financing
initiation
those include
the in the mexico water
association the rural community
assistance corporation there is
loads sorry though the southwest
environmental finance center at
in a received mexico
new mexico state university has
technical assistance support
available through a recent grant
from the environmental
protection agency
there are loads of technical
assistance opportunities out
there for local systems
it is imperative that those
systems take advantage of those
resources
thank you matter charion
representative garcia appreciate
the comments
you know speaking from the
drinking water bureau's
perspective we have staff that
answer phone calls assist water
systems
you know days night's weekends
holidays during the fires uh the
cities operation staff were on
on the phone with with our staff
at all hours of the night giving
them updates we were
communicating back and forth and
we continue to communicate with
the city as well as other water
systems across the state
you know while it's not we don't
we can't quantify this I would
say that the work that we do has
has helped communities to not
get violations for different
things over the years.
Are including the city of last
vegas
and speaking to the assistance
that we provide we do have
technical assistance providers
staff members we have contracts
with technical assistance
providers that that go out and
assist communities with various
things throughout the state
the I think that the challenges
is that the needs of communities
across the state significantly
outpays the assistance that we
can provide it takes a lot of
time and effort weeks months
years to be able to build that
capacity for it for communities
and we want to do a better job
we want to be there for
communities
but we do need the resources we
have limited staff you know
while we do have contracts you
know that the contractors are
limited also so you know I i'll
end with that thank you so much
madame shell of it is it okay if
the city las vegas
say manager speak yes just
introduce yourself for the
record place.
Thank you madam chair my name is
robert anna I the city manager
thirty days in
for the city of las vegas and I
I see a lot of of faces that
have known for many years and
and appreciate very much the
opportunity to come in briefly
relative to representative of
garcia's comments and in those
common set of happened
throughout the course of the day
I would first inform must be
remissive I didn't think each
and every one of you and
especially senator compels and
representative consider less for
the support associated with sb
six and those resources that
were provided to the city and to
local governments that have
suffered the devastation
associated with the fire in the
need for resources to expend and
facilitate us getting back on
her feet we will be providing
some more detailed breakdowns of
millions of dollars of
expenditures directly connected
to speech in particular and I
will thank you again for for
that a support and work to get
us those resources I I sit
alongside mister martinez madame
chair representative garcia and
i'm proud to say
that I work alongside and as
well as the mayor merrill metal
and and the full council we have
councilman martinez here today
as well but you can't put into
words the devastation and the
impact that this fire has every
single day
there are reminders everywhere
we look
these people all of us that live
in this community feel it and so
when you say you see the weight
and the pressure it's something
that madam chair representative
garcia we we carry every single
day
what I wanted to articulate
clearly is that our team has
worked.
Closely with the regulatory body
and the drinking water bureau
and their team to work through
the challenges associated with
the administrative orders and
the sanitary surveys and will
continue to do so on a daily
basis role active to the ninety
eight million dollars we are
going to enter into a venture
based on the direction of the
mayor and the council to partner
with the state in the mexico the
likes of of many maybe have not
seen to the level that that we
need to but I want to see on the
record
that we haven't been city nidel
there is much that has been done
it accordance with those
administrative orders there of
many expenditures and work that
has been done to the damage to
the system to number one first
enforcement foremost sustained
clean water to the citizens the
last biggest so I wanted to say
man i'm sure representative
garcia center completes all of
you here today we're fully
committed to engaging that
partnership with the people from
the state of new mexico you're
correct to in great engage those
private entities that we need to
to appropriately design
construction and carry out a
facility and partnership with
the state of new mexico that
serves the needle needs of of
las vegas and and the citizens
were for years to come but III I
can overstate the appreciation
of the support that you've
provided and and will continue
to come back to the table i'll
be candid in articulating that
the mayor in the council gave
clear direction that we need to
be more aggressive about our
processes in our functions and
how we report back our progress
and frankly this gentleman next
to be in many of us on his team
have been so busy just
sustaining the work of making
sure that we have clean viable
water.
They haven't had the opportunity
to come back to the table and
and help us articulate that to
the community to the legislators
in the state in the mexico and
so i'm fully committed to do
that in lock step with the mayor
and the council and this general
men and the rest of the team and
thank you madame chair I
appreciate the opportunity to to
make a few comments
thank you madame charon I want
to thank mister comments and
I think a
position was if he manager is
gonna go long ways and making us
with us when it's always been
a glorious and proud traditional
community of our state and
and I hold high
dedication to commitment in
order to see that everything has
been made possible to do the
water system will be made
article so thanks again for your
common are really appreciate
that I really appreciate your
stepping up insuring your
comments with this committee
thank you manager.
Any other questions before I ask
something
okay so all mr nice to down
i'm as they congratulations and
condolences you're gonna have
some edicts in your job but my
question is for the city last
how long do you
i'm assuming that with the money
and the relationship with the
state you're going to develop a
brand new system and if so how
long will take
mature members of the committee
were fully committed and a
partnership with the state in
the mexico to to take a close
look at the system in a
comprehensive manner
there's there's there's
essentially
two conceptual frameworks and
and and that mister martinez can
help expand on those but it it
has to do with the sheering and
I want to be careful with my
wording because I I know we have
our merion council councilman
martinez in particular that's
articulated a new system we won
a new system
what that means though is we may
be able to modernize certain
components that are very viable
and useful at the plant and then
augment that with additional new
parts to the facility so we're
about seventy percent complete
on rio before we even engaged in
the partnership with the state
on on two conceptual frameworks
one of which utilizes a few
components and modernizes those
the other would be a a full
fledged brand new facility
depending on which framework
that we would select is going to
depend on what the plan design
construct would look like and so
mister martinez could you expand
on a little bit of that more and
maybe provide some insight as as
to some of the timelines that
we've talked about in our own
analysis and yes so just to give
you guys a little bit of a
history.
Before we have the cascading
events of the flooding the city
of actually is did have some
preliminary design and plans for
other infrastructure that was
going to be a new water
achievement plan some other
safeguards for tribidity and
stuff like that but when we had
the the flooding it turns out
that none of those designs are
anything like that organized
advice for a new facility that
was going to help us produce
water and times of need so what
happened is the center last they
guess had to turn around revamp
and rethief how things are going
to work so to see the last
biggest came out with the two
concepts number one is
modernising an upgrade will the
existing infrastructure with new
facilities meaning upgrade
to all the tradition systems to
meet the chemistry and the
tribidity of the water as well
as modernizing
upgraded equipment and you've
upgrade the facilities that are
there and the other conceptual
ideas are full blown water
treatment plan and based on
the details of like mister said
the plan designed construct you
also have to look into do we
have enough landmast we have
there's do we have that does it
meet the states requirements not
just that not doesn't early
going to the drinking water real
but this year last week it's
also an operate to resource
which is a branded in the peter
sandso you have to take account
into another entity stepping in
an and getting in with them to
make sure that we're gonna be
able to
not just get the water from the
reservoirs to the water
treatment plan but what is that
going to look like because if
anybody here knows about water
treatment for way swatter these
are expensive you have a twenty
four inch valve that we're
looking to purchase and it's two
hundred thousand dollars.
For a valve in order just
opening clothes opening closer
and the two hundred thousand
dollars piece of equipment of
those are long term things that
were looking into to see if it's
viable for the city as well as
seeing if we can
modernize or new water treatment
plan but utilize it for the work
for us that we have because if
anybody here taking a water bill
can attest this fighting water
operators now a days it's very
difficult
if I could
madam chair because
cause
you have to specific question I
and and and I think we're trying
to get to to an answer the you
know there was some
speculation at a recent meeting
that was held actually in this
room with the state in the
mexico of a year and a half time
time frame as as a as a
possibility
with we think that something
that we're gonna have to sit
down with the state of new
mexico as a partner within by
all means if if there's the
ability for with the new
partnership that we have with
the state to get to that point
we we love that challenge in
that opportunity will we get
their based on some of the
expert advice that that we've
been given up it's probably
going to be a big a big
challenge in a steep build a
crook to claim but but I do
think that a realistic time
bring could be within two to two
to five years depending on which
plant is selected mister
martinez is that a good
estimation so at the last
council meeting I gave a rough
estimate of the two
possibilities that we can go
through and timelines are
modernization with new
facilities with the water
treatment plate back a look
anywhere from three to four
years and that's if there is not
a the whole lot of red tape and
a water treatment plan can go
anywhere from five to eight
years
pending on size.
Capacity and things like that at
the cover the city's needs don't
the one add on that I would make
is that some of the adjustments
that we've been immediately
working on to the facility in
communication with the state of
mexico drinking water bureau and
and there leaders is making sure
that the augmentations that we
do to our existing plant can
sustain us for several year old
years well we're in construction
and we're estimating based on
some of the improvements that
were making that we could have
up to the fight to ten years
in place while we're what we're
determining the actual facility
itself is that correct mister
martinez that is correct and for
your references to your last
biggest is past year with the
administration that we have
we've already popped in over
four million dollars into the
water treatment plate just to
keep it stable with new upgrades
to get us to that future like I
was talking about either
the upgraded updated facility or
new water treatment platform
thank you for those responses
and thank you all for being here
this afternoon we appreciate it
and very much and let's see if
our next panel is all here eric
monroe
john a yarbi
n jonas is here
journalist you need a break to
walk out of the room
with no matter i'm doing what
thanks okay.
Presentation of the day.
Committee members if you notice
this is a report this committee
is required several agencies to
come in front of us to do a
reporting by certain dates
throughout the interim so this
is one of those required to
reports.
So is eric starting the
presentation
or who is starting
yes
it will be china europe from the
dan you'll be serious in
associates giving the
presentation on our behalf
okay so john are your b is
starting correct okay you're
going to introduce a stop.
All right
i'm john I are i'm with daniel
be steams and associates.
And my hydrogeologists about
twenty five years of experience
and i'm licensed in the states
of a texas and idaho danielly
stevens is an associates is an
environmental consultant in
engineering firm had quartered
in apple cricket new mexico.
And so what are we talking about
today are the results of a study
we conducted for the san will
mine specifically looking at
environmental impact from the
mind and it's a facts on
potential receptors and our
study was about a year in a
house
the study that I am presenting
in the giving in this present at
this the overview i'm giving and
this presentation is documented
in our report that we just
finished.
We conducted our study to
satisfy conditions of the sand
line generating station facility
and minor mediation a
restoration act
enemy de is responsible for
study the generating station mmd
is responsible for study of the
mine we are hired by m empty and
jonas will be speaking about
updates to the generated station
of purpose of the study is to
guide future and mmd actions and
strategies regarding compliance
and permitting at the moment.
So
there you go I could do the ad
either way it doesn't matter.
And I think ethan handed out my
presentation right he did if you
just referred to the page of the
yeah i'll start doing that thank
you madam chair.
So right now a month slightly.
So the sand were mine its
located in the four corners
region or western forming to
located their several surface
water courses south of the mind
the sand one river flows to the
west it is faired by the animal
so the plot to rivers upstream
of the mine and the chocolate
river downstream of the mine the
boundary shown on that slide
that is the lease and permit
boundary for the mine.
So mining at the same one mind
began in the early nineteen
seventies again a surface mini
it switched to underground
mining in two thousand two the
mine has operated pretty much
continuously sense the seventies
with a one
temporary hole in two thousand
eleven due to an underground
fire otherwise it's been
operating continuously up until
about up until september of
twenty tw.
Mind slight five
existing features at the sand
with mine primary mind features
are include existing and former
pits and an underground mine
area
the underground minority is
shown with a horse on on
vertical lines and occupies
pretty much the majority of the
central portion of the permit
respound call combustion by
products are from the generating
station have been placed as back
fill into the pets they consist
of fly ash and floga flu gas
disauthorization material
i'm bringing those up because
ccps have been a topic of
concern and investigation at the
sand on mine
for a federal train each
exist at the moment they include
hutch canyon some way around
stephen torrio and west water
the hutch canyon show and west
water royals were different from
their natural training just to
accommodate mini the diversions
are expected to remain in the
closure the onside eros before
that I just listed out flow only
during storm events and drained
towards the sand on river.
Current status of the mine
was more line is the current
owner and operator the last day
of mining activity was september
twenty ninth of twenty twenty
two
they are currently back filling
the tuna prepare it's wonder
it's the last pit to be back
fielders a pitch of it right
there
so not a sheet not a huge pit
it's pretty small when you
compared to other pits like a
copper minder cop reminds our
gold minds
and completion of that back
filling is scheduled for us
spring of twenty twenty six
md conducts my monthly
inspections at the mine and the
mine itself conducts quarterly
water quality sam both ground
water service water.
I'm on slight seven
so we conducted a pretty
extensive are comprehensive
investigation but before we got
into it but there's a few things
that we did
to prep ourselves the first was
a site reconnected to be
conducted as I regardless to
familiarize their cells with
conditions and operations at the
mine we conducted public
outreach and received comments
through a web based portal some
were emailed to md public
comments for our included in our
investigation report
public notice also included
information on a public heat
public meeting which we held at
the sand on college campus on
september twenty sixth of two
today twenty twenty four
existing monitoring data that we
compound consists mostly of
ground water surface water data
collected by the mine
data had been collected at the
mind since nineteen seventy
providing a very long history to
sat to assess environmental
conditions.
Slide eight
this is a graphic year showing
exist the existing groundwater
monitoring walls
at both the generating station
and the so there's numerous
ground water monitor while
supposed facilities generating
station monitor was a shoulder
green at the minds are shown and
blue
we again we compiled all
available data from nineteen
seventy four
and then what we did you is more
recently nm's gave us
access to some more recent data
for the generation station so we
added it to our maps and tour
analysis.
This map is similar to the
previous one but showing the
surface water monitoring
locations was two types here at
the moment the first type is
surface water samplers that are
actually in place in the arrives
so they collect storm water
samples when the when the
aroyals flow the others are
called nifty's outfalls and in a
perfect world they always stay
dry and for the most part for.
Most or history they have been
dry at the mind but those are
would monitor the success of the
best management practices at the
mind to contain and prevent
storm what are running.
Study findings
are actually before I get the
state finance few more slides
before I get there
our study was a desktop
investigation so should be
really clear on that we looked
at existing data existing
information
we didn't go out and do new
monitor wells are collect
additional samples there and
there's a lot of information
we reviewed existing documents
and reports this information
consistent publications monetary
per reports and permitting
documents
we valuated existing monitoring
data is data consist of those
collected primarily by the mind
we use these data to identify
the different water bearing rock
units and ground one of flow
directions
we map the distribution of
chemical constituents
created time serious plots to
look at temporal trends perform
statistical analysis and
ultimately care to rise surface
water ground water conditions at
the moment we also identify
potential nearby receptors and
assess the threat site
conditions post to those
receptors finally will be
documented everything in an
investigation report.
Now on test
slide in love
so the add to send my mind
there's three primary water
bearing rock units they include
it and they got pictures of them
off to the right and that
strategraphic geological
strategy
call
olivium fruit information and
picture close sanstar round
water quality at the mine is for
meaning constitutional
concentrations are higher than
water quality standards however
some concentrations appear to be
naturally elevated
concentrations are greatest in a
luvial brown water
upgrading grown water is also
poor we see that but we are side
and if I they need for better
characterization up of up radio
ground water walt
historical discharges to the
generating state from the
generation station too less
water royal are documented and I
do believe that that has had
some impact on surface water and
grown water.
The next few slides it's a
pretty short presentation so I
can't I won't go into all the
date in all the analysis that we
performed so what I did as I
took a sampling of that so the
next three slides are going to
give you a picture of the types
of analysis.
So what you're looking at here
is what's called the potential
they're important to a brown
water hydrologist because we use
them to determine
groundwaterflow direction
so we developed potential metro
surfaces for each of the three
hundred logic units remember
their luvium through information
and picture
this has been lubia so it shows
a groundwater flow direction is
from north to south
along the westwater royal and
wear basically it's westwater
royal for most of the graphic
and then
as southern part is it goes back
to some way when you get below
the conflicts
solution water generally flows
north to south and to the sand
one river
the generation station does
operate to recovery trenches
one is called the memorial
trench recovery system and the
others this somewhere are
recovery track these trenches
intercept poor quality ground
water and prevent it from the
impacting down ready.
Another thing we did
to get a handle on psych
conditions is we constructed a
lot of or a few of what are
called hydrogeologic pros
sections so we looked at things
in the ultimatum that way we can
see like vertically how are
things like what do things look
like next to each other I picked
this cross section here because
it shows all three of the water
bearing rocks particular
sandstown fruit and formation
and the overview
do I have a point
so right there you can see the
olympian olyvia misalways
important in an environment like
this because used the year
lubian is your fast path usually
if contaminants are going to get
away from you they're going to
do it through the eleventh said
it's a higher it's usually a
higher permeability and your
bedrock sequence which would be
a participant sandstorm in full
information are a little bit
tighter and don't carry water as
readily or is I think another
important feature on this
graphic because it shows them it
shows the not on colony impact
of mining but it just definitely
shows the affect of mine is this
is the backfield
so if you could imagine there's
your fruit information that's
what they might
so that that that would have
been the hole that they had
extracted and then they back
filled the area with still.
Slight forty.
A development of box simple
statistics
statistics development of box
and whisker plots as one of
several analysis we perform to
buy way chemistry data
other analysis included chemical
cons a chemical constitutional
contribute chemical constituent
distribution maps time serious
plots and tabulated comparison
to water politics standards is
analysis our presentation the
investigation report box plots
are graphical means for
summarizing a presenting data
shown our plots of tds
mph values
the greatest constitution
concentrations tedious and so
far are observed in a luvio
well.
So right here is tds and then
these are a little boss here so
our vertical access here would
be concentration so you can see
that this has our greatest
research greatest contact
concentration right here
I mean some of them got there as
high as a sixty eight thousand
dollars.
And so faith looks very similar
to tds so again that luvia walls
are going to show us show the
highest concentrations
boron.
Or on in the backfield wells was
highest in the back fill was
rather wise your poorest quality
was in the water system surface
water quality is where much
better quality than what we're
seeing ground water you can also
see that on the scraffic with
the nip desampling locations and
the surface water sites ph is
near neutral to slightly
alcohol.
Slide fifteen.
Water bearing feel information
and pitch sandstone low
permeability of rocks with very
low low wells water love as
expected to recover due to the
sensation of mining so in order
to facilitate mining what they
had to do as they had up the
water down right because I
couldn't take take the walk a
dig the rock out what so there
was some pumping down of the
water table so now that they've
start mining those water levels
are going to recover
I talked about her earlier my
presentation
cbs call combating by products
that were
sent from the generating station
and used it back for what the
mine they have been a topic of
investigation both by you and
and and the US t s most
constituent concentrations and
ccp lead I should say that's
water that would pass through
that call combustion by product
material are comparable to those
of native round water and then
the trouble times from these
areas where it was placed is
long you're talking on the
orders of thousands of years.
Surfer swattered quality and you
see this in the box plots
service water quality is better
than ground water quality horse
water quality along west water
royal and lower somewhere so if
you remember that potential
metric surface map that I showed
of the illusion system it would
be that only it would be that a
roy
storm water in parliament at the
mind have been effective at
preventing just charges to the
arrivers rarely do we ever do
rarely has the mine seen any
reflect in any water party
samples from their nippies
outfalls
deviously identified two areas
of primary concern olivial brown
water beneath west water royal
and the somewhere royal back of
water recheck and point that out
it's it's need be thought it on
one of the previous graphics and
then settlement of was caught
around that appears to be
impacting surface water
the report does identify a few
data gaps those are documented
and probably the biggest one is
the need for a dish a few
additional monitor.
Slide seventeen
mentioned this early in the
presentation one of our task was
to identify potential offsite
receptors and then assessed the
threat on conditions at the
minds of post to those receptors
percent potential offsite
receptors included the sand one
river and water supply well
located on the river
groundwater can potentially
reach these receptors by two
routes does some way around a
luvio ground water system which
I should previously and travel
through water bearing bedrock
fruitland for nature footline
formation and picture close
sands down of the these
potential pathways present
minimal rest to receptors due to
the presence of existing water
recovery systems and I entered I
pointed out earlier but I can
point those out again if need
and low permittee of his esteem
water bearing right.
In terms of reckless reclamation
and restoration existing mind
closure is adequate they've got
they already have a closure
close out plan the primary
reclamation means is to backfill
regret cover and revegetaria
expect this as expected to limit
the infiltration of media
quarter rainfall but brown water
but again groundwater levels are
expected to recover so that
recovery brown water levels
would be probably that would be
the primary transport mechanism
I think of contaminance from the
back hilarious however again I
think that risk as well because
the permeability of the rocks is
continued operation of the
somewhere royal recovery trench
is important I think to the
containment of poor quality of
living round water
otherwise travel to the bedrock
system
is I think of little consequence
because the travel times are
long and the flocks is to the
river alone I did mention it
before that the mine impounds
currently impound storm water to
keep run off from going into the
run off from my errors for going
into the royals once everything
is covered and vegetated those
will probably not be necessary.
And that said that that
concludes my presentation.
So thank you so
the others of you don't want to
make any comments manager I will
from the intermediate
perspective just give you some
run down on the report that you
all have this okay
of a separate hand out for them
I know this item on your agenda
had some changes in terms of the
names that were on their
not on the agenda but also here
with me as torture shooming from
the environment department for
our manager of our grandmother
quality bureau's mediation per
site section and he'd be happy
to answer any questions
george team worked with jacobs
our engineering or our our
contractor
when you don't know something
that's right
but i'm always too much your
time i've just got a couple
pages announced to go through
as you all are aware of likely
aware twenty twenty three
legislature past house but one
forty two strength and oversight
transparency and accountability
for word legacy contamination or
potential contamination at the
same one generating station
appreciate john's distinction
between the eminer and army
department interests and your
restrictions at the site and
will speak to the environment's
particular concern about
ground water contamination and
reporting on clean up status and
public health risks
the
absolutely
now the same one general
decision I was in waterflow the
next goal was operated for
almost fifty years from nineteen
seventy three to twenty twenty
two that's now under going down
the listing and decommissioning
and that is why you all wanted
us to to carry out the studies.
Required under house still one
forty two at the planet they had
activities including combustion
waste one or management solid
was disposal and that absolutely
are activities that could
contribute to the long term
contamination of shallow and
deep groundwater
we have some concern about
specific contaminance those
include some that were just
discussed natural so fates are
snex lenium uranium vocs and
dissolved salads a lot of the
contamination on site already
exceeds groundwater quality
standards and multiple
monitoring wells those are new
mexico environmental department
grand water quality standards
the plant operated under three
discharge permits although it
was one facility there are
different components of it that
needed discharge permits for
their operations
one regulated process water and
surface and poundments that the
pounds that you see on the
images on the cover and in
the later pages of the report
there's also a discharge permit
for their solid waste disposal
pit and for the somewhere that
was discussed in the previous
part of this presentation.
We review and force those
permits to maintain compliance
with the permits and to protect
ground water of course so what
in our own investigation tell us
one we have a lot of data gaps
in in that y
from my reading and my memory of
your passing this bill is why
you you want us to do this such
so we we have a lot of data gaps
and groundwater and soil
sampling especially for certain
types of contaminance like p
fast
and deprocuffers so we know we
have inadequate downgrade
modering in high risk areas we
know that there is uncertainty
about certain recovery systems
particularly somewhere royal in
our perspective
we know that there is a lack of
background wells to determine
what the natural levels of these
contaminants were we don't
necessarily have that historical
record
in the previous presentation
spoke to those upgrading
levels and we just think that we
need to do a lot more to
understand what those background
levels are
so to date we contracted with
chickens engineering very
recurable affirm that is a lot
of work in the next goal and
all over to do a day to gap
assessment and do a preliminary
what we call a fees to
environmental site assessment
that is part of the
state and federal regulatory
framework in terms of
contaminated sites to put it
simply we installed six new
monitoring wells in high
priority areas we
gathering that data and will
have results soon from that
testing that will
continue to inform the planning
from the house bill one forty
two work.
Into the the closure market that
we anticipate we developed a
conceptual site model and
updated a sitewide
hydrocheological model
we did all this with the public
involvement transparency that is
called for in these processes
and hospital and forty two there
is a public meeting that
georgians team held in february
we continue to solicit public
comments and respond to those as
we get some of the issues that
we have heard are who's
responsible to fund the clean up
what are the possible future
land uses at the site how are we
going to enforce the existing
permits what financial assurance
is available in in what is the
plan for locked her monitoring
so
we've through that process we've
affirmed km's responsibility for
the clean up I can from permits
won't be terminated and tell all
the water quality standards in
the permit requirements are met.
So next we are gonna continue
implementing the monitoring
strategy and modeling strategy
we're going to finalize our
phase to esa report that I
mentioned earlier in q three the
next quarter
you know today through september
with the results
of some of those new monitoring
wells we're going to seek to
install additional wealth
together even more information
under the review of our
discharge permits and we're
gonna maintain the public
transparency and and reporting
to the legislature
there won't be much new
information but we're reporting
to you maybe you and your
colleagues who are on the rate
of activities has just materials
committee next friday and we
were happy to come back as we
gain more information out of
this
you know that like I said the
goal of the bill seemed to be to
get us on a path to planning for
what is necessary to make sure
we're protecting ground water at
the same one generating station
site
that is directly in line of
course with the new mexico
environment departments mission
we are committed to science
based decision making community
involvement and unforcing our
standards so look forward to any
additional comments from george
and new questions all may have.
And i'm sure members of the
committee my name is george
human as a jonas mentioned on
the manager at three minutes and
oversight section of the ground
water quality bureau so my staff
were involved with the efforts
that were just discussed and we
are really.
Historic data that were able to
do deeply into and take a close
look at as part of this that
then let us to looking at where
our data gaps are and where we
need to go in the future so we
really believe this has been a
great opportunity for us to look
at all day to look at where we
need to gather new data and then
as a spring board going forward
develop the plan for how does to
investigate the entirety of the
senate germany station site
which is well or two to acres
and then plan for a mediation of
the contamination and
grandmother thank you.
Okay so do we have another
precedent
no.
Okay this is a lot to take so
i'm still reading.
Questions coming.
Okay so are scientists here is
going to start with some
questions rubber service
thank you for your presentation
so I was kind of in and out but
chris far as a high school out
teacher I love box and whisker
plats I don't actually see him
usually still thank you for that
and this is amazing thank you
I miss being in the classroom
because I would have showed this
so on this I don't know what
page it is page eight
just charge permits so you the
ground water contaminance of
concern tell me more about those
because it seems like they're
some of them are are pretty high
especially the ts and in boron
right
so what are we doing with those
madame chair representative
service you know that we have
three current distruct permits
under the water quality act and
the ground the sovereign sport
protection regulations for the
sand law and generating station
so what some of these detected
ranges indicate or a
concentrations in the waste
waters that were generated by
the process of energy production
so the waste waters that went
into your parliament's sport
operation as you can see some
pretty high concentrations of
our his constituents and then
that's why the structure permit
existed was to make sure they
were discharged in a manner that
would prevent the contamination
of ground water and appropriate
world that happens but we don't
live in a perfect world so miss
spent her so is is there a
potential for contamination or
or no I mean how close are you
have how close is the water is
it seat
madame chair representative we
know from groundwater monitoring
we've done under the distract
from us that there is some
degree of ground water
contamination at the facility
what we don't yet know is the
total extent of.
Contamination again because it's
such a large facility and
operated for so long and at one
point when they were fully up in
production for energy production
the permits authorized this
discharge of more continuing
gallons a day of waste watch
that's quite a bit of water
going into this parliament so
going forward what we certainly
need to do is to have piano
conduct a more thorough site
when destination to assess where
contaminates occur on the
property and the development
plan for for remediation
that and chair so
is this water able to get back
into the watercycle will can it
can can go anywhere and can get
to the community waters
madam chair representative it's
a good question so I think
ultimately one of the things
that we we don't know yet is
how will ten minute ground water
be cleaned how will it be
remedied
that remains to be seen and you
do it do a lot more
investigation first before we
could determine how that will be
a big question is when you
recover ground and you clean it
and you immediately what you do
then with the reclaimed water so
looking forward
to be things as putting it back
into the ground
as we move forward and water
supplies are constrained people
do talk about can we put it back
into a political water supply
potentially
that's to be kind of cutting
edge territory now something
we've dealt with in the past but
I think when we go forward
looking at the current use
regulations that are being
propagated there's certainly a
focus on looking at can we take
waters that are contaminated or
are deemed just you know not
proper for for domestic use is
a way we can put them to some
benefit I think looking forward
that would have to be something
to be considered as well
a manager I guess I guess it's
very some because of the
produced water we have in the
southeast corner of the state in
its everywhere and so much of it
and when they do injur.
We're looking at a lot of
earthquakes tremor small tremors
I I don't I hope we don't see
that here if you do inject
it's just there's there's so
many things but it looks like
you're moving in the right
direction I hope
and that's all the questions are
thank you.
Thank you center city.
Thank you manager and forgive me
because part it was hard to hear
so i'm not sure I I got
everything um
is there another is there a
document that we can look at
that is the entire study and
where is it
never
yeah they keep out in chair
thank you senator lopez there is
a report you can access it on
the earning m m m md website and
I think eric can get you that
website that there's a pd up
I would like to read it and
really digest it because this is
a lot of information and then
part of
the
this day data gap assessment
I had trouble following what
your what's going to happen to
fill in those gaps I I know
you're doing additional
monitoring wells and you're
doing um but then then what I
mean because the the water
quality is she looks significant
to me
again i'm not looking at the
report just what I can
understand here this is pretty
significant and his senator is a
representative of saturday and I
said are we going to be able to
continue what's going to happen
and so I guess i'd like a little
more discussion about okay here
are the gaps and data we're
gonna fill these gaps and this
is what we intend to do once we
fill these gaps
you probably have some
assumptions about what you're
going to find in these gaps at
least I do just based on what
i've seen here have you thought
about that and and what does
that look like I may know i'm
asking you to kind of go more
into the future with what's
going to happen with your
mediation.
Madam chair senator
we are definitely looking
forward to what is next and
that's why I think this
opportunity to conduct this
study is a really great spring
board for the department to to
answer that question
at this point time as I mention
we have three active discharge
permits so what we're
considering is what's the best
part forward for requiring the
responsible party that's pn to
do further investigation or
immediate and so we're
considering is it under the
permit is it through
the portion of a regulations
called the abatement regulations
we haven't quite determined what
exactly is the best help forward
yet but we're discussing those
internally and will discuss it
very shortly with our senior
leadership team as well to
decide what's about best pet
forward but to answer to get to
the point of you know filling
those data gaps will require
further work to be done by pm at
this facility so is you know pn
is looking at selling it in this
I I guess it's more of a legal
question where my mind
automatically goes to and that
is do we know that the buyer is
taking on the responsibility or
are they leaving it with p and m
and the p and m is going to
disappear or we ensuring that
they need the buyer is accepting
the liability for this
because we've seen that happen
in other situations where they
sell their company or they
declare bankruptcy and they
disappear the the responsible
party the blue party disappears.
Manager senator
I definitely appreciate the
question brings me back to my
days as a student in your soft
procedure class
but I do think that
that is a legitimate while that
is a legitimate concern
we will make sure that we hold
the responsible party account
there are a federal **** and now
some state law that allow us to
have clearer authority to do
that with centerbook twenty one
that you are passed this year
you really clarified in state la
what irresponsible party is and
that would extend to a successor
energy
excellent and I think that's
real important to keep an eye on
that
has the transition moves forward
just because well you know how
this is how things can fall for
the cracks and so I I think
that's really important I really
appreciate this ideas a lot to
digits and I appreciate all of
the work that is going to
it and also the work there is um
you know the remate rate
remediation is response is
the liability in the
responsibility of the person who
caused the harm and I know that
we up to find it some of this
and I understand why but I think
it's really really important
that we follow this carefully
and i'm looking for a look for
that report
is it is the citation where
you're but you said you'd send
it
on there somewhere I also think
somebody's from pm's here if you
want okay that would be that
they'll be great to hear them
share i've already thought about
it didn't respond.
There's a.
Good afternoon madame chairman
members of the committee i'm
sure growing horse with pn
government affairs I get to see
women senator
pinemas committed to working
with enemy and all its
stakeholders through this
process and I could talk a
little share a little more
specifics with you but we're
committed to working with the
community or a community
remediation and we've been doing
a lot of work over the years and
working closely with med another
state holders on this including
federal
federal partners as well and I
think that enemy de also touched
on the public component took
this and recommended to work
with their candidates as well
and ensuring that we keep folks
informed through this process
and are you confident that the
transition if there is if the
cell does go through that the
transition documents will
move the liability forward to
the
to the buyer or or what is the
plan for that
sorry you're used speaking about
her potential transaction
were at the beginning stages
where at the beginning stages
and I can talk to you a little
more about that but today you
know we're committed to
remediation and reclamation of
the site
all right well if you know I
just think it's real really
important to that
that the rebitation does go
through and that there were
always is a responsible party
that
there is come is just as
committed as pms to two to
remediation as it is right now
so thank you thank you very much
I appreciate it
thank you are there any other
questions or comments but.
Thank you very much
there's a lot of information
here that just I have the sake
of insurance as my colleagues I
just don't want to see
any spread or
flow up contamination
i'm concerned about the future
mr p and m thank you
thank you for being here today
thank you very much
bound to find a one quick piece
of information i'm able to get
the
mmd report to any look
electronic location and post it
for you
or I can just hand the link to
send their money if you are
staff sarah she will make sure
the committee gets wonderful
thank you
thank you very much all of you
for being here I know you waited
or you can
to be the last one
committee members is there any
business that we need to do
today
so committee membership on your
one other are invited to the
charlie spicken span bakery from
five thirty to seven thirty pm
they are not open during this
time all of the asset he is up
in the syria and the secure
association are putting on the
standard for us so if you are
available please stop in we'd
love to see you there and
committee we are in recess
until nine am tomorrow morning
thank you.
