Introductions
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Of course, to the vice
chair, to the members of the
committee, to our staff and of
course to the guests that are
here with us, uh, State Senator
Pete Compos representing all our
parts of seven counties in
northeastern New Mexico and it's
always great to be here in Las
Cruces.
regardless of the time of the
year. Thank you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
State Senator Larry Scott.
uh
District 42
Lee, Eddie, and Chavis Counties,
uh, appreciate
the hospitality of Las Cruces
and look forward to the next 3
days. Thank you.
Good morning.
I'm Chair Jim Townsend, um,
Senate District 348 and Otero
Counties, always glad to get
back to Las Cruces, where they
got good red chili. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
Harlan Vincent's House District
56 Lincoln and Otero and uh
thank you for hosting us Las
Cruces, went and had some good
Mexican food last night and it's
always nice to be here.
Uh, good morning, uh, John
Henry, uh, representative of
District 54 for Eddie Chavez and
Otero, um, very happy to be back
in Las Cruces. Proud graduate of
NMSU. So, I walked around the
campus last night and had fond
memories. So thanks for having
me back.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Good morning. My name is Elaine
Senna-Cortez. I represent the
beautiful people of District 62
in Lee County. I got here
yesterday, took my almost 3 year
3 year old on a dinosaur hunt
and went shopping, so I've had
an amazing time being in Las
Cruces already. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Gail
Armstrong, state representative
for District 49, Sierra Caine
Socorro, and Valencia. Thanks
for having me.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Montoya from San
Juan County, um, don't mind the
shirt. Uh, I sent my kids and my
money here to New Mexico State.
All I got from UNM was this
lousy shirt
tomorrow.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and,
and attendees. My name is Martin
Zamora. I represent House
District 63 covers the
south half of Curry, the north
half of Roosevelt, Aldebaca
Guadalupe and touched San Miguel
County. Thank you for your
hospitality.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, members of the
audience, and those viewing. My
name is Patricia Roybal
Caballero, and I represent House
District 13, which is the far
southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque. Welcome to my
hometown. Welcome to my
homelands. Thank you so much.
I thank you, Chair. Uh, my name
is Representative Kathleen Kates
from District 44, uh, District
44 is all of Corrales, the
northern part of Albuquerque and
many parts of Rio Rancho. Thank
you.
I always love being here in Las
Cruces.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
to be with you and good morning,
Las Cruce. It's great to be with
you and uh thanks for coming to
the meeting today.
and thanks for having the
meeting here in Las Cruces. I
check.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, it
is great to be here in Las
Cruces. We, we were here last
week for another meeting, um,
and this is my alma mater, so
it's always great to be here.
I'm Debbie Serignan. I represent
House District 21 in Bernalillo
County. If you know Albuquerque,
it's the Monzano High School
area and thank you for hosting
us today. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Matthew
McQueen, I represent House
District 50, which is the
southern half of Santa Fe County
and the Placitas area of
Sandoval County.
Thank you. I'm gonna ask the a
Sara to introduce herself and
all the staff. Good morning,
ma'am Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Sarah Reed
Meyer council Service. Uh, we
also have Angela Dakin and Ian
Keller, uh, drafter, as well as
Bob Chavez helping with um AV
and webcast. Thank you.
Thank you, and I'm Liz
Stephanics. I'm a state senator
in District 39 representing
parts of four counties, San
Miguel, Santa Fe, Torrance, and
Valencia, and thank you for
hosting us here in Las Cruces.
So if the first panel would come
up, we have the president of New
Mexico State University, the
mayor of Las Cruces and the
chair, I believe, of the sen of
the Dona Ana County
Commissioners.
So we'll start with the uh
president, please.
Let's see if this worked, Madam
Chair. So, Madam Chair, thank
you for having us, uh, here to
OK, so reminder to all of our
speakers and our committee
members, we can have one mic on
at the at the time I'm a big
offender, so, um, if we could
all remember that. Thank you.
OK, Madam Chair, let's try this
again. So first of all, thank
you for being here. Uh,
obviously, uh, we take a lot of
pride in having you here. We're
excited to, to be able to
welcome you and uh especially
this committee, uh, because we
do spend a lot of time and uh a
lot of our research monies on
water. Uh, we have some of the
best, uh, experts worldwide, um,
and so we're very proud of this.
I will want, I do want to say
one thing. So after having, uh,
undertaken a
trip through all 33 counties
visiting all of our extension
offices this summer. Uh, I know
a little bit more of the people
you represent and uh the the
challenges, the different
challenges that each one of you
faces so it's been a great trip
for me and my executive to go
around, uh, meet many of you in,
in your locales but also get a
sense of uh of uh how our land
grant mission really needs to
exemplify itself across across
the state and for
the for uh uh both
representative Vincent and
Representative Henry, I'm going
to become a part-time resident
of your counties because I'm
about to buy a cabin in
Cloudcroft, just so you know,
so, uh, but, uh, back to the
topic at hand, we are about to
start our semester we're really
excited, uh, our enrollments are
up, um, I, I yesterday if you
were on campus, you probably saw
a lot of kids walking through
the gates. We had the probably
one of the biggest, uh, numbers
of
I think it was over 1000
students uh who came both to the
convocation and through the walk
to the gates.
this speaks to the vibrancy of
this of this campus and uh
coming back to this topic at
hand, we really know that our
research in water is crucial at
this time. I know that this is
one of the big topics that the
state is uh taking on in the
next few years.
given the scarcity of resources
and what is happening uh in
nationally and in this state
this year we've had a lot of
rain, so that's been great, but
we can't always count on the
rain, so we have to figure out
how we're going to, uh, work
with our, uh, water resources
and uh uh hopefully you will be
getting a little bit of that
flavor throughout the
presentations this this these
next couple of days and also
through your visits in places
where um
uh work is being done that I
think is going to be and
continue to be transformational,
so I'll keep it short and uh
leave uh my colleagues to to be
able to present their there and
introduce themselves as well,
but thank you again for being
here. This is an exciting time
to be here.
Thank you, and I'm sure there
might be some questions later
and uh for all of you, thank
you.
So
let's now go to the mayor.
Uh, you don't have to keep
passing. We have two there, so
yeah
Well, good morning. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Committee, thank
you as mayor of Las Cruces, I
want to welcome you to our
beautiful city of Las Cruces and
of course to Aggie Nation as I
am also alumni of NMSU, uh, it's
great, it's great to have you
here, uh, so that you can see
how beautiful Las Cruces really
is when you see the sunrise over
the Oregon mountains and you see
our beautiful sunset. You'll
know how beautiful this this
city of the crosses and Mesa
Valley really is. So thank you
for, for being here. Thank you
for, uh, uh, allowing us to come
here and speak and, and welcome
you and talk about some of the
things that we have going on in
Las Cruces. um
you know, very, very excited. I
got, I got a note, I think it
was uh Senator Campos that said,
uh, regardless of what season it
is. You're here at the best
time. We actually have 5. Our
normal, uh, spring, winter,
summer, fall, and chilly season.
So you're here right at the
peak. It's chilly season. Best
time to be here in Las Cruces
and um we're we're, we're very
excited and very pleased
because, you know what, what you
do, uh, with water and natural
resources is so important to
New Mexico and so important to
the Mesa Valley, you know, we
have the sunlight, we have the
soil, we have the water, you
know, our backbone is out of
agriculture and it's so
important and and it's important
for us to partner with NMSU with
all the research and development
and to partner with the county
with all the agriculture that
goes on there, but for us as a
city, it's the growth and
development, and I wanna share
with you all some good news that
we have here in Las Cruces. We
did receive a $60 million
grant, a federal grant for uh
infrastructure. We will have a
new road, uh, where our high
school, if you come in from, uh,
the, the east side from the
Oregon mountains is Oregon
Mountain High School, and that's
Mesa Grande that will, will
travel south all the way to
Loman connecting about 50 miles,
but what it creates for us is
just on the northern part in the
next within the next 4 years is
about 4000 new homes, you know,
attainable homes, affordable
homes, affordable housing, uh,
commercial, industrial, so we're
gonna see a spike and a growth
in the city of Las Cruces with
that infrastructure, that grant
of $60 million. I think that's
the most we've ever received in
the city as, as a grant and
we're very excited about it, but
you know, with every blessing
there comes burdens, and it's
the water usage, you know, our,
our most valuable resource and
how do we cons
er ve and how do we continue
with that. And then also the
the tying into that
infrastructure and what it leads
to bottlenecks in different
areas, and the roads and, and
things that we're gonna need for
funding to help us with that
infrastructure growth and
demand, but it's very exciting
of what's happening in Las
Cruces because again it goes
back to our natural resources
that makes this area so
beautiful that people will want
to move here and we've got a
great opportunity, but I want to
put that in the forefront that,
you know, in order to look
forward for that growth and
development
we're gonna have to also take
care of our resources. So I
appreciate what you all do and
how you look at that and what
you'll set up for the future,
uh, just sharing what's going on
with Las Cruces, and again,
thank you all for being here.
Thank you. And now the chair of
the, um, county commission.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
thank you for saving the best
for last this morning. Uh,
hopefully I can do that position
justice. Uh, my name is
Christopher Schier Hernandez.
I'm the chair of the Donana
County Board of Commissioners,
um, I am also an NMSU graduate,
although not born and raised
here, I chose to finish my
degree at NMSU, um, and on
behalf of my fellow
commissioners, welcome to Donana
County. Um
just a couple things that Donian
has been working on that's
really exciting and you all, uh
that has to deal with a lot of
the things that you're going to
be talking about today is that
the county has submitted an RFI
to look at the brackish water
under the industrial park of
Santa Teresa. Uh, we are waiting
for that RFI to come back, which
will be helping us leverage
private public partnerships to
explore um a possible
desalinization plant in Santa
Teresa, uh, with that being
said, it will help us bring
clean
drinking water to a lot of
residents in that growing area,
all up and down, uh, the border.
um
and it would be definitely
looking at what is happening
currently in El Paso, Texas,
where they've been doing this
for decades. Uh, we're also
supporting New Mexico border
authorities to capital requests
for another water tank in the
area, uh, with the possibility
of, uh, drilling a few new wells
to help with the growing
expansion and both Sunland Park
and Santa Teresa region, um,
we're also talking, taking a
systematic approach in looking
at our
uh, water resources within the
county. We are a very large
rural sprawling community. We
have a lot of different
challenges, uh, with the
population that we have and as
many colonias as we have in the
area, so we're not only looking
at what it looks like for um
residents within the city
center, but we're also looking
out in our rural areas. Uh, we
currently own and operate 4
within the county of Donana,
that being La Mesa, Chaparral,
Rincon, and
Salem, um.
and, and we're really kind of
focusing on it. There's been a
lot of conversations here in
Donian County over water and our
natural resources and those
things precious to us. So I
think we're taking the steps in
the right direction to further
prosperity for water in our
communities for generations to
come, one being with that
possible desalinization plant in
the border, uh, being the first
in, in our region so
with that, I'll, I'll leave
I'm up to you all. So thank you,
Madam Chair and committee.
Thank you. Before we go to
questions, uh, could, uh, I have
Representative Little and then
Representative Do introduced
themselves.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, members of the
committee, and good morning
members in the audience. I'm
Charlotte Little. I represent
House District 68, which is in
the northwest corner of
Albuquerque.
Very good to be here. Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, first of all, thank you,
Madam Chair, for inviting me to
be here. I didn't expect that to
sit with y'all. Um, I've served
on finance and transportation
committee and uh council
services. So thank you very
much. I appreciate that and it's
great to see the president and
the mayor and commissioner, um,
Rebecca Dow, I have the northern
part of Donana. I have a little
bit of Sierra County and the
city limits of Socorro and so
it's great to be here. It's a
very important topic for all of
us, particularly in our area.
Thank you.
Thank you. Now we're to
questions, comments from the
committee.
Uh, we have Representative
Armstrong to start.
please. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, gentlemen, for
your presentation. Um, always
happy to be at NMSU, uh, it's,
it always feels good to be here,
um, I wanna talk to you, ask a
few questions, Mr. Mayor, about
your $60 million in housing, um,
was that federal, state, a
combination of all? Where did
all that money come from?
Yes, Madam Chair and committee
member Armstrong. Yes, that is a
private, public. It was a
federal funding, uh, grant
through a developer here and um
so that's how that was obtained.
We as a city are the fiscal
agent to receive the funding and
uh make sure that that road is
designed and inspected and
approved
Uh, thank you for that. I, I've
noticed a lot of, uh, housing
going up. Is, is any of it,
Madam Chair, uh, for low income?
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, committee
member Armor, yes, um, so with
the development that's gonna go
in that area, 40% of that has to
be affordable housing, so there,
there will be uh affordable
housing, attainable housing, and
then as a developer decides for
the housing, but we'll have a
mixture. We just recently passed
our new land use code here in
the city of Las Cruces. It is
more flexible and creative so
that we can have commercial, we
can have, uh, multi-use
families. We can have affordable
housing and maybe we can look at
even zoning some of the area for
industrial.
Thank you for that, uh, Mr.
Mayor and Madam Chair. Um, are
there gas lines running to every
one of those new housing units?
at this time they're, there
isn't with that, uh,
development, uh, the developer
has used some, uh, in some areas
north of town and has also has
some subdivisions that do not
have gas lines and is all
electric homes, so there,
there'll be a mixture depending
on, on how we go in that
direction with the developer.
Thank you for that and so, uh,
it's, it's a permit that was
only allowed to be permitted if
it was all electric.
No, no, ma'am. That's not the
case at this time because it is,
like I said, we're, we're 3 to 4
years away from that
infrastructure taking place, uh,
at this point there, uh, we'd
have to work with El Paso
Electric on utilities and look
at our water lines and even
whether we're going to go with
gas lines in that area or all
the area or partial area. It
just depends how we can connect
and, and how we go in that
direction.
Thank you for that. So none of
these are permitted only for all
electric.
No, not, not, not yet. We do
have some areas where this
developer has where it's all
permitted for all electric.
Uh, thank you. um
so that all electric is caveat
to part of receiving some of
that money.
No, I don't think that was, um,
part of the
the grant approval for, for this
grant that took place for the 60
million. I think it's just more
for the infrastructure and tying
in and helping alleviate uh safe
route from Highway 70, uh, to
Loman in Las Cruces to for, for
traffic control safety for
future development, uh, right
now in within 4 years in one
area we're looking at 4000 new
homes
total we're looking at maybe
10,000 homes in that area. So I
think it's more for the growth
and development that we received
the approval for that grant
funding.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you all for being here. It's,
um, I always love coming back to
uh my hometown.
and I have a, a question for
each one of you briefly. Uh, I'm
gonna start with, uh, Doctor
Ferman, and um
my son is a graduate of NMSU.
and I am of UNM
so that makes our family living
very interesting when it comes
to sports, particularly and
academic achievements. Um, so
for the purposes of this
committee, Madam Chair, how is,
um, I'd like to know how animSU
and I followed the progress
through the years as leveraging,
um, research and innovation.
uh, to help us all in New Mexico
adapt to the what we are seeing
as long-term water scarcity.
and climate changes.
in agriculture
particularly in water intensive
crops because you are our main
institution in this area. I'm
interested in
that. Thank you
Madam Chair and Representative
Royal Caballeros, thank you for
the question. Uh, I'm, I'm very
excited to be able to answer
that question because uh we have
incredible research not only in
the more traditional areas where
water is being done, especially
with regards to industry, but
also obviously in agriculture
and the partnerships that some
of our agricultural experiment
stations are starting to uh have
both with the counties and the
towns and the cities where they
reside, uh, but also
internally working on, you know,
sort of drought resistant crops,
making sure that there are uh
new uh new uh let's call it gen
looking at how the evolution of
certain uh genetic types
actually favor less consumption
of water. Those are all really
high on the work that we're
doing. Uh, we're seeing it
especially on the eastern side,
uh, you know, in our research
centers like in Clovis to
Kumari, um, and in, in, in, in
Artesia. So, uh
that is a uh a central aspect of
what we're doing, uh, some of
the partnerships, for example,
I'll just give you an example in
Tucumari, the city and Tucum
carrying are, uh, agricultural
uh experiment station worked
together to basically take uh
you know uh wastewater and then,
uh, sort of make it usable again
in different functions, uh, both
at the agricultural extensions
uh uh uh services but also uh
across their own experimentation
with
water, so it is something that
we're advancing because we need
to do this and you know, you
talk about um uh water uh
water uh now I the term escapes
me, but precisely the need to
reduce the consumption of water
in those water intensive crops
is one of the principal uh
aspects of this research. So,
um, yes, uh, the answer is we
are really committed to that and
uh as I said, we
have really intense and great
researchers both at our stations
and on campus that are uh
evolving that research.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and that
is very important because we
look to your institution for
guidance in this area, um, thank
you. Moving on to Mayor
Enriquez.
um, good to see you, um, Mayor,
how is the city? I'm
particularly because of the area
and the region region that we're
in, interested in knowing how
the city is engaging with El
Paso and Ciudad Juarez, um, to
address cross border water
challenges in the Rio Grande
Basin.
and
in answering that, do you
believe regional water compacts
are working as intended.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Caballero, thank
you for the question.
Yes, I, I believe, um, you know
for me firsthand it's
establishing that relationship
with El Paso and Juarez, so I, I
have developed a good
relationship with Mayor Johnson
and Mayor Crewsquellar Perez and
we're always looking, uh, you
know, we, we, we have that
battle and we have that issue
all the time. There's just some
litigation going on right now
that it's hard to say if, uh, it
is working or not, but the
relationship is there so that we
can take care of what we have
and work together is
definitely there
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
relationships do matter in the
long term. Also, thank you for
that. And finally, um,
commissioner
Salmo Hernandez, I hope I
pronounced that correctly.
We're oftentimes, um, in the
state and federal governments,
um.
sometimes presume certain
positions that glare is killing
me right now, um, but from the
county perspective, what role
can local governments play in
strengthening water planning.
particularly when state and
federal policies oftentimes lag
behind local realities and
that's we've been attempting to
address how we can balance this
and give
credence and in priority so I'd
be interested in knowing how
you're, how you respond to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
the county has been leveraging
our
partnerships, especially with
NMSU and other uh entities to
look at what the future of water
is, and you're correct in
stating, you know, the state did
a great job. They put out the
strategic water, um, bill which
we're going to be going and
applying for grants here pretty
soon, which is great because it
definitely fills in the gaps
between what a county or
municipality can do compared to
the state and the federal
government, but we've been
seeing a lot lately here at the
local level that leveraging
those partnership
s that we have, we're able to
further the investment in the
community when it comes to those
water issues, as well as water
supply, um, and we're kind of
looking towards the future by by
having those conversations early
on, but we are noticing that
there's, there's a lot of
challenges that are arising
right now, and I think with the
help of the state of New Mexico
as well as county government
we're able to leverage different
kind of funding structures to
look at how we can move forward
in that
regard
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
responses, all of you.
Thank you. Any other questions
or comments from the committee?
Yes, Representative Kates
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so
much for your presentation.
Thank you. I, I, I do, uh, love
Las Cruces, uh, the audiences a
great show of engagement on um
on this topic, and I do
appreciate it, um, uh, I look
forward to, uh, being able to
tour the DeSalitization project
as well and I'm looking for
that. Just a couple of quick
follow-up questions. The, um,
housing that you talked about
that is through federal and
state grants, um, and currently
it's an all-electric. Is any of
that being, um
subsidized by using solar while
you take advantage of the fact
that at least for the 1st 4
years we'll be all electric.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, Kates. No,
the, the, the grant was for the
infrastructure for the road.
What will generate from that
infrastructure will be
additional housing, the growth
and development in our
community. There'll be several
different permits, uh, allowed
whether they're all electric or
gas lines in areas is yet to be
determined, uh, affordable
housing, uh, will be part of
that as 40% of that development
on the northern side of that
road has already been approved.
Uh, so, so there will be a
mixture there, um, like I said,
we just passed our new, uh, land
use code
uh having that ability for
creativity and flexibility. So
thank you for that clarification
I also am interested in knowing,
um, as, as everyone in in the
country and the state are
dealing with different housing
issues, whether it's
transitional or entry level or
do we know if, uh, our
university or student housing
and is that affecting the city
itself? Do we have a shortage in
that and do we have a plan to
expand that with any kind of
workforce whether it's for our
hospital or our teachers or
student.
Madam Chair, Representative
Kates, uh, if I, if I understood
your question with regards to uh
uh sort of NMSU is whether AR
housing is is uh is having
significant issues with the
water, uh, and then are we, uh,
thinking about how we can
partner or produce the kind of
workforce that will help advance
the issues with regards to
water. Is that is
that what I'm hearing
Thank you, Madam Chair. No, I
think that that is going to be
addressed later on in our
agenda, which I'm very excited
about that, um, uh, no, I am
asking whether or not there is
student, uh, student housing
shortages here in Las Cruces or
um if there are plans to expand
any kind of workforce.
related housing.
So I'll answer the first
question because it's a simple
simplest, no, uh, we are
actually doing really well with,
sorry, by the way, uh, Madam
Chair, a representative cases,
we are currently uh actually
facing an interesting
challenge we typically have 92%
occupancy in our student housing
on campus this year we're doing
really well. We're at 98%. Uh,
that to me is exciting because
it shows that
students want to be on campus.
We also offer, uh, I think a
discount, uh, a discount vis a
vis the neighboring uh uh
neighboring housing
opportunities so students are
taking advantage of that, uh,
which is for me personally a
really good thing. It gives
vibrancy to the campus, but my
understanding is also that
there's plenty of housing in the
surrounding areas for students
who need it, uh, at this point.
So I I'll pass it over to the
the mayor for the second part of
the question.
Yes, thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representative Kates, yes, uh,
it can affect our, our
community, our city as uh
enrollment grows, but um, I
don't think that's, that's the
issue that we're seeing, but
we're very fortunate here in Las
Cruces. I think we, we've had
several housing projects that
have been approved and we just
received another additional $11
million for housing. I know our
housing administrator Natalie
Green is here present.
and uh she's doing a tremendous
job with, with all the projects
that are going on. So we have
like 3 or 4 projects that are
going on from senior to other
affordable housing and
partnerships that I, I see that
um
in all actuality we're, we're
getting ahead of it. We're,
we're, we're actually, we're
still behind, but they're,
they're, they're shovel ready.
They're in the they're, they're
in the works right now and I see
Las Cruces is very fortunate to
have a lot of housing
developments going up right now.
Thank you, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much. Um, I have a
question regarding, uh, the
increase in housing that's
coming along, um, it's really
good to hear and I did hear
about, I did hear about the low
income housing being available
in that development and
references made to affordable
housing, what I'm curious about
is the types of homes that are
being built
in terms of
starter homes. We have, it's
great that we have provisions
and uh have opportunities for
people in the low income arena,
Madam Chair, but it's also
important that there is a class,
uh, there are individuals
working families right now who
are in between the low income
and moving to another one.
They're trying to get their foot
in the door for starter homes.
I'm wondering what you consider
starter homes and if there are
uh homes such as those
being made available to that
to that group in between
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Little, thank you
for that question. Absolutely,
and that's, that's where we use
the phrase and that came from
our developers here locally, um,
to, to create what we call
attainable housing to attainable
housing to fit that, that, that
middle class uh right now on
average anywhere a new home can
be anywhere from 300 to 320,000.
We have some developers that are
that are shooting for getting uh
a home where it could start out
at 2:40, 260. So that, that's,
that's their goal, uh, with the
the rising cost of materials,
that's what really makes it hard
for for our developers and our
homebuilder, but that's what
they're looking at and that's
what they phrased it as
attainable housing.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the response. I'm really
glad to hear that. I, I'm
hearing a lot from
families who are not able to
reach, uh, the new home, uh, the
new developments that are coming
in, uh, to some areas across the
state, uh
and so it, I'm glad that there's
actually an effort, a conscious
effort being made to develop
those attainable homes and
especially we all understand the
prices that have gone up, uh,
for materials, but doing their
best to uh
make them attainable and within
reach for those families is
really critical to me so thank
you very much. I'm glad to hear
it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all my question. Thank
you. If the audience can't hear
at any time, if you just wave,
we'll readjust the mic. Uh,
Representative Zamora, you're
next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters, uh
Mayor, I'd like to have a little
clarity on the $60 million.
Was that
$60 million I believe it was a
grant
And, and is that for the road or
for the housing? I, I kind of
got mixed up in there which,
which it was.
Yes, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Zamora, yeah, for
clarification, it's for the
road. It's an infrastructure
grant for the road, the road to
be developed, it's about 50
miles and it's $60 million that
a private developer submitted,
but it's a private public, so
the city of Las Cruces receives
a grant from the federal.
OK, so, so we're not
we're not talking about $60
million.
for housing, right? Am I correct
in that?
Madam Chair Representative
Zamora, you're, you're correct.
The 60 million is for the road.
The, the developer has acreage
there that has already submitted
and and put a, a plat out for uh
a subdivision area there that
will generate about 4000 homes
and 40% of that will be uh
affordable housing.
Thank you, thank you for that
clarity and, and are you
receiving any money from the
state of New Mexico for housing?
here in Las Cruces, Mr. Mayor?
Yes, we've been very, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Zamora, yes, we have, uh, I
think recently our most uh
recent one we've received a $11
million for about 4 different
housing projects that are going
to take place here in Las
Cruces.
That's great. And, and how much
how much of that 11 million will
actually go to 2x4s in concrete.
How much of it gets tied up in,
in
bureaucracy, I guess I would
say.
Mr. Mayor
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Zamoa. It's, it's difficult to
say, but, um, with the rising
cost of materials, it's, it's,
it's always like it seems like
we never have enough like every
time we look at it, it's like it
increases by 3%, you know, uh,
as, as we move forward, but, uh,
I can't, I can't give a pinpoint
on exactly, um, where we're at.
We're, we're trying here with
the city of Las Cruces with our
permitting process.
to make it as business friendly
as possible so that we can
eliminate a lot of the red tape
so that time is money and we can
reduce those costs, get the
inspections done quick. So we're
trying everything we can that we
can control to, to help, uh, you
know, use the funds as they're
needed and as we know, the
materials are the most expensive
item in the project that uh
we're trying to look at
everything else and how we can
skirt around
some of those things still build
safe but yet in a timely manner.
and, and Mayor, and how much has
anybody done any studies on how
we could help as legislators and
in Santa Fe with rules and
regulations.
as to how we maybe bring the
cost of a house down. I know, uh
there was a bill in Santa Fe
and, and maybe some of the
legislators can help me remember
where this bill landed, but
there, or, or the governor was
pushing for
every new house that was built
in the state of New Mexico to
have an EV charging station in
it.
and I believe that cost was
somewhere between 10
100 and $15,000 and I don't
know, I, I think it varied on
putting it on an existing house
and maybe a new house, new
construction, but, uh, are these
homes, are they gonna have to
have EV charging stations in
them and
have you looked into that,
Mayor?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Zamora, when, when you talk
about the EV chargers and I
know, I, I haven't heard
anything or seen. I know that we
follow the energy, uh, code and
look at those things and
anything new will, we'll look
into. I can tell you that with
the HomeBuilders Association
with the state of New Mexico,
they're always looking at
working with the New Mexico
municipal League and how we can
reduce the costs and
and, and, and that's a big part
for the local end is how we can
uh work on some of the
permitting process and then work
with the state as well, talking
to construction industry
division and also the uh
mortgage Finance Authority on
how we can all work together in
having a fluent and smooth
process to eliminate a lot of
the costs, so that's an ongoing
conversation that's always going
on with all the entities
involved.
Thank you for that, mayor, and
Madam Chair, I don't mean to put
you on the spot, but do you
remember where that bill went or
or whatever became of that new
rule on the, on the EV stations
and in new homes in the state of
New Mexico.
I don't. I think it was Senator
Soulsville
June.
It didn't pass
is what I'm being told. Senator
Scott, you have some
information.
Madam Chair, the construction
Industries division by rule has
mandated that new construction
contain an EV charging station.
whether and I don't believe
that there is any restriction.
on how expensive or inexpensive.
that dwelling needs to be.
So without getting into the deep
in the discussion. My
understanding is that you can
either put in
um a separate um EV charging
station that costs a few $100 to
charge in a few hours or plug
into a regular outlet to take
overnight and take and use quite
a bit more electricity, but I
didn't want to get into the
whole discussion about that. So
back to your, you have the
floor.
and uh Madam Chair.
I'll try not to keep it, not to
take it in that direction where,
where we get into like a heated
uh debate like we do in Santa Fe
sometimes about some of these
issues, but I think it's very
important
uh, to the city of Las Cruces,
the state of New Mexico
and, and this is a legislature
and also the governor
when we mandate these things
like this,
to, to our citizens of the state
as to why we're doing it and why
we're taking it that direction.
and maybe
Jane Doe doesn't want
to have an, an electric vehicle.
So why, why would we mandate her
to have another
$10,000 cost or $15,000 cost on
her house.
if she's not going to have an
EV, uh, in a, sitting in her
garage being charged.
Uh, I think these are very
important issues, Madam Chair.
Uh, another thing is that I hear
and I haven't built a house
lately, but I hear that in the
state of New Mexico, now you
have to use 2x6s instead of 2 by
4s to.
And, and those, those rules like
that cost us more money
and we have to ask ourselves why
So as we go forward, Mayor, uh,
Madam Chair and Mayor.
uh
if you come across issues that
that are
gonna hurt your, your, your
projects and, and building more
homes here in the, in the city
of Las Cruces.
I'd like to help you if, if I
can
uh, and, and maybe, maybe put
this back on the table in Santa
Fe.
If, if those rules come up and,
and you investigate it and they
come up and, and they're going
to cost you a bunch of money
and there's no need for it. I
think, I think we ought to work
on them
uh
that concludes my questions with
the mayor, Madam, Madam Chair,
but I do have a question for the
president of the university
here.
Uh
Mr. President, Madam Chair
in Clovis at Clovis Community
College
uh, the pay that we're paying
our instructors in the nursing
program
is, uh, at times a lot lower.
than they can go out and work at
the
at the hospital there in Clovis.
To me that's, that's a big issue
because, because now
we're having a hard time holding
instructors
and recruiting instructors to
teach the students.
and it's a simple fix, but we
never have tagged on it in the
state of New Mexico to fix it.
So Madam Chair, and Mr.
President, I'd like to know if
you have the same problem here
at your university.
Madam Chair and Representative
Zamora, in terms of faculty, we
do not have the problem. I mean,
I think the the whole nursing
profession has sort of been
turned around, uh, turned upside
down by COVID, but we have, uh,
we seem to have stabilized at
least our teaching faculty
within the system, so we are
able to attract people to want
to teach.
but as you, as you pointed out,
I, the nursing profession and
the salaries that are paid at
different places in order to get
uh instructional use from, from
nurses has been a challenge. I
think it has been a challenge
nationally and I can imagine
that, uh, especially at
community colleges where some of
the pay is lower, it's gonna be
and it will continue to be a
challenge. Uh, I I don't know if
that answers really your
question, but the main campus is
doing pretty well, and we have
' t turned anything from our um
uh our uh community colleges, at
least internal to an MSU to
suggest that there are issues in
that area.
So, Madam Chair and Mr.
President, am I hearing you
correct that you don't have that
problem at the university level.
You're, you're being able to pay
those instructors well enough
that, that you feel like you're
gonna keep them and they're
making more than they would if
they left
uh, instructing and, and going
uh to work as a nurse at the
hospital. So, Madam Chair,
resentative Zamora, uh, there,
let, let me, let me be clear. We
have faculty who come in on the
tenure track that uh usually are
uh pretty satisfied with their
with their salaries. We also
have teaching faculty who are
what I would call uh professors
of practice who come out from
the system and for
them actually working as
instructor as a supervisors,
provides an uh an additional
source of revenue. So in fact it
is something that they are
excited sometimes to do because
they do love teaching and they
add it onto their regular
profession, which makes it
easier for us to get good
quality of external and up
to-date uh professors of
practice, so, uh, it's, it's a
little bit of both things which
helps us maintain the quality of
our teaching.
Thank you, Mr. President, and
thank you, Madam Chair. That
concludes my questions. Thank
you, Representative Zamora. I
next have Senator Steinborn,
then Senator Townsend. Thank
you, madam. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Good morning again.
gentlemen. Um, so I have a few
questions for, for probably each
of you, uh, Mayor, just a little
bit about the road. So you had
mentioned it's a 50 mile road,
is that right, Hampshire
Madam Chair, Senator Steinborg,
it's approximately 50 miles from
Oregon Mountain High School to
uh Lomond, so where that
neighborhood, uh Walmart is on
Sonoma Boulevard.
You visualize it as 50 miles
just seems like a lot for that
stretch of land, but um
a lot of desert out there. OK,
thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
Mayor, and I'm so
so we're getting a federal grant
to build that road and then the
city's going to.
take it over the, the grants
coming to the city that we're
gonna own it and have to
maintain it is that?
the deal, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinor, that's correct. OK. How
many landowners would you say
are served by, you said that
there's a developer in the area.
How many landowners are around
that road, do you think? Madam
Chair, uh, Senator Steinborn, a
lot of that is state land and
BLM land, uh, currently the
developer owns a large portion.
There are a few privates along
the way, but there is a lot of
state land that we would be
looking at to um
seeing uh converting that for
maybe commercial industrial, and
additional housing in the
future.
Thank you. And is the developer
given that they're gonna be a
beneficiary of this road. I know
a lot of times developers will
pay, pay the cost, frankly, to
put roads in, at least up front
and other utilities in this case
we're getting a federal grant
which is a great windfall. I'm
just curious, is the developer
what are they kind of
what are they kind of putting
in? Are we, are they putting
anything in outside of
Yes, madam, uh, Chair and
Senators Steinborn, there are
some matching funds that that go
with this and there could be
approximately about $10 million.
We'd also be seeking some of
that funding, uh, for the state
to help us out with that, uh,
for the make sure that it is uh
completed, uh, what the
developer is putting up front is
the design and all the uh
planning and uh I would say the
planning and designing that goes
into that, that they've already
put about 1.5 million just into
that research design and uh the
future development of it.
Thank you, Mary and Madam Chair,
how many houses are they
anticipating in that development
there, you know?
You have Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Steinborn, like I've
said, they're, they're looking
at just the northern part of
that, what they, they do own is,
is approximately 4000
Wow.
4000 acres. 4000 homes. 4000
homes. Gotcha.
Yeah, thank you. And so I'd
heard
so I'd heard the term uh forget,
I already forgot it the uh not
affordable homes, but the
Attainable, attainable, right,
and then you had said it's
whatever that number is, 200,
250,000.
um, and maybe it's a
conversation for Miss Green. um
doesn't, you know, I don't know,
depending upon income levels, I
know that's a kind of a place in
the market where there's.
it's kind of the fastest part of
the market, but in terms of
affordability, I wonder how
affordable that bracket is for
lower income people who
financially are trying to
struggle to even get into a
home.
That's really my question and I
and I mean, out of 4000 homes,
it'd be good to have some
inventory in that range. It
feels to me, but I could be
wrong on my numbers or my
assumption there maybe that's
just a conversation I could have
with Natalie offline.
uh, unless you wanna speak to it
at all.
No, uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Senator Steinborn, absolutely
we'd have to bring Natalie into
the conversation, but just
speaking on the on behalf of the
factors such as interest rate
and what the developer can do
and how they can get ease of
entry into those homes will be a
lot of factors into being able
to finance it because it is
difficult, it is very
challenging. Thank you, Mayor.
And while I'm, while I'm on this
topic, or any parks, new parks
planned to serve that area in
the area of the development.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator
Steinborg, yes, that would, that
would be part of it. It, it
would, I don't know exactly what
the uh percentage would be, but
definitely when they do that,
they, there would be that and uh
I'd be advocating for public
safety such as fire stations and
maybe we'd have uh East area
Police quarters as well for
public safety and early
response. Thank you. Yeah, and
we hear that from our
constituents all the time and
kids in neighborhoods that, you
know, the need to have
accessible nearby parks and
you know, it's time to do it is
when it's being built and we're
negotiating with the developer,
so
I think that's super important
um, and obviously you have a lot
of resources in that part of the
county going in so or that are
already there community centers
and stuff like that, so, um,
right on, that's all I have for
you right now. Thank you, Mayor,
for all you're doing for Las
Cruces. You really are doing a
great job and
appreciate it. And so, uh, Mr.
President, I have a question for
you. I know you've really
championed AI. You've really
brought technology, the new
technology era to Las Cruces
with some of your focuses. Can
you talk a little bit about what
you're doing
here to make AI.
or integral to NMSU and to New
Mexico.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Steinborn,
uh
you know, it's sometimes you
need to leverage what you
already have. So, and we had
really good uh people already at
the university, not only in the
fields closer to what AI would
be, which is probably computer
science and electrical
engineering, but across the
university and in fact uh I
believe that last week some of
our, uh, some of our researchers
presented on the work that is
being done and AI and
agriculture, uh, up north. So
the
so what I did was uh try to
bring together all these forces
into an institute and the state
was generous enough to provide
us with some funding last year
and uh we are supplementing that
funding with internal resources,
uh, you know, last year we added
500,000. This year we'll
probably be looking at another
$1 million that we're putting
in, so that, that is, uh, for a
couple of reasons. One is uh to
um create synergy between the
different places in the
university where AI
is being produced because
there's always really uh fertile
uh room for cross pollination
when you have these, these uh
researchers, but the other one
is, is really to, uh, fulfill
our mission as a land grant
institution, uh, we are in some
ways a more uh applied knowledge
in, in some areas, um,
institution and so using AI
machine learning and um
thinking also obviously about
the, the many challenges that uh
it's producing these days
because it's uh not just uh an
indiscriminate use of AI and
machine learning, but it's also
trying to figure out the
ethical, um, you know, uh,
compromises, but also the the
the ethical issues that
sometimes AI produces, but in my
vision, it was really about how
do we partner with uh many of
the other areas of research and
the in the university and
obviously for this committee
water
is an important one because a
lot of the research that is
being done on peruse water and
brackish water on recycling and
reuses of water produces a lot
of data and that data is
becoming almost unmanageable if
we don't put some kind of uh I
don't want to call it control,
but some kind of
rationalization, and I do
believe that AI and machine
learning will help us do that,
but across the board, uh, I'm
excited about the the the
possibility of seeing where in
fact
we can uh increase the, the, the
research that we're doing in
this area. I mean, I, as I said,
my travels across the state have
also allowed me to see, for
example, how in ranching, uh,
virtual fencing has become a big
thing and AI and sensors have
really used to have it really
helped to make that a much more
viable format of what we do, uh,
when I went up, um, uh, in, uh,
in Clayton,
instead of what we saw, for
example, is the use of these uh
these processes as we want to
call them to uh figure out the
best composition of feed for our
cattle so that we provide uh
better feed that produces more,
uh, well, let's call it more
weight, so better cattle, but it
actually reduces the amount of
feed that the cattle need. So
these uh improvements, uh, I
believe really, uh, fall into
the mission
that we have to uh give research
and innovation that helps the
state, um, so we'll continue to
do that. I know that uh our, you
know, we're part of a consortium
in New Mexico, but there's also
really good work that is being
done in the Border plex region,
so we're looking at that as
well, and especially as
manufacturing is coming into the
region, they're looking at most
industries right now are looking
for AI savvy students. It
doesn't mean that they have to
be AI majors. We do have the
first bachelor's of Science in
AI
Machine learning at the
university in the state, but
it's also about embedding it in
all of our majors because it's
already there. So it's just how
do we train our students to be
better at using it in a way that
is responsible and let's call it
useful for the state.
Thank you and Mr. President, I
just have one more question and
I know we might be kind of tight
on time, so are we doing all
right?
Yeah, we're doing fine. OK, um,
it's kind of one question with
two parts. So before you came
here, before we started the
opportunity scholarship, we had
a problem with we were really
bleeding in and sorry, forgive,
I know you know this, uh, but we
are bleeding enrollment
at all of our universities. It
wasn't just NSU it was all of
them.
and um we
coming out of COVID and
maybe prior to that, so the
opportunity scholarship really
turned that around, helped to
turn that around and get more
people on a pipeline to go into
school, which is great.
My que and now I know there's a
trend of more people going on on
online for school in New Mexico
is really adapting to that.
NMSU, I should say, is adapting
to that. So in a macro sense,
could you just speak to how
enrollment is going at NMSU and
then the role of the opportunity
scholarship, the continued role,
which is a thing that we fund
it's not cheap, but in my
opinion it's one of the most
important investments we can
make. Can you talk about the
continued importance of that and
NMSU and also changing strateg
ies and meeting
changing times
Madam Chair, Senator Steinber,
so, um, I know we're actually
tight on time because I could
actually take a long time here,
but let me, let me very, very
specific, uh, our numbers uh
across the system right now look
like we're gonna have uh an
enrollment growth of about 1000
students. Of those, uh, about,
again, we're projecting out
because we're still not a
census, but about 120, believe
it or not, are going to be on
main campus and about another
450, 500 will be on
online. And uh but our regional
community colleges are also all
growing. So we're seeing growth
across the board. Now what you
ask is, is a fundamental
question, does the opportunity
scholarship have have an
influence. Certainly it does,
uh, and, and it, it creates
opportunity precisely because it
takes away the tuition element
for a lot of students and and
and that's 0.1. The one place
where we need to be still
conscious is for the cost of
attendance costs like housing,
like food, um, food scarcity,
and so those are the, the, the
services that will ensure that
we are successful with the
Opportunity scholarship. So the
state has been really generous.
We need to continue to be uh
really careful to all of our
students and how they have been
either prepared uh academically,
but also in terms of their own,
let's call it home economics to
the realities of college because
the opportunity scholarship
takes away the 11 pressure
point. But the pressure point
doesn't go away. We still know
that we have a lot of students
who use our food pantry, we have
a a real drive to try to
eliminate that need for our
students, and as, as we have
come to realize, uh the other
pressures are always there and
especially in academically, we
could probably do a better job
of pre-preparing our students
and we're doing some of these
bridge programs coming in, uh,
but I think two things that
the opportunity scholarship has
done and I, in my trips across
the state, one thing that I have
realized is we haven't
advertised it well enough in
many of the communities because
when we've brought it up in some
communities, they were
surprised. So I think the
partnership with the um higher
education department and the
universities needs to be at the
level even of the advertising of
this opportunity and then
explaining what the other
costs are.
Uh, one initiative that we
haven't gotten to yet, but I,
I'm thinking very seriously of
make is we need to put our
costs, our total cost of
attendance.
on our websites so that students
can see what it really looks
like, not only having had the
opportunity scholarship taken
away, but so they can realize
what the other costs are so that
we can partner with them with
the other aspects of their
financial experience.
Thank you, ma'am Chair and thank
you President for paying
attention to these issues, and
that's all I have in the
interest of time. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Senator
Townsend.
I think you're gonna wrap this
up, but you have some time.
Oh
Oh, and then we'll have
Representative Kadena. So
Senator Thompson, thank you,
Madam Chair
Oh.
Mayor
President
Chair
Um, thanks for being here.
Um
I
I
I'm glad you like AI because,
well
they were talking, I was doing a
little chat TPT and and groin
and
and I was amazed, um
the 4000 homes, 40% of those are
gonna be affordable homes.
which is um
you still
a good number and, and good.
That's, I support that.
What I, what I thought I heard.
um from Representative Armstrong
and Zamora and
was there is a
Excuse me, Senator, it's not
just you. If you're speaking,
could you put the mic directly
in front of you because uh
people are not catching
everything. Thank you.
I'll scooter too. How's that?
Thank you. One of the things I
saw was in affordable homes.
only uh between 0.5% and 1.3%.
of people
utilizing affordable homes.
own an EV today.
It's a really low number.
Um
which would be of those 4000
homes would be between 25 and 40
of those homes would be.
people that should have the
right to buy an EV and I
strongly support anybody that
wants one, should have one. So
that's not the question. My
question is, I looked up the
cost of an EV charger in New
Mexico.
and currently
it's between $500 and $8000.
It's not a
they don't give you the option
as they should, quite frankly,
as, as you, Madam Chair,
mentioned.
They, they recommend a 50, that
they require a 50 amp service.
And that's really not the cost.
The cost on 4000 homes.
to add 50 amps of load per home.
is over 200,000 amps.
of incoming power structure to
that grid.
That's where the real cost is
and it's huge. It's, it's
hundreds of thousands, it's
millions of dollars.
So I would just, um, I would
hope that as you go through the
process, the other thing I
looked up, Madam Chair, just
because I didn't know
how many, what's the percentage
of people that want natural gas
in their homes between 69 and
74%.
So if you want to meet the needs
of people
that are
utilizing
these homes which we should meet
their needs.
You would do a lot more by
offering
multiple fuel sources, gas and
electricity than just trying to
push an EB mandate. So that's,
that's one thing that um
I wanna make sure that you
understand.
The second thing, Mr. President,
I, I heard you were at 98% and
your housing. Kudos. Good job.
It seems to me that how much of
those are are students that have
assistants in, in that, in their
housing. Do you know off the top
of your head?
Madam Chair and, uh, Senator
Townsend, I don't know off the
top of my head. Well, the thing
that I
coming from the business world,
the thing I got to thinking
about is, on one hand, you have
a, a public-private partnership
trying to build 4000 homes
And on the other hand, your
subsidizing students coming in
that kind of either depletes
the, the market of people going
out to rent uh
a private, uh, supported housing
or you're basically forcing the
market rate down a little bit.
Kids going to college, I get it.
I mean, I, I'm, I'm there, but
if, if we're really going to
promote a public-private
partnership, which I'm a strong
believer in. We shouldn't
undermine that effort on the
other side.
Um
so I would hope that um
uh
that we look at both sides of
that, uh, Senator Steinborn uh
mentioned something that I was
interested in.
and these
this road, wherever it goes, I
don't, I don't really get where
it goes, but.
but I do understand is there's
$60 million
of foregone capital
that a developer has had to put
in a development in order to
extract a return on his
investment for land that he owns
adjacent to this.
How
how many
how many
private entities
uh, are, are benefiting from the
$60 million.
and
and has anybody really looked at
that? I mean, I always
become a little bit suspicious
when I see a huge dollar amount
going into an area and
somebody's developing right next
to it, like.
voila, they hit the, they hit
the jackpot here, you know,
they, they got a big benefit of
$60 million and they didn't have
to
uh put the infrastructure out
there. Have, have you, how, how
many people are
how many private
landowners are there that are
benefiting from the $60 million?
Do we know?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Townsend, uh, to be exact, no,
I, I don't, but it is a jackpot
for Las Cruces because there is
uh some of the private ownership
that this developer has, and
then there's other privates and
then there's a lot of state land
and BLM land that, that's
available, but what it also
brings to us that that we can
use some of that state land for
some commercial and maybe
looking at some city property
that we have out there
for industrial as well, so it's
a huge uh economic uh developer
for this community for the
future. It just doesn't serve
one individual. It's, it's,
it's, uh, it's, it's good for
the whole community, and I'm
not, Madam Chair, I'm not
arguing that. I, I, but I have
to, uh, try to protect those
dollars. You, you say that as a
singular developer, is that
correct?
Is there just one developer?
At this time, it's one developer
that put in for the private
grant.
for, for the federal grant that
that was received that the city
receives, but there are multiple
that will benefit from this. OK,
I'll leave it at that for now.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Mayor.
Thank you, Representative
Cadena, and would you please
introduce yourself as well. Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Representative Lara Catana, and
I'm honored to serve in House
District 33 here in Donana
County. So that includes the
historical communities of um the
Tortugas Pueblo, Messia and San
Pablo, as well as NMSU's main
campus about the West side and
south side of Crus and lots of
the valley. And I was peacefully
enjoying some yogurt and berries
in the back, madam chair, but I
got fired up when I heard, um,
our colleague Senator
Steinborn ask a couple of
questions in relationship to the
Opportunity scholarship. So I
just quickly wanted to make a
comment about what's coming up
for me from constituents and
young people across the state
this time of year with um higher
ed coming back into full swing.
So just as context, I have two
teenagers, one is starting their
freshman year of high school at
at Las Cruces High, and my older
daughter just graduated from Las
Cruces High in May. Um, and
certainly for me what I felt for
a couple of years now was that
the opportunity scho
lar ship was
political propaganda promised by
one politician that we never
delivered on.
I've been more than impressed
about the way our higher
education institutions lifted
that mandate and did what they
could.
to bring meaningful ways for
potential students in New Mexico
to show up on these campuses.
But this time of year, as I have
last year, I've received so many
communications from people that
say this still isn't affordable.
I thought college was free.
I thought I had a chance to do
something different.
So, and, and I hear from a
parent of a graduating senior
that's about to start college
herself, I heard about a couple
of families who changed plans,
who had kids that maybe were
going to go to Texas or Arizona
or Colorado and got bribed back,
like, it's no tuition in New
Mexico. I'll buy you a new car.
We'll go on a cruise. Stay here.
But I've also heard about those
graduating seniors that would
have been first gen immigrant
families, families who
have
maybe not quite made
the economic conditions real to
see college as part of their
future.
who still aren't starting
at NMSC this fall because
regardless of opportunity, we
didn't change the conditions
that made it possible for them
to imagine something like this.
Um, so I am so proud of NMSU and
shout out to our community
college DACC for the meaningful
work they do every day to show
up differently, to address
housing, um, instability to
address food scarcity, uh, but I
think it's really important that
we say out loud, like there was
a lot of media around these
announcements and opportunities.
but for me, so many families are
still receiving these letters
that say NMSU or UNM is going to
be a total of 8000 or 13,000. My
daughter, who happens to be
leaving somewhere far away
tomorrow, um, the letter
ultimately for her financial aid
package, had she attended here
was 3 or 4 times what ultimately
um I will be paying for her to
go to school somewhere else. And
by the way, I love this
institution. She was ready to
imagine something different
ly and and see the world from a
different place, uh, but thank
you all for the work you do
every day, and thank you for
continuing to name that there's
this whole spectrum of issues
that young people, students of
all ages are navigating as they
imagine something like this, so
we can't begin and end with
opportunity. That was a
political stunt. Let's talk
about what it means to change
access to higher education every
single day. So thank you for
that.
Thank you very much. Any last
comment?
as we are rounding up to our
time.
Thank you so much uh for all of
you, uh, staying and presenting
and answering our questions, and
as you can see, anything you
want to do, we're gonna have
questions about
Thank you again for your
hospitality while we're down
here. Madam Chair, thank you
again. Welcome to Las Cruces,
and I hope you all enjoy your
visit.
Thank you. OK, could we have the
next panel start to come up? We
have
Austin, Davidson, Lisa Owen,
Michael Chavis, Nikki Kozlowski,
Sara Flore receivers, and Denise
King.
the
talk.
Oh, just that.
Committee members of
this meeting we're trying to
focus on, uh, food and egg, and
of course, water and everything.
So it's quite a few of the
presentations that you're gonna
see while we're down here is
related to that.
So, are you ready
OK, please go ahead. Awesome.
And just everybody, please
introduce yourself. We have
people watching online as well
as here in the room. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Austin Davidson. I'm a fiscal
analyst for the Legislative
Finance Committee. I will be
giving you a presentation
specifically on the recently
passed reconciliation bill and
its impacts to the federal
budget and in particular its
impacts to snap or supplement a
nutritional assistance program.
It'll be something like this.
It'll be in front of you, it's
also going to be up there
included in this presentation is
also a breakdown in some of the
Medicaid impacts because of the
federal reconcili
ation bill, I will not be going
into those. I'll be folksing.
mainly on a high level of what
the reconciliation bill did and
then also changes to snap.
So turning to the first page,
excuse me one second. If you're
chatting, you need to go outside
or
probably downstairs because it's
all coming forward. Thank you
very much.
Go ahead, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, the first page
of your presentation, well, I
guess technically the 2nd is a
breakdown specifically of what
the federal budget in FY 24
looked like. So there's that
first section, it's going to be
that mandatory spending, and
then there's going to be the
discretionary spending, and then
there's going to be the debt
interest, and those are what's
called the total outlays, that's
the total budget of the uh
federal budget specifically $6.8
trillion and then the inner ring
highlights the total revenues.
So that's the amount of money
that the federal government is
bringing in and then the
outlying circle is what they're
spending and you see that
difference is what's creating
that deficit roughly $1.9
trillion. So the large portions
of the mandatory spending are
going to be Social Security,
Medicare, and then Medicaid, and
then with a discretionary are
two separate buckets, that's the
military spending and then the
non-military spending, and then
that light gray area over there,
the net debt interest, that's
the amount
that the federal government pays
on the amount of debt that our
country currently holds, roughly
$800 billion. Turning next to
the second page of the
presentation. This gives two
separate graphs. The first one
is a growth of the federal
deficit and then the second one
is the amount of federal debt
that is held by the public, and
there's going to be a
presentation by the consensus
revenue Estimating Group
tomorrow in front of the
legislative Finance Committee,
and they will give more
information
about specifically these two
graphs and how the
reconciliation bill will be
changing them.
Turning next to the 3rd page,
this is a helpful breakdown of
the total revenues. This is the
amount of money that the federal
government is bringing in
through taxes, the largest
portion, 2.4 trillion, is the
individual income taxes. The
second being payment payroll
taxes, and then the third being
corporate income taxes and now
this is roughly Garonn by about
7 to 8% every year, and I think
that's an important number to
keep in mind when you turn to
the next page, and that's going
to be your
total outlays. You can also
think of it as the amount of
money that the government is
spending, that's $6.8 trillion
and the spending has grown by
about 11% every year, so the
amount of money that the
government is proverbially
making is growing by 7 to 8%,
while the amount that it is
spending is growing by about
11%, thus growing this deficit
that is oftenly remarked on, and
so key to this is what has grown
in the federal spending,
specifically Social
Security has grown by about 0.5
trillion since 2019, while
Medicare has grown by about 6%
every year and then Medicaid has
grown by about 10% every year,
and for Medicaid this growth was
in part due to the increase in
enrollment due to the COVID-19
pandemic and also not
de-enrolling people and not
unwinding it as traditionally
fast as it usually is. Another
thing to note is that the
largest growth out of any of
these is actually in that debt
payment.
specifically that has grown by
about 135% over the past six
years, and these payments are
set to increase due to the
significant spending and
borrowing increases done during
the pandemic, and again, that's
going to be that beige kind of
highlight right there, that's
about that $800 billion that is
spent on the debt that we
currently hold.
Turning to the next page, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
is a breakdown of what the
discretionary spending looks
like in those two separate
buckets, the first being
non-defense and the second being
the defense categories, and each
of these have grown at different
levels with the largest being
certain of veteran benefits
being the one that has grown the
most.
turning
the next page
out of chair, members of the
committee, these two graphs
specifically highlight the
changes in the different
revenues and tax cuts, and like
I said before, the consensus
revenue estimating group is
going to be giving a
presentation tomorrow that will
go into pretty extreme detail
into these things and so I can
certainly relay any questions to
them, but I think they'll be a
more comprehensive breakdown of
that tomorrow.
Turning next to page 8. This
gives, I think, a helpful high
level overview of what the
federal reconciliation bill and
its impacts on the federal
budget, starting at the top, it
cut taxes, and it's projected to
cut them by $4.5 trillion. This
includes extending previous tax
cuts enacted during the prior
Trump administration and it also
created new tax cuts on things
such as tips and overtime. It
also made cuts to the overall
mandatory and discretion
ary spending by $1.2 trillion.
This is over a 10 year timeline,
and these cuts included reducing
the spending on Medicaid,
Medicare, and the Affordable
Care marketplace by about $1
trillion over 10 years. It also
increased the near term spending
on armed services by about 150
billion and Homeland Security by
129 billion, though these
increases were not spread out
over that 10-year time, and it
also made other significant tax
changes
and another thing that the bill
did is that it increased our
debt limit. This is the amount
that the federal government is
allowed to borrow, and it
increased that by about $5
trillion.
turning to the next page. These
are the specifics tax changes,
and this is a high level
breakdown of those, and again,
the rag will be giving a more
detailed breakdown, but the high
level of it is that they change
the state and local tax
deduction, the standard
deduction and the car loan
interest deduction and these
three could reduce revenues by a
projected $190 million for the
state in FY 26 and then
additionally these, this
estimate at 190 does not include
more complex change
s like changes to the bonus
appreciation tax or the guilty
tax, which is the global
intangible low taxed income.
Turning to the next page, Madam
Chair, members of committee,
this is more detail about what
the high level reconciliation
bill is specifically going to be
changing and for the interests
of this presentation I think
specifically lines to, 3, and 11
are important, specifically the
work requirement expansion and
there's actually an error in
this slide. I apologize. It
initially says less than 10
years, that actually is 14 to 17
years, that's the new um
workplace
work um dependent deduction so
there's also new stricter state
tax cost share triggers, and
this is depending on payment
error rates and also the states
will now pay 0 to 15% benefit
costs targeted due to that
payment error rate, and it also
increases the administrative
costs of SNAP to 75%. Currently
it's 50/50 between the state and
the federal government and that
final one, Madam Chair, members
of committee, would be on line
11, and it's this clean
energy tax credits and the new
reconciliation bill is going to
be speeding up the phase out of
those tax credits specifically
the wind and solar phaseouts
will have no credits after 2027,
and then for hydro nuclear
geothermal, those credits will
now sunset in 2033.
turning now a lot of pages,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, because the next 10
pages go into Medicaid and in
the interests of time for the
rest of my panelists and for the
interest of this presentation,
if you could turn to page 2 that
is next when there's more
discussions of the impacts to
Snap.
Now, specifically, like I
highlighted on slide 10, the
main changes to snap is going to
be expanding work requirements
from ages 55, it's now up to age
64 as well and also changing the
dependent and changing that now
from ages 18 to now 14 to 17 as
well. Additionally, Madam Chair,
members of the committee on the
next page, there's also, I think
a really helpful breakdown of
the timeline that these changes
to Snap.
will specifically happen. So on
page 21, you'll see that the
state match requirements are set
to begin in October 2027.
However, within the bill, they
also created some grace periods
depending on your state's
current payment error rate and
due to New Mexico having a
payment error rate that is above
that 6%. It's highly likely that
we will have a delayed
implementation for that state
match, essentially the amount of
money that our state would have
to pay up for Snap and you see
that first
blue line right there, that's
the payment error rate if it's
too high, it would possibly
begin in FY 29, and if those
payment error rates continue, it
could delay implementation of
this pay until FY 30, and then
that bottom line is when the
federal shareriff for
administrative costs will start,
and that's going from the 50/50
we have now to the 75 state 25
federal, and that will be set to
start in October of 2026.
So that's a good helpful slide
to keep in mind as we continue
discussing any of the changes to
Snap.
turning next to page 22. This is
more of a breakdown of these
costs that the state might see
depending on the payment error
rate, and these are changes that
the bill also put through.
Current law states that the
federal government pays 100% for
benefits, and now due to this
change in the reconciliation
bill, you'll see the graph over
there kind of highlights the
sliding scale depending on how
much the state would then pay
for Snap. So say for instance in
that second column, if our state
had a payment error rate of
between 6 to 8%, we could pay
possibly 57 million in terms of
current snap, and then if it
goes up to 10%, it could go up
to 115 million over 10% error
rate, it could go to 173
million, but again, the caveat
to all of that is our current
payment error rate will probably
trigger a delayed implementation
of those payments until we get
below the payment error rate and
then it will be implemented.
Turning to the final slide,
discussing snap. This
specifically highlights those
administrative cost changes so
that first part of the table
highlights that the current law
states that we're paying roughly
37 million and the federal
government is also paying $37
million. That's that 50/50
match, but then due to the new
changes in the reconciliation
bill in October of 2026, we will
then be paying 56 million to 75%
than the federal match will be
that 2
5 % or the 18.9 million.
Additionally, the other changes
are changing the work
requirements, expanding those
from 54 to 64 and also changing
the dependent from 18, and it's
now going to between 14 to 17.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, the final
slide of this kind of gives a
high level overview of what the
next steps are in terms of
planning for this specifically
there's still a significant
amount of uncertainty on the
status of specific programmatic
federal funding, for instance,
things like workforce training
and education, many of the
bigger fiscal impacts from
reconciliation are not in next
year's budget cycle, nor are
they in the traditional language
of a backfill. And so the next
steps as a state are what would
or
should a framework look like for
analysis to help with the
recommendations on what to do
next, and so the current draft
LFC budget guidelines for what
to do next, uh, suggests
treating these requests for
replacement, the same as if an
agency was asking for new
expansion funding and that
framework would specifically
include looking at is this
program specifically addressing
a priority of the community and
then presumably also looking at
if this federal program that
will be replaced has robust
information about how effective
it has been in addressing that
priority and then also is this
program's funding being reduced
or eliminated, or is it being
permanently or temporarily
eliminated and how we can use
that analysis going forward and
then finally Keely is does the
state need to replace the
program to address the need
using the existing federal
format or could the state free
itself from that current
regulatory barrier and develop a
new state-specific approach
going forward.
So that Miss Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you, and I'll turn it over to
the next presenter.
Thank you very much. And would
you take back the info the uh
thanks for the overall uh
federal presentation to LFC. OK,
so Lesa Owen next.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Committee members, appreciate
the opportunity to come visit
with y'all a little bit. Um, my
name's Lesso and I'm the deputy
director at New Mexico
Department of Agriculture. We're
based here on the NMSU campus.
So welcome here and I hope some
of y'all have been able to enjoy
some of the red chili that was
mentioned earlier. I happen to
agree with that. That's a very,
uh, endearing thing here. So I'm
gonna visit with y'all a little
bit about some of the federal
funding impacts to agriculture,
um, some of the mixed bag with
the budget reconciliation
bill and some re re
reorganization that's going on
at the
US Department of Agriculture.
so
earlier in, in 2025, um
there were some federal funding
pauses that, uh, impacted some
of the, the good programs that
we've got going at the
Department of Agriculture, the
resilient Food Systems
Infrastructure program, which is
um basically designed to rebuild
build resilience into the food
supply chain and we have
grantees throughout the,
throughout the state that
participate in this program.
Well, there was a, a, a funding
freeze was put in at the federal
from the federal government
where we were basically told
that don't submit any more
invoices after I believe it was
January 10th and we're kind of
in a state of limbo for several
months. Fortunately, um
the department was able to
basically our, our civil
awardees and producers.
that uh participate in this did
not see any uh
did not see any impacts to the
their ability to get reimbursed.
We were able to carry this over,
um, and, and keep the program
going. It was a couple of months
and then the federal funding
freeze was, was done away with,
so they were able, we were then
able to get reimbursed and catch
up on that. Same with the local
food procurement assistance
program. It, it had the same
type of uh uh funding freeze,
but that one again, we were able
to keep our, our, our sub
awardees getting reimbursed and,
and keep going on that. Um,
there
' s there is talk that the, I
believe the Bresner bill is
talking about permanently
codifying the local food
procurement assistance program.
Currently, the way things are,
this current funding cycle would
be the last one for that
program, but there is talk at
the federal level of some
legislation to make that one
more of a permanent program.
Moving on to the next page. Some
other direct impacts to the
department, um, are pesticide
compliance program receives
grant funds from the
Environmental Protection Agency
each year, um, just to, to help
with our program, we are
receiving a 20% reduction in
that you can see on the, on the
handout, page 3 now, um
down from 600K to about 479,000.
And so this, some of our
this really won't impact our,
our core work, but some of our
ancillary programs like um
um pesticide disposal capacity,
some of those programs will
probably have to be reduced a
little bit just to be able to
absorb that cut. Um, similarly
with the, the Food and Drug
Administration provides uh a
funding through a cooperative
agreement for our produce safety
program.
Um, and that one, again, a 39%
reduction, you can see there
cutting us down to about
353,000. And so our program will
continue to be able to conduct
inspections and provide
compliance assistance. However,
this, this reduction in funding
will decrease the amount of
outreach and education that our
folks are able to do and provide
to producers and
given that the pre-ag water
harvest rule is coming into
effect this year. There's a,
there's a pretty good need for
some outreach just to make sure
that folks remain in compliance
with that, and this will reduce
our ability to provide a lot of
that outreach.
Moving on to our next one,
getting into some of the
budget reconciliation bill
impacts.
this there's, there are several
components of this one that are,
are, are, do have some benefit
to, to ag producers kind of
gonna focus on those as, as some
of my colleagues are hitting it
on, on some of the other cuts.
Um, farm safety net and Disaster
support the agricultural risk
coverage program, price loss
coverage program, funding, um
there, there is some
improvements to that to raise
those prices, and basically it
just the, the risk management
that these programs provide to
um agricultural operations. It
kind of raises, raises those up
a little bit and provide some,
some more security for our, our
farmers and ranchers, um, crop
insurance, the, the, the
subsidies are going up on the
insurance plans, um, coverage
levels up to 90% and these
programs are important from a
risk management
standpoint when given the, you
know, the weather in New Mexico
hasn't gotten any more stable
and it's, it certainly provides
challenges to our ag producers
and this just does provide a
little bit more of a safety net
or a risk management opportunity
in, in dealing with those
vagaries of our weather.
Um, I'll, I'll touch a little
bit on, on, on some of the, the,
the tax.
changes that are, that can be
beneficial to our agricultural
operations. Um, there's some,
some key tax benefits that were
extended, um, section 199A for
uh basically pass through
deductions that, that, uh, can
be useful to uh
operations that go to an LLC or
an SCO or one of those type of,
of, of pass through
partnership type things that uh
a lot of family farms and
ranches tend to, tend to move
towards just to keep uh keep it
in the family. It's um
extended those at uh at 20%, um,
increase of standard deductions
and other things like that just
help the bottom line of, of, of,
of a farm and ranch opera
operation.
Uh, the state tax exemption or
the, the death tax as it's, uh,
as it's often called, um, locked
in at $15 million per
individual. That's something
that has certainly beneficial
when, when, uh
operations become
get to the point of passing on
to the next generation.
um, enhanced section 179, and
this is basically uh enables a
farm operation for immediate
write-off of the entire cost of
new equipment, new technology,
different things like that,
which is incredibly important
for modernizing, um trying to
bring some of the new tech into
agriculture, uh, provides a, a,
a benefit and a, a easier way to
do that because we all know.
new tech and new equipment is
not cheap for any for any
industry and agriculture is
certainly no different, um.
some other funding increases,
the specialty crop block grant
program, um, increasing about
$100 million a year. That's
nationally and what exactly what
that will, will, uh,
translate to as far as increased
funding for the program in New
Mexico. We don't know yet, but
we do expect that there will be
an increase there and uh
certainly provides some
benefits, um, expanded, um,
funding going to trade
promotion. Again, that $285
million is a, is a nationwide
increase in that, in that
program, but there will be some,
some, some of that funding,
additional funding will come to
New Mexico and that will help
our, our folks, uh, expand
market opportunities
both, um, domestically and
internationally and to open up
new markets for for some
some of our producers.
moving on to the another one
So within the
the reconciliation bill, the
conservation programs are, are
incredibly important to our ag
producers. There were
a lot of grants that were tied
to the inflation reduction Act
that specifically were targeted
at climate smart agriculture and
forestry practices, many of
those grants have been clawed
back and some of those do impact
some programs in New Mexico.
There was some research that was
going to happen in the soul
health realm with uh NMSU kind
of as a subcontract through a
grant in Colorado through CSU.
that um got clawed back. I know
the, the uvera coalition had a,
had a piece of one of those
grants that they were gonna use
for some um carbon ranching type
outreach and and work and, and
so many of those have clawed
back and, and, uh, won't be put
on the ground here in the state.
Um
those dollars did actually were
used to increase the the.
I guess the, the, the baseline
funding for some of the
important conservation programs
like the Environmental Quality
Incentives program Conservation
stewardship program,
agricultural easement Program
and regional conservation
Partnership Program. I did not
think I'd be able to spit all of
those acronyms and actual words,
and I made it through it. So, my
goodness, that uh I that uh
that, that is a good thing. So
that provides some permanent
increase in those in, in, in
those programs that will be in
the
the base funding so that that
certainly was a
uh the flip side to that
provided some
some benefits for agricultural
producers and then the last
thing I wanted to talk about was
USDA recently came out with a
reorganization plan, and, uh,
there were 4 main pillars to the
plan, it wasn't a very lengthy
document if you all happen to
have, have seen it. There were 4
main, main things that they're
touting to do workforce size
alignment, um, basically
reducing the size of the
workforce
just to reduce, reduce costs.
Um.
relocation of, of resources.
There's the proposal is to move
um
there's, there's about 4600 USDA
employees that work in the, the
DC area, and the idea is to
relocate uh a good bunch of
those outside of that, um, as
you can see on, on, on the
the slide there, there's,
there's 5 regional hubs that
will
kind of serve as, as the main
service centers, Salt Lake, Fort
Collins, Kansas City,
Indianapolis, and uh, and
Raleigh, North Carolina, um, if
you'll notice there is a star in
the middle of, uh, about where
Albuquerque's supposed to be on
the map and Alba there is USDA
has a
pretty large service center
there that has a lot of their
grants and agreements type stuff
that serves not just New Mexico
but around the nation and that,
that facility will be maintained
in their plan and there's some
others, um, some others around
the country that will be
maintained. There's a tremendous
amount of questions though as to
what will and what will not be
maintained. There is some talk
of some research centers will be
uh maintained and, and kept in
operation and while others will
not and that's a, that's a
huge question because um
the research that comes out of
those is incredibly important
for advancing, advancing
agricultural technologies. Um,
the other
pillars of it, if, if you will,
the was to reduce the
stand-alone, reduce the
bureaucracy was kind of was, is
kind of the idea behind it and
consolidating support functions
into centralized areas that.
all of these ideas, uh, you
know, they, they certainly sound
good, but there's, as I said,
this, this plan has created more
questions than answers. There's
just a tremendous amount of
uncertainty as to what it will
actually look like within the
different agencies of, of USDA
Forest Service, Wildlife
Services, uh, all of those serve
incredibly important functions
and it's with uh, you know, NRCS
and their, you know, their
ability to provide the, the
technical support to our
producers on the ground. We
don't know exactly what that's
gonna look
like. Hopefully there, you know,
we won't see a, a reduction in
that or, or an increase in time
for the, the processes that have
to move through these agencies
in order for something to happen
on the ground. We're hopeful
that that will, uh
will, uh, work out in, in, in
in producer's favor, but
they're, like I said, there's
just a lot more questions than
there are answers with that
reorganization plan, and we'll
remain engaged with that and,
and, uh, and see what it looks
like and
good timing with that. I believe
that's my, uh, last slide, and I
will pass it on to
the next person
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much. Uh, Nikki
Koslowski.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, I
appreciate you taking the time
to allow us to speak with you on
behalf of our safety net
Services at the HCA. I'm Deputy
Cabinet Secretary, uh, Niki
Keselowski, and I'm gonna walk
you through a few of the items
as my colleague in um LFC
highlighted from our funding
impacts that we're seeing.
Um, overall, uh, wanted to, uh,
let me forward that, sorry. Um,
remind us how many um New
Mexicans the HCA currently
serves. We serve 848,000 New
Mexicans, about 40% of our
population, um, and specifically
for SNAP 23% of our population
is using our safety net
services.
On the next slide, I wanted to
um
remind that every New Mexican
will be impacted by this bill,
um, and across our programs
specifically as about 1.3
billion in SNAP revenue, um, is
at stake for 1700 New Mexican
grocery stores, farmers'
markets, um, convenience stores,
as every dollar that's spent
there is fueling their jobs,
they're feeling more revenue
within our economy and so it
will be a very um large impact
to New Mexican as a whole. We
also have a very high rate of
child food insecurity, about
23%, which we do believe is
likely to worsen due to the
downstream impacts of this bill.
Um, overall, the investments
that we have made um in the past
few years have um reduced our
child poverty from worse to um
17th in the nation, so about an
8.9% impact, um, overall, and we
do believe this is likely to
reverse this trend, um, so very
large impacts that we're seeing
from our organization.
On the next slide, highlighting
a few of the things that um my
colleague uh already spoke about
from LSC but um the new
requirement for us to um share a
portion of the cost based upon
our error rates. Um, currently
we are over goal, um, and we'll
share that in a later slide, um,
but what we'll see from that is
a significant amount of loss of
funding due to that, as he
mentioned, um, for 50 million
all the way up to 150 million
impact just from an error
rate, um, and so based upon
where we're at, we do expect to
be in a delayed implementation,
but there are risks with that
because if we happen to get
better at the error rate, then,
but not significantly, we could
see one of those impacts of
those three ranges that were
shared, um, overall, the, uh,
federal funding match, so the
50/50 match to the 75 is uh
another impact of about 57
million, um, we also believe
that resetting the formula of
the benefit amount, so
in 2022 we saw a change to how
um they did the formula for
benefits. It's also called the
Thrifty Food Plan. It had not
been done since 1970. So that,
we did see a 21% increase in um
funding received from that
change, and we do believe that
likely they will reduce it. um,
and so that has not been
clarified yet. That is done each
year, so this year's impact, we
did not see that, but we do
expect an impact in
F. 27.
Um, the additional work
requirements will, um, we will
see a drop in who is eligible
based upon that. We did
implement, um, beginning this
year for 4 of our counties and
with that we did see about a 40%
reduction in eligibility based
upon folks actually doing the
work requirements and reporting
back to us, so we're estimating
around that same take rate, but
it'll be a larger impact, um,
overall to the
state.
Also, um, eligibility
reductions, uh, this is really
around um their changing the um
sua.
allocations so they're not
allowing Internet to be part of
your bills any longer as well as
having to um show proof for
heating and cooling as part of
your separate bills that like if
you potentially have that
separate or if you're in a
housing situation that already
pays for those things. So we'll
have to provide more
documentation on that and then
also narrowing the SNAP
eligibility for non-citizens is
a coming impact as well.
On the following slide, um, I
won't go into them too much
further, but these are specific
amounts to all of the items that
I shared, um, that largely are
in line with um my colleagues
from LFC as well, um
so we can share those and
overall,
on the next slide, are impacts
to the snap, changes on elderly
and disabled cases. So during
our 25 session, um, we were
appropriated funds to bring up
the minimum amount for our
elderly and disabled population
to $100. Um, we did see a very
large growth this year and we do
believe that based upon the
growth over the three-year
pattern will be about 80% so um
we are seeing that we'll need to
appropriate
more funds to maintain that, but
mostly because we do believe
that the thrifty fluke food
implant will bring the amount
down. So with the growth as well
as the reduction in the minimum
amount, we'll have to supplement
that program.
On the next slide, we'll talk a
little bit about our error rate,
um, currently we're at 14%, um,
a little over 14.5 and that is
um about 5% higher than the
national average, um.
overall there are um a couple of
reasons there are errors, so
there are client caused reasons,
so, um, whether or not they
share that someone is now living
in the household or someone has
moved out of the household, um,
whether or not there is someone
paying on the mortgage with them
or not. And so if they don't
share all of the information
that's called a client caused
error, um, and those are usually
found during our federal audits,
um, agency cost is an error that
is caused by my
team and that is something that
they have processed wrong, um,
and that we have have calculated
something incorrectly and either
overpaid or underpaid um in
benefit amounts.
Our biggest um contributors
overall, uh, for these are
mostly policies that we chose to
um join in on that were given
from, um, the federal
government, so likely most of
this was due to waived
interviews. So if I'm not doing
an interview, I'm not getting as
much thorough information from
you, um, to calculate your
benefits correctly and this was
done um through the COVID
pandemic, we restarted those
interviews last October, um,
which has helped us
significantly. Um, we also were
not doing the six month
recertifications, um, so we reba
we regained those back in July
of 2023, so we are now doing
both, um, which is also helping
the error rates, um, we've also
had a policy of accepting self
attestation. So if you tell me
that your, you know, internet
rate or that your car payment is
a certain amount, um, we're
accepting that.
um, and
then a potential of an error
based upon what you said your
rent was, etc. then if it's
higher or lower, it's adding it
to the calculation errors. We
also have um been on a massive
growth, um.
trajectory for our staffing of
caseworkers. Um, we did see a,
um, massive amount of uh
attrition due to the great
resignation. um, we were
appropriated funding this year
and so what we're finding is
about 50% of our staff is 3
years or less, um, and so that
does lead to errors. It takes
you about a year to get um
kind of
set in the ways of all the rules
and the complexities of what
you're doing as a caseworker.
So, um, we are still seeing the
experience level from that
perspective, um, as well as all
of the unwinding pressures that
we had um in processing
timeliness, um, over the
previous years after, um, COVID.
Um, on the next page, we have,
we have been um focused on our
error rates since I would say
October of last year, really
figuring out what do we need to
do? So around October of last
year we finally got timely in
all of our application
processing which allowed us to
focus on the errors, um, with
that we've, um, improved pretty
significantly already. um,
however, we do know that
improving training of our
caseworkers, improving our
vacancy rates and making sure
that there are enough
workers to process the cases
overall, um, understanding the
impact analysis of that cell
attestation and what that means
to our errors and how impactful
it is, so looking through some
of those items as well as we are
um engaged with other states and
understanding how are they so
low, making sure that they're
comparable to our size and our
complexity and so making sure
that we're looking at
who has some best practices that
we can gra grab as well. um, so
working through those, um, and
then also making sure that our
processes, um, which are likely
outdated as we've implemented
new items, making sure that we
are, um, staying up to date in
that.
We do know that a few, um,
investments will be needed. We
do need, um, as we head into
this with the increased work
requirements, um, we, and then
the likely fallout and
reapplication of those customers
will likely need more staffing,
um, to process timely as well as
uh maintain the errors, um, as
well as some system changes. We
are looking at figuring out how
to create better guardrails to
not allow the errors to be made
in the first place, um, some
preemptive questions, making
sure that we checked
multiple, um, pieces on
household income, um, those
types of things and looking at
that and then also making sure
that, you know, on our online
systems when the customers are
doing it on their own that we
are prompting them um for
completeness so that they are
giving us full um access to
their documents, um, so that we
can make the right
determination. We are also
looking at an interview assist
tool, so seeing that we are
about a year in with interviews,
um, really having, um
AI help us in making sure that
we didn't forget something or
that we're asking more detailed
question if something doesn't
add up of what we've entered in
the system, um, we're also
looking at
tying in a caseworker scorecard.
So bringing back an agent level
um error rate goal. So making
sure that they know where
they're at, what their
specifically doing on each cases
and bringing that in. And then
also redesigning our customer
notifications. Oftentimes what
we have found um is they're very
complicated to read. What do I
need to give you? What more
documents do you need and really
making sure that's very clear to
them, um, to make it as easy as
possible so that we're not um
creating undue
burden.
And then lastly, I just want to
share again, we do have a, um,
ability to make big improvements
as you saw over the last year
and a half in our timeliness,
and we've been able to maintain
it. I do believe that with the
right focus, um, our error rates
will come in line and we won't
see the big impacts of this
large amount of money that the
New Mexicans need to pay and
that we're wholly responsible
for the agency errors and what
we can do to impact that.
So I thank you for that, and I
will pass it off to my next
presenter. Thank you, but it
seems like if we keep the error
rate high, we won't lose as much
money.
Uh, Sarah Flores Sivers.
Would you like good OK.
Good afternoon. My name is Sarah
Flores Sivers. I am the food and
nutrition bureau chief.
and also the Wiccan Farmers
Market director within DOH.
So thank you for your time
today. I'm gonna be speaking
about the WIC program and then
also the farmers' market program
this afternoon. Veronica Grego
will also go into more in depth
about the farmer market program
as well. I'll just be focusing
on the funding aspect.
So you do have the slides in
front of you. So on the first
one, there's a lot of
information, positive
information I'd like to share.
So just as a reminder, Wick
serves pregnant women,
breastfeeding women, postpartum,
infants and children up to the
age of 5.
We serve about 515,000 families
per year, and we have 61 clinics
throughout the state, and we
serve all of our military bases
as well.
and
on the bottom of your left-hand
slide, um, we're really proud
that New Mexico was the first in
the nation in May of 2022 to
partner with our SNAP Medicaid
and TANF programs. We have an
integrated system where that
means when one of these families
applies for one of those
programs and on the back end the
system will say they also
qualify for WIC. Their
information will then be
dispersed into one of our
systems within based on the zip
code. So again, eliminating more
transport
ation issues and bringing the
same documentation to another
WIC appointment because we're
all inquiring the same
information. So with that, it
has been a huge success and
since May of 2022, our caseload
has increased by 34%, which is
outstanding. Normally on a year
nationally WIC will grow between
2 and 3%, and so I broke down
per year. You can see the actual
growth percentages, so that is a
wonderful, um, increase that
we're able to close that safety
net
and serve more families,
especially now.
And then because of this new
partnership we're also averaging
between 500 and 700 families per
month.
and as you can and also on the
bottom of that slide we serve
more than half of the infants in
the state.
And so it's a great partnership
and we're doing a lot of
advertising Wick and Snap better
together because Wick is usually
the stepping stone and then
graduating into snap if needed.
On the next slide, page 3, I'll
go into potential resource
limitations for the next year
and I do want to clarify that
WIC was not mentioned in the Big
Beautiful Bill
Um,
so one of our issues, as I
alluded to, it is a wonderful
thing that we're our caseload is
increasing and they are able to
serve more families, but with
that, our first, my first bullet
that you'll see
page 3, thank you. Um, our FNS
based grants for food and admin
need to be accounted for and
adjusted accordingly. They could
not keep up with the increased
growth because this has never
been seen before. So that's one
thing at that is putting us at
risk, but we are already in
contact to get these base grants
reevaluated to accommodate um
the additional admin and food
funds that we need to serve all
of our families.
I did want to point out that WIC
is mentioned in the president's
bill to cut the produce, which
is our CVB. It is an additional
allotment of money, um, as you
can see we have $54 to $13 and
for our breastfeeding mothers,
$26 to $10. So we're hoping that
this does not pass because below
the fruits and vegetables are
number one redeemed item, which
is phenomenal. Um, it is great
that our families are getting
the fresh produce that they
need, so we're hoping
that is not eliminated
And then the third bullet I do
want to mention because we do
have money coming from HCA
that's filtered through DOH for
the SNAP Education component.
Unfortunately, as you heard
earlier, that SNAP education
funding has been cut.
and on the bottom of the slide,
I did want to show you, give you
an idea of what the WIC annual
budget is. This is for FY 24,
breakdown for food grant admin,
and our formula rebate that we
are required to have and that
formula rebate money goes
directly back to food.
And then on the left, I just
wanted to highlight some special
projects that we're focusing on
now into the next year. We'll be
having 5ick mobile vans, one
through each region, so we can
go to where the families need us
most, especially with
transportation issues. So if
it's a community center, church,
outreach events that we can
partner with all of our other
agencies here at the table, we
can do so. We're also very
excited to finally go to online
EBT. This is what Snap currently
has. Right now we have the mags,
um, the
smart card chip where
unfortunately you we have to
have physically have the card to
come into the clinic to load the
benefits. Now that will be
obsolete. We can load the
benefits through the cloud.
And then our high tech smart
uhick app we're really excited
for, um, that's already in use
right now. Families can upload
their documents, they can
request an appointment, they can
change and cancel their
appointment, take online
nutrition educations, and it is
also a shopping app, so if they
have questions at the
supermarket, you're like, is
this an a WIC approved item they
can scan it and it'll tell you
yes or no. So we're just trying
to meet the families where they
are, keep up with the new
generation with being tech
savvy, so this has been a huge
success.
So now I'm going to switch over
to the senior and Wick Farmers
Market program.
OK. So with the Wiccan senior
Farmers' market pro um program.
This is funded out of the food
farm bill.
So we have in the past, both
programs have been 100%
federally funded through the
farm bill, serving eligible and
uh eligible seniors, 60+ and our
Native American community, 55
and plus. Luckily, 2 years ago,
we were receiving state funding
that was non-reoccurring from
the Governor's Food initiative,
which has helped to serve more
seniors throughout the state,
and I wanted to show a breakdown
um from WIC families to our
seniors and then the non-reo
c cur ring state funds.
And again with this program, um,
since it is through the farm
bill right now, thank you. It
has been, we've heard, we are
going to be receiving the same
flat base grant as prior. Some
we've heard it will be cut, some
we haven't. So I'm sorry that I
can't provide more definite
information, but as you're all
aware, we're kind of all over
the place, um, with this budget,
but we are doing everything we
can to monitor it closely and
still provide as much food to
these communities without
minimal impact.
Um,
and again, here's some just
pictures we wanted to share of
our WIC mom and child receiving
a food basket.
and then seniors and then just
the vision that we hope we can
serve more communities
throughout.
That is my presentation on the
WIC and senior and Wig Farmers
Market. I will pass it to
Michael. Thank you. Yes, and I'm
sorry that I had bypassed you,
um, Mr. Chavez from PED.
And then after that we'll go to
the Zoom for aging.
please.
Good morning everybody, Madam
Chair, members of the, of the
committee. I'm Michael Chavez.
I'm with the manager with the
Student Success and wellness
Bureau under the New Mexico
Public Education Department. So
I'm gonna be talking about the
federal funding cuts and the
impacts on New Mexico's food
systems.
So, you know, over the years,
we, our names kind of changed in
what we've done as a bureau, um,
but basically what we do is we
oversee the national school
lunch program. We have
approximately 245, that's a typo
now for school, you're 25, 26
school for authorities in the
state of New Mexico. That
includes public schools, charter
schools, private schools, Bureau
of Indian Education entities and
uh residential childcare
institutions in our state.
um
are also part of uh on our
purview and under our uh our
supervision is the Senate Bill
4, which was passed in 2324. And
that was the Healthy universal
School Meals Act, and that's to
influence healthy universal
school meals in our state, and
that's to ensure that all
students in the state of New
Mexico students in the state of
New Mexico eat for free.
So part of our carve out with
that overall, uh, spending,
which is about $42 million for
this year. We're we're using $2
million
in funding for the New Mexico
grown program.
Um, we wanted to make sure this
money's still available to our
farmers and make sure that this
money still stays within the
state of New Mexico. So we just
realized how much of an
important uh program this is in
our state and for our schools
and students in the state of New
Mexico as well as our farmers.
So two of the immediate funding
cuts for within our bureau and
and within some other uh
entities in their sta in with
the state government was uh the
US Department of Agriculture
announced uh there was a $1.13
billion bill for a grant for uh
local food programs across the
state of New Mexico, uh,
specifically New Mexico received
$5.6 million which was your
marked to support local food
school schools and childcare
cooperative for PED
and the early child caring and
care department over a
three-year period. So ECCD as we
call it, um, they were gonna be
the, the administrator and we're
gonna be uh working on kind of
what we're gonna do on the
parameters over this grant. That
funding was immediately cut and
then we were uh writing a grant
in relation to the Patrick Leahy
farmed the school grant, which
was about $500,000. And that
funding was cut as well for, for
this school year.
So another program and, and this
one is, is.
could be an impact and, and
we're still kind of monitoring
this, but as of this year and
it, it's called Sunbucks or the
Summer EBT program is kind of
two different names, but now
it's called Sunbucks here in the
state of New Mexico.
As of this past July, over $35
million in benefits has been
out.
given out for eligible students
and families. The way this
program works is uh students
that are eligible, um, they can
receive $120 and their family's
4 groceries to purchase at
stores during the summer months.
The 3 months over the summer
months under uh the parameters
with the US Department of
Agriculture is $40 a month, so
the 3 months total of $120. We
already have 294,000 students
that are receiving this for
this year. We were able to get
uh over 275 students that were
automatically eligible to
receiving you either TA TANF,
snap, and Medicaid-Free or other
categorically eligible
categories such as McKenny,
Vento, Homeless, Foster migrant
or runaway students. So these
students received the money in
May and the, the last day to, to
apply for the program was this
past Friday, so that we're just
gonna give the last allotment
here uh at the end of this month
of Aug
us t for the students that were
still uh filling up their free
reduced applications. Students
that do not receive
that do not receive tennis
snapped, Medicaid or deemed
eligible in any of the category
eligible statuses have to
complete the free reduced
application which we do have
online.
and which we're realizing that
may reduce the number of
students that could qualify for
these benefits. Um, part of the
reasons could be, um, they don't
want to complete the paperwork
or families don't want to give
out their personal information
on a government uh system.
So
in other there's some families
may not have access to these
computers, so that's one thing
that we're seeing that could be
an immediate impact as well.
So the other program that we're
working closely with that uh
works closely with healthcare
authority and the SNAP and TANF
is the community eligibility
programmers.
So as of this year for 25, 26,
we'll have 858 New Mexico
schools or 203 school food
authorities eligible for the
community eligibility program.
So this program is a federal
program that started in 2014,
2015, and it's to reimburse
schools that are high poverty,
serve most meals for free to all
students without collecting
applications and uh leaving the
paperwork burden.
In school year 25, 26, we're
able to get all 100% of the
schools to participate in the
CEP program eligible, and
that'll be like I said, 203
school food authorities are 858
schools in the state of New
Mexico.
So that's the majority of the
schools that are currently
participating in the national
school lunch program.
and uh what we're gonna do is
we're starting to already work
with schools for next year under
the, the community eligibility
program, if you do uh start it
as your first year, you're
eligible for 4 years.
So, uh, everybody's gonna be on
it this year, but they're on
different 4-year cycles. What
we're trying to do since the,
you know, the benefits that
we're anticipating the change
next, next year. We wanna get
everybody into the community
eligibility provision that is
eligible to participate for 26,
27.
So kind of a little bit of a, a,
a graph here and kind of what's
going on this year with how much
we spent on claims. Um,
we have approximately $215
million that we've spent, uh,
for school year 24, 25 and, and,
and claims.
$169 million was uh with the
federal and about 45 million was
on the state. Um, we were
allocated, like I said, a little
over 41 million this past year,
so we had to ask for a
supplemental, uh, uh, income for
this school year to pay the
schools that to wear a little
bit short on. So that's about
79% of the funding for on the
federal side and a little over
20%, almost 21% on the state
side. We want to
ensure that we're spending as
much of the federal dollars as
possible and, and that uh using
the state allotment. As you
know, as this is, it's an
expensive program, the universal
Free meals program and it's
gonna get more expensive as
meals start to uh cost more
across the state and federal
reimbursements increase.
So
um
those are, it's been a lot of
work kind of just uh, what we've
been trying to do, uh, we're
proud of kind of staying on top
of this and, and trying to stay
ahead of the curve of kind of
what we're gonna anticipate
moving forward with uh with the
meals programs in New Mexico.
One thing that we did see, uh,
on the program and we're
starting to see it addressed as
uh we're starting to increase in
student attendance, uh, with the
meals program and uh we're
starting to see an increase in
meal participation, so we are
happy to see that that's
starting to uh assist with our
programs and assist kind of with
our goals within the public
education department. Uh, once
again, I'm Michael Chavez. It's
good to see everybody again. Um,
my number's on, on the
slide there and uh
that's my presentation
Great, thank you. Um, we have
one more presentation by Zoom
I'm sorry
Oh, go ahead and uh Denise, are
you on morning and I am, and
hopefully you can hear me. The
connection, it has not been the
best this morning, but I'm gonna
turn my video off to strengthen
that connection, but hopefully
you can hear me. Um, good
morning, um, and Madam Chair and
members of the committee, my
name is Denise King. I'm with
the Aging and Long Term Services
Department.
the Aging Network division
Director, overseeing the federal
funds and state funds that
support our aging network that
includes our area agencies on
aging, the older Americans Act
Services, as well as our
volunteer senior corps programs
and our senior employment
programs. Um, what I'd like to,
uh, go over today and hopefully
you received this slide deck is
a few of our um known stats of
our aging population here in New
Mexico.
New Mexico as of 2020, we had
10% of our older adults 60+, um,
having reported, uh,
self-reported that they were
having difficulty living
independently. I, I say this and
I start with that stat because I
do think that this is um a a
very telling, um, important stat
for us to all know that our
aging population is in need of
support
of services to remain in their
homes safely and um to live
independently. And there,
they're reporting that um the
need for their ongoing
supplemental uh in uh
nutritional incentives and that
includes SNAP benefits. We have
many of our older adults that
receive our lunch meals from
senior centers across the state.
We have 240 senior centers that
include the tribe's pueblos and
nations. We have approximately
70 tribes, Pueblos and nation
centers, um, so of those 240
senior centers, many of our
older adults that are receiving
lunch meals in the form of
congregate meals or home
delivered meals. Um, those that
are receiving home delivered
meals
being assessed once a year, um,
determining that they are in
need and they have mobility
issues.
and they're in need of that home
delivered meal. We know that the
service of that um home
delivered meal that the cost for
that service is higher than our
congregant service, um, and and
growing. Um, we have a large
home, uh, based clientele,
seniors that rely on that one
meal per day.
5 days a week, or those that are
scoring high nutritionally and
needing weekend meals. And so I
think it's important for us to
act um now as we have our aging
population growing by 2040, we
will have an increase of our
population by 200,000, um, and
that means in 15 years, we would
have had 28% growth of our aging
population, and that's 60 plus.
Um, we
are 10th in the nation currently
of our 65+ age group that are um
that are nutritionally at, at
risk. And so I think those are
alarming and that we need to
take note of that. Many of our
older adults, um, even though
they're receiving those meals
that are very important from the
senior centers. They are two
very reliant on the food boxes
that they are receiving from the
New Mexico Healthcare
Authority, um, in the form of
those food boxes, it meets the,
um, nutritional gap in many
times. In addition to the Snap
benefit, um, we
routinely hear from our seniors
that
the amount that they're
receiving in SNAP, having been
reduced, um, is still a, a, a
gap, um, uh, filler for what
they are in need of. Now they do
need more and um they're always
advocating for themselves of of
having more, um, in SNAP
benefits, uh, as a department,
we have transferred um for the
last few years, funding at the
at the end of the year to
healthcare authority to do one
time um
increases to those SNAP benefits
so that our seniors can um have
that as a add on to what they're
currently receiving and Snap
benefits. So the funding cuts,
although unknown, is very
alarming for this population
because we do know that our
aging population is growing and
they're in need and keeping them
at home for as long as we can is
very important. Um, I do want to
highlight a few other stats.
with our population in that New
Mexico has the 5th highest
poverty rate for our 65+
population, so that's 13.7% of
those um receiving SNAP 60+. Um,
we have over 64,000 seniors that
are receiving uh SNAP benefits,
and that was as of um FY 22.
Um, I just heard from healthcare
authority on um this morning
that of those seniors receiving
boxes, food boxes from the food
banks, um, that it's just at
10,000. So those are, uh, again,
some um alarming stats that I
wanted to share with you that
these are our vulnerable older
adults that are in need of those
important and supportive, um,
programs across
many departments from aging a
long-term services to the
healthcare authority and
Department of Health. Many of
our older adults also get
referred because they're
nutritionally at risk to
Department of Health for the
senior food senior Farmers'
market vouchers, and it's
important that they're able to
also have those fresh fruits and
vegetables added to their diet
to increase their nutritional
value of what they're receiving.
The
additional stats that I'd like
to go over today, and we're on
the next slide is our
performance measures at the
department and um our first
performance measure that we
report on is our of our older
adults 60+ that are receiving
the congregant and home
delivered meals and that are
assessed on an annual basis.
It's a needs assessment, and
there's 3 parts to that
assessment. One of the uh one of
them is the um nutritional
assessment that's done, and
those that are nutritionally at
risk. This last year, FY 25, it
was 25% of our older adults, um,
were nutritionally at risk, and,
and I say that again because
those are the seniors that we
collaboratively between
healthcare authority, Department
of Health, and others, um, serve
and so it is important that we
really
um track any kind of funding
need and funding potential cuts
because it's this vulnerable
population that will be um
significantly impacted, and of
our older adults, um, those that
received.
home delivered meals and
congregate meals in FY 25, our
numbers went up. There was
4,191,156 meals served out of
our senior centers for our older
adults. We serve 50 over 50,000
unduplicated consumers across
the state, and that's growing.
And so we saw a over 4% increase
over FY 24 that I think that
needs to take
uh be noted that that growth we
need to continue to um support
the funding, although
the, the state funding, general
funds, support the
um
network tremendously at 4 times
over and what we get in federal
funds, it is still important
that we keep up with the growth
of our older adults, and we're
seeing that the costs for home
delivered meals and congregate
meals going up as we see that
many of our senior centers pay
more in milk than our public
education, um, schools, um, we
see that the packaging for home
delivered meals. Um, unlike
other meal programs, those costs
continue to go up and they go up
mid-year, which significantly
impacts our, our providers'
budgets because they don't know
how they can't project mid-year
of what those um trays are gonna
go up and so many of our old our
providers are reverting back to
the reusable trays for our our
homebound. So I wanted to
highlight on many of those stats
from the aging population, but
just how
important, um, working across
departments is important to
really support this population,
and I stand for questions and
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much, Ms. King.
Um, first of all, I'd like to
thank you all. Um, it's given us
a perspective from all the state
agencies. I appreciate your
time, your coming to the meeting
today.
So, um, let's see how many
people have questions. I'm gonna
start with Representative Dow,
but others who would like to be
recognized. OK, thank you. Let's
see.
here.
send him for Stein boyfriend,
who else? OK, little.
worry about
Thank you,
Madam Chair,
and thank you uh just a minute,
Scott.
Senator Scott
I'm trying to get everybody so
we know how many.
Yeah, I have. OK, so we have
123. We have 6 people who would
like to be recognized. And so if
you just keep that in mind,
we're not having any time
limits, but just keep that in
mind. Representative Doo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you members or thank you
presenters. um, I, my first
question is for USDA and on the
um the farm safety and disaster
and the crop insurance. that
seems that that's a pretty
important benefit for New Mexico
producers considering our floods
and our fires and the cascading
events, what will, what do you
how is that gonna help cover
with insurance and
what does that do for our
producers
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. Um
basically with the, the
increased subsidy increased
subsidies for insurance
policies, it will lower the
premiums that producers will
have to pay some of the
increased coverage levels will,
will kind of raise the, the
payments that will come in if
there is a crop loss, it will
raise the, the amount of that
that's covered. So it it
increases their risk management
portfolio. It makes it a little
more affordable and it makes it
have a more robust coverage, I
guess would be the best way to
describe it. And Madam Chair and
presenter, is this
do they have to use this to
restore their, their, um,
practices or are they able to
take that and
move out of state, sell the farm
It's an insurance payment, Madam
Chair Representative, these
insurance payments, once they've
received the insurance payment
and
I, I hate to paint a broad bust.
There's a lot of, there's a lot
of, uh, you know
specifics with, with each
different type of program, but
once they've received it,
they're, I don't believe that
there's any requirement that
they put it right back into
their, you know, to their
operation as you, as you
mentioned, they, they could
decide to, you know, give up on
that and, and, and try something
else.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that. And I know
that chili and pecans are a
specialty crop. Does New Mexico
have other specialty crops? I
see they have an increase in
funding as well.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question and
um
specialty crop block grants are,
are tailored to a, a lot smaller
crops and, and my, my apologies,
I'm not extremely familiar with
the different types, um
some types of uh like legacy
type like
Keoa, um
some of the less wide known
ones, uh, pecans were, would
probably not be a specialty crop
bought bought grant because they
are such a, a large established,
uh, crop within the state. um,
it's, it's more niche market
type things, emerging markets,
those types of, those types of
activities. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for that. I, I do think pecans
are, but, um, on the
conservation programs, that's an
increase in the base rate.
That, yes, ma'am. So it's not,
we're not gonna have to rely on
one-time funding that base rate
just went up.
Representative, yes, that the,
the, the overall base levels
after this will have, will have
increased in, on a, on a
permanent basis. So, that's
great news for New Mexico
because we fully utilize those
from our farm service agents.
OK, Madam Chair, um, my next
questions are for PED, um.
I was curious
did people stop, did they start?
Oh, is cannabis a specialty
crop?
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't believe so.
Thank you, thank you. I'm sure,
thank you for that. I don't, I
don't think it is either, but I
will find out. OK, on the free
and reduced meals, Michael, I
just wanna just thank you. It's
been quite a while, but I worked
with you for many years, and you
were always so kind and gracious
to the non-public schools which
serve quite a few low-income
children, especially during the
pandemic, making sure that they
got those EBT cards that had
first only gone to public school
kids. I want to thank you
for being committed to
homeschool, private school, and
those families that are low
income that are using
non-traditional methods of
education. I just, I just wanna
thank you for that, but my
question is in regards to the,
the free and reduced application
to fill out for the other title
program
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Dow, thank you for the kind
words. First of all, um,
they do not need to fill them
out for the other programs based
on the facts.
We use the direct certification
numbers like for Title One and
they use the ranking based off
the direct certification. So
Title I schools don't need to
use that. We're working closely
within our department to make
sure that they can use that and
it's, it's a more accurate way
to determine poverty versus the
free reduced applications
because
it's kinda difficult to
determine income and when the
free reduced applications when
you kind of when you contact
families.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for that. And what about
non-public schools, Madam Chair,
for non-public schools, those
ones do need to do free reduced
applications, uh, still because
they're still part of the
national school lunch program
and the direct certification
numbers within our state are so
low. So we are uh making sure
that we're working with them and
providing them training to fill
out these applications on a
daily basis, especially right
now, so that's correct.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and my, my
questions are for WickC now, um,
in the Farmers' market program.
Um, I, I, I don't think I
understood the slide correctly
that we're around $60 million in
funding coming to the state and
almost 20 million of that is
administrative costs. Could you
explain that to me, Madam Chair.
Yes, Representative Dell, um, I
think there's just some
confusion, so I apologize
because I know the slides
weren't up. So on page 3, the
budget listed for food admin
and formula, that is just the
WIC program, not the wick and
senior Farmers' market program,
two separate, yes.
So this is just indicating the
WIC program itself.
Mr. Chair and presenter, so
this administrative cost $19
million with a total
appropriation between food grant
administrative cost and formula
rebate of $57 million.
It appears that the
administrative cost is over 1/3.
In the blue bar. Yes, correct.
OK. And that is, and again,
sorry, that is just clarifying
for the WIC program itself.
So, OK, Mr. Chair, and so then
what is the total percentage of
administrative costs?
I'm gonna have to get back to
you on on that. Thank you. Um, I
did, I do really um appreciate
the farmers' market program and
the Double Up Food Bucks, and I
hope we find a way to prioritize
this because our farmers, the
average age of farmers over 60
in New Mexico, and this is one
way that small producers and
folks are doing direct to, um,
and they, they're able to sell
their smaller crops and, and
it's really important for us to
grow our next generation, um,
but I, the senior mill sites
we, there's a lot of senior mill
sites in this region that are in
jeopardy of closing. Maybe not
in the city limits of Las
Cruces, but in this region from
Demming, Hidalgo, Grant County,
Sierra County, Socorro County.
They are all uh really
struggling to be funded, and I
hope that we put some more
emphasis on how we're going to
sustain the senior meal sites.
We've learned at Indian Affairs
Committee that the, the uh
tribal have a base funding that
allows them to be sustainable,
but a lot of these rural areas
are in jeopardy of funding
I'm wondering, Mr. Chair and
presenter, if there are times
when delivery is actually less
expensive. I know of a county up
north at one of their mill
sites.
has less than 30 mLs a week, and
they have a site that's open for
in-house and delivery. It seems
like in that case,
delivery would actually be a
cost savings instead of having
to have a facility that's open
as well as the, the, um,
deliveries. If one person in the
household qualifies for the
indigent delivery. Does the
spouse or other seniors living
in that also get their meals
delivered or do they have to
travel to the site?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
I think that could be answered
by all of us since we've all
worked so closely together,
making sure what you alluded to
that we can maximize food
delivery from each agency to
throughout the state and this
afternoon Vonka's gonna go into
exactly just that we just were
awarded a first refrigerated
food truck. So she's gonna give
more information on that, um,
but just um speaking just for
the farmers' market program and
eligibility. Yes, we always want
to inform the family, yes, if
anybody else qualifies, please
let
' s sign them up to just spread
the food out and so they're not
just sharing that food box, but
it does unfortunately go back to
eligibility for the Wiccan
senior program.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So a
spouse could get a delivery at
home and the partner or other
household member would have to
travel to the food site.
if they're not eligible for
indigent.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Dao, we do not do
food home delivery, just
speaking from my program, but
the others might, if you would
like to to chime in.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. It might have been aging
and long term that does that,
but it had been the case that
that only the person that was
eligible for the home delivery
that had the disability or was
not able to travel, was able to
get the food delivered and then
the partner or other person
would have to be going to the
site. I think there are some
cost savings that we're really
gonna have to look at and some
strategic thinking to solve the
problems where some counties
have 6 and 7 mill sites. Most of
us, the region down here in the
Southwest has one, and I don't
know of one that has adequate
funding this year. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Henry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
think most of my questions are
gonna veto the cabinet cabinet
secretary
Keselowski, is that, is that how
you say it?
Perfect.
I just have two quick questions,
uh, that, that might lead to
more, but I, I'm looking at
page.
uh
I've lost the page. You, you
cited in your, in your slides
that 457,655 SNAP participants,
um, out of that number, how many
of those are citizens and then
how many of those are
non-citizens. Is there a
difference or are those all
citizens?
It's on pay
5 page numbers here
It's on this page
Madam Chair of Representative
Henry, um, I'm not sure that we
have that breakout of the
citizens um on the slide deck so
I can get back with you on that,
um, but we are seeing a
narrowing of support for
non-citizens, um, mostly are due
to, um, children.
Uh thank you for that. So, so
out of the, we, we have no idea
on the 457, let's call it 458
just because it makes it easier
to say round up, uh, we don't
know if they are
if they are all citizens, that
that's just what I'm curious on.
No, I don't have that number.
The non-citizen number would be
for children.
And so I don't have that
specific For children only. So
the non-citizens, the only
non-citizens in that number
would be children.
Thank you for that. The other
question I have, um, I'm gonna
go to
a slides a few ahead of that
that I really got stuck on
uh, when it says new, uh,
investments in New Mexico's
safety net have reduced child
poverty from worse than the
nation.
27.4%. Can you tell me what
I, I see the 8.9.
um, but when I'm actually doing
chat GPT, uh, which I think
we've heard a few folks have
mentioned that before. I thought
I broke it for a second and it
didn't have an answer, but it
actually did come up with an
answer.
It shows us that we're still in
childhood poverty before you,
you put into all these other
things into it. We're still the
worst in the nation, is that
correct?
Um, the stat that was listed was
due to an independent study, and
we can get you that, um, that
was run for the year of FYI, I
believe 23 and 24. Um, so I can
share that study that was done,
um, that we cited in this one.
Thank you, uh, Chairman, um,
Cabinet Secretary, I can tell
you the one I looked up and said
the only reason that there's an
8.9, uh, that we've moved to
17th is because you add in all
this other supplementary poverty
measures. If you actually look
at childhood poverty, we've,
we've actually been worse than
the nation for the
past 4 years. Um, nobody is,
nobody unfortunately has beat us
at that. So can you tell me what
have we done to reduce childhood
poverty actually.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Henry, um, what we're based upon
the sighting it was due to, um,
food insecurity and poverty and
so helping families with um our
safety net services are adding
into an income that they
wouldn't have to utilize, and
that was what what the study was
boosting up childhood poverty
based upon the safety net
services.
So Mr. Chairman and, and Cabinet
secretary, so in your slide when
it says that the New Mexico
safety net have reduced
childhood poverty. That's
probably an incorrect statement,
correct? Because we have not
reduced childhood poverty over
the last 4 years.
So I don't know that how by us
not reducing childhood poverty
over the last 4 years. How now
this is going to reverse a
positive trend, which I don't
see a positive trend because we
have continued to stay the worst
over the last 4 years. Am I
right on that? Where am I
missing my numbers?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
I'll have to get that study and
understand specifically what was
in there, um, as you mentioned
in what you were able to look up
maybe holistically from a child
poverty perspective, that
statement could be incorrect, so
I'd have to look at the study
and um understand exactly what
um factors went into that.
Thank you,
Madam Chairman. Yes, if you
could do that because of the,
the ones I'm looking up are
immunity American Community
Survey, uh, since tends to
continuously have us as as the
worst. The only time that we get
better, like I said, is when,
when we add that supplementary
pot poverty measures, which is
assuming what your're referring
to.
but I would still have a hard
time with the statement of that
this is going to reverse the
positive trend, considering that
our trend again has never, never
been reversed. We continue to
stay the worse, so I would love
to see how, how that statement
actually uh plays into effect.
The other one is just one up
from that downstream impacts on
child on school attendance and
academic performance. Can you
tell me the justification how
this is actually going to affect
um school academic performance.
Madam Chair Representative
Henry, yes, um, essentially what
we have found is, um, as uh my
colleague at PED mentioned that
we are seeing school attendance
improve. We are seeing, um
behaviors in school likely
improving due to um having food
and so not having as much food
insecurity, they're able to
focus they're able to attend um
so those are where that
statement is coming from.
So we're, we're uh
Mr. Chairman, sorry, I almost
skipped it. Uh.
so we're saying that we're,
school attendance is up only
because of child of food
security. Is that, is that what
the statement I just heard,
Madam Chair Representative Hume,
no, this is just a factor of
what we're seeing based upon um
safety net services. So this
isn't only because of SNAP. This
is saying based upon SNAP and
the, you know, what the risks
that we have of any cuts to SNAP
could have impacts in these
areas.
OK, Madam Chairman, the other
question I have, and maybe I
missed it somewhere, uh, it was
probably in this presentation,
um, somewhere, not just yours,
but one of them.
So the, the children that are
going to school is there still
lunch provided and breakfast
provided at school.
Madam Chair Representative
Henner, yes, they're still being
provided breakfast and lunch on
a daily basis.
So, Madam Chairman, I guess if I
could I say that if, if SNAP is
being reduced and food at home
is becoming
harder to come by
actually going to school would,
would maybe go up in attendance.
Could I, could I also make that
guess? Is that correct?
Yes, Representative, you could.
Thank you, Chairman. That's all
I have.
Thank you very much. Um, next is
Senator Steinborn, then
Representative Little. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
panel. Boy, that's a lot to
digest. I'm gonna got some just
kind of high-level questions.
Number one for Austin at uh LFC.
30,000 ft
How many um
the big beautiful bill, what are
the, uh, cuts to New Mexico that
we are anticipating two New
Mexicans, I should say, that we
are anticipating
or exploring backfilling
through our budget
process
Madam Chair, Senator, that's a
great question. I can certainly
get you a more detailed
breakdown program by program. I
know that one of our principal
analysts, Eric, is also working
on that analysis. I also know
that agencies are also working
on these projected cuts, and I
would rather cite those and give
you some, you know, ballpark
estimates right now. Thank you.
So let me just add, uh, somebody
else brought this up as well.
Why weren't we covering the
entire handout and um in
particular, we're looking at
food system
s in this, uh, particular
committee and um that's why I
was saying that the handout was
done very well by the director
and his staff, but there are
many questions that we're not
getting into in this committee,
and I recognize that. Thank you.
But you still have the floor.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure, yeah,
indeed, this, the budget that
Bill touches many areas of New
Mexico.
and um
indeed, so
in terms of food
you know, I, I also turned to uh
AI.
and asked the question, how does
food play a role in poverty?
in a place a great role in
poverty, and I think.
yes, New Mexico has historic
poverty and there's
a lot of reasons for that, I
suppose, but um, but cutting
food is not the way to get out
of it.
and it's just going to make it
worse for those states, not just
ours, but a lot of states,
including a lot of red states
that have a lot of poverty too,
by the way.
So, um
my question for you
assistant, um, secretary or are
you the assistant secretary? I
get that right? OK.
Thank you. So in terms of SNAP
you kind of referenced the state
backfilling those reductions, is
that kind of what you
anticipate. Obviously there's
some different cost shares
mandated by the law, but also
some cut potential.
um
do you anticipate the
legislature, hoping the
legislature will backfill those
and what would that cost us?
Um, amount of chair or senators,
um, there are programs that we
have anticipated, uh, potential
of backfilling. Um, however, the
biggest impacts, um, that we're
seeing are going to be a
requirement, so the error rate
will be a requirement as a cost
share of the benefit, um, so
it's, you know, if your error
rate is not high, they're saying
you're, you're gonna be on the
hook for it. Um, the other piece
is, um, the administrative costs
changing
Um, there are a couple of
programs, as we mentioned, our
SnapEd program is, is ending,
um, and whether or not we'll
likely backfill that funding or
not. So we do have, um, those
out to the legislator for, um,
special session.
Thank you.
Real quick on the error rate,
how do they determine that? Did
they audit the state and figure
out what our error rate is.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, they
do a, um, federal audit each
year.
Interesting. And I noted we're
not um we lead in a lot of
things, but we're not leading in
the error, right
I would point that out. It's
good to reduce errors, but, but
New Mexico national, I mean that
was seemed to be what I saw in
the chart.
Is that correct
Yes, that is correct. So that's
um,
and then I saw that we
anticipate just a lot of people
losing SNAP because of new
requirements, new work
requirements or whatever. Yeah,
Madam Chair, Senator, that is
likely what we're seeing. We're
about, um, 55,000 customers. We
are anticipating losing due to
work requirements. The new
requirements as my peer in LFC
mentioned were um due to the age
changes as well as the dependent
changes. Um, so I used to be 18
and under
for children, the parent did not
need to work. Now it'll be 14 to
17, and they will need to work.
They will need to work 80 hours
a month, um, but what we did see
in the implementation of those
work requirements for the four
counties this year was a 40%
drop in customers remaining
eligible. So they were either
unlikely to find employment or
retain employment or report that
they were um employed. So 40%
drop in in who was eligible.
So with the thank you Madam
Chair. So with the work
requirement, if they don't find
work, they, they lose the
benefit.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
that's correct.
Intersting. OK, thank you very
much
um, just moving on to the WIC
program. So is that funded
through the farm bill, Madam
Chair, is that where we're
looking for that funding
situation? Madam Chair
Representative, um, no, it is
not, um, the WIC and senior
Farmers' market is funded
through the farm bill, the WIC
program is not.
and have did we experience any
cuts with that? No, not with the
wig.
Well, that is good to hear
OK. So, thank you for that. And
onto the PED program
you had spoken about the
community program and how
important it was. I don't know
if I heard you talk about any
anticipated cuts there? Are we
looking at any reductions here?
Madam Chair, Senator, yeah, we
we could see some changes and
anticipate it with SNAP and next
year, but we're trying to get
all these schools on the
community eligibility provision
and get ahead of it right now in
in next spring and get them
found on you for your cycle so
we can have them going by school
year 20-30, so that's what we're
anticipating right now and what
we're gonna plan to do moving
forward to get ahead of it.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much. And Austin, I
I appreciate that and you know,
with all the talk about
ending PE, you know, the
Department of Education and
block grants does make you
wonder
how that would affect us and
what they're looking at doing.
Do you have any thoughts on
that?
A Madam Chair centers divert I
don't really have a whole lot of
thoughts. It's, it's a lot, so
it's it, it is.
Just a lot of concerns, I'm sure
Yeah, I won't go into it.
Austin. I'm very curious about
all the provider, um
the hospital fees and not
knowing the right way to put it,
that we passed the last few
years to raise more revenues to
keep our hospitals stable, and
it seems like the big
bill, um
reduce that or cap some of that?
Is that true? Or were they kind
of made hole in that bill.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, that's
a great question. I do not have
that for you right now. I can
certainly ask Eric, and he can
certainly provide you a detailed
explanation of those costs, OK,
because that speaks, of course,
to the provider issue that I
know many of us are concerned
about. It's all I have. I really
appreciate the good work you all
do and uh hopefully we can
continue to support your
efforts, so he command chair.
Thank you, Senator. Next is
Representative Little, then
Representative Roy Buck
Caballero, then Senator Scott,
then Representative Montoya.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
appreciate the presentations
today, uh, a lot of my questions
have been answered. I think I
have 30, brief questions. Um,
the first is in relation to um
uh Deputy Secretary Owen's
presentation. I was just curious
as to um let's see on page 3 you
had the impact uh and one that
caught my eye was on pesticide
compliance related grants, and
it just crossed my mind with the
d
ry intense heat, uh, Madam
Chair, that's been, we've been
facing this year. I've noticed
as I walk through Tao's, uh,
what we were up there last week
as you walk there's like this uh
little
greeting of grasshoppers going
through as I'm walking through
and it's, it's frightening my
family, uh, are farmers in, um,
the reservation I come from and
uh I'm just wondering if this
dry, intense heat, uh, as I know
it has an impact on the pests
that are that proliferate is
that also going to be impacted
by the ability to um what's the
term uh
to deal with those pests going
to be impacted by the reduction
of funds directly to farmers,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
your question is, did, did this
reduction of funds, will it,
will it impact the ability of
producers to
apply pesticides where they need
is that
Thank you for that question. Thi
thi this will not, this, these
EPA funds that that come to us,
um, are, are, are used to, um,
one of the programs I mentioned,
we do a pesticide disposal
program where
old
no longer
no longer useful or no longer
viable pesticides can be brought
in and, and we use these funds
to help dispose of those in a,
in an environmentally friendly
manner. That type of thing, but
um to to short answer to your
question, no, this, this will
not impede the ability of, of
folks to spray the things that
need to be sprayed
Thank you, thank you very much,
um, Madam Chair, my second
question is, um, directed to
Miss uh Floris Ses, please. Um,
I'm curious as to, uh, on page 3
of your presentation, um, the
777,000 and uh education funding
that uh was cut. I'm wondering,
um
if there's a chance an up uh.
that you may have the numbers of
individuals that might be
affected by this, uh, them or
their families thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, I can get those numbers for
you. I'm just reporting on that
other program's behalf, so I do
apologize for that. Not a
problem. Thank you, Madam Tribe.
That's fine. Uh, my last
question is, and I think you
touched on this, uh, before, but
if you've got something to add
on the Madam Chair, on the, uh,
staffing that's been
impacted. One moment.
No, as a matter of fact,
Madamere stand corrected, I
correct myself. I did get the
information that I needed to
that question. So thank you very
much. Uh, that's the end of my
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative, uh, Austin has
to leave to do a presentation
for LFC. So I would like to uh
let everybody know that we have
uh 4 of our people on the list.
Do you have any questions for
us, and if not I'm gonna jump to
the next person, the next
person, and then we'll come
back.
um
I did have one question for
Austin and then all the others.
I'll state it quickly just
Austin, um, yes, just to Austin.
The reconciliation bill expands
the SNAP work requirements at
states cost sharing and slashes
Medicaid as you've presented in
your presentation, so uh by over
1 trillion I believe you said
nationally. So what is the
projected fiscal cliff for New
Mexico's general fund if we have
to backfill these cuts. Do you
have that?
Adam Chair, representative,
that's a great question. I think
if you go back to the
presentation specifically on
slides, 22 and 23, those are
those projected numbers that
could be those backfills, so
specifically, Madam Chair
Representative, on slide 22, it
kind of gives a rolling scale
depending on that error rate. So
for below a 6% error rate for
not going to be increasing any
spending, but if we're between
that 6 to 8%, it could then
become 57 million and that it
increases from there.
but again also keep in mind
there is also that Greece period
that's been implemented where
have states do have a high error
rate, that implementation will
be pushed back.
Now in terms of the costs for
administrative costs, that is
going to be more in the
immediate, that's going to be in
October of 2026, and that's that
change from the current 50/50
admin cost share. It'll now
become 75, 25 for the state will
be incurring an additional 25%
and on slide 23 you'll see it's
going from 37 million to then 56
million. So those are the
initial estimates of that
potential cliff that the state
will be incurring.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much and good luck on
your presentation. May I proceed
then?
Oh,
so Senator Scott, do you have
anything for Austin?
Representative Montoya anything
for Austin. Please go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for handling it that
way because all, all of my
questions are for Austin, and
their budget questions.
um.
um, Madam Chair, um, in Austin,
so we've removed
means testing from several
programs. I, I think uh SNAP
and
uh and school lunches or maybe
not snap, but school lunches
we've removed means testing
Is this part of the reason
that we're facing uh
any
and follow up to that is what
other programs that there is a
federal limit.
Have we also
either done away with means
testing or we've increased
uh the, the
who qualifies. I know we've done
this with Medicaid where we've
increased
um, so
Madam Chair Representative, I
think, uh, my colleagues at HCA
could maybe provide some of that
information. I do not have that
information currently as to
those changes. I can certainly
ask Eric to provide you a
breakdown of those specific
questions. Why don't we do that
because I can.
ask this question later when we
go back through. I don't want to
jump the line to ask a question
other than you. So, um, what I,
what I'm looking for, um, is
it appears we're going to be at
odds with the federal government
because we are providing beyond
federal limits.
And so the way it's being
presented is
that
uh we're being punished, that
New Mexico is being punished.
and uh
for being out of compliance
but out of compliance is
something we've done as a
legislature
which is increasing.
either the percentage of poverty
for someone to qualify.
or doing away with means testing
altogether.
So whereas we've
as a legislature have acted as
if it's a
uh us expanding as a is a good
thing instead of what we're
doing is providing maybe for
folks who don't need the help,
which
I hear the exact opposite
argument when it comes to
tax policy. Well, this group of
people doesn't need it.
but when it comes to our
programs like SNAP, like
um Mill programs like Medicaid.
We, we seem pretty ready to go
well beyond.
the established limits. So if
you could get back with me, I
would like to know that, um,
either prior to, uh, next, uh,
for sure before the session
begins and, and, uh, that would
be very, very helpful. So thank
you Madam Chair. I'll.
I, I'll ask my other question
later. Thank you. We'll circle
back. Representative Kate for
Austin.
Uh, thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much
for this very detailed
presentation. I know that often
in uh my one of my
disappointments of this process
is that we um often or LFC often
creates data based on uh what
something is cost but not what
is something has been saved, um,
I would ask that I am sure that
many of these programs
were historically created based
on a percentage of savings, such
as we realize we feel feed
children and uh uh a mothers,
uh, there is a drop in infant
mortality. Um, when there is an
increase of uh food and less
food scarcity is there, uh, a
decrease in criminal activity.
Um, I think that there's some
historic, I understand it's not
current, but some historic
percentages that are in
available
for when we present data
on the cost
that we can at least look at
historic.
percentages of savings of why
those programs were initiated to
begin with, and thank you very
much, Madam Chair
Uh, thank you. So Representative
Sarana for Austin, and then
we'll circle back to the regular
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for your
presentation. So Austin, on page
22 and 23, do these estimates,
um, take into account technology
needs updates to the
applications, upgrades to the
systems or network. Is any of
that taken into account here?
Austin and I know you need to go
on to your next committee. So
committee members, uh, we're
gonna go back to the, uh, list,
but in the meantime, um, I know
the smell of food might be
tantalizing. So if you'd like to
go get your plates, uh, please
do because after this we have
public comment, of which there
are many, and then we have a one
o'clock presentation. So we will
continue with questions, but if
you'd like to get your plate of
food, please go ahead, committee
members. I'm sorry I cannot
offer that to the audience yet
because we might not have enough
food. We'll see. OK,
Representative Royal Caballero,
back to you.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
sorry I misunderstood you
originally, but thank you. So,
um, I'm gonna go, I have
questions I think for everybody
remaining but short, uh, for,
um, Mr. Owens
on, um, I'm referring to I think
the line getting, yeah, page 3
was um
so with a 39% cut
to FDA uh produce safety
funding.
How will the department maintain
oversight in order to keep New
Mexico prone produce safe for
schools and families. That's one
question then I have one other.
for you.
Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that question. So
the, the 39% reduction will
definitely impact our program.
Um
the, the, the ability of us to
conduct inspections and, and
provide compliance assistance
should not be reduced, so we
will put this over here so that
we will be able to go on site to
uh uh to producers operations
and look at things and do
inspections and make sure
they're there. What it will
decrease is our ability to do
outreach and education, which I,
I mentioned um the, the, there's
a new pre-harvest water rule
that's coming online this year.
Teaching
producers about that, informing
them, educating them on the new
requirements that will, um
not be as robust as we would
like it to be due to this cut,
but it, uh, our, our ability to,
to get out on the, on the
premises and, and, and take a
look at things shouldn't be
reduced.
Thank you. It's good to know it
won't affect compliance. Thank
you. So my next question has to
do with page 7, and that is, um,
the rescission of the uh
inflation reduction Act, Climate
Smart funds.
um means that
we will have fewer resources for
sustainable practices. So how
will the department
prevent farmers from abandoning
soil and water conservation
efforts in our state, which is
water scarce.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question.
That, you know, it, it
the, the funds were redirected
away from all of the grants that
had the specific tag of being
climate smart, ag or climate
smart forestry. They're
redirected into other
conservation programs, so it's,
it's difficult to say exactly
where they will end up. They
will, you know, through the
environmental quality incentives
program from conservation
stewardship program, all of
those, the, the funding's
basically being moved into
those. It just may not be
targeted specific
it, it could be targeted at, at
like soul health practices,
those types of things, but it
may not be because it's a more
broad, a, a more broad
conservation program that just
targeted that specific climate
smart um tagged group of
practices.
give me in turn and you'll keep
us apprised of that and how
that's going to be managed,
correct? Absolutely. We're
definitely, any information we
can provide, we will definitely
be definitely on that for you.
Thank you. And so, um, thank you
for that. Moving on and I'm, I
was trying to keep it in the
order of the presentations, but
I may have lost track um
excuse me, I believe this would
be for um
deputy secretary Kozlowski, yes.
so um
OK.
the state's payment error, as
has been discussed, is at 14.6%,
which is more than double the 6%
um threshold. So right now what
concrete investments in staffing
and IT
are you requesting to reduce the
rate before penalties hit, and I
believe that they may hit in
2028.
Adam Chair Representative, um,
we have asked in, um, special
session for both staffing and IT
infrastructure, um, so that'll
be set as well as um a
multi-year appropriation
potential for a 3 year due to
system impacts as well as
staffing, we are looking at
another um major staffing impact
from um the Medicaid portion as
well. So, um, and also knowing
how much you can actually
recruit and staff at once, um,
making sure that it's
sustainable will
take us at minimum 3 years.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you for that. That's
good to expect. And then just
moving on real quickly to uh Mr.
Chavez, the um
so the in your report, I can't
hear it is, um, the PED reports
that we have
almost 295,000 students in the
national school lunch program.
and you indicate that that
reflects 80% of funding coming
from federal reimbursements.
What is um your contingency plan
gives the Federal claims shrink.
and I right now I'm, I'm
anticipating shrink by 5 to 10%.
Madam Chair, Senator, our
representative, I'm sorry, um,
our contingency plan will be to,
you know, kind of seeing what's
gonna happen, especially with
the
how we're gonna cover it with
the state funding and covering
it in that way. Um,
what I look, what it looks like
right now is the threshold still
with Medicaid-free, those
students that we have under the
healthcare authority and the
SNAP. They're not changing on
our end. So those, those are
gonna still be tied a lot to
what's going to be happening
with them, and we don't
anticipate a huge change on
that. There may be a change in
uh other ways that they do it
moving forward, but right now we
don't see that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, but you
will be putting plans in, in
place in the event to prepare
for that, correct? We sure will.
We're always keeping an eye on
that. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chavez,
and I, the last two were for
the, I believe we were the last
two presenters that I have note
of, um, so
for um
Miss Flores Sis uh
my question
has to do with um
I, I'm wondering how the
Department of Health
uh, will be coordinating with
the Department of Agriculture
and the Public Education
department.
to help us ensure that families
um continue to access local food
when we know local food and
local food sources when we know
that federal programs are
already shrinking, already
shrinking simultaneously. It's
real concerning to me, but that
we have those populations and a,
and again, the next question for
Ms. King, the elderly, uh, the
aging population, so.
how what is in place to ensure
um
that families continue to access
food, Madam Chair, um,
Representative, thank you. That
is a wonderful question which is
on all of our minds, um, right
now I can already reassure you
that we are already working so
closely and especially with Miss
King online, not only with WIC
but also our WIC and senior
farmers' market, we collaborate
so closely together as I was
alluding to earlier, if we're
doing food drop offs or
community events we all contact
our agencies making sure we
are all aware so we can um
eliminate you know cutting down
any kind of admin costs to see
how we can support one another,
saying Wick's gonna be here,
would you like to attend to
maximize all of these benefits
from the programs to that
community to lessen any
transportation issues and and
costs and so forth. So that just
at a high level is what we're
we're currently doing. I mean,
what we're already doing and
then also in the future um I can
get back to you um specifically
from our secretary of her
commitment as well.
That would be very helpful.
Thank you very much. And
finally, Madam Chair, um, the
last presentation I was trying
to keep, uh, Matt notes here and
I hope I captured it would be
from uh Denise King.
and um so I noted that um
there was a note that 65
+ population is expected to grow
by over 200,000. That's always
been a huge concern of mine, and
that will happen in the next 15
years. So I'm wondering how the
department is planning to handle
the surge in food assistance
demand if the federal resources
continue to decline at the rates
that they're declining, but also
as part of the overall budget.
recon whatever that
is called right now and I don't
know if Ms. King is still
online. Do you think I should
save that question or King, are
you still online?
Madam chair and representative.
I am, and thank you for that
question. The department is
committed and has been
committed, um, and to our older
adults, and yes, that is a um
true factor that in by 2030 we
will um be expecting that our
population 65+ is going to
increase by 200,000. And so
those that receive services that
are under the older Americans
Act which is the
60 + We tend, we will see even
a, a, a larger increase. And so
our food and our nutrition
programs are the highest
accessed service under the older
Americans Act Services, and so
our commitment is to see that
the funding is um requested to
support that this specific
service for the congregate meals
in the home delivered meals. Um,
and prioritizing um the federal
funds that we have and, and that
includes the NSIP funding, the
nutritional supplemental
incentive program funding that
supports the raw food costs for
the meals.
And, and then also our New
Mexico grown food um,
uh, which we have
continued to expand on for our
network providers to purchase
local sourced foods to
incorporate in there the meals.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and this
is the final question and if you
can't answer it directly right
now, I, we can have an offline
conversation, but noting that
same, um, those same that same
data, um, I noticed that New
Mexico ranks 3rd nationally for
senior food insecurity with
about 18.4% at risk.
Um, are there particular
safeguards that you have um in
place that you plan to advocate
in order to prevent the snap
cuts.
uh worsening for seniors um from
hung from, from they going into
complete hunger.
Madam Chair and
Representative, um, indeed,
that, that is the um
the actual goal is to
collaborate amongst State
departments to see that there's
a safety net for our older
adults that are nutritionally at
risk and um as it as it has been
said, we work closely with
Department of Health with the
senior food um market vouchers
as well as with the healthcare
authority, with the food boxes
to see that that um gap is
filled for those that are
nutritionally at risk. And so
for those that, as you said,
that um with us being 3 in the
nation for food and security.
Our focus is to identify those
that are being assessed on an
annual basis that are scoring
high nutritionally high of what
we, um, are scoring 6.
+ and that needs assessment. And
so getting them connected to
local food banks, to local
providers um in their area to
see that that gap is filled.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for uh to
all of you for your great
presentations. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Scott
Thank you, Madam Chair. I guess
my questions would primarily be
directed toward
the secretary and we'll start on
page 6.
And I see that there are 457,000
plus.
participants in the program
Madam Chair, uh, Madam
Secretary, can you
tell me what the total SNAP
distributions were for 2
024
Madam Chair, Senator,
distributions of, I'm sorry.
the total snapP distributions,
that is
how much
money went out the door to these
457,000
participants
We do have that number. I don't
have it in my presentation in
handy. I apologize. OK. Well,
Madam Chair, and
Madam Secretary, I've got a
little AI working for me here
that had that number at
approximately 1.3
billion dollars. Does that
comport plus or minus with?
what you
would have in your Madam Chair,
Senator, yes, that is on the 2nd
bullet, but, um,
in like full distribution I have
that number, but yes, 1.3
billion. OK, so
the 2nd bullet point on page 6
says that those retailers are at
risk of losing
$1.3 billion which is 100%
of what the SNAP benefits.
were were distributed last year
over what time period, I guess,
would be the question
that this bullet point
represents.
Madam Chair, Senator, I will
have to look at what that time
period would be for because we
are looking at a multi-year
impact overall because of when
the work requirements go in when
the 50 food plan changes when
the potential for um our
differences of each of the error
rates potentially could be
coming in, so those could be,
um, over a multi-year, um.
factor so I can get back with
you on that one.
Madam Chair, Madam Secretary,
I'm glad you brought up error
rates because that was my very
next question.
At a, at $1.3 billion of
distribution.
and a 15% error rate, we're very
near that.
The error in dollars would be
approximately
$200 million or about 190
million. Would that
be a fair statement
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I'd
have to look at the actual error
percentages, um, and the amount,
um, some of the amounts that are
factored in our a
you know, a cumulative amount,
um, from the client cause error
rate as well as the, um, agency
error rates. So we'd need to
look at what the actual
appropriation amount is, um, it
is based upon the audit very
low, but because of the way that
they look at it as
you get a certain amount of
audit, um, numbers and then that
dollar amount and then they tie
it into overall from a cost
perspective, so it's a bit, it
looks like we only made an error
of $35,000 but when they
appropriate it over the whole,
it comes out to a larger amount,
so I'll have to figure out what
that amount is for you.
OK. I guess I was
trying to simplify the math, but
out of $1.3 billion of
distribution
if the error rate
is 15%, that would be close to
an error of $200 million. So
one could make the case, Madam
Chair, that if we reduce that
error rate significantly. We'll
never take that to zero. We
could make up
most
of this $203 million that is
listed in your third bullet
point. Would that be fair?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
so the 203 is the culmination of
what we would have to
potentially pay um as a cost
share so not that we would lose
the actual funding for SNAP.
It's what the state would need
to pay to cost share the
benefits. So if we do get our
errors into the 6% range or
below, we wouldn't have to pay
the amount. It would still be
federally funded.
OK. Thank you very much for
that. And then my last question,
Madam Chair,
Is there been any effort, I, I
know that
uh folks in New Mexico at 200%
of the poverty level are
eligible for SNAP benefits.
Has there ever been any effort
to quantify
how much of the New Mexico
economy is underground.
that is
ash
or, or off-book.
compensation
and
if there hasn't been
is that something that we should
be looking at.
with respect to some of these
programs.
Madam Chair, Senator, I am not
certain of that answer. Um, I
know that we do have our current
FPL at 200%, but I'm not sure
what factors um have driven that
and how much of that would
potentially be
off-book funding, um, or items
that they're, you know, when
they're considering the poverty
level, um, so I'd have to look
at when, um, or what was
factored into that when that
change was made.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all I had. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for your answers.
Thank you, Senator, and I'm
really encouraging everybody to
go eat because we're gonna keep
going
Uh, Representative Montoya, your
next.
Madam Chair, I think I'll, I'll
wait till I hear back from
Austin and I'll
I think I'm good. Thank you
Thank you, Representative Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you very much. I know
this, these reports are
um
very detailed
uh,
and, um, and you
man
um, and, um, and your projecting
uh possibilities based on we're
trying to figure out how
how, uh, like any law is
interpreted.
and and projecting, so I do very
much appreciate that.
I, I wanna go back to my
statement with uh LSC with
Austin is I understand what
you're projecting are the actual
costs
um
I would like presentations to
have a history. Why does this
exist? Why does this program
exist so that we know as
policymakers
um, things can change and
changes to the program can
occur. Cultural can changes
maybe, uh, you know, this is not
a value of ours anymore, um, or
we have a better value or one
that we want to fund more, but
having a little bit of history.
I know the attorneys don't let
us put purposes in our bills
anymore, um, but it does help
for a policy decision, a
decision maker to understand.
what was the purpose, what did
this program want to address
when in its original inception.
um, so that as we make those
changes, as we review our
cultural changes and our changes
in priority.
We understand what the purpose
was as well.
um, uh, thank you, Madam
Secretary as well thank you, uh,
Madam Chair. I am going now, uh,
first with um.
and I understand this is just
with food insecurity.
Uh, do we have statistics based
on
uh, elderly, uh, facing food
insecurity, um, currently or in
the past with increased
hospitalizations or a cost
analysis of what assisted living
and nursing homes are, uh,
compared to at home.
um care we we have that
statistics analysis, do we not?
Representative, I'm gonna ask,
uh, Ms. Denise King to try to
answer that from aging and
long-term services.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank, thank you
Madam Chair and, and
Representative, um, I don't
have that
that information readily
available that I will absolutely
get that back to you.
Uh, thank you. Thank you very
much and thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, uh, this is, uh, a question
for Sarah in our current SNAP
program, you did, you were able
to, you were very enthusiastic
about that we are now able to
provide Snap to the cloud and
being able to we provide any
kind of food service or snap,
um, on an emergency basis, uh,
such as, uh, to address food
insecurity during a wildfire or
other natural
disasters
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative, um, speaking
just for the WIC program itself
when it comes to any kind of
emergency, um, yes, we try to
make sure um
that especially if an example of
medical formula, you know, a lot
of mothers come to the program
for special medical formulas, so
we work closely trying to be
proactive to make sure we have
enough on hand, especially in a
lot of these communities, the
grocery stores are shut down, so
we need another means for them
to be able to provide for their
infants. So that's just one
example of how we're trying to
work within the community to
make sure they have what they
need and then again going back
working with all of our partners
on food boxes or FEMA or
something like that, making sure
there is appropriate food should
the groce
ry stores be down, but um I'll
pass to my colleague to talk
more about um your specific
question.
Uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes, so we currently for any
disasters, um, do emergency food
replacement as the disaster
declaration comes up into
effect. So if you had to leave
your home
and you know, your food was left
all in the refrigerator and it
went bad by the time you came
back. We do replace benefits,
um, but also we are in um a our
disaster error right now, so we
are doing, you do another
supplemental you can apply for
disaster SNAP as well, um, and
receive a benefit, um, based
upon, uh, different factors
other than your normal factor.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you very much for trying
to answer that very broad
question, um, I would that would
be something else I'd be
interested in. You're, you're
talking about the impact of
increased food scarcity, uh, due
to a lack of federal funding in
this today's presentation. So
how would that affect for our
because we know wildfires is not
just a
point in time, right? We're
gonna have them every year from
now on whether or not people can
get access to grocery stores or
they can't get access to their
mail to receive, so I love the
idea that they're getting, they
could get an emergency SNAP
benefit through the cloud. How
is the um threats to the SNAP
program going to impact
emergency food services as well.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
essentially um
it's still the eligibility
questions. So if the thrifty
food plan reduces the amount of
eligible funds, um, and instead
of, you know, $100 it could be
$80. So we, we would see that
same reduction, um, in what
you're eligible to receive. I
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
just like for a point of
privilege please, as, as we have
wildfires, individuals who may
have not been previously on WIC
or Snap,
but now no longer have access to
a grocery store or maybe no
longer have access to an income
because their business just
burnt down.
They are in need of food or
access to food, uh.
quickly
um, and need to be able to be
qualified quickly when federal
funding is being threatened on
basis of an error rate.
while we are trying to qualify
individuals in an emergency
situation. I do have some
concerns with that, and I would
love to know in the future how
we are going to be able to
provide our food for our elderly
and our mothers and individuals
in emergency situations
um, when we are fearful of that
error rate impacting the federal
contribution. Thank you.
Thank you very much
Um, seeing no one else on the
list. I would like to thank this
panel very much. You've
presented quite a bit of
information.
Thank you
Thank you, Senator
on.
I heard you are met
and maybe I misunderstood, but
you made a comment right at the
end of one, I guess just as we
went to questions.
about the best way to
save money was
I, I think you were in error, I
think, I don't think you meant
to say this, that, to keep the
error rate high.
Well, uh, right now, Senator, we
are benefiting from the Alaska
provision by having a high error
rate. And eventually that will
go away, but right now,
it's our to our benefit.
Well.
I understand
the basis of your comment, but I
would think that long term
long term, and for the health of
the
for the state
reducing the error rates.
is in our best interest.
Thank you
So thank you very much, you all.
Thank you. OK, so we have um a
person uh or two who want to
make a public comment and then
we'll take a, a 10 minute break
so that everybody can finish
eating and come back and I have
Christine Dobbins, or Dobby or
Dobbins who if you're here,
would you please come up?
Is there anybody else who wants
to speak that's here in the
audience for public comment and
do we have anybody on the Zoom
if you, if you're on the Zoom
and you raise your hand.
Is there anybody, nobody on
Zoom, OK, so would you please
introduce yourself out for the
record. Hello, my name is
Christine Dobbin. I'm from
Anthony, New Mexico, and I
currently go to NMSU. I'll be
graduating with a master's in
Public Health degree this fall,
and I wanted to urge you to pass
and support comprehensive
climate legislation um to help
adapt and ensure that we can be
resilient in our community,
Extreme heat is killing our most
vulnerable elders, farm workers,
every single day
and our livelihoods, um, our
chili harvests are being
affected as well. We're living
in a prolonged drought season,
but now we're having perforated
floods from the monsoon runoff,
which is contaminated as well as
our groundwater.
Um, also our altered wet season
has delayed significantly our
chili, onion, and sour gum
harvest and led to some lost
wages. We live on an inactive
fault line historically
inactive, and we've seen a
dramatic increase to almost 200
small scale earthquakes this
year due to fracking, injection
wells in our region, um, on top
of the air pollution that those
industries are um emitting into
the air.
Our climate solutions are
essential for both the state's
agriculture, the sustainability
of that, and for our health, um,
so thank you please invest in
our community. We really need
you.
Thank you very much for being
here. Is there anyone else for a
public comment?
Thank you very much. Uh, we will
ask, uh, the majority of people
who are already eating to come
back by 1:15 so that we can
