Wildlife Federation here Club
Rio Grande, uh, Trout Unlimited,
Wildlands Network, and Wildlife
for All. Uh, and that was up in
Red River and that was, uh, that
was very nice and much
appreciated.
Um, this morning, uh, we're
joined by Senator Bobby
Gonzalez. Senator Gonzalez,
could you introduce yourself?
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chairman,
um, and to the committee
members, so.
Uh, so Senator Roberto Bobby J
Gonzalez, District 6, and uh
Questa in this area has always
been my district as a as a House
member.
I represented this area for 25
years and then as the Senate,
you know, it's also in our
district, but uh I really want
to welcome all of you to this
part of the state. It's the time
of the year that you get to see
a lot and a lot of change in the
foliage and beautiful colors and
I'm sure that you had a very
wonderful uh dinner last night
at being in the town of Red
River, but again, a big welcome
to to all of you, um, right here
in Questa this
one of the communities that um
really had a really put
themselves together, you know,
when the closure of um Chevron
mining and uh known as Molly
Corp.
And uh that came to a halt, you
know, almost from 900 employees
to almost nothing. And so it was
a real hard time for um a
community in many ways, but um
they have made it and they have
really worked well and uh one of
the very key players into um
refining, you know, some of the
skill sets has been a UNM Taos
has been a real champion in
providing a lot of assistance,
you know, in different areas. So
again, welcome.
For being here and thank you Mr.
Chairman and members.
Thank you, Senator. Anything
else from the committee before
we get started? OK. Uh, our
first panel is stream Access
Enforcement. If our panelists
could join us at the front
table.
We typically go in the order
you're listing on the agenda, so
Mr. Grayson, if you'd like to go
first.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Members of
the committee, uh, my name is
James Grayson. I'm the chief
deputy at the New Mexico
Department of Justice, and I
want to thank the Mr. Chair and
the committee for inviting us to
speak today. I'd like to provide
a little bit of background with
the um Adobe Whitewater opinion
from the New Mexico Supreme
Court that underlies current
stream access litigation. That
opinion was issued in 2022 and
the New Mexico Supreme Court
reaffirmed, uh, what it had held
in 194.
5 in an opinion called Red River
that, um, the waters.
Belong to the public, the waters
of New Mexico, whether they are
perennial or torrential, belong
to the public and the public has
a right to recreate and to fish
on those waters, um, and what is
new in the, in the Adobe
Whitewater opinion is that the
Supreme Court recognized that
that public easement includes
the right to touch the beds and
the banks of the river to the
extent necessary to enjoy, uh,
recreation or fishing, um, on
those waters.
Um, the New Mexico Supreme Court
also determined that that was
not a takings for landowners
because that has always been the
case. That has been the case
before, um, the United States.
Um
Uh,
Incorporated New Mexico and it
was the case under Spanish and
Mexican rule and so, um, the,
the, uh, New Mexico Supreme
Court held that the the New
Mexico constitution's
recognition of that right,
simply, um, recognized what had
always been the case.
The um.
The, uh, trout stalkers was the
defendant in that case, and they
petitioned to the United States
Supreme Court on the takings
issue, but it was not accepted.
Um, that petition was denied by
the United States Supreme Court.
So it is a final judgment from
the New Mexico Supreme Court.
So at the Department of Justice,
we recognized that there was
going to be, um, a, a little bit
of a struggle in terms of
implementing this opinion. And
so we began to look at the
rivers across the state, um,
particularly the rivers that are
heavily trafficked and used for,
for recreation, um, like, like
the Pecos River, the Chama
River, we sent our special
agents out to those rivers to
determine whether there were
barriers that went across the
river. Um, and that was the
subject, um,
Of the Adobe Whitewater opinion
is that there had been barriers
that had been allowed by certain
regulations and the New Mexico
Supreme Court said that those
regulations were
unconstitutional.
So we did identify some barriers
on the Pecos River, and we
worked with the Department of
Game and Fish as well as, um,
the, the, uh, groups that are
represented here today, um, to
contact the landowner owners and
to develop a cease and desist
letter that we then sent to land
landowners with barriers. Our
goal
Was the same as the New Mexico
Supreme Court's,
um, ultimate opinion, which is
that this is a balanced
approach.
The public does have the right
to recreate. The public has the
right to access those waters,
but the public can't trespass
over private land to get to the
water, and the public can't exit
the, the, uh, water onto private
land, um, that is marked for no
trespassing. And so we wanted to
work with the landowners to let
them know what their rights were
and what the public's rights
were.
Um, we successfully managed to
have a number of barriers
removed from the Pecos River,
and there were a few landowners
that did not remove the barriers
as a result of the cease and
desist letter. So we filed suit
against one of them.
We were able to reach an
agreement with that individual,
we entered a consent decree with
him. And the reason for that was
that after the cease and desist
letter, there had been an
indication that there was an
unwillingness to comply.
So for those landowners that
voluntarily took down their
barriers, we did not enter into
a consent decree. We did not
file suit. But for those who did
not, once we filed suit in
court, we believe that having a
consent decree in place was
important and it ensures that
those barriers don't go back up.
Um, unfortunately, even after
the consent decree was entered,
this individual did not remove
his barrier. And so we filed a
motion for an order to show
cause and the 4th Judicial
District. Um, that is still
pending and we are working with
the landowner to try to get that
barrier removed.
Uh, we also identified another
landowner who had not removed a
barrier and we've recently
filed a suit against him as
well, um, seeking an injunction,
uh, to require him to remove
that barrier.
And again, we're trying to work
with landowners on this. Uh, we
understand that it's it's a
change for them, uh, based on
that, that regulation being held
unconstitutional. Um, but at the
same time, this, this right of
access is extremely important
and, um, it's, it's something
that's ingrained in our
Constitution. And so, uh, we
need to be, uh, vigilant and
making sure that we remove those
barriers and provide access to
the public.
Um, that, that's basically where
things are.
Mr. Chair, it appears that
Representative Zamora.
Represent tomorrow.
Um
I was just trying to get a hold
of Mr. Chair so he could put me
on his list. Yeah, keep, keep
going.
Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um,
And so that, that's essentially
where things are, um, in terms
of the litigation that we have
filed, um, several landowners
did file suit in federal
district court against the
Attorney General and against the
director of the Department of
Game and Fish, um, as well as
the State Game Commission
arguing again that this was a
takings and our position is that
that issue is resolved by the
New Mexico Supreme Court. Um,
but that litigation is ongoing
and we filed a motion to
dismiss.
We will shortly be filing a
reply on that, um, motion to
dismiss. So that's where things
stand and, uh, we're working
across the state with local law
enforcement. We've met with
some, uh, we met with a sheriff,
we've met with some local law
enforcement to talk about what
Adobe Whitewater means, where
there might be some gray areas,
how we can work with landowners,
how we can de-escalate potential
conflict between members of the
public and landowners who
do not want the public near
their land.
And, um, that, so our goal is,
is really to educate.
And it's to ensure that there is
access for the public. Thank
you, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee.
Thank you very much. Next up we
have, um, Jesse Debell.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
I appreciate the opportunity to
be here. Uh, thank you to Mr.
Grayson as well for providing
the legal update, uh, I'll, I'll
be very, very brief and then,
uh, we can hear from, uh, my
friend and, and co-worker, Ms.
Barrett. I, I would just like to
say from the New Mexico Wildlife
Federation's perspective, we
really want to, um, emphasize
our appreciation for the
Attorney General's office and
for Attorney General Torres
being willing to take on this.
You and, and really step up for,
for the public and to uphold the
constitutionality of this ruling
and to uphold this, this public
right that we've had for so many
years but have been denied for
decades and decades. The work of
the New Mexico Wildlife
Federation continues to focus on
public education, helping the
public recognize what Mr.
Grayson just stated, that the
public does not have a right to
trespass across private
property, nor do they have a
right to get off of the water,
uh, where it's on private
property.
But we also are educating the
public about about proper use of
these public resources about
stewardship as the as the stream
access case made its way through
court. And even before it was in
court when it was still being
handled at the Game commission.
We heard from countless
landowners talking about the way
that the public treated the
resource that they would leave
trash, they would leave fishing
line, empty Styrofoam worm
containers, any number of
things. And so it's really
critical that that outdoor
Recreation is that members of
the public who who rely on our
beautiful natural resources for
their enjoyment, recognize the
importance of taking care of
these things so the New Mexico
Wildlife Federation is committed
to doing ongoing stream
restoration projects so that we
can do habitat restoration in
partnership with private
landowners. Uh, we also, uh,
want to work together to create
signage and to help further
educate the public out in the
field and just ensure that this,
this, um,
Clarification of our ability to
access our, our public resources
is not ultimately met with
conflict but rather met with
cooperation. And, and this
stream access rule is not very
different than what exists in
some other states like Montana,
for example, where stream access
is and has been, uh,
Honored the way that New Mexico
is currently honoring it and and
there is great cooperation and
so for all of the stories that
exist about conflict and about a
negative interaction, I would
just like to say that there are
also plenty that are happening
every single day where anglers
and boaters are having
encounters with private
landowners and those discussions
are friendly, those
conversations are, are pleasant
and cooperation is happening and
I think, uh, Ms. Barrett might
talk just a little bit more
about that, but thank you very
much, Mr. Chair and committee
members.
Thank you, Jesse. Uh, next up we
have Sherry Barrett with New
Mexico Paddlers Coalition.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee, my
name is Sherry Barrett, and I
chaired the New Mexico Paddlers
Coalition, which is a coalition
of local and national paddler
groups from
including the Adobe Whitewater
Club. Our mission is safe public
access to New Mexico's rivers
and streams.
We also want to thank Raul Taris
or New Mexico Attorney General
and his staff for their
commitment to our public access
to the rivers and streams.
I have a PowerPoint that I'd
like to show now. I may I have
the first slide, please?
So right now we still have
numerous impenetrable and
hazardous fences that are
existing on our rivers, um,
these are extremely dangerous to
the public. We instruct on the
dangers of strainers in rivers,
mostly, uh, excuse me, uh,
trees, logs, jetty jacks down in
the Albuquerque area. But these
fences, especially in areas of
high flow, when there is high
flow, and also around
Blind corners are extremely
dangerous to boaters as well as
anglers. And we aren't just
concerned about our members, but
also the general public that
often has inadequate expertise
and knowledge and even safety
equipment for these rivers. So
we have to be aware of all
aspects of not only New Mexico
residents but also the tourist
industry. But as you can see,
these fences that still exist on
the Pecos River are
impenetrable, which means that
they are not
Providing for public access to
these rivers. Next slide,
please.
Uh, the top slide, uh, not
showing up greatly though, but,
uh, one of the problems is it's
a barbed wire fence. And these
can be very difficult to see on
rivers, especially in high
flows. And again, these can
ensnare people.
Boaters and anglers and cause
drowning.
And these drownings occur
throughout the United States as
documented by American
Whitewater. And so we have to
figure out a way to get these
fences.
If they're necessary to be
paddler friendly. And we're also
still seeing a lot of signs that
threaten prosecution for the use
of these stream beds that again
are as Mr. Grayson said, the
public's. Next slide, please.
There are uh paddler friendly
fences that exist on the Pecos
River downstream of the town.
Um, uh, the first picture is a
slide of a helpful sign alerting
voters to an upcoming fence on
the river, and then down below
you can see what is a paddler
friendly fence with our friend
Mr. Dubell, um, paddling
through. They're, they're not,
you know, we would still rather
not see fences on our rivers,
but we recognize the need for
livestock.
Exclusion or containment in
certain areas due to the nature
of, of livestock on different
parts of the river.
But as you can see, this fence,
it hangs PVC pipe down from a,
uh, a wire across the top, and
you can separate it and still
boat through. So it is a
enetrable fence and it's, it
removes that danger of
entrapment, ensnarement, and
drowning. Next slide, please.
The New Mexico Paddlers
Coalition members and Adobe
Whitewater did retrofit a fence
on the upper Pecos River this
year for a landowner. As you can
see that top slide is an
impenetrable fence and the, the
lower one is, uh, retrofitted to
again be paddler friendly. This
fence cost material wise about
$1000 and then our members are
all volunteers, so it was
volunteer labor.
Next slide, please.
Here's also a paddler friendly
fence that was constructed on
the boundary of Villanueva State
Park on the Pecos River. Um,
this one is, uh, a, a very nice
fence, very, very well done,
constructed by advanced
environmental solutions.
So, as you can see, there are
solutions out there that both
contain livestock and provide
for uh navigability for passage
along our rivers and streams to
ensure river access, um,
throughout New Mexico. Next
slide, please.
And we also fully embrace River
stewardship. We recognize that
their litter does accumulate and
our members, as well
We also are working with
governmental agencies down in
the Albuquerque area,
especially, but also with the
Bureau of Land Management to
enact a signage that promotes
safety on rivers as well as
leave no trace ethics. Thank you
very much for your time and I
hope that, um, we can move
forward with the removal of, of
fences that aren't necessary in
the retrofitting of those fences
were necessary for containment
of livestock. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you, panelists for your
presentations. We have most of
the committee, uh, wanting to
ask questions. Uh, so I'll, um,
we'll start with Thurs and some
more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee and presenters,
uh, good to see you guys here
today. So.
As we go forward with this and,
and we, and we've been through
the court hearings and
everything, how much
How far up to the river or into
the river can can a rancher
fence?
Before you have a uh a paddle
friendly fence I believe is what
it was called, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, representatives are
morons, so that the Supreme
Court's opinion requires that
there be access to the water.
Um, and so that would be the
entire stream. Um, there must be
access for anglers and for, um,
those wishing to, to recreate on
the water. Um, in terms of
fencing, there are
Um, there, there are acceptable,
um,
Types of fences that can be used
for a visual impairment for
livestock, um, but, but that
fence must be, um,
It, it can't be attached at the
bottom so that it paddlers and
anglers can go through the
fence.
And, and Mr. Grayson did, did
the court
Give any kind of specifics or
or.
Or anything about how to build
that fence or what kind of
materials could be used or
anything like that?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Zamora, no, the, the fencing was
not an issue in the Adobe
Whitewater opinion. Um, the, the
issue in that opinion was
whether individuals could touch
the bed and the bank, um, for
purposes of fishing and
recreating. And so fences have
not been adjudicated. Those are
issues that will work their way
through the courts.
And, and how far could
How far
Onto the ranch or onto the bed
of the river can.
Can the people
Go.
Before it's considered
trespassing.
Mr. Chair, Representative Samoa,
um, they're, they're always
going to be gray areas, um, and
the courts will resolve those
gray areas, but, um, under the
Adobe Whitewater opinion, what
the New Mexico Supreme Court
said is that members of the
public can touch the bed, and
they can touch the banks to the
extent necessary to enjoy the
recreation or fishing on that
water and, uh, while making a
minimal impact.
On the land.
And so, um, those individuals
cannot damage the land,
um, but they can touch the bed
and the bank.
Thank you, thank you for that
answer. So, Mr. Chair, and Mr.
Grayson, so they're, they can't
camp there or build a campfire
or anything like that.
Mr. Chair, Representative Zmo,
uh, no.
Uh, the land, the land around
the river, the land off of the
water, that remains private
property.
Thank you, thank you for that,
Mr. Chair and Mr. Grayson. So
then, uh.
What, how, how did the, the
ranchers' cattle come into play
in the courts about how they
were going to keep their cattle
onto their ranches.
Mr. Chair Representative Samoa,
that, that also was not an issue
in the New Mexico Supreme
Court's opinion. Thank you.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair
and thank you, Mr. Grayson.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Stefanix.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Um, I
personally, uh, support the, the
court ruling, but I represent
Pecos.
And I have had 2 right at the
end of last session I had 2.
Landowners who have been there
forever, who are on the river,
they're not wealthy people. They
are people who
Inherited the land and inherited
very small uh
Homes. One of them, and they
brought pictures to show me and
one of them had uh.
A small cabin lived by himself,
but he was about, he only was
about 5 ft from the river.
And his concern was not so much
the gating as it was, the
proximity to the river and the
allowance of individuals for
egress and ingress.
And I tried to reassure him that
that was not the case, that
that's not the meaning, but he
was very concerned and I almost
did a memorial.
Mr. Chair, that looked at how
these issues could be negotiated
for the landowners. So, Mr.
Grayson, uh, is your department
willing or do you have a person
that's, uh, willing to sit down
with landowners to talk about
their private concerns?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
yes, we, we have done that. Um,
we've worked with the
landowners, um, to whom we've
sent cease and desist letters.
We've also worked with a larger
group. They've, they've come to
our office to have a meeting.
And so we've heard their
concerns. We want to continue to
hear their concerns. We want to
continue to work with them, uh,
because we, as, as I mentioned
earlier, we understand that this
is for them, this is a change,
um, under previous regulations
they were allowed to.
A fence or gate, um, parts of
the river, and that is no longer
the case under Adobetwater and
so we recognize that it's going
to be a bit of a struggle to
educate landowners, um, as to
what they can do and to educate
members of the public about
their limitations, uh, because
the landowners have, do have the
right to have their private
property protected and we're
willing to work with local,
local law enforcement and making
sure that, um, trespassing laws
are enforced.
So, Mr. Chair, do you want these
individuals to contact you
personally or is there somebody
else and then later you could
perhaps give me that contact.
Yes, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, I'd be happy to give that
contact information to you.
Thank you. That's all, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While I
don't agree with it, but that
doesn't make any difference
right now, uh, because private
property owners pay property
tax.
On that land underneath that
river.
And so have you, has anyone
thought of being able to take
out that.
Uh, property tax for the
landowner? Has that been talked
about at all from anybody?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, I'm not aware of
anyone talking about that, but
the, the, the beds and the banks
still remain private property.
There's a public easement.
To access that property, but it
remains private property.
Uh, I, I thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I, I understand that,
but my ranch, I have private
property signs.
Um, posted, and if someone
crosses that line, I can
prosecute them.
And not with stream and river.
So I'm not here to argue about
that, but what I am here to ask
is, what is your first line, uh,
Mr. Chairman, and, uh, Mr.
Grayson of communication with
the uh.
Landowner, if there is fencing
across.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, we've, we've
approached it in different ways.
It depends on whether, um, the
landowner is on the property. We
try to contact them in person.
And just have a conversation.
Um, if we're not able to get in
touch with them, we do send
cease and desist letters. Um,
those letters inform them that
they have the right to, um, post
for, uh, no trespassing on their
property and that individuals
from the public do not have a
right to cross their land in
order to access the water. So we
want to inform them of, of their
rights as well, um, but we also
need to inform them that there
is a constitutional right of
public access to the water
itself.
Thank you for that. I was hoping
it wasn't just a cease and
desist letter. So I appreciate
you trying to contact them
personally first, um,
understanding that, you know,
not maybe some people don't live
on that property full time. And
so I appreciate that a lot.
Thank you for that. Um, one of
my questions is, uh, Mr.
Chairman, if there's no water in
the creek or riverbed.
Do people have access to that?
Or does there have to be water
in it?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, the, the New Mexico
Supreme Court's opinion is based
on the water itself. So the
public has the right to the
water. They don't have the right
to access land without water on
it. Um, at, at the same time,
the New Mexico constitution
recognizes that public right to
water for both perennial and
torrential water. So it doesn't
have to be permanently.
Um, flowing, but if it is
flowing, then the public has a
right to access it.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
if it is flowing, they have
access. If it's not, then they
don't. So, um, in where I live,
we don't have a lot of free
standing water at all, um, most
of it's, uh, you know, if it
rains really hard, we possibly
have.
Uh, the Rio Sala and uh some
others that run pretty heavy. So
when it's running water, people
have access, but they cannot
leave, um, they can be on the
banks as long as it's to enjoy
whatever apparently fishing,
even though there's, it's dry
most of the time, so they can
leave the banks for that, but
not for any other reason. Um, my
concern, uh, Mr. Chairman, is
that during
The rainy season.
And we have running water that
people will say they're
accessing that for water, for
fishing and enjoying,
recreating, uh, but they're
actually just trespassing to
look for shed hunting or
poaching animals. And so I, I
was curious.
If it has, you've stated if it
has water, they can access it.
If it doesn't, they cannot. And
so if ranchers, um,
Have
Fences up to a certain area,
fencing that out, that river or
dry creek bed or whatever it is,
fencing that out, they cannot
pass that fence. Is that
correct? If it's on the side,
not across on the, on the side.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Armstrong, if I understand your
question correctly, yes, that's
the case. Um, they remains
private property, they can, um,
take,
Efforts to make sure that people
do not
Uh, come onto their private
property away from the water.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So from what I understand, and
correct me if I'm wrong, Mr.
Chair.
What I understand
You have the right to access.
But there's nothing in statute
to tell me as a rancher.
At what point in time my fence.
is an impediment. Is that right?
Or do you have a specific
Rule, regulation, statute that
says this is the fence that is
acceptable.
Across that river.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, uh,
there's no statute that, that
says what fence is acceptable,
um, the right of access is based
on the New Mexico constitution,
and those are general
principles. So the question is
what is reasonable?
And that's what the courts will
eventually determine.
And
until I, a court rules on what
is acceptable.
Ranchers are pretty well in the
dark.
And, and where I'm getting at,
Mr. Chair, and, and Mr. Attorney
General, is this.
There's a whole world of fencing
out there that we call water
gaps.
You're telling me that you have
access to something when water
is flowing.
There's probably more.
Water gaps and fences where
these are, these were made to
wash out on high flows, but
The rest of the time it's the
ranchers' duties to put these
back up so that cattle can't get
out.
Well, there's a, there's a point
in time in there.
But these ranchers.
For breaking the law.
Because water is flowing and
that gap's up.
And if a paddler decides that's
the exact moment in time that
they want to go through there.
Then that rancher's impeding
access.
And I know it's a very flaky
point on the law, but it is a
point in the law.
That that someone can be
breaking the law.
When they're just doing their
normal.
Business
And so,
I would very much like the
Attorney General's office to
To give us the definition of
what's acceptable.
As a fence across the
The river
What's acceptable to keep the
cattle in.
And still legal.
For a paddler.
For access.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods, right
now, there aren't specific
guidelines.
The general guideline is that
there must be reasonable access.
So if there is a, if there's a
fence across the river, um,
that, that cannot be, uh, that,
that an individual who is
fishing or recreating cannot
cross. That is not reasonable
access.
For years, Mr. Chair.
For years.
On the Canadian.
Going to very suit that started
this was on the Red River Cattle
Company.
And it was the Canadian going
across what is now the present
bell ranch.
And it was a normal thing and
the for many years,
That one or two of the wires was
cut.
Out there in
In that area on that river so
that paddlers could go under
that fence.
And the paddlers themselves put
ribbons up on that spot so that
one would know where the next
one could go through.
But because that's a continually
flowing river and there's
continuing pressure of cattle
going through that area. That
fence was maintained to keep the
cattle in.
What you know is a requirement.
Of the fence laws in the state
of New Mexico.
So
Evidently that's acceptable.
On that particular stretch of
the Canadian River.
So
Did the law change from that?
And I know it's a it's an
individual particular spot that
you have no knowledge of. I
understand that, but what I'm
getting at.
You're asking someone to comply.
And it may not be a change of
law, but it's a change of
culture.
That has happened in the pretty
recent time zone, and I know
you're getting with ranchers
and, and telling them that what
this is not acceptable.
But the
It's hard not to break the law.
If you don't know what the law
is. If you don't have an exact
example of what the law is.
And so
it's funny, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
As you know, I carried, or you
may not remember, I carried a
fence and law several times.
And uh
Uh, the highway department
fencing law.
At one time, we actually exempt
the highway department from
keeping fences up along the
highway and, and I had to put
the law back in.
To create a law to put fences
back up so the highway would
maintain those fences.
And there's a very definite
layout.
For a highway fence.
They tell you what they want.
And a contractor if they build
that fence, they have to build
to those specifications.
And to hear today.
There's not a specification
here.
It makes me wonder.
If we're going to go this far,
let's let's go ahead and go far
enough so we know what's legal
and what's not.
I realize this is an opinion of
the Supreme Court.
And probably the judges on the
Supreme Court don't want to feel
like they know how to build
fence.
Across the river, so they leave
it such that it's gone up in the
air.
That I would feel better and I
know most ranchers would feel
better.
If we had a better idea.
And I know you presented ideas.
But still,
It's not
Exactly what's acceptable or
not.
To me, if there was a ladder
going across the top of that
fence and back down the other
side.
That gives someone access. Now,
will the paddlers say that
that's access? No, they won't
say that's excess because that
means they'd have to take that.
Pedal across the top of that
fence and back down, right?
You want to be able to go.
Stay in the river and go right
in.
So, but to me it's, it's still
pretty foggy and I know that
And another piece of this that's
very foggy to me, as you said.
They can get on that private
land if there's not any no
trespassing sites.
And that's another part of the
law that's very foggy to me, Mr.
Chair, because it's, it's pretty
common if you live in an urban
area and you have a front yard.
You don't have to put no
trespassing signs on your front
yard.
But it's not acceptable for
people to get in your front yard
and camp.
So I have a
Private property is something
that people don't understand the
rights on private property, they
understand them if they're in an
urban area, they understand
someone owns them.
And if it's even state property,
hell, we'd probably put a fence
around it.
We probably impair you from
going into that state property,
at least at times.
And there's no
There's no egress or access.
At any time you want.
But on private property, you
have to, you have to put signage
up, and I know that's the law,
and I know that's the way it is,
but
It makes it, some of this stuff
doesn't make a whole lot of
sense to me.
If it's, if it's, if it's, I'm
assuming the no trespassing
signage is there to show it's
private property.
Essentially, that's what it
does. It shows you that private
property, that's not public
property.
But
Anyway, I'm rambling. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Vream.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr.
Grayson, uh, trying to
understand the breadth of the
decision, but, uh, let's take a
stream that's the width of this
table. So I could walk up it,
let's say 5 ft off the bank and
fish that stream. Is that
correct, Mr. Chair
Representative Ream? So it, it's
gonna be each individual case is
going to be, um, assessed
differently, I think.
You know, we've, we've been to
areas, um.
I, I went down to the Peria
River, the P stream, and you
know, there are places where
there's no water flowing at all.
Um, there are places where there
is a little bit of water
flowing. There are places where
um there's, there's a break in
the water and it's it, you know,
and, and a little island in
between. So each individual
circumstance is going to be, um,
I have to, you have to be
assessed individually, but from
the New Mexico Supreme Court's
opinion, the the
general concept is that people
can touch the beds and they can
touch the banks to the extent
necessary to enjoy recreation
and fishing while uh creating a
minimal impact.
To the land. Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Grayson, you know, and I'm
talking about, you take some of
these very small mountain
streams.
They don't have, if you will, a
wide riverbed, you know, yes,
the volume of the river will go
up and down depending on the
year on the time of year, but
it's grass on both sides.
So you either would have to walk
up the river which will destroy
the habitat or you go ahead and
walk on the edge of the stream,
and that's what I'm getting at.
Ken, is that lawful, and it
sounds like under the decision.
That it's lawful, this river
flows year-round 10365 days.
And Mr. Chair, Representative
Rem, if that's, if that's what's
necessary in order to enjoy that
that water, then then that would
be lawful. OK.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Grayson, when I read the state
constitution,
I understood it would also allow
me access to dry Arroyo beds.
There's no water flowing. Can I
go up that dry royal bed.
Mr. Chair Representative Vareem,
the Constitution provides access
to water and so it provides that
the water belongs to the public.
It's the water specifically that
the New Mexico Supreme Court
addressed in Adobe Whitewater
Club.
So, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Grayson,
if there's no water in it.
Then you can't go up the dry
river bed. Mr. Chair
Representative, that's correct.
OK. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Yeah, yeah, Mr. Mr. Chairman,
and Mr. Gray, we, it came up,
well, what if there was water
there, let's say this morning
and it's muddy and there's pools
of water.
I know this is attorney's
question.
Yes, Mr. Chair and
Representative, like I said,
there were, there will always be
gray areas and, and we'll rely
on the courts to deal with
those, um, from the, from the
perspective of the New Mexico
Department of Justice. What
we're trying to do is make sure
that there's access to those
areas where the public that the
public uses the most and so
that's why we started with the
Pecos River, um, we, we will
move on to other.
Large rivers where there are a
large number of people
recreating. Um, that's not the
only place where that
constitutional right exists, and
that constitutional right
exists, like I said, for the
Percher River, which in some
places is, is this wide.
Um.
But those are, those are
situations that are going to be
dealt with probably by private
individuals. So you'll have
members of the public who may
sue for access, or you may have
landowners who try to keep
people out and contact the
sheriff, um, to, to report a
trespassing. And so those,
that's the way that some of
these things are going to play
out and from, from our
perspective that the New Mexico
Department of Justice, what
we're trying to do is educate
people, try to, try to tell
people where their lines are
clear and give people general
concepts that they can use.
And also convey that this is,
this is a question of
reasonableness.
And people have to be reasonable
on both sides of the issue.
Landowners need to be reasonable
and the the individuals trying
to recreate need to be
reasonable as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Representative
Representative Ferrari. Thank
you, Mr. Chair, and, um, thank
you, panel for all your hard
work to, you know, protect and
make sure that, you know, we
use, I like to kayak, not as
much as I, I would like to and
also go fishing with my son, um,
so these are really important
for, you know, people to be able
to recreate and enjoy, you know,
what water we do have, um, I
got.
To kayak in Kentucky when we
were there for a conference and
go down a tributary from the
Ohio River, and you know it was
just really enjoyable and I want
that for, you know, generations
to come. So thank you for all
your hard work on this. Um, my
question is to Mr. Grayson, what
type of barriers are still there
that are noncompliant um
landowners are using. Are they
still very dangerous and do we
need to do.
Something like an emergency
clause to um protect, you know,
paddlers.
Some of the, some of the Mr.
Chair Representative Ferrari,
some of the, the fences or
barriers that we've seen have
been dangerous. We've seen
single strands of barbed wire
going across the river which
could be extremely dangerous for
a paddler or an angler.
Um, right now we're, as I
mentioned, we're trying to take
down all of the barriers on the
ecos. We've been successful. Um
there was a cable at one point
that was going across the river.
Um, there were some PVC piping
that was attached both at the
bottom and the top with barbed
wire throughout. Um, so those
are some of the types of fences
that we've seen, and we're
trying to remove all of those
barriers.
And it's in terms of an
emergency clause, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Ferrari, uh, we
are, we are instituting court
actions seeking preliminary
injunctions to try to have any
dangerous barriers removed.
Great, I'm glad to hear that.
and Ms. Barrett, you probably
agree with
Getting that done, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, yes,
there are still very hazardous
fences out there. We see some
even with concertina wire on
them. And as I said, those are
very dangerous to ensnaring
boaters and anglers and causing
injury or drowning.
To this day, they're still
there.
Mr. Grayson, is there something
You know, like the emergency
clause, can you go in there and
just
Take it out.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Ferrari, we're going through the
court system, so we're not,
we're not just going onto the
river and taking fences down.
We're going to court and and
having a judge order that the
defense be taken down, and that
process does take some time.
Before we get to the stage of,
of going to court, though we are
trying to work with the
landowners and as I mentioned,
we've we've had several, several
landowners who have voluntarily
agreed to remove their their
barriers. Um and
We continue to have landowners
do that.
Um, Mr. Chair, yeah, I wish that
there was something.
Immediate that could be done
cause before more people get
hurt. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Uh, I
have a couple questions and a
couple of comments.
Um, first, there's been some
discussion about uh ephemeral
streams, um, and it's not Mr.
Grayson, you're welcome to
disagree with me on this, but
it's, it's not clear to me that
The lack of water at any given
time defeats the easement.
That is, if the easement is
connected to
Perennial or torrential water
and the water is not present.
At a given moment in time.
It's not clear to me that the
easement goes away and a good
example, I suppose, would be the
Rio Grande, which drives in at
times in stretches. And I still
think that easement exists.
The
The scope of that.
However, it's certainly unclear.
Um, and the way we get rain in
New Mexico, especially in the
monsoon season, um, you know,
I've long said that the parking
lot at Albertson's is a trench
of flow.
And that's not what we're
talking about.
Um,
But on the other hand, the uh
the Galisteo Creek, uh, which
runs, um, by my property, um.
In the village of Galisteo, it's
typically.
Uh, to the 3 ft wide, and maybe
1 inch or 2 deep, um, during
storm flows, uh, I've seen it 40
ft wide and 10 ft deep, uh,
which is really a roaring river
coming out of the, the Kenyan
and Kenyaita. Um, I would.
I think it's quite possible that
I have a right to hike the Galao
Creek up into um uh the
mountains.
Uh, it does flow, um.
Uh, intermittently, um, but
that's, you know, I'd have to
take another look at the
opinion.
Um.
Some of the concerns expressed
by my colleagues.
You know, I, I share, I get it,
you know, well, what this, what
about this case? What about this
case? What about this case? And
I would just observe that.
The, the difficulty in
Coming up with a standard is
part of the reason it would be
really difficult to legislate
this.
Because if we said it was
extended to the high water mark.
Well, in some cases that.
Might be too far. In other cases
it might be not far enough.
Uh, if she said, OK, well, how
about 10 ft past the high water
mark. Like again, that could be
too far in cases. And I know
there there are situations where
for paddlers, I'm not a paddler,
but I appreciate what they do,
you know, they're, they, there
are places where even a
floatable stream, it's not
passable and they, they portage
around obstacles, you know,
what, what right do they have to
do that?
Um, you know, I, I think, you
know, I appreciate the
Department of Justice approach,
um, I think it sounds to me like
they're being cautious. They're
being friendly. They're um only
escalating as needed. Uh, it's,
it's remarkable to me that
someone signed a consent decree
and still didn't remove their
fences.
Um, you know, at, at a certain
point, um, uh,
I mean, that's just sort of a
lack of good faith.
Um, I used to do a lot of city
attorney work
and
It was interesting that the vast
majority of people when they're,
when they are informed that
they're doing something wrong,
we correct their behavior.
Right, like 95%, 98%.
But those couple people that
don't, um, can be really
difficult to deal with,
especially when we're talking
about civil litigation. Um, it
just, it tends, you know, to
present Ferrari's point, um, you
know, there, there is no
emergency clause. We don't have,
um, I, I, I think we would be on
shaky constitutional ground if
we were out there taking down
fences on our own.
Um, so I think the approach of
going through the courts and
having the courts direct the
landowners to remove these
fences, I think that's the right
approach. Um, I think if
Both sides, if everyone sort of
takes a reasonable approach,
case by case, you know, what can
I do? What can I do? Can't I do?
And tries to work with the
reality of the the physical
environment. I think we're we're
going to be in pretty good
shape. Um, and what, you know,
might be appropriate for one
landowner in one place, um,
might not be appropriate for
another landowner in another
place, but
I think we're gonna have a
really hard time coming.
Up with
a, a bright-line standard.
That we can put down on paper.
Um, we saw some of the pictures,
um, uh, there are some things
that are clearly not permitted.
And yet still exist, uh, that
are dangerous and yet still
exist. And I believe that in
some of those egregious cases,
uh, if someone's injured on one
of those fences, uh, that would
warrant criminal charges. I
mean, they're violating the law
and if they cause serious injury
to someone. Um, I, I think the,
the failure to comply should be
taken into consideration.
Um,
For Mr. Grayson, I have a
question for you on the
department of game and fish. Um,
I believe Mr. Debell pointed out
previously that, uh, not today,
but previously, the department
of game and fish was very eager
to enforce.
These regulations when they had
no authority to do so.
And now that they have authority
to enforce access.
They don't want to touch it.
And Mr. Grace, I'm curious, have
you been able to get any
cooperation from the department
of game and fish.
Mr. Chair, we, we have been
working with the Department of
Game and Fish, um, they've, we,
we constructed a cease and
desist letter. Um, we
communicated that to them. They
agreed to send those letters,
we're still discussing with them
exact phrasing in there, um, but
when they identify barriers,
they've agreed to send those
letters to landowners and let us
institute core action if if
necessary if the landowners
don't comply. Um, so we are
working with them.
also had issues. The landowners
wanted us, landowners on the
ecos wanted us to be in touch
with the Department of Game and
Fish to see if there could be
restrictions, um, on some, on
fishing, um, for some areas
where those areas had not been
fished publicly in a long time,
and there were, it was a a a
very um
Robust, I would say fishing
habitat. And so we worked with
the Department of Game and Fish.
There were not restrictions, um,
that could be put in place and
we let the landowners know that,
um, and so, um, they have been
responsive and they have been
working with us.
OK, well, that's, that's
encouraging, um, Director Sloan
at a, uh, in previous years had
expressed uh skepticism about
their ability to enforce this
because of the lack of clarity,
um, but I, I think
you, you.
I think he's sort of backing
them up on the legal aspect, um,
that sounds like an effective,
uh, partnership partnership to
me.
Um,
one other topic I want to touch
on was the private property. Um,
and I recognize that a lot of
these easements are across
private property. Um, but I, I
also, you know, I, I, I, I'm a
real estate lawyer, you know, I
deal with property. Um, I have a
property. I have easements
across my property. I have a
trail easement across my
property. I have utility
easements across my property. I
still own that property.
I still pay taxes on that
property. I'm still responsible
for, you know, that property.
Um, and that's, that's
effectively what this is, is
people have private property.
Um, and there's an easement
across it, the.
The public can access the
easement.
They can't leave the bounds of
the easement.
Which is a gray area, I get
that, but you can't, for
example, you had 40 acres on one
side you have the public road to
the east, a creek or a river to
the west. You can't park on the
public road.
hike across the 40 acres to get
to that creek.
That's not the easement. That's
private property.
You can hike up the creek and if
there's maybe, maybe there's a
park somewhere up above down
below, you know, maybe that's a
point of access.
But once you access the creek,
then you have
You know, somewhat freedom of
movement, um, as the water would
flow. And I think we're gonna
have to look and see whether
it's whether the water has to be
present for for that access to
exist. Um, but that's, to be
clear, there's still private
property and the the statute
that
Sort of led to the
Restrictions on the access. If
you look at it closely,
Uh, it doesn't say what the
former game commission claimed
its head.
It all it says is you can't
cross private property to get to
the public stream.
And so like the statute.
Isn't unconstitutional.
The regulations they wrote.
Which they claimed were based on
the statute.
Those are unconstitutional
because it was
You restricted the public access
and they were also exercising,
in my opinion, the authority
that they clearly did not have.
Um, and the original version of
that statute included a rule, a
grant of rulemaking authority to
enforce it. And that was taken
out in the legislative process.
Uh, and it was just the statute
that passed narrowly in the
house, um, that said you can't
cross private property.
It's like, well.
That's the fact. You can't cross
private property to get to a
public stern.
So I, I've been working on this
issue for a long time and uh
I've been watching it mostly
from the sidelines and, uh,
maybe someday I need to get out
on the on the rivers and and see
it up close and personal.
Um, Senator Worth,
just a couple of follow-up
questions that I've seen in my
law practice and doing
mediations of these kinds of
issues. Is there, and maybe it's
Mr. Grayson, uh, the right to
recreate Chair McQueen mentioned
hiking.
What about, I mean, does the AG
take opinion on someone puts on
waiters and just starts hiking
up with backpacks up the river,
is that OK? I mean, I certainly
understand fishing and and
boating, but we've got hiking
and then, and then second
question on an intermittent or
ephemeral stream. Can you ride a
motorcycle?
Can you ride a four wheeler up
up up up the stream is that
within the definition of
recreating, which certainly for
some people it is. And I guess
the question is, are these just
things that are going to need to
be played out.
In the courts, um,
Because I do, I do think that
the fishing right and the, and
the, and the voting right. I, I
certainly understand that. I
think when you start getting
into hiking rights on, on
intermittent streams and
arroyos.
Quite frankly, that's, and then
the question is, what's the
scope of, is it hiking? Is it
mountain bikes, motorcycles?
Four wheelers, and it's been
argued, and I've seen it argued,
and, and it's causing lots of
Consternation, I think Senator
Woods was talking about the
consternation of the lack of
definitions. And maybe this is
something I'm curious too. Could
the Department of Game and Fish
come in and do regulations that
would define some of this,
define the fencing for Senator
Woods to find the scope,
obviously.
You know, it's, it's, there's a
statute in place and there's a
Supreme Court decision. So just
some thoughts, and I don't maybe
Mr. Grace, you can help me with
some of those questions because
I'm seeing that happen and it's
causing lots of, of challenging
land use issues for folks.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Lear, um, that,
that is correct. I think it is a
challenge and I think it's a
challenge for landowners. It's
also a challenge for the public
to know what they're able to do,
um, as I mentioned earlier,
we're, we're approaching it from
a concept of reasonableness.
Uh, is it reasonable to drive a
four wheeler up a small creek
for purposes of recreation. That
seems to be going too far.
Is it reasonable to hike?
That seems well within the New
Mexico Supreme Court's concept
of recreation, um, and enjoyment
of the waters. Um, at the same
time,
I've seen a creek with a hiking
trail that's 30 ft away from the
creek.
That's not a hiking trail that's
for the enjoyment of the water
that's a hiking trail that's to
hike.
Um, and Mr. Chair had had raised
the question of, of dry creeks
and um Arroyos, um, I, I, I
don't know the answer,
uh, Mr. Chair, to that question,
all I can say is that that's not
an issue that's dealt with by
Adobe Whitewater. It's not an
easement that is protected by
Article 16, Section 2 of the New
Mexican Constitution and and the
language of the Constitution, I
have it pulled up here.
Um
The unappropriated water of
every natural stream, perennial
or torrential, within the state
of New Mexico is hereby declared
to belonged to the public. So
it's the water that belongs to
the public, and that's what the
New Mexico Supreme Court dealt
with in Adobe Whitewater Club.
There may be some other source
of an easement on an arroyo, um,
that I'm not aware of, but as
far as stream access goes in
terms of Adobe Whitewater Club,
it applies to the water itself.
Mr. Grayson, if I may, on that
point, um
That that reading of that
constitutional provision led to
the idea that you had the right
to access these rivers, but you
had to float.
You can't pull up to the bank.
You can put your foot down in
the bed.
You couldn't touch anything
other than the water. And the
Supreme Court has clearly
rejected that interpretation of
that constitutional provision.
So the scope of it, um, I, I, I
believe.
Uh, remains to be seen. I, I
know the, the Red River case
which preceded the White Water
Adobe case talked about
recreation and the and the uh
recreation being a beneficial
use. Um, if I remember correctly
to Senator Wursts point, I think
the uh oral argument, the
Supreme Court actually asked the
ATV example.
And the response was essentially
what Mr. Grayson said. It's a
question of reasonableness. And
I think all of us would think
driving an ATV up a creek is not
reasonable. Um, uh, driving a
motorcycle, you know, probably
not riding a horse.
Maybe, you know, you know, so
it's, you know, these are things
that have yet to be determined.
And Mr. Chair, I just think the
challenge is with an
intermittent stream.
Because I'm hearing, you're
saying if there's water there,
that was really the focus, but
in a situation where the water's
gone.
And you're, I mean, the one I
was dealing with was a, a
stream.
bed that's 100.
plus feet across and so the tiny
little piece of water when it's
there and then it goes away and
there's all kinds of tracks and
trails and, and it just, these
are the gray areas, but I I do
think what you said, Mr.
Grayson.
is helpful. And again, it's just
your, your, your interpretation
of this, and I realized that,
but I this needs to be flushed
out because it's causing, it's
causing angst and you're right,
it's causing angst by those that
want to use it and by those that
are trying to figure out what is
the scope.
Thank you.
Representative Ream for a 2nd
time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr.
Grayson a couple, um, questions
have come up, uh, Kim, this rule
or decision applied to tribal
land.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Rehm, I think those the those
rules would be different for I
don't know that they would be
different, but those would be um
a different source of law.
Um, for, for tribal land.
And I don't know the answer to
that.
OK, and Mr. Chairman, um, Mr.
Grayson, so if a landowner
doesn't present a danger and by
that I'm let's use the example
of putting a fence across the
river.
But in individual gets injured
on the land, not by a danger
that the landowner.
Made are the landowners liable?
Mr. Chair, Representative Rehm,
um, as Mr. Chair said, a lot of
these things remain to be seen.
Um, there are many ambiguities
in terms of liability, I think
there's a question of liability
if there's a fence.
And so there's a question of
liability right now for people
who put up a barrier across the
stream that cannot be crossed if
someone is injured, um, there's
a question of liability, but as
far as I'm aware, there's no
case law on that issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, thank you all for your
presentations. Uh, you can, you
can see the level of interest um
on this issue and, uh, I'd like
to particularly thank Mr.
Greason and the Department of
Justice for
You know, stepping up and
addressing this, uh, and doing
it in a really thoughtful way.
So thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee.
Thank you
So our next panel is preserving
dark skies in New Mexico. If our
panelists could join us at the
front table.
That
To find
Are they trying to like irrigate
off the roads or?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think we're getting
PowerPoints squared away.
OK, our next panel is preserving
dark skies in New Mexico with
Peter Lipscomb and Gayen
Chisler, um, gentleman, uh,
welcome, uh.
I look forward to your
presentation. I'm personally
interested in, uh, I understand
where you're working on
legislation with Senator
Stephanix. Um, we, we don't have
that legislation. We're not
presenting a bill. I get that,
um, but if you could touch on,
uh, if they're like the
mechanics of how, uh,
preservation of dark sky would
be enforced. I'd be interested
in that if that's something
you're in a position to touch
on.
They're
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, my
name's Peter Lipscomb. I'm vice
chair of the New Mexico chapter
of Dark Sky International and to
my left is.
Gayen Gisler, I'm a council
member of the New Mexico chapter
of Dark Sky International.
So, New Mexico Dark Sky
International, um, we had a
multi-year effort to get the
chapter established, um, and
I'll tell you more about that in
a moment, but as we're going to
be discussing issues related to
light pollution, I would just
like to share a set of
introductory slides to get you
familiar with some of the terms
that we use. Um, there's 3 main
components to light pollution.
Next slide, please, Tom.
So the first one is Skyglow. um
Skyglow results from
Uh, unshielded and improperly
aimed light fixtures that cast
light above the horizontal
plane. Next slide, Tom.
And so we have glare, and in
this image, um, we can see that
lighting has been used to um
illuminate a walkway for the
safety of pedestrians on a
college campus. But if you
notice, the second portion of
it, the student disappears. So
where are they? They're actually
next to the light pole on the
right in the shadows, so, um,
while these lights do a good job
of illuminating a
the glare inherent in their
design makes it hard to detect
the potential hazards nearby.
Next slide, Tom. And then the uh
third term that we use when we
talk about light pollution is
light trespass. Um, so this is
an example of an unshielded
light from one property, how it
strays into the neighboring
building's property and windows.
So to prevent light trespass, we
suggest light output be properly
shielded and aimed for
containment within its property
of origin.
Next slide, please. Color
temperature as we get into the
statutory language, we make a
recommendation about using warm
color temperatures when
possible, so, um, when you look
at this scale on the left, uh,
2000 Kelvin is, um, describing
something more like candlelight,
um, 5500 to 6500 Kelvin
describes what we get during the
daytime when the sun's up, it
could be varied because of cloud
cover.
Uh, and then we want to avoid
getting into the uh higher
temperatures, the cooler or cold
uh temperatures for light
because that involves blue
light, blue light scatters, um,
which explains why our daytime
sky is blue.
Next slide, please.
So Dark Sky, New Mexico chapter
we formed.
Uh, click that one, please, Tom.
Yeah, in June 2023, and we have
3 goals for our chapter. Go
ahead, Tom. First is, yeah,
become a leading force for
protecting New Mexico's dark
places and eliminating light
pollution,
develop professional credibility
with government, industry, and
Um, the public so that we become
an authoritative voice for
outstanding, protective and safe
practices. Uh, and then, yeah,
bring the experience and
expertise and resources of Dark
Sky International to enhance and
enrich our statewide work.
Next, please. So we thought
after getting our chapter
together, it might be useful to
invite people from around the
state, um, across disciplines to
meet with us in Socorro, and
here's a list of some of those,
uh, the people who came, we had
tourism, we had small businesses
that are hosting telescopes for
people around the world who
operate remotely under the dark
skies here in New Mexico. We had
the Bureau of Land Management,
National.
service, um, uh, Doctor Ryan
from uh Magdalena Ridge
Observatory joined us
illumination Engineering Society
members, National Park Service.
I just want to highlight the
involvement of Carlsbad Caverns
coming to the meeting, um,
because they are getting
questions from their visitors.
Uh, there's a portion of the
park and the visitor center that
overlooks land to the east, and
when it's dark, it's fully
illuminated by lights in the
distance, and the questions are
Getting from their visitors are
what city is that? Um, and uh so
they've established a program
and are trying to work with uh
companies like Franklin Mountain
Energy and Chevron Oil, uh, to
talk about how that lighting is
impacting the environment. So
that's what Dark for the Park is
and we can talk about that more
later if you're interested. Uh,
next slide, please. So it's one
thing to say that light
pollution is increasing in New
Mexic.
Mexico, but.
I wanted you to see what it's
looking like, uh, and so I
created this gift using data
from meteorological satellites
that have a sensitivity to
light, uh, and you can see a
progression over the last number
of years and the heat map is
showing how the, how intense the
light is at the center of our
larger cities and towns, and
then the spread. And one thing
to note is
The um
Is the increase along main
travel corridors, so US 491, US
550, I-40, uh, what had been
independent dots of light are
now joining together along those
travel corridors. So next slide,
Tom, and you can see I've added
the town names, uh, so find the
one nearest where you are and
see what you notice about how
it's changed over the years.
And so what we'd like to ask for
in terms of uh consideration on
the existing night sky
Protection Act and changing it
includes the proposed
improvements. So the first one,
lets you take that Galen.
So, um, the existing act is
called the Night Sky Protection
Act, and we'd like to change the
title of it to read responsible
Outdoor Lighting and night sky
Protection Act because a lot of
this is just about using
lighting sensibly. We need light
for our activities at night, but
we use far too much of it and we
misdirect it. So um we'd like to
educate people into the proper
uses of light so that we don't
spoil the night sky.
All right. And yes, we'd like to
expand the purpose to recognize
additional benefits beyond just
astronomy. The original language
does just say, you know, for,
for astronomy, and we think that
this is such a broad-based
multifaceted, multi-layered type
of thing. We all live under one
sky. Um, so it is a shared, uh,
heritage. It is a shared natural
resource. Um, so, uh, we want to
go ahead and and change some
things on the purpose and the
next.
Tom.
Right, so go ahead,
we have Dark Sky International
and the um illumination
engineering Society have
promulgated principles of
responsible lighting and, and
these are that when you install
a light, it should have a clear
purpose, you know, exactly what
you're using it for. It should
be directed onto areas where it
is needed. Um, it should be no
brighter than necessary. There's
no need to to illuminate a
football field with a light at
your
Front door. Um, you should turn
it off when it's not needed, use
it, use it only when it's useful
and um use the warmer color
lights as, as Peter showed a
moment ago, the, the uh um uh
lower color temperature lights
to, you know, down to 2000 even,
um, rather than the lights that
have a lot of blue content
because blue light um scatters a
lot more effectively and is also
more harmful to wildlife and
human health and um than warmer
colored light.
And we would like to amend the
definition of shielded light
fixture, uh, which is included
in the, the uh present version
of the Night sky Protection Act
to have the limit of light
delivered from any light source
above 80 degrees from Nadir, so
directly down, um, and to 5% of
the total light output. So
anything above that 80 degrees
would be a lower amount of
output compared to what's below,
um, and
I have the next slide, Tom shows
an illustration of what this is
actually talking about. It seems
a little contradictory, the way
the uh the other sentence was
written, but you can see here
the 10 degrees as we're talking
about 80 degrees above Nadir,
and the difference between the
90 and the 80 is just 10, so
that's just an illustration of
what we're describing there.
Go ahead, Tom.
We're, um, we want to add a
definition for light trespass as
we saw on one of the slides
where we could just barely see
it in this in this uh cavernous
auditorium. Um, when you have
light on one property that's
illuminating another property
that, um, you know, is, is a
trespass in a in a in a certain
way and, and you don't want, you
know, light from your neighbor
or light from a streetlight, for
example, shining into your
bedroom window when you're
trying to sleep. Um, that's just
common sense. And, and, and so
we'd like
To include that as part of the
legal definitions in here that,
uh, and it's recognized now
internationally as an important
principle that we should try to
apply when we're talking about
responsible use of light.
So shielding of outdoor light
fixtures, we would request that
that that language be modified
to any light source that is
mounted above 4 ft shall be
fully shielded we thought of
this because of the popularity
of Ballards, you know, for
wayfinding on sidewalks and then
and facilities, um, so we wanted
to have that fully shielded to
prevent light trespass or glare,
uh, with the exception of
temporary holiday or festoon
lighting, so shielded lightings
to be installed and maintained
and
In accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications
and instructions for use. Um,
so, taking into account changes
in the lighting industry since
the original Night Sky
Protection Act and being more
specific with regard to
exceptions, we, we felt that
saying that, you know, the
fixture is being installed per
spec, that's required uh in
order to achieve the
requirement.
And, and even lights that are
lower than 4 ft should not be
directed towards the sky, um,
why do you want to shine light
in in into the sky, but also
critical in this, in the
language that we have here is
that we specifically refer to
light output in terms of lumens.
Um, the existing night sky
Protection Act um talks about
Watts. Watts is a unit of
electrical power, not a unit of
light output and, and so.
Talking about lumens gets us
more specifically at the
question of light, um, quantity
of light and in particular
sense, the technology is
changing now to solid state
principally, LED lights, light
light light emitting diodes,
um
which use a lot less power.
They're far more efficient at
producing a certain amount of
light than incandescent lights
and other types of lighting. And
so, um, so the use of
Of um of of a light output term
like lumens is much more
appropriate, and that's what we
uh what we advocate for the, for
the change in the, in the law.
All right, so non-conforming
light fixtures, there was an
existing exemption in the
current act um that says it's OK
as long as it's distinguished
after 11 p.m. we would suggest
that the impact of poor lighting
applies to all times of night,
not just after 11. And in fact,
it may be more important to use
the responsible lighting when
people are awake and more likely
to be affected.
So this one, the use of mercury
vapor lighting fixtures. I mean,
that's, that's completely
obsolete. Nobody uses those
anymore. Um, so we want to
change the title of that section
to light source and and modify
it to say that lighting shall be
LED or shall be solid state, for
example, LED and capable of
being turned on and off and um
and dimmed down to 25% of their
full output. So,
um, again, um, LED lights,
solid.
lights are far more energy
efficient. You waste a lot less,
you use a lot less energy and a
lot less money uh for the given
amount of light, and so, um,
yeah, that's, that's why, that's
why we want to change this one.
OK, we have um language related
to exemptions that we request
some change on, um, so modifying
the exemption for advertisement
signs. Let's, uh, could we
narrow the scope on that to
roadway navigation and safety
signs instead of advertisement
signs, um, they can be lit from
above the advertisement signs
and still achieve the same
functionality.
So this is a tricky one. the,
you know, clearly lights are
installed for worker safety at
farms, ranches, dairies, um,
mining or oil or or so on. Um,
so we, we want to maintain the
existing um exemptions for those
um activities up to a certain
time
we wrote down January 1, 2027,
but the legislature can um
decide on what to do that, but,
um, again,
We want, we want to emphasize
that
lighting can be updated to um
to, you know, responsible sort
of fixtures shield, proper
shielding, and um and use of
um
you know, lower, lower color
temperature lights, um, at, at
reasonable cost and, and often
at considerable cost savings to
those industries and we want to
give, I mean we we would like to
promulgate
of these things, you know, sort
of instantly, but we, but we
recognize that things take time.
We want to give enough time for
industries to adapt for
education to occur, um, in the
use of of of the five principles
of responsible lighting.
Alright, and so as as Galen was
describing, yeah, it's kind of a
three-tiered approach so that,
you know, by January 1st, 2027
or whatever date is determined
to be acceptable.
You know, any lights that's
legally installed prior to that
date, it's fine, keep them
there. Uh, anything that's going
to be installed that's new after
January 1st, 2027, make that so
it's compliant to the latest
technology and shielded
correctly and directed properly.
And yes, absolutely there are
federal law requirements that
have things about lighting for
workers' safety, so we want to
continue to observe that. We're
not saying that's something to
disregard. Um, but then after 10
years, um.
We would suggest that existing
lighting then be replaced and
that gives the industry time to,
you know, plan for things, plan
for construction, uh, and they
could do it, of course, sooner
if there's a, you know, there's
a, it could be a shorter return
on investment, uh, if they were
to replace them sooner, so, um,
and we think that the
three-tiered approach would
probably be something worth
considering.
And that's what we wanted to
present to you. Um, our contact
information is there, the QR is,
is if you wanted to learn more
about the membership of our
statewide chapter and the
statewide council, um, you can
learn about that at the Dark
Skynmdarsky.org.
That concludes our presentation.
OK, um, going to the committee.
First up, we have Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and so
nice to finally see you in
person. We've exchanged a few
emails. You left me a couple
messages, so I appreciate, um,
what you're doing. I also, Mr.
Chairman, appreciate the dark
skies, uh, two different
communities in my district, um,
we have a large telescope, uh,
entity and Magdalena, believe it
or not.
Um, uh, the Magdalena Ridge
Observatory that we have the
VLA, we have a lot of things
that, um, bringing economic
development to our little town
of Magdalena, and we appreciate
that, first of all, first and
foremost. Um, one of my
questions is, Mr. Chairman and
gentleman, is
I've never heard of the, um,
Night sky Protection Act.
And so I'm wondering who, uh,
where this came from and, uh,
who polices this act?
And um, those are my first two
questions.
OK, uh,
Mr. Chairman and Representative
Armstrong, members of the
committee, um, the origin of the
Night Sky Protection Act in 1999
arose from um
The New Mexico Heritage
Preservation Alliance's
declaration of the night sky of
New Mexico as an endangered
cultural resource, which was a
really kind of a novel idea. Uh,
nobody had considered that, you
know, anything like the night
sky was something to um protect
or preserve, conserve for future
generations. Um, and Pauline
Goels introduced the night sky
Protection Act to the
legislative session that year.
uh, and
It was, um, it didn't have an
enforcement clause in it
originally, uh, and there was
no, um, home for um like on a
state level, there was nothing
designated as where is this
being tracked, you know, which
agency, what, what department?
Um, in 2000, language was added,
narrowing the scope for
enforcement to the construction
industries division, uh, and
Including an enforcement clause,
um, so those were two things
that changed and my
understanding of, you know, what
we're looking at with the Night
sky Protection Act is that the
scope of enforcement is still
within state buildings and state
properties, um, but we are
setting a statewide minimum
standard with the night sky
Protection Act and local
political subdivisions, um, you
know, be it a county government,
be it a municipal government,
can always be more stringent.
In their requirements for
outdoor lighting and what they
might pass as part of their
development and zoning language,
but they can do no less than
what the state has on, on its
statute.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for that explanation
just because I'd never heard of
it. Um, we just built a, a home
a couple of years ago out on our
ranch and of course, had a
permit and inspected and
everything else, so I'm, I'm
gonna do a little further
investigating and see if CID is
Making sure that these laws are
followed or this, this act is
followed because I'm not 100%
sure that it is. Um, one of the
things that uh
I want to ask is
Are the dark dark skies being
preserved? Are you trying to
preserve them for all of New
Mexico because my, my.
My question is for towns,
cities, big cities specifically
Albuquerque, where we saw the
big ray of light, um.
And that I can see the glow from
my ranch, the glow of
Albuquerque at night.
Um, and I'm 2 hours away and as
a crow flies, I have no idea,
but I'm, I.
I'm a little bit concerned.
About.
Making more stringent mandates
on little towns like Magdalena,
for instance, uh, and what is
the cost?
Going to cost the small
businesses and the people to
update after the 10 years, even
though they are exempt for a
while. It looks like for
businesses, possibly it may be
um
We, we said ranches and farms,
dairies, things like that to how
cost effective is it for them
to, uh, to change their type of
lighting, say, the school with
their football field and their
lighting. How is that going to
affect them?
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Armstrong, um, there are a
number of facets to your
question and um and I'll attempt
to answer some of them. The in
terms of, in terms of the cost
of installation and so forth. I
mean, these things are getting
cheaper all the time, LEDs and
and so forth, and also you save
money in not having to um
illuminate the entire world. Um.
Regarding the question of of um
are we doing this for the whole
state? Well, the interesting
thing about our night sky
Protection Act, which, as Peter
said, was promulgated first in
1999/25 years ago, is that this
was the first statewide.
Um, legislation to effect to
recommend night sky protection,
um, in the country, in the
entire country, and, and, um,
and so Dark Sky International
has used us as a model for it,
but um, as, as you saw from the
gifts, if you could um interpret
what was going on there. The
true dark areas in New Mexico
are shrinking the bright cities,
I mean, they're, they're
growing, of course, as, as, as
they normally would. Um.
The the tragedy for
Our cultural heritage, as human
beings is that
Today, 80% of people live in
places where they have never
seen the Milky Way.
Um, and likewise for wildlife.
Excessive lighting effects
migratory patterns of birds. It
affects.
nocturnal pollinators, um, it
affects human health, um, and so
we'd like to benefit all of
those constituents, humans, the
cultural heritage, wildlife,
pollinators, um, and
By reducing the impact of
excessive light, um, on, um, so
I mean that's, that's the
purpose of the original night
sky Protection Act. Um, we see
from the gift that it has not
been effective at um stopping
the spread of light and so we'd
like to improve that, um, for
the benefit of, of all of those
constituents.
Thank you for that answer. I, I,
I appreciate that. So is the
Uh, is this a federal, this act
federal or state?
Yeah, we're we're on the state
level and, and, um, so yeah, and
the scope of enforcement I was
describing earlier, I think is
just it's most appropriate to
think of it as the state
buildings and the, but the
exemption language does include
things about farms and ranches,
so I, I felt like, you know, I,
I feel like we, we need to look
at that and, and talk about it
some, but the other things, the
benefits of of the Night Sky
Protection Act, that maybe you
One of the first in the country,
uh, other states have taken
advantage of their dark skies.
We have only a small amount of
dark skies left in the western
part of the country in Colorado,
Arizona, Nevada, Utah are making
great strides and and leveraging
their dark skies to attract
people to the state. One of the
things that are stakeholders
meeting that we learned from the
uh New Mexico Tru was they had
put up on their web pages a
number of images, uh, and asked
people who are visiting their
web pages to
To
select the one that resonated
most for them. So a wagon wheel
on somewhere on the Santa Fe
Trail or, you know, um, markings
from uh um ancient site, um, or
the Milky Way over white sands
and, and the one that got the
most interest was Milky Way over
White Sands. Um, Cody Ferguson
from New Mexico True shared that
with us in December 23, 60% of
the pollinators, yeah, they're,
they're active at night. Um, we
have the residential.
communities in the state that
are um calling themselves Dark
Sky communities. So there's
development, economic
opportunity in a number of ways
there. The night sky tour
businesses that those hosting
sites I mentioned, and Tom, if
you could go back to that gift,
the uh one without all the town
names. Um, we could just
Review the shrinking natural
darkness areas, uh, a number of
state parks, or excuse me, a
number of national parks and uh
Clayton Lake State Park was the
first dark sky place formally
designated by Dark Sky
International here in New
Mexico, and since then 8 other
locations around the state, um,
have joined on the National Park
Service, so that they recognize
the value in preserving a
natural darkness, the one prior
to.
I don't know if it's easy to
see, but yeah, the dark, the
darkness up here, here in your
area, these puddles of black are
shrinking and shrinking, um.
So I, I'll leave it there for a
moment. Thank you for that. I
noticed one of the biggest,
brightest was El Paso, Texas.
It's what I think that that that
is right there. Juarez, yeah,
so, um, you know, I don't know
how we control the things around
the outside of the state, so,
um, I am, like I said, I'm all
for the dark skies. I personally
think this could be done at the
local level of enforcement, um,
with the villages and cities and
things like that, they could
enforce this themselves. I
honestly don't know that we need
legislation to do this.
Um, I
Want to have the kind of light I
want to have at my ranch house
and.
You know, for
Dangerous encounters at night,
um.
And, and then at my gas station
that I own, you know, I like to
keep it very well lit. I
understand the more not the the
the more amber tones and and the
down, but, uh, you know, for
safety reasons, I have it well
lit at night we have one of the
only pumps within a 60 mile
radius that you can buy gas at
night with a credit card and
even when we're not open and not
a lot of people have that in, in
my area.
So there's certain concerns I
have, but I tell you, I
appreciate it and I'm all, I
love the dark skies we have
several people come out from
Albuquerque to our ranch, and
we, I have an actual area where
you can lay down and look at the
sky because uh you can see so
many beautiful things there and
they are in awe, almost every
time I have a beautiful picture
um of a during hunting season,
that is from 6 o'clock at night
until 6 a.m. in
The morning and, and it's
absolutely gorgeous. People
cannot believe how
they forget to look at the sky
because they can't see it where
there is bright lights. So I'm
all for what you, what the dark
skies. I just don't know that
this is the avenue we need to
take, but I'm happy to sit down
and listen and appreciate your,
your presentation.
Mr. Chair, um, Representative
Armstrong, um, doing things at
the local level is extremely
important. I absolutely agree
with that, and um I was part of
a group that helped um Los
Alamos come up with um with a
new lighting ordinance that was
um instituted in, um, or made
effective in January of 23. Um,
I've also been um talking with
um with the village village
council at Angel Fire, um they
have a, um, an amazing
sparkling brand new lighting
ordinance that they're bringing
forward. Um, we're talking with
Taos, we're talking with a
number of other municipalities
around the state. Um, the, uh,
on a local level, you can do a
lot more things than you can on
the state level and in
particular, you know, there's
language in in these ordinances
about, you know, gas station
canopies and all that sort of
thing, just how to do that
properly and and stuff and, and,
and there's also a lot of
language about um putting,
putting lights on motion
sensors.
you know, which, um, you know,
basically shine when they, when,
when they're needed, um, and,
and so forth. So, so there, you
know, the the the
municipalities, the counties can
um can, can, um, do a lot, but,
um, but I think there is also
need, um, you know, as in the
existing Night Sky Protection
Act and the improvements that we
want to make for it, to it, um,
for an umbrella that covers the
entire state.
Thank you for that and, and, and
just, you know, reading at your
last number C under the last
exemptions were added at an
expiration date for exemptions.
And so.
Um, you know, I'm, I'm, I'm
thinking about.
The entities of the state of New
Mexico, uh, i.e., oil and gas,
that that give a lot of money to
our, um, budget in our state.
And I saw down in Carl's Bat or
the Permian Basin area where
it's, it's pretty bright down
there, but just the, the, the
cost of the changeover because
it will expire after 10 years
and then the other part that I'm
thinking of is the cost to
schools.
To play baseball games at night
and football games at night,
changing out that, uh, that, so,
so in Magdalena, they never
could afford to buy.
Lighting
We donated that because we bid a
job from UNM to take down the
lighting and dispose of it. We
donated it to the school because
they could never afford to buy
it. Well, a lot of these schools
and the state, I don't know that
they can afford to replace that
lighting and all of these school
districts. I, I would like to
see with that penny, pretty
penny would cost. So just, just
concerns that I have looking at
the bigger picture,
understanding where you're
going, but the concerns. So I, I
appreciate
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
May I, may I speak to that for a
moment, um, sports lighting is
mentioned in the current version
of the Night Sky Protection Act,
and it is not something that
we're requesting be changed the
way it's written right now, I
think is fair for the types of
reasons that you've outlined,
um, and sports lighting does
require a higher color
temperature. So anybody who's
designing those facilities knows
that, you know, to be able to
see a ball coming right at your
head, you need, you know, 5000
Kelvin. Um, and so we're not
saying you touch any of that.
And we'll just, we were thinking
for chapter 74 related to night
sky Protection Act at that
stands as is. Um, when it comes
to the Permian Basin and the oil
and gas, and yet, they are a
huge part of our budget. Um, I
just want to go back to a
comment I made earlier related
to what we learned from our
stakeholders meeting in Carlsbad
Caverns. We had a representative
from Shell Oil doesn't speak for
Shell Oil, um, but what we
learned was that they are
looking at
and Franklin Mountain Energy as
well. Um, they're looking at
starting to um participate in a
voluntary retrofit of their
lighting, and they have to be
careful because they need to use
types that are non-explosive.
Um, there are certain
requirements in these sites
that, you know, we know they
need to observe. Um, but they're
patterning the effort along with
Carl's bad Caverns National
Park, um, after what had been
successfully done in the Trans
Pacos in Texas.
Um, voluntary program for oil
and gas platforms and drilling
operations out there was uh
spearheaded by um the McDonald
Observatory for reasons that are
probably obvious. Um, but, and
so we're not saying we want to
put anything onerous or
burdensome on the oil and gas
industry, um, but the fact that
they are engaged in this
dialogue with Carlsbad Caverns
and that they are taking steps
voluntarily, um, is, is
something I think that we can uh
we can look forward
To learning more about as the
Dark for the Park program moves,
moves ahead.
Thank you, Representative. Next
step, uh, Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, um,
thank you for mentioning the
dark for the park. I was going
to ask more about that, um,
because having been at Carlsbad
recently, you know, we could see
the, the glow and um.
It would be great if you have
that, uh, voluntary, um.
Kind of update for whatever the
oil fields are doing, um, and
McDonald Observatory is a
wonderful place and if they've
done that kind of accommodation
for Texas, um, they should do it
for New Mexico too, and I'm glad
to hear that. Um, did you want
to add any more about it?
Um, I would like to offer to
members of the committee, um,
uh, to send to your, your
respective offices, um, we have
a um info sheet on Dark for the
park specifically so that it
contains more detail about the
work that's happening and, and
why it's happening and who's
involved. Um, so I just throw
that out as as something I could
share with you.
Um, that would be great if you
could send it to our committee
and then they can, uh, disperse
it. Is that what you're
suggesting?
OK. Yes, thank you. Um, also,
um, I am really interested in,
um, supporting this as well as
I'm sure the Audubon Society is
part of your um support, um,
coalition uh mainly because of
the protections for bird
migration at night and glad to
hear about that. Um, but also
the light trespass, um.
We're, um, situated, um, not
close to our neighbor, but they
have one light that comes on,
uh, automatically if something
gets in, you know, like an
animal sets it off and it comes
right through our house like you
were talking about, and um, so I
think making that change, um, in
the definitions, uh, 74, 12, 3,
um dash B is something.
I, I would really appreciate
cause it's so irritating and um.
Invasive into our home.
So thank you for doing that. Did
you want to say anything more?
Yes, just wanted to add, Mr.
Chairman, um, representative
Ferrari and members of the
committee, um, related to the
light trespass, um, right, and,
and, and we have to consider
property owner rights. I mean,
property owners have a right to
light their property as they see
fit. Um, but as a neighboring
property, it's my right to keep
it dark if I want to. Um, so the
light trespass, you know, and,
and having something.
As a statewide minimum standard
can pattern for the local
political subdivisions to use
that language and think about
what they would want to do if
they were willing to enact it,
um.
So yes, thank you.
Mr. Chair Representative
Ferrari, I would like to add one
thing from personal experience,
um, I do tabling events um on
dark skies at various venues,
um, most recently at the state
fair, um, a couple of weeks ago
in Albuquerque, and we have
people come up to us at, at
these table events almost
inevitably somebody comes up um
to complain about a neighbor's
light that shines in their
bedroom. And what do we do about
that? And, and my answer to them
is.
First,
Talk to your neighbor, you know,
suggest that it might be.
Better for neighborly relations
if they would do something about
that light shield it properly so
that it doesn't shine in your
eyes and stuff like that. We
don't recommend having, um, you
know, enforcement.
You know, in terms of, in terms
of, you know, this light is too
bright, you know, you're
You know, doing something
against the law will, you know,
um, impose a fine or something
like that. We don't recommend
doing that. What we recommend
is, um, um, a, uh, um.
A dedicated effort to educate
people about the right way to do
things. And, um, and, and that
first of all involves a person
to person communication. You
know, you talk to your neighbor,
I talked to my neighbor. Um, we
spread the word.
That way in order to improve
lighting conditions for
everybody.
It's Mr. Chair, thank you, uh.
We've tried, but they're never
home and we're not home a lot,
so,
but I also um the lighting, the
sky here is just amazing, um.
Coming up from Taos all the way
to Questa on.
Wednesday night, yeah, it was,
it's just beautiful. Thank you.
Right, if I may add one more
comment we're on time so we're
we're gonna move on, um, because
we have a couple more people
that have questions, of course,
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
don't know, maybe I missed it,
but you know, I've gone to the
southern part of the state and
we now have all the uh power
generating windmills and you
look at the skyline and all you
see is red dots, you know,
flashing red dots, is there
something in here to fix that
or?
Mr. Chairman, Representative
Ream, members of the committee,
um, yeah, those, those kinds of
things are related to
navigation, um, aircraft, um, so
as it exists in the night sky
Protection Act right now, those
are, those are out of bounds
that those things need to be
maintained, so they're worth
just just a quick comment. Um,
first of all, I think 25 years
later, it's we need to update
the statute, technology has
changed so dramatically that
that alone.
Uh, merits the proposal. I just
want to flag. I don't want you
to get you too attached to this
purpose section. Uh, it's gonna
get stripped. We don't do
purpose sections anymore and
when this bill comes to Senate
Judiciary, the existing law is
going to get stripped as well.
So I just want to flag that
cause you refer to the five
principles as an important
guidance and I just, you know,
you understand that that's just
something we do without even
getting into it because it
create
It's real challenges in, in the
courts when you have purpose
sections. How do you codify
that? Yeah, I just want to flag
and I just the final thing, I
just, I think, you know, Sarah
Stepanix, it would be good to
reach out to Chair Chandler to
see if you could get this heard
in front of courts corrections
because I know that there's
going to be a whole string of
legal questions, and this bill
will go to Senate Conservation
and judiciary. I think you had a
version in 2019 if I remember
correctly, um, and so I just
want to flag that that that kind
of
work, I think if you do that in
the interim, it's gonna be
really important on something
like this because there's enough
different questions and legal
issues that it can get derailed
if you haven't done that kind of
preliminary spadework. So just
some comments. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Wirth. Um,
Had a couple of comments and
questions, first off.
I occasionally find an older
statute with a purpose clause
that's on the books. I love
those old purpose clauses. I
mean, they're really useful. So
it's a, you know, I like to see
a purpose clause, but also I
know they don't survive the
Senate. Um,
So I had a question on
enforcement, uh, the existing
statute appears to be limited to
public buildings.
Are you proposing changing that?
I think that the scope of
enforcement needs to stay on, on
as written for the statute.
It's, it's a state level thing,
so it applies most to the state
buildings facilities, um.
Maintenance yards of its DOT,
um, things that are under
purview of the state.
Um,
OK, that's really limiting if
you only apply the law to public
buildings.
I mean, I like all the, I mean,
I think of like all the car
dealerships when I drive through
Albuquerque, things like that.
Like why wouldn't, why wouldn't
those be
covered? Mr.
Chair, um,
Again, as I was saying to to
Representative Armstrong, um.
A lot of the meat of that kind
of thing is, is going to have to
fall on, um, localities and on
municipalities and so forth and
so, um, I don't think it's the
purview of the state to, to
regulate a car dealership in
Albuquerque or anywhere else.
But um an Albuquerque lighting
ordinance um should have the
teeth to be able to do that.
So I mean, I don't know if you,
if you're building, if you're
installing lighting,
in Albuquerque, do you need to
go through CID? Mhm.
That would be the local zoning
and planning department. I, I,
I'm certain I'm in Santa Fe
zoning and planning will tell
you what you can build, but the
details of the structure, I
would think would go through
CID.
If it was for a private car
dealership, Mr. Chairman. Yes.
To build one. OK, so the Night
Sky Protection Act has the
minimum standard language, um,
not above a horizontal plane, 80
degrees, um, so I, I, I, I think
I see what you're getting at,
um.
So yeah, narrowing the scope to
something that's just state
perhaps doesn't make sense.
OK,
I, I, I think, you know, I've
looked at this statute, um, a
couple of years ago, uh, when it
was brought to my attention, um,
I, I, I totally sympathize with
Representative Armstrong. I
think most of us would have no
idea this was even on the books.
Um, I, I think it needs um.
It, it, it needs a substantial
Revisions because what's on the
books doesn't really do much of
anything. And if we're gonna
take this seriously, which I
think we should, and I think it
should be at the level of, uh,
it could be a couple levels,
right? I mean, it could be a
local zoning issue. It could be
local enforcement, but if you're
getting building permits to
install these lights, that's an
appropriate place to enforce
this before they're ever
installed. And that's, you know,
a role for
I think that's a role for the
state. So I do think that's
within, that's a very reasonable
approach for the state to take
and not just limit it to public
buildings.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I, I,
I think we'd be very happy to
work with you or anybody else
on, on, um, improvements in
that, in that regard. Um, the,
uh, I mean, the, for example,
the, the lighting ordinance that
we um managed to get through the
Los Alamos County Council has
specifically that um you know,
Lighting plans should be part of
any proposal that goes before
the, the um the planning
committee and um and and so that
that has to be vetted at that
level, um.
Does it have to be vetted at the
state level as well? I, I not.
Privy to that kind of um
process, but it could be.
OK, so I,
I we need to work on this going
before course of corrections and
Justice is an excellent idea.
Mr. Chair, uh, Sabina Gaynor is
our drafter and so you need to
take back many of these comments
to her and um.
Uh, we will make the request to
the next committee. Thank you.
Um for committee's information,
uh, there's, there's a penalty
in the current act.
And says for the first offense,
the offender may be issued a
warning for the second offense
or an offense that continues 30
days after the warning, $25.
Minus the replacement cost for
each offending fixer.
So, basically no enforcement,
no. Um, so that's something you
want to look at in terms of um
you talked about 10 year sort of
phase phase out for existing
lights. Um, we looked at, I
don't know what happened to this
um uh Representative Andres
Romero had a had a bill to put
um
Uh, diaper changing tables in
men's restrooms, um, and when my
kids were in diapers, uh, uh, I
often handed them to my wife
because I said, hey, you know,
there's no change table in the
men's restroom. Um, and the
trigger on that was uh the level
of investment, I think, so like
if you have a functioning light,
it might be 10 years old, might
be 20 years old. It's probably
expensive to replace that. If
you're gonna replace it.
Then you should do it right. So
you might want to consider
instead of a 10 year time frame,
you know, uh, you know, some
sort of trigger that deals with,
you know, if you're replacing
the light, the new light has to
comply.
That's something else we're
thinking about and the the uh I
appreciate the carve out for
athletic lighting, um, just
because I know that'd be hard to
deal with, uh, you know, I live
out in Galeo, um, and you know,
once a year, maybe every other
year, uh, I drive home at night
and it looks like there's a
football game going on.
And what it is is film lighting.
Um, and, and, you know, they, I
don't know if it's a security
thing or they dim it when they
actually do the filming or what,
but they have a tremendous
amount of light and um the first
time I saw it, you know, I was
pretty much taken aback, but
then, you know, it's like, you
know, that's good economic
activity and it's temporary and
something I can live with. Uh,
so not, you know, that's, that's
not something I worry about. It
just might be something, uh, you
want to consider whether
there's, you know,
Temporary permits, things like
that or just a temporary
exemption for that kind of
activity.
That was the end of my coming.
Senator, yeah, just to clarify
on the scope, the way I read the
statute, it, it is not limited
to just state buildings. The
enforcement provision is, but it
applies across the board and it
specifically says section 12-7B,
the provisions of the Night Sky
Protection Act are cumulative
and supplemental and shall not
apply within any county or
municipality that by ordinance
or resolution has adopted
provisions restricting light
pollution that are equal to or
more stringent. I mean, I think
the way I'm reading this, it's
across the board.
But then it's the enforcement
provision, the only enforcement
that's there is is CID on state
buildings. So maybe I'm getting
that wrong, but I think it was
designed
to apply across the board, and
that's why you've got exemptions
for
Mhm. For far if you look at the
exemptions, there's specific
exempts for farmers for those
are all private property. So
it's not state and that um
I don't disagree, but you pass a
law and you have zero
enforcement, you know, what have
you really done?
Well, it sounds like there was a
little bit of sausage making
that went on when it got passed.
Yeah, so, um, I, I mean, I, I've
I've looked at as I said, I've
looked at this before, it
interests me. Um, it needs work
from where it is now, so thank
you very much for your
presentation. grateful for the
opportunity and I found it very
instructive. We'll get comments
to everybody, um, and uh thank
you for your time. Thank you
very much.
OK, are,
uh, next panel or last panel
before lunch, we do have some
panels after lunch, uh,
pesticides, uh, aerial spraying
and neonics, um.
These were topics that were on
the the work plan. Come on up,
come sit at the table, please,
um, and when we're working to
put together the panel, um.
We, we had some difficulty
finding panelists to talk about
different aspects of this. Um,
so I'm not entirely sure where
we ended up. Uh, these are, uh,
I think both interesting topics.
I think they're somewhat
different topics, um, different
in scope, uh, and type of use,
but uh we have, um, Saka,
Charles Sibner and is she here?
Oh.
OK, so Sharon is here.
And we have all of our panelists
on via Zoom.
As, as usual, uh, we'll go in
the order the pis so first up,
uh, on the agenda we have Steve
Baca, assistant director of the
vision of agriculture and
Environmental Science at NMDA.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me this morning. I do have a
PowerPoint presentation for you,
uh, to begin with, so if I could
get that up.
No
And as mentioned, I'm here
representing the New Mexico
Department of Agriculture,
agricultural and Environmental
Services Division, uh,
specifically, I'm an assistant
division director and I oversee
the pesticide compliance section
for that division.
Uh, next slide, please.
In general, I wanted to just
cover the responsibilities and
authorities issued to the
division in my sections
specifically, uh, primarily
primary statutory
responsibilities under the
pesticide Control Act, um,
involve registration of
pesticide products. Continuous
review of those product labels
in order to ensure that they're
in compliance with EPA
standards.
We are responsible for licensing
and certification, uh, the
testing, licensing.
Um, issuance of continuing
education, things of that sort,
to a variety of applicators
including commercial
applicators, non-commercial
applicators, public applicators,
private applicators, pest
management consultants, and we
also issue a pesticide dealer's
license.
We are responsible for
verification of continuing
education for those applicators
just to see that there's this
overall certification and
training component and the
minimum level of um
understanding and education with
regard to the licenses we issue.
Finally, we are responsible. If
you could go back a slide, the
last bullet on there, right
there, yes, please. Thank you.
Um, we are responsible also for
ins inspection and verification
of licenses and inspection
overall. This involves that
verification of licensure. Um,
we'll review application
equipment out in the field, um,
inspection of products that are
used out in the field, the
storage and disposal of those
pesticide products, we also look
at application records for all
the different types of
applicators that are making
these.
Um, we are responsible also for
looking for safety and
protective equipment for all
types of applicators, so field
inspections, both routine and in
response to any kind of
complaint. Next slide.
Responsibilities continued. Some
programs in support of
compliance with Pesticide
Control Act. Investigation of
complaints that may involve
misapplication of pesticides.
We have an unused pesticide or
pesticide waste collection
events, where to date since 2007
when we started this program,
we've collected 906,0892 pounds,
so we're getting really close to
1000 pounds of waste pesticide
that's been collected at these
events throughout the state. It
rotates around and we try to get
it around to various areas, um,
so that we have is even coverage
as possible. I'm looking to also
expand these, this program
overall.
Uh, because it's been so
successful and I think it has a
really positive response from
the industry.
Uh, we also investigate bee
kills in conjunction with the uh
the other part of the division
of agricultural and
Environmental Services, our
entomology and nursery division.
We conduct an annual survey of
surface water looking for
pesticide residues. The idea is
that if residues are found, we
want to go back to potential
users of those pesticides that
may have been found and provide
education as to um minimizing
the the potential for getting
that, those pesticide products
in the water. So education is a
big part of that.
And then we also do con
continuing education
presentation to industry. A lot
of times it's mostly updates and
laws and regulations types of
uh.
Reviews for the industry folks,
the license holders.
slide.
As was mentioned, um, aerial
spraying was going to be a
subject matter on this and so I
wanted to touch base a little
bit on that as well.
Applications through aerial
spraying, um, we've seen being
made to private and public land
for the following restoration
projects, agricultural
production, and in some cases an
invasive pest projects um.
We've seen the application of
insecticides and herbicides for
for various projects in private
land and public land is
mentioned there. Uh, one thing
we haven't seen but would
involve aerial application and
hopefully we don't ever have to
see it as the, uh, if there was
a public health issue and
mosquito control on a large
scale could be called in through
aerial application. We see it in
other states that we as part of
our EPA region like Louisiana,
but we're pretty different from
Louisiana in that sense.
However, aerial application
would would fall under that. In
General aerial application can
happen through a fixed wing or a
rotary aircraft as we see in the
image there. Um, this is an
interesting project with a
helicopters spraying some
invasive weeds on the, on the
ecos years back.
Applicators are predominantly
commercial applicators, um, so
that means they're going to be
applying for hire and they could
be hired by a public entity or
perhaps BLM or the state or by
private landowners as well in
being a commercial applicator,
they maintain the liability
insurance.
And have an annual renewal of
that license that involves
continuing education, so they're
meeting a certain standard. Um,
what we've seen in our state is
that the aerial applicators
predominantly partake in a
national safety aerial program
as well called PAS.
Um, that's not administered by
us, but it is a pretty common
that these applicators go
through this program.
Pesticide label language is
pretty distinct when it comes to
aerial application, you know,
the labels are very clear
whether the product may or may
not be used through aerial
application. And so in our
inspections, we're verifying
this this language in
conjunction with on-site
inspections that we do or record
reviews that we do for products
that have been used. There's a
great deal of technology used in
aerial application, including
GPS controls. I mean, before, or
back in the day, I guess I could
say there was what we call
flaggers.
People were out in the field or
in an area being sprayed
literally with a flag to give an
idea of the pilot where they
were last at. So that's
obviously pretty, pretty
dangerous job, I would imagine
being out there. Uh, but now GPS
controls are used pretty widely
and uh allow for uh more precise
application of pesticides
through aerial application. Uh,
there's also, you know,
electrostatic spraying, which is
technology that charges the
droplets of the pesticides so
that they do make contact with
the plant a lot more efficient.
Um,
and then now we're we're seeing
UAVs or drones as it were, come
into aerial application as a
potential
application equipment. Now,
there are FAA rules that that
come into play with this and
there's also from the national
perspective of EPA because it's
so new, um, a lot of the
questions that we have are what
labels can be used and how are
labels going to be adapted for
UAV. So those are things that
we're currently addressing and
uh
Looking into it uh right now
there's maybe 1 to 2 applicators
that are examining this as a
potential for their business and
um and and working with UAB
technology.
Next slide.
As mentioned, one of the subject
matters for today was going to
be a neonic neonicotinoid
insecticides.
For those that may not know,
this is a chemical class of
insecticides, chemically similar
to nicotine for the control of
insect pests in the following
application areas that includes
agriculture, and we see products
that are typically going to be
treated seed or liquids for
spraying.
In the turf and ornamental
sector we see liquid sprays and
granules, structural pest
control, we see neonicotinoids
and spray formulations and baits
as well, and we even see
neonicotinoids in pet
treatments, the small droplets
that you put on the back of your
pet, um, there's an active
ingredient that's neonicotinoid
that is involved in that type of
use.
The Majority of these products
are reserved or restricted to to
use by professionals in the
sense that the way that they're
formulated and the way they are
sold or large volumes, a lot of
label language, a lot of
technical information with the
use of them rather than to
homeowners, which are typically
going to be more ready to use
products. We've seen overall a
decline in the number of
neonicotinoid products available
to homeowners in retail outlets,
and we've done, we've done a
project just recently where
we're going into the stores and
cataloging and seeing what
exactly is on the shelf.
And we hadn't found any
neonicotinoids. There's a wider
range array of alternative
active ingredients that are out
on the market and so a lot of
these products have gone away
from access points for the
general public. They remain,
like I say, in these
agricultural turf and ornamental
and structural pest control
sectors for those licensed
professionals that are using
them, uh, and that that have the
uh continuing education and
license renewal and things of
that sort associated with their
use under our um
surveillance, if you will, with
our inspections and our uh
licensing that we have in place.
Excellent.
Continuing on with neonicotinoid
and insecticide information. Um,
we do some be surveys and in
conjunction with some federal
bee surveys as well, and to date
we haven't found any neondenoid
in the samples that were
analyzed under these um spray
surveys, um, typically that's
going to be wax and honeycomb as
part of the surveys off to the
side there, you can't really
quite see it on the screen, but
perhaps on your your papers. Uh,
those are the eight neo
nicotinoid active ingredients,
so.
We haven't also found no
detections in surface water
analysis to date, um, we found a
few herbicides and things of
that sort, pesticides of
interest in that regard, but
nothing with regard to water and
neonicotinoids
No detections and past bee kills
associated with pesticides
either. I mean part of what we
do is respond to the bee kills
in conjunction with theology and
nursery group and
When we do that, if the
situation allows, we'll take
samples, swab the bee hives or
collect bees, collect residue
samples of that sort and um
looking for insecticides looking
for potential pesticide residues
and haven't had any detections
in the past bee kills um that
are associated with
neonicotsoids. We have found
other agricultural pesticides,
one being chlorpyrophos, which
is actually a product of
applicant or pesticide that has
start has gone away, um.
Recently, and we're seeing it
actually being phased out um at
the national level.
And next slide, last slide, also
in conjunction with, with
neonicosoids, I thought that
pollinator information was
relevant, so I wanted to just
put this on as part of the
presentation. One program that
we fund and has been pretty uh
popular with regard to
pollinator work is an annual, is
a drift watch.
A website where producers of
specialty crops or apiaries, a
bee hives owners can put their
locations on a map so that
pesticide applicators can then
see where they may be located
and within the website there's
there's amounts of information
for communications so the
pesticide applicator might be
able to communicate with the
Napier area or a uh specialty
crop grower, um, that they're
planning an application in the
area and perhaps they might be
able to move hives or cover
hives.
Or just in general that they're
going to be there at a certain
time.
But it's been really popular and
we promote this with our
continuing education talks
throughout industry so that we
get more people signing up for
it.
Um, we've been in collaboration
with Mexico Beekeepers
Association on bee health
surveys, most recently in 2023.
Sponsor pollinator habitat
Improvement gardens, um,
specifically in Albuquerque
there's a garden was placed at
the botanic Gardens of Tingly
Beach with the city of
Albuquerque and then another
park where they put pollinator
habitat, pollinator friendly
flowers that are going to be
flowering throughout the season
and year, um, in order to
increase pollinator habitat.
As mentioned before, we do
surface water surveys looking
for neonicotinoids as part of a
survey of other pesticide active
ingredients.
And we do investigations bee
kills and looking for pesticide
related causes
We've done some projects on a
larger scale with pollinator
protective messaging on water
bills that went out in
Albuquerque, so 130,000 water
bills going out with those
inserts that you find
occasionally, um, Mars
specifically had a pollinator
related messaging on that one?
We also had produced some
television commercials that also
had pollinator protection
messaging within those as well.
That was a very large scale
program that aired during the
NCAA tournament back in 2021.
We've we've developed outreach
material for National Pollinator
Week, um, that we were able to
hand out a large amount of
material to the public.
Continuing education
presentations to industry. We
also include pollinator
protection practices and
messaging within that as well,
specifically to label language,
uh, there was initiatives by EPA
to put label language specific
to pollinator protection on a
variety of of insecticides name
specifically the neonicotinoid
products as well.
National training related to
pollinator health and bee kill
investigations, so we
participate in national
trainings and, and the most
recent one was this year where
we sent inspectors to North
Carolina to get caught up with
regard to some bee health issues
with like, like.
Be health and, and pesticide
related issues.
And most recently, uh, we've
been working on the pollinator
memorial that came up at the
legislative session, and I
believe that.
The document was submitted to
the Secretary of Agriculture
yesterday and would probably be
making its way, I think, to this
committee at some point.
And with that, I am done with my
presentation.
Thank you for that. Next up we
have.
Sharon Savvaggio, um, Sharon,
you're our first Zoom of the
day, so hopefully we sort of had
figured out yesterday hopefully
we're good to go. Sharon, are
you with us?
I am with you. Um, I am just
bringing up my presentation
here, so hopefully you'll be
able to see that, um,
And let me know if it's showing
up on your screen. I can't
really um see it.
Um,
From where I'm at.
Is it showing up?
So we have uh the committee has
handouts of your presentation.
There is a screen in the room
off to the left, which isn't,
uh, super visible to, uh, pretty
much anyone, um, but if you go
through your presentation, uh,
we can follow along on our
handouts and for anyone watching
at home, they're they're posted
on the legislative website under
the committee, uh, all the
handouts are posted there. So if
you want to just walk through
your slides, we should be
To follow along.
Um, it's showing here and
hopefully it is showing up on
your screen and well, thank you,
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee for inviting this
theercy Society for Invertebrate
Conservation to be here today.
My name is Sharon Salvaggio. I'm
a pesticide specialist with
Xerces. Today I'm gonna talk
with you about um sustainable
solutions for pollinator
stewardship in New Mexico.
Um, my colleague Caitlyn Hasse,
who lives and works in New
Mexico, is in the audience
today, and Caitlin, uh, if you
want to give a little wave, that
would be great.
With Ceres is all about is
protecting the life that
sustains us because we really do
live our lives in partnership
with these little guys. We
actually need them more than
they need us.
Though his works across the
country with farms, ranches,
community groups, and homeowners
to help protect, expand and
improve habitat, food
pollinators, and other
invertebrates. He in New Mexico,
led by our Santa Fe staff,
Caitlin Hasse. Xerxes has
provided nearly 32,000
pollinated and drought tolerant
plants for free to 675 New
Mexico partners over the last 4
years. Expanding habitat and
strengthening community ties.
This
Uh, screenshot shown here uh was
the Santa Fe, New Mexican. Thank
you to them for writing about
this project, which we did in
partnership with the Northern
Youth Project, CASA first, the
New Mexico, Asequi is
Association uh program and
Defenders of Wildlife.
These are uh a few of our
partners and allies within New
Mexico, we are really grateful
that there are so many people
here wanting to conserve and
protect pollinators and help
reduce threats that they face,
including including the threat
of pesticides.
And the reason why that's so
important is that the Southwest
is actually a hotspot for native
pollinator diversity.
New Mexico alone supports more
than 25% of all the native
beast, bee species, and close to
half of all butterfly species
that are found in the United
States. And many of these
specialists visiting only
selected plants such as creoso
cactus or sunflowers. A familiar
example to you might be the
Yakamass, which requires yucca
plants for food, and yucca
plants depend upon this moth in
turn.
And when plants rely on a
specialist pollinator, it means
that they can't produce seed in
any other way.
Wild insects provide people with
services estimated at $7000
billion annually. These include
the whole community of insects
that bury manure and break down
dead plants and animals. We
could not live without them, and
certainly we wouldn't want to.
Another very large group of
insects provides natural pest
control just by eating and
parasitizing other insects. We
obviously need those guys too.
And then there's pollinating
insects, of course, vital to a
huge array of crops and native
plants. And then finally,
insects of valuable as food for
other wildlife. Practically
every bird in the country needs
insects when rearing their young
and many highly valued fish who
also predators and insects. So
when you look at the value of
commercial and recreational
fishing, wildlife viewing,
photography, and hunting, it all
adds up to big dollars every
year.
So we recognize the value of
insects to ourselves and to
ecosystems. Given all this, we
and our partners and friends in
New Mexico became alarmed when
we first learned of a planned
federal burial spray of
insecticide near the Richama in
northern New Mexico in 2023 to
kill native grasshoppers.
Some facts about this that I
wanna review, first, the spray
was planned with carbol, um,
over 39 square miles of mostly
public lands within the Riochama
watershed, which is a designated
wild and scenic river.
Carol is highly toxic to bees
and other insects and a likely
human carcinogen.
The spray was um planned for
late June when monsoons were
imminent, and the purpose was to
kill grasshoppers on leased
public lands to protect
livestock forage.
The spray included portions of a
willingness study area and a
federal area of critical
environmental concern.
So we own many in the community
had so many questions about
this.
The community was caught by
surprise by the plan to early
spray this large block of public
land. The news did not come
through the animal and plant
health inspection Service at
AFIS, which was the federal
agency leading the spray.
Nor did it come from the
managers of the public lands
where the spray was to occur,
the Bureau of Land Management
and State Land Office. The only
announcement was a posting of a
contract for bidding, but this
was on a government website that
people only search when they're
specifically looking to do
business with the government.
It's not the kind of place where
people actually go to find out
news about the public lands. So
stakeholders were taken
unawares, including Pueblo and
tribal communities, river users,
drinking water managers.
Downstream farmers, hikers, and
nature lovers.
Another question was, why was a
spray planned with a pesticide
that the label says shouldn't be
used over blooming plants. The
project was planned for late
June and photos taken at the
time show many plants in full
bloom in the area. Many with
pollinators actively foraging on
them.
The label states that the
product is highly toxic to
honeybees and warns users not to
apply the product to crops or
weeds and bloom.
A number of procedural issues
also raised questions. These
included items like the US Fish
and Wildlife Service conducting
its endangered and threatened
species review on a different
chemical, not carbool.
Most grasshoppers are not
actually pest species, so it
it's it's important to figure
out what species are present and
the atheist delivered samples to
the state for identification 6
days after the spray was
advertised to contractors and
non-damaging species was
actually the dominant species in
the last sample taken. There
were also nobus designated to
protect arroyos and other
seasonally dry watercourses,
although monsoons were imminent.
And the area supplies drinking
water for Santa Fe and New
Mexico.
And finally, the land management
agencies gave a thumbs up to the
spray um months prior to surveys
and without adequate public
involvement.
Local landowner has written a
letter um that is included in
your packet. I want to read a
few excerpts from that. Um, this
is from Mike Nee, a resident of
Chama Canyon.
For decades I have walked and
ridden the entire area with Avis
proposed to spray. Overgrazing
is rampant in the area and is a
cause for grasshopper
infestations and is detrimental
to all plants and wildlife of
the area to compound the
overgrazing of pesticide sprays
continuing a downward spiral.
I consider myself a riverkeeper,
the real Chama watershed is
source water for 6,000,000 water
users. I live and own property
in the Wild River section of the
Riochama directly west of Navajo
Peak.
And Mike talks about his many
appearances before different
governmental bodies.
We are too slowly becoming aware
that there's a danger to our
life from the indiscriminate use
of pesticides. Toxic pesticide
treatments would have been far
more harmful than beneficial to
life. Better management of the
BLM lands with AIs proposed to
spray would be the best practice
and better use of public funds.
So what happened in the end in
2023? Well, after a huge public
outcry, the BLM and State Lands
Office withdrew from the spray
plan citing inadequate analysis
and subsequently, the state
commissioner of Public Lands
expressed support for a more
comprehensive and formalized
process and noted that staff in
the state land office want to
work with the ranchers who lease
state land in adopting arrange
rangeland practices that could
reduce grasshopper counts. This
is important
Because another huge grasshopper
spray could be proposed and
planned at any time in the
future.
And the best way to prepare for
that in a way that is most
helpful for ranchers while also
being least harmful to wildlife
is to invest in rangeland
management that can help make
the land less conducive to
grasshopper outbreaks.
While such practices could
incorporate a variety of angles.
One thing is clear, conserving
predators of grasshoppers, such
as native birds, is an important
piece of the puzzle. Multiple
studies show that native birds
can reduce grasshopper densities
anywhere from 27% to 80%.
Although the Riochama spray was
canceled in 2023, it left the
community on alert for another
spray. More than 1600 people
rode into the AFIS office this
spring in 2024, expressing
concern about a possible new
spray and urging restraint.
So given the controversy and the
high stakes, we believe the
legislature can lead the way
with some potential solutions on
state lands and waters. Managing
state public lands can be done
with a thoughtful, balanced
approach that could support
lessees and meet these broader
needs. First, let's recognize
that New Mexico citizens want
sustainable solutions. So we ask
that the, the legislature help
the New Mexico State lands
office develop and implement
management practices that help
be resilient to grasshopper
populations.
Second, protect watersheds. Most
of New Mexico's waters don't
fall under the protection of the
Clean Water Act since the recent
Supreme Court decision.
The state required protective
protective buffers in
watersheds, both along permanent
and seasonal um areas would help
protect water from pesticide
contamination.
So upholding right to know
principles is really um
important. Please require
advanced public notification of
any pesticide applications on
state public lands.
For citizens are really worry of
broad aerial sprays over public
lands. So we suggest that state
agencies independently vet and
publicly share the data that is
used in considering potential
pesticide applications,
including the survey data and
economic justifications.
Finally, um, some places harbor
high biodiversity and just
should be protected from any
spray.
I want to broaden the
discussion, just briefly, um,
beyond grasshoppers and public
lands and consider how the
legislature could help pollinate
a conservation more broadly
across New Mexico within cities,
towns, and agricultural lands,
including some agricultural
lands that are managed directly
by the state.
The stunning Polovedo diversity
of New Mexico is important for
many crops. Farming is and has
been a part of New Mexico for
2500 years. Many foods and feeds
produced in the state today need
pollinators, including alfalfa,
chili peppers, cotton, and
squash. The legislature can help
protect New Mexico's
agricultural productivity by
conserving New Mexico
pollinators, but pollinators
really do need our help now.
Many bumblebee species have
disappeared.
Parts of the foment ranges in
western states and have dwindled
in population size. This is true
for each of the bee species
shown on this slide, which is
all a new review for federal
endangered species listing.
And some butterfly populations
who also shrinking. One recent
study finds that up to 80% of
the most widespread butterfly
species in the Western United
States appear to be in some
state of decline. The three
shown here all exist in New
Mexico, and we want to keep the
population strong.
So one way to help is by
tackling the worst pesticide
actors that threaten pollinators
of the many risky pesticides,
neonico, neo neonicotinoids
really stand out. They used
heavily um in the ways that Mr.
Baca um explained as cop seed
coatings also used in um towns
and cities.
But through toxicity is
mind-boggling. It's incredible,
but a single kernel of
neonic-treated corn has enough
insecticide to kill over 80,000
honeybees.
Neonic seed treatments are
registered for a variety of
different crops here in New
Mexico and some data even
indicates that seed treatments
don't actually improve crop
yield, which raises an important
question.
adding a toxic pesticide,
whether it's needed or not, a
sensible idea.
Especially when we now know from
hundreds of studies how deadly
neonics are for bees, beetles,
butterflies, aquatic insects,
and other invertebrates.
Now neonics a very long-lasting
and they're watersoluble, and
although Mr. Baca mentioned that
neonics weren't found in the
sampling that's done here in New
Mexico. Unfortunately, that
study used a lab whose equipment
was not sensitive at all. It
that lab used was was basically
wasn't able to detect neonics at
the concentrations they're
normally found with more
sensitive equipment across the
country, um, the results show
that 53% of streams have
Unix in them and a study in New
York looking specifically at wax
found neonics in 40% of wax
samples.
Fortunately, many states are
already protecting pollinators
from neonics, and some are
making pollinator harmful
pesticides restricted use and or
prohibiting neonics outdoors and
non agricultural settings. These
angles really do help reduce use
overall and especially in cities
and towns. Some states have also
passed bills eliminating treated
seat applications, resting back
local control and we're
protecting public lands from
neonics. Several of these preced
Setting bills include exemptions
for emergencies, so they allow
an escape hatch if needed.
Well, in the long run, we
recognize that helping people to
shift the way that farming
occurs and the way we landscape
and garden, we'll always have
the most lasting impact. It is
still very valuable to tackle
these bad actives.
In 2021, Senate President Pro
Tem Mimi Stewart introduced a
new bill in New Mexico, and we
applaud that leadership.
We hope that once again New
Mexico representatives and
senators will work to slow the
decline of New Mexico's unique
pollinators by protecting them
from the worst pesticides in the
way that best fits New Mexico.
So with that, I wanna thank the
chair of the committee and the
members of the committee and the
staff who work to organize this
event. And I also want to thank
our supporters and members.
Thank you.
Next up we have Charles Hidner.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Other
members of the committee,
everyone present here. I'm a
rancher in northern New Mexico.
My wife Verna and I manage um
several different types of land.
We run about 250 head of cattle
on a cow calf operation, and
it's a life that I grew up with.
I grew up on the same ranch that
I now manage.
And it's just, uh, it's a great
life out there. Um, but, but
I'm, I wasn't always only a
rancher. I actually got a degree
in soil science.
And uh and then spent 31 year
career with mostly, mostly with
natural resources conservation
service as a sole scientist, but
I also had range rangeland
management specialist on my, on
my crew.
I was a sole scientist, I was a
project leader. I was also um a
major iron resource area,
project manager through my
career.
So to say that I know a little
bit about our land, about soils
and about range. I think I can
safely say that I do. We, uh,
live on a ranch that is, um, uh,
our house is situated on a hill.
I have to applaud the the
previous uh dark skies uh
presentation because where we
live at, there's not a house in
any other direction.
And when you turn off the lights
at night, it's dark, and we
enjoy that. So, but it's a great
life out there. We, um,
I retired uh 12 years ago and
began working on the ranch full
time.
We've seen uh many different
animal species, including uh
deer and elk, of course,
mountain lion, uh, bear, black
bear, even uh uh Antelope came
and lived with my hippers for
about 4 years, found safety in
the in the herd numbers of the
emper and it would just migrate
everywhere that they went. Uh,
we haven't seen a uh a uh oryx
yet, but I did take this picture
when I did the whole survey of
White Sands missile range.
Down in the southern part of the
state. Next slide.
And let me just say before we go
any further that I feel like I
have a very progressive type of
of land management on my ranch.
The cattle are often on one
pasture for one week, 3 weeks at
the most they may not return to
that pasture the rest of the
year. So there's a lot of rest
that goes on out there on the
ranch. Uh, we have, we found
challenges whenever we began to
get increased elk herd because
the cattle would graze the land.
The grass would come back, guess
what happens after 2 or 3 weeks.
That's when the E Kurds move in
because they want fresh green
grass, green growth. So it's
hard, it's more challenging to
manage because of the elk herd,
but we never thought we'd face
what we faced whenever we began
to get um
almost double um
levels, um.
Can't think of the word now, but
uh
uh of uh of grasshoppers down on
the place.
This is a slide in 2022. You can
see that everything's pretty,
pretty dead. This is not from
drought. We had pretty good
water in 22.
Um,
In the next slide,
This was taken just this year.
Um,
To give you kind of an idea if
you look way in the background
you can see a little bit of
green and you feel forward to
the next slide.
You'll see that that's the front
of the grasshoppers reached.
Yes,
the, we did in 22 contact API,
see if they could come and give
us some help. Uh, they came out
and they began to look around at
the the grasshopper problem. And
I asked the guy, now, my
understanding is that uh 27
grasshoppers per square yard
would constitute a plague. He
says, you're, you're correct
about that. We're interested in
levels down to 8, but 27 is a
play. He got out there and
counted.
He got 41.
In a square yard, he said, oh
no, this can't be right. Let me
try it again. The next one was
52, so to say that we had a
grasshopper problem and be
putting it mildly. Now I, I want
to say right now, I, I, I do not
like Spain. I'm the last person
that would want to spray, but
there comes a time when you
maybe feel like you have to do
something to try to protect the
natural resources you have out
there.
So get, get, just to give you a
little bit of an idea. I've, I
managed also um on not just
private lands, privately owned
lands, but private lands that
are leased
on BOM, allotment land, and Per
allotment land.
The Forest Service allowed me to
do some management on Pso in the
next slide will show you, uh,
oh, OK, I'm sorry let me back up
a little bit. So this is almost
exactly the same area going
forward to slide that's what we
just looked at that was not
affected by the grasshoppers. It
it same so I think in in the
next slide it'll demonstrate
another area. I think I'm pretty
good at land manager out there.
I'm kind of offended that people
would say that we do that we
all.
that we don't know what we're
doing out in this area because I
feel like I know what I'm doing
out there, and I have done a lot
of conservation practices on the
land. I finally got permission
to do some conservation
practices on poor service land
that next slide will show uh
here's an area that I was able
to come in and brush cut. You
can see what it looked like in
the foreground, these are the
the same allotment, two
different pastures. Uh, this was
done last year.
The next slide is internal into
this pasture. This is not a
cricke or anything. This is just
an arroyo that that ran and fill
up with water, but you can see
the amount of grass that exists
in there, the year before, the
year over just a year ago, this
was covered with sagebrush just
like that, what you saw in the
foreground of that first slide.
We contacted Auss they came out
and they looked at things. They
decided maybe that Spain might
be in order.
Um,
It takes a long time to get all
the processes done.
Yes, they were planning on using
carbool because at that time
Cardinal was the only thing that
they could use to be able to
target insects at that later
date because it took so long to
get through all the red tape,
um.
Carbona is dangerous. Yes,
carbonol is also what people put
on their gardens to control
insects.
So it's um is used in in uh but
in his prescribed form, much
less dangerous than what people
would think. They were they were
going to use half the
recommended doses. I'm just
speaking a little bit rapist at
the moment. I'm not in charge of
any of that. I'm just saying
what I learned from the whole
process, have the recommended
dosage only in um in bands so
that they would attract the
grasshoppers in from.
side. It had a um spray with
about 46 to about 5 to 6 mph
winds so that the spray is
absorbed into the side of the
grass and not touching the
ground. 46 hours after the raid,
if there's no rainfall event,
it's absorb in almost negligible
effect from it in the life span
is 5 to 7 days. If nothing
happens, no rainfall event
within 5 to 7 days, it's, it's
going away. Now like I said
before, do
I like to say no I'll do
anything to to keep from doing
that, but we, we figured that we
needed to try to do something.
It was mentioned uh that uh in
the Navajo P a lot or area was
mentioned. That's my allotment
over there, and I've done
everything I can with it. I'm
restricted quite a bit because
it is beyond them land, but, um,
but it, uh, I, I try to apply
the same management on those
lands as they do on, on private
lands. 3 weeks on each passion
and they moved out.
Um, in that area.
His last line.
Is that one we've already
repeated incidentally,
This is on B on land right here.
It's a combination of BLM land
and in private land. There's no
fence between it, so there's
you're seeing both within this
slide, um,
so there's no way to manage any
differently.
What happens whenever you don't
do something eventually.
I can tell you what happened on
my medals. I lost about half of
my metals to the grass was
completely destroyed on them.
This was a little more
resilient. Uh, this has already
is already greening back up and
coming back with recent rain,
but I don't know how much more
pressure it can take, uh, it,
uh.
It's, it's kind of funny because
2 years ago it would look just
like this. We got about 12
inches of rain within 4 months,
which is really unusual. The
grass all grew up about that
tall. And guess what, it was the
most attractive thing to the
Kurds. The Kurds moved in by the
thousands, and when they got
done,
It looked about like this again.
So it faced a lot of challenges
out there and we do the best
that we can. We just, uh, uh,
you know, we try to, to do what
we think is right, we would, we
certainly would never want to do
anything that would be harmful,
but I think it's only fair to
say that there's always two
sides of a story. Sometimes
they're more extreme. Hopefully
we can pull them closer
together. Hopefully we can find
what the true answer is, do we
need to do a little bit of
action?
What happens if as a soil
scientist, if we don't take care
of the grass and keep it growing
on there and we lose it.
Then we lose all cover
and rampant, uh, soil erosion
will begin to occur not just
from water erosion, but wind
erosion and will have massive
amounts of dust, uh, building
the air and we began to lose
soil.
Takes 1000 years to build 1 inch
of soil. I it only takes like a
a couple catastrophic if we
could advances to lose it all.
I'll do anything that I can to
try to keep soil in place on the
ground.
Thank you.
Thank you,
thank you very much uh for your
presentation.
Uh, questions from the
committee. Representative Samoa.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you presenters for in these
situations like this, uh, I, I
was born on a farm, raised on a
farm and ranches and.
And I've been there. I've felt
it. I've seen it, and
Grasshoppers can devastate a
corn crop. And it seems like
they come out of nowhere.
And
In the little bit that I've
learned about him is, it's, it's
the timing of the rains.
And the egg lays and and how
everything, all that plays out
and uh, and, and.
Mother Nature gives us.
Some pretty good challenges to
deal with and and.
In the way we've improved with
technology and science.
We've made these chemicals
available and
I believe.
That we do watch them as a state
and, and, and we do keep an eye
as to where they're going and if
we see a problem, we've always
addressed those issues like if
If we get them in the waters, if
we get them in, in the, in the,
in the honeycombs of the bees
and and.
Of course, we're not all experts
on on how you look for these
signs or levels or or whatever.
So, so my question is.
Do you, does, do you feel like
New Mexico's doing a good job?
Or, or do we have some serious
issues that we need to be
looking at in the legislature,
uh,
Is, are, are we weak on the on
the side of it, or is this? I, I
know, I know people don't like
spraying.
Don't like to receive.
The spray sometimes like, like
in this incident that we're
talking about here today.
But is, is New Mexico out of
balance on this and and what's
your opinion? You're, you're the
one that sees sees it, sees this
up front, inspects it, and looks
at it. How, how do you feel
personally about?
Mr. Turn.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee and Representative
Zamora, um,
I believe we are a strong
program and that we do have a
really good handle on the
oversight of pesticides. Now
that's what the industry people,
because we have been given that
authority through the Pestide
Control Act. We've been doing it
a number of years, so we know
industry, we have good
relationships with them. They
understand the way the procedure
goes with renewal of licensure
with continuing education
language, the labels, the law.
That's something that we tell
them over and over.
So they know us, they have a
good relationship with us. They
understand how enforcement
works. The part that was
lacking, I believe, was
education to the general public.
And that was what spurred the
projects that we that I
mentioned at the end of my
presentation with the water bill
mailers with the television
commercials, um, with the, the
packets to go out to to folks at
public libraries in different
places like that for pollinator
protection.
Because
I think the general public has
the idea that if a little bit of
pesticide works, a lot works
better, you know, they can get
the job done faster. Well, the
professionals that we work with
and license the industry folks,
they understand that now the
pesticide is designed under the
label directions.
Through research that was
generated and issued to US EPA
for that initial registration
for purpose. The product is
designed to have the minimum
amount necessary to control the
pest, but also not persist in
the environment and not pose a
danger to food, to the the
actual person using the product.
Or the or the public themselves
around where these pesticides
are used. And so with that, you
know, I think we do a really
good job of educating the
pesticide label is the law.
Um, when you compare our, our
group or our section to other
ones around the country, you
know, we're, we're just, we're
pretty small when it comes down
to it, but we really get the
state covered well. We have
field staff and office staff
that respond immediately. So
whenever we have complaints come
in, we're, we're on the on the
call immediately within 24 hours
we're talking to the
complainant. We're talking to
the applicator typically, um.
And so we, we're very responsive
and we do a really good job with
that. Like I say to the
industry, solid. I, I don't see
any problems with that, and I
can say that because I've
noticed over over the years I
started as an inspector in the
field.
In the Four Corners area and
then throughout Albuquerque and
then at one point I was one of
the only inspectors in the
entire state as we were kind of
thin at the time, and then I
moved on to um Inspector
supervisor, program manager, and
now my current position. But
over that time I've seen the
trend of violations has really
gone down because our inspectors
are working diligently and have
really established really good
relationships, and I think
that's key is the relationships
we've established with the
industry folks, the license
holders.
They know they can contact us
right away, not if a problem
happens, but before that, if
they have a new product label
and they have a question, they
know who our inspectors are. My
phone number was on the, on the
front of this. That's my cell
number.
I'll take a call at any point
from anybody, especially someone
that has a concern about a
pesticide and the question on
how to use it because we want to
be that resource, and I think we
have really moved into the spot
to be a solid resource for the
industry folks, and we're
continuing to, to get the
information out and educate the
general public because that was
the, the spot that needed a
little bit more, but I think
since 2021, with those large
scale projects and uh we did a
good job and we're going to
continue with that.
Thank you for that and, and Mr.
Chair and, and, uh, Steve.
So,
You're not standing or sitting
here in front of us today and
telling us that you're short,
FTEs or that you're not funded
well or that you're not being
able to cover the state or
anything like that.
So that people can.
Understand.
And meet up to the standards of
The labels and how we have to
use these products.
Am I correct in saying that?
Mr. Chair and members of the
committee and Representatives
Zamoto, that, that's correct.
We, we're not.
Looking for any additional
funding or anything like that we
have our funding, we have our
program in place, everybody has
their role within our division,
we've been cross working with
entomology and nursery so that
more people are available to be
that resource, to give that
information and to have that
education um available when
contacted by industry and the
public.
And, and thank you for that, Mr.
Chair and, and, and Steve, I
think it's very important that
we understand as legislators.
That these tools that we have,
these chemicals, pesticides,
however you want to say it, that
we have are necessary.
In the practices that we use
today for the amount of food
that we have to produce to feed
the people of the state of New
Mexico and across the country
and around the world.
We produce here food in New
Mexico.
For people everywhere around the
world, and it's important for a
rancher.
For a farmer.
To have these tools because what
we've evolved into, we can't
control anymore.
With just the natural setting.
We, we depend on us keeping our,
our grounds from being eroded
and if anybody has ever had
blowing ground.
You know what it does to it in a
hurry. It, it, it, it is
detrimental to our land.
And we do a lot better job.
I think as long as we're
following the rules.
We, we've applied the science to
the rules.
To make these chemicals safe, I
think we ought to allow these
tools to be acceptable to the
public. I think in the past,
we've seen some issues with some
chemicals, and they've been
pulled off the shelf.
Am I correct in saying that, Mr.
Sher?
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Zamora, that's correct. Um, one
that comes to mind is the an
insecticide and agricultural
insecticide been around a long
time. I used it in farm
production as well, called
chlorpyrifos.
Um, the tolerances were revoked
by US EPA a couple of years
back, some lawsuits were took
place.
And they're currently working
out the details about that, but
the manufacturers of those
products basically voluntarily
just took the product off
because they could see that this
is not going to continue. It was
just one of a wide variety of
products that are available out
there, but that's true. If
there's a problem with it, it'll
be taken care of immediately. I,
I remember one, another
particular one, an agricultural
pesticide that was pulled, and
we literally were tasked with
going out to each person that
had purchased it. It was a
restricted product, so we could
track that through dealer
records and
Literally had to go put eyes on
it and and make certain that we
knew what was out there and how
it was going to be sent back to
the manufacturer, so that things
can be pretty immediate, um,
when, when there's a problem
that happens with the product.
Thank you for that answer and,
and Mr. Chair, thank you, and,
and I'll conclude with one last
statement is, I want to thank
Mr. Hibber for being here today
and, and presenting the other
side of the story.
And, and how we need these,
these tools that we have
available that we've done a good
job.
Uh, creating and and researching
and, and we keep them off the
shelf till we make sure they're
safe.
And then thank you for the other
side of the presentation that we
don't want.
To ignore, we want to listen to.
But we, and, and if there's some
problems there, we want to fix
them.
But as an agricultural
community,
I think we ought to, we ought
to.
Stick to the science and and
not.
Let our emotions take hold of of
the science and and use the
tools that we have available to
us to.
To grow good food and and
healthy food for our, for our
people in our community and
across the world. Thank you,
sir, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Thank you, Representative Samoa.
Um, thank you all for your
presentations, um, I, I was
curious, uh, Mr. Baca, um was
suggested that you weren't
finding uh traces of the neonics
uh in your testing because the
lab didn't have that level of
sensitivity. Did you have any
response to that?
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee believe the detections
were at the parts per million,
um, with regard to those surveys
and so if I mean, you know,
there there is more sensitive
testing that can happen, of
course, but in particular to
those that I know of, it was at
the parts per million level that
we're detection levels. And
within those, um, a number of
other products including the
chlorpyrophosphide I mentioned
previously, um, was, was
detected as well as other
products like Spyromeofen.
Um,
DET even and Landisau Lathan
just to name a couple of other
active ingredients of
insecticides specifically that
were detected with uh within
that study.
OK, thank you for that and um uh
thank you to Representative
Samoa for his comments. Um, I,
you know, I
I, I would hope there aren't
sides to this issue, you know,
and, uh, listening, um, to Mr.
Hibner, um, you know,
He wants to do things right. Um,
that's what I heard from all
three panelists. Um, I think
there is um I think we have a
pretty long history in this
country, certainly in my
lifetime of
Using chemicals and finding out
later.
The unintended consequences of
that use. Um, so I think we
should be careful, and I thought
the um uh Miss Silvaggio raised
some really good points about
the use of the carbony and as it
had been proposed, the timing of
the use, the impact on
non-target species, things like
that. So I think those are all
things that we need to um take
into consideration as we work
together to achieve, you know.
The commonly desired outcome.
So thank you all for your
presentation. Senator Woods.
Just
Just 2 center wood.
OK. Many times we sat here and
we talked about we're going to
do this by the science.
We're going to let science
decide what's the best thing to
do here and I think the one
place that we do more research
and then anything is these
chemicals.
And you say, well, untended
consequences.
And it may prove sometime in the
future, but at the present.
That's what science has shown
us.
And to say that, that, that
One person is more expert than
another person, you know, you
can have all kinds of degrees
behind your name.
But the guy out there on the
ground is pretty damn important
guy.
I've seen these, these spots on
the ground where these
grasshoppers have embedded and
they have put their
Seed pods down.
And it's the exact perfect time.
Those grasshoppers come out.
And they may not come out every
year. They, they come out when
the conditions are perfect, and
all of a sudden you can have a
huge infestation. And there's,
and we think of a grasshopper,
but there's also leafhoppers.
There's other things.
Out there, not everything feeds
off the same plant.
And it still looks like a
grasshopper.
And the science of, of
controlling those to break that
cycle is a pretty huge deal.
Just to break the cycle and then
we can let it calm back down.
It's
It's tough to make a living out
in the country.
And it's, it's, it's, you're,
you're trying to manage the best
you can and it's not like I've
had many people talk about the
runoff.
In the in the urban areas.
That runoff into the street,
into the gutters and and go to
the rivers and pollute the
rivers. It's, it's, it's, we
hear a lot of times about
fertilizer polluting the rivers.
A lot of that comes from the
urban areas. It's not all from
the rural areas.
It's science and, and that
label.
I've been told time and time and
time again from your bunch.
Use it by the label. Don't go
off label because that's against
the law. We, we had a big
presentation to start with, and
it was all about the law and
what's reasonable.
This is a tested science and we
know, and, and you may or may
not know, but I'm a certified.
To put out pesticides. I have to
take tests. I have to get to
continue in education, I have to
jump through hoops to keep that
certification up.
And it's, it's a,
it's necessary for me to know
the latest and the most
important laws affecting me and
the chemicals that are affecting
me.
So
This is important. This is
important stuff that science
proves that it needs to be used
once in a while, not all the
time. These chemicals aren't
poured out every year.
But when those investigations
get so high.
Something needs to be done. And
I think in science, we need to
think about that.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair, for
the opportunity to let me come
in.
Thank you, Senator Woods. Thank
you to the panelists. Uh, we're
going to take a break for lunch,
uh, the, the agenda has us gone
an hour. I would like to be back
by 12:45, um, and then maybe we
can finish up a little earlier
today, uh, but we will take a
break for lunch. We do have
lunch, uh, provided, uh, our
lunch sponsors are Audubon
Animal Protection voters, Mexico
Wildlife Federation, Trout
Unlimited, Sierra Club, and
Conservation voters. Um, I thank
them.
For, uh, bringing us lunch
because for some reason, the
legislature doesn't have a
budget to pay for lunch.
Um, thank you all very much.
