a.
Morning, Mr. Chairman, members
of the committees and guests. My
name is Martin Zamora. I
represent House District 63,
South half of Curry, north half
of Roosevelt, Dubaca, Guadalupe
to touch San Miguel County, and
I'm very happy and proud to say
that I have my grandson Eli here
with me today. Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. Peter
Worth, Senate District 25 in
Santa Fe and good to see Eli.
The moonymous chair Pat Woods,
uh, Senate District 7, Currique
and Union, and soon to be
Harding.
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair,
Vice Chair, of course, members
of the committee. It's great to
be here with you, those people
that are online. A couple of
things, uh, I really like to
work to save our endangered
species, but uh it's getting
close to Thanksgiving, so I'm
having some other thoughts to it
so we deal with that, uh, but,
uh, state senator Pete Compel
was coming from northeastern New
Mexico representing other parts
of 7 counties, and it's great to
be here. Happy Thanksgiving to
everyone.
Good morning everybody,
colleagues and people at home
and guests in the audience. My
name is Susan Herrera. I
represent, uh, the northern part
of New Mexico, some of it, are
most of Rio Riba, little bit of
Santa Fe, uh, Sandoval and
Talison, good to be here this
morning, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Vice Chair, members of the
audience, and Christina Ortiz, I
represent House District 42,
which is most of Taja adjacent
to Centerra's district. I'm, uh,
I'm happy to be here. I will
likely be bringing my children.
tomorrow.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, it's a
pleasure to be here. Uh, our
last roundup of the meetings and
I'm Liteanic Senate District 39,
currently parts of 6 counties,
Bernaleo, Lincoln, San Miguel,
Santa Fe, Torrance, and
Valencia, but that will drop
down to 4 counties in January,
and I know we have a lot of
important work these last two
days. Thank you.
And I'm Matthew McQueen, House
District 50, which is uh
southern Santee County and the
Placitas area.
Sandoval County, um.
Sure.
Good morning members. Uh, my
name is Sarah Reedmeyer with
counsel Service as well as we
have Tom Kirshka, um, Andrea
Martinez is helping on webcast
and uh Angela Deacon as well.
Thank you.
OK. Thank you all for being
here. We have 2 more days, um.
Before Thanksgiving, uh, 2 more
days of committee meetings. The,
the meetings are set up today to
focus on mostly budget issues,
and tomorrow to look at, uh, get
a preview of some legislation
that we'll expect to see in the
session.
Uh, any questions or
announcements or any uh business
from the committee before we
start, Mr. Chair, Senator Woods.
Mr. Chair, I, I'm going to do my
best to be here. I'm also
supposed to be in a interim
transportation meeting, uh, but
I'm gonna do my best to be in
your meeting because it's so
important, and the other problem
is I've got a caucus that will
be coming in this afternoon. So
I will be missing your late. OK.
Thank you for being here.
uh, vice chair of Hispanics, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
we do have some groups who have
offered to provide lunches both
days, so, uh, when it comes time
for that, we will uh let you
know the details and the donors.
Thank you. Great. Thank you for
arranging that.
Anything else?
OK, first up this morning, we
have the Citizen Science Working
Group.
Um
OK.
Good morning. Uh, we, we
typically go in the order on the
agenda, but if you have other
preference, feel free.
Oh, and you do have to use mics.
Good morning.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Kate
Cardness. I am the community
engagement coordinator for the
Environment department, uh, and
I'm here today, uh, with
Uh, other members of our working
group to present to you our
recommendations to expand the
use of citizen science for state
agencies in New Mexico.
So, um, I'd like, uh, my, uh,
Other group members to go ahead
and introduce themselves.
Uh, Mr. Chair, thank you for
having me. I'm Toby Velasquez
with the New Mexico State Parks
Division. I'm the director.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, thank you again for
having us. I'm Mike Sloan,
director, Department of Game and
Fish.
We have a few others in the
audience as well.
So before we get started, uh,
I'd like to share the definition
of citizen science that the
working group came up with, um,
that we agreed on, uh, which is
the involvement of New Mexico
Mexican volunteers in scientific
monitoring and data collection
to inform resource management,
which includes New Mexicans at
heart.
Uh, house Memorial 34, uh,
originated from hundreds of wild
friends students who voted to
work on citizen science
legislation, uh, last fall.
And the students worked with
their sponsor, Representative
Christina Ortiz.
Uh, and A Cortez, sorry, uh, and
advocated for uh the legislation
to expand the use of citizen
science in New Mexico. And of
course, that House Memorial 34
passed in the house with
unanimous support, uh, in this
past February.
Um, the House Memorial 34
directed the the New Mexico
State Parks, the environment
department, state land office,
and the Department of Game and
Fish to participate in a working
group with wild friends, um, to
collaborate on a pilot program
and to recommend actions to
establish and expand use of
citizen science, uh, by state
agencies. So starting last
February, we met about monthly
and we got to work.
And that, um, membership
includes the Environment
Department, the Department of
Game and Fish, the forestry
division, the state land office,
the New Mexico State parks, the
natural heritage of New Mexico
and the wild Friends program.
Oh sorry, I think it's mine,
yeah.
Um, so those working groups were
facilitated using the citizen
science program at environmental
agencies best practices guide
created by the Environmental Law
Institute and from those
meetings, there were 8 basic
takeaways, um.
Data needs
Um, as you can tell just from my
last conversation with you when
we talked about species of
greatest conservation need, over
half of those are species that
we don't know enough information
about to to have a good handle
on, so there's a basic natural
history and distribution
information that's lacking. So
there's a, there is a great need
for data, um, out there, whether
it's water quality or species
information.
Program designed to maximize the
utility.
Of the capacity increase of the
citizen science program to
provide, we need a coordinated
approach.
Data management tools. Um, the
issue is less about data
management. All the agencies
sort of have data infrastructure
and more about actually.
Collecting and getting the data
in a place where it can be used.
Um, volunteer communication.
Successful program will require
making the program known to all
New Mexicans across the state
and recruiting those volunteers.
And so these are some of the
reasons we need some
coordination and um FTEs.
Moving to further along,
training and technical resources
ensure data quality and
integrity, agencies will need
capacity to not only
Acquire but also trained citizen
scientists, so.
Um
strategic partnerships again.
This can't be done alone. It's
really gonna be a collaborative
process where we'll try and get
cities, counties, um,
municipalities involved, and the
citizens there and try and bring
forward that data that we can
all use to to better New Mexico.
Quantified outcomes.
Agency staff will monitor
metrics to ensure the program's
effectiveness. Obviously we
don't want to just go and have a
bunch of data and not really be
able to use it, we've got to
have.
quality control and that kind of
stuff.
In continuity, um, a program
coordinator will do those things
I just mentioned, ensuring that
the data quality, ensuring we
are able to bring the program
from one year to the next and
continue to collect good
information.
So those are the, the 8
takeaways.
Um, the citizen science.
pilot project, um,
Pilot project consists of 5
field trips with state agencies
participation on various state
lands across New Mexico from
Carlsbad to Penasso.
As a whole, the pilot project
showed the program could be
successful and provided useful
information for building out the
program on a larger scale, um,
that's the reason we're here
today because we, we do see
value in moving forward with the
program.
With that and over to Toby.
Thank you, Director Sloan. Um,
again, Toby Velasquez from New
Mexico State Parks, and we get
into the recommendations piece,
which is, in my opinion, part of
the report that means the most
value. We were able to actually
go and put boots on the ground
as director Sloan explained, and
see that the project would have
the enthusiasm and the interest
to carry it forward, not only
from the agencies, but those,
those individuals that were
coming in, wanted to be part of
the biology and conservation
that each agency contributes to
with our specific missions, uh,
and we're, we, we all are
partners in other ways. And so
it was bringing.
another uh dynamic of these
partnerships between the Mexico,
uh, Environment Department, uh,
the game department, state
parks, etc. uh, and the state
land office to come in and get
back to our roots, which is the
biology and the conservation,
the preservation of these areas
that we're all in charge, uh, to
be responsible for. And so, uh,
what the first recommendation is
to establish a team of program
coordinators consisting of one
coordinator at each of the
member agencies and divisions.
That was immediately identified
after the pilot project roll out
because we had
to use, um, existing staff, uh,
to help coordinate and to help,
uh, communicate what was
happening, not only on the
administrative buildup, but also
on the ground in order to make
the citizen science project work
and um that recommendation of
coming back and bringing uh
re-establishing for some of us
re-establishing for some
agencies establishing this type
of position for the first time,
even though it's part of our
mission, uh, for example, with
New Mexico State Parks mission,
uh, public education.
education, education of our
citizens, both environmentally
and outdoor recreation is part
of our core mission, as it is
for many of the agencies within
this working group, um, it was
clearly identified that we need
to grow some capacity with staff
in order to be able to uh
promote this program moving
forward.
Program, in my opinion, is
always dependent on people. Uh,
it's very difficult for a
program to exist without someone
taking ownership of that program
from each respective agency and
driving it forward, making sure
that no one becomes complicit,
that no one's asleep at the
wheel, that a new program can
move forward based off of their
intentions to get it done,
um, on recommendation number 2,
leverage opportunities to expand
and integrate citizen science
related efforts through
partnerships.
It was clear that in different
ways, the agencies were already
partnering, but in this specific
citizen science programming, uh,
we're doing our own things and
at in and I'll just speak for
state parks, in some ways not as
robust as needed to be done in
order to create the data and the
information and engage the
biology and the public to come
out and volunteer to help with
citizen science. And so what
better thing than to, uh,
reunite agencies on a program
that are gonna draw people in.
to parks and wildlife areas,
state trust lands, uh, to help
us better improve our database
for a biodiversity and
biological understanding in
general, while then informing
our decisions on conservation
and preservation. Um, um, these
partnerships are, are going to
be vital for this to happen, um.
Additional partnerships with the
outdoor recreation division as
another opportunity for this
working group that we see moving
forward, as well as other
partners, both state, federal,
and local as they start to
engage their open space and
their biodiversity needs and
better understanding of data and
growing the citizen interest
into participating in what is a
more democratized uh opportunity
for building science. And so,
um, our recommendation number 3
is uh develop metrics of success
and share outcomes from
and science projects. This is
the output. This is, this is
what we're gonna get to is, uh,
for example, the bison M product
that many agencies rely on, how
can we continue to
Produce good citizen science,
good agency-based science, so we
can continue to improve our
databases across all boards, so
that when we need that, uh, with
New Mexico State parks, for
example, of the 35 state parks
found across 25 or 33 counties,
only 9 of those parts are owned
outright by the New Mexico State
Parks division and on behalf of
the state of New Mexico. The
remainder over 2/3 are owned by
another natural resource agency
of some type. Some of them are
gaming fish.
Some we lease from uh the state
lands office, some released from
the reclamation, a couple from
the Corps of Engineers, and so
this partnership piece for
Citizen science is gonna be
crucial for each of our agencies
as we move forward, so that we
draw in those other supporters
and co-managers to contribute to
a better product in, in, uh, not
only citizen science, data
management, communication,
recruitment, and marketing our
state, um, we're the 4th most
biodiverse.
in the country.
And uh we need to start treating
our state as such.
And so, um, number 3 is really
important in that it brings more
partners to the table.
And am I still going?
I'm still going, all right.
So for, uh, slide number 14
examples of citizen science
needs, um, the New Mexico
Department of game of fish,
identified that they have needs,
uh, focused on, um, species of
great concern, endangered
species, other non-game species
across the state, the New Mexico
State Land Office shared a
similar, uh, needs in developing
a biological baseline in areas
like the state's boot hill,
where there's not a whole lot of
conservation and information
being uh generated.
at this time, the Mexico
Environment Department,
obviously, uh, not only from a
regulatory perspective but also
from a youth perspective, uh, is
a primary partner in making sure
that citizen science furthers
each of our missions, and then
obviously the New Mexico State
Parks division, and I can give
you more specifics on state
parks. I won't, I won't speak on
behalf of the other agencies,
uh, for, for many years, we were
the, we had Coyote Creek State
Park in Mora County on the east
side of the Sangre de Cristo
Mountains, and it was the
documented mating pair of
southwestern Willow Flycatcher
east of the Sangre de Cristos.
The only reason we knew that, we
found that out as an agency was,
we had a biologist who was there
on vacation and identified the
nesting pair and brought it to
our attention. And then we
brought in other, uh, biologists
to confirm that, and um had we
not had someone who was
interested and had the
background in a citizen science
role, we never would have known
that. We would have potentially
changed the habitat manipulation
along the Coyote Creek, uh, and
could have damaged or in other
ways.
threatened the nesting pair of
southwest willow flycatchers, so
it's, it's another example of uh
bringing citizens in to help us
do a better job, inform our
decision making, and be a force
multiplier moving forward, uh,
so we can improve our
conservation efforts as a state.
On slide 15, uh, why is citizen
science needed in New Mexico? I
think we covered a bit of that,
but I'll, I'll go through it.
I'll try not to read it word for
word, but it definitely will
help our agencies, uh, expand
and uh create some growth and
capacity to better inform
ourselves and generate the data
that's necessary to support our
missions. Um, we talk a lot and
we hear a lot in the legislature
as well as in our administrative
discussions at the department
level, that there's always
cross-cutting needs for data to
serve all entities.
And that's what we're trying to
do here. Uh, we lean on gaming
fish, um, the land uh office
leans on state parks and so
forth, and it's gonna be
important uh for us to improve
that relationship and
information contributions, data
management and data sharing
moving forward. Uh, create a
cost-effective solution.
What better than to have
volunteerism and stewardship as
part of our models moving
forward in supporting our
missions. Uh, we need more
involvement, multi-generation
involvement, but generational
involvement nonetheless, to make
sure that the value of our uh
public lands and those lands
that are in charge to the state
to take care of and to further
for conservation and
preservation are there and doing
better tomorrow than they are
today.
Um, also tying it into
STEM-based learning
opportunities for K through 12.
Building interest and knowledge
in our youth is gonna be
crucial, uh, the enthusiasm that
we saw in the pilot project from
the youth participants was
tremendous. Um, many of those
kids from time to time have
never been to a state park.
They've never been to a wildlife
area. They may have never been
to some of their state trust
land. So getting them out there
gives them new perspectives on
what's available to them to
improve their quality of life,
while they're contributing to
the citizen science project that
is going to help all of us do
better for conservation.
Um, it also supports just
general public engagement, uh,
in the example of Coote Creek,
and that individual not spoke to
us, uh, we may have actually
endangered that habitat for that
southwestern will of
flightcatcher, uh, nesting pair,
uh, having people more informed
makes people more responsible.
Uh, we saw during the pandemic,
um, when people flooded out to
the outdoors. There was trash
and RV dump uh sewer everywhere.
It was chaos. We saw it in the
hemis, we saw it in the ecos. We
saw it in.
Parks. We saw it in just about
any public property a person
could find.
Citizen science will help change
those perspectives and make
people feel more uh responsible
for a leave no trace and a
recreate responsible, um,
mentality as well as have them
bought into the program that
each of our agencies are trying
to accomplish by getting them
involved in the science, and
that's gonna be important moving
forward. Um, and then also
offering more outdoor
recreational opportunities for
New Mexicans and tourists. Uh,
how many times have you told
someone that had never been uh
to the outdoor.
yours, your special spot,
whether it's the way Caldera or
Elephant Butte Lake State Park
near Kettle Top, and then they
go because you told them, and
now they go all the time. It's
become their spot.
And when people are engaging
these public agencies in that
space, on that platform. It will
likely bring them back, for one
reason or another, maybe
involving citizen science, maybe
involving hunting, fishing, or
public education, and we see
that's a positive as well as
this program will be expanded
throughout.
Um, with that, uh, Muchisimas
gracias, thank you for this
morning. I wanna thank, uh, the
UNM uh Law Center and the Wild
Friends, as well as all of the
participating agencies and
representative Ortiz for taking
this memorial uh on for us and
all of you for uh supporting
that memorial unanimously, um,
it really was a demonstration of
need.
Through that pilot project, as
each agency understood what this
could mean for us moving forward
as a better contribution to
conservation and biology in the
state of New Mexico.
And, uh, with that, Mr. Chair,
uh, we open for questions.
Thank you very much. Uh, first
up we have Representative
Bortez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
so much for that presentation. I
want to thank Sue George for
rounding up.
All of those uh young people to
testify they were excellent, um,
and I, I'm, I'm hopeful that we
can get some of this funding in,
in the budget so that we can
continue this work. I have some
questions about that
specifically, which is that um
have your department's requested
funding for the program
coordinators in the executive
budget or any of the budgets
you're looking at me,
um.
Mr. Chairman, Representative, we
have not specifically done that
because at the time our budgets
needed to be developed the
ongoing meeting, so at this
point that request is kind of
gonna have to be separate from
the budgets are built into it
later. Thank you for that. Um,
so this funding would go for the
permanent FTEs so the
coordinators in each of those
agencies, will there be a
specific facilitator, or is that
like sort of a rotating
leadership for facility
t ation of any meetings that
That come come out of it. Um,
Mr. Chair and, and
Representative Ortiz, um, it
would be a coordinator assigned
to each division or each agency,
department or division that
would then be part of that
broader team to connect those
agencies through the other
coordinators that would execute
the program, uh, moving forward.
Thank you. Um, and some of this
money, the request is for um for
data management for its program
expenses. Will there be a
development of a new database or
will you be, will your
coordinators be looking at all
the databases that exist in all
the various agencies and trying
to
Understand that data.
Uh,
thank you. Um, Mr. Chair and
Representative Ortiz, um, I
believe the, the, uh, costs are
mostly for a um joint website,
uh, and, um, the ability to
perhaps contract that.
To um
Manage the website for the, for
the group.
And, and Mr. Chair and
Representativetez, I'll just
expand a little bit on that.
Those funds, uh, we've already
found a willing partner, um,
Natural Heritage New Mexico,
who's already contributed to,
uh, as they're programming to
biology and conservation is
willing to be that um recipient
of those program funds and
manage on behalf of the work of
the of the coalition, uh, moving
forward, which would be
web-based uh opportunities
program functions, as well as
anything else that would be
program specific that would be
serving.
All of the agencies contributing
to citizen science.
Mr. Ja, representative, I also
point out that Natural Heritage
already does quite a bit of our,
our data housing and that sort
of stuff, so it's a, it's a
natural fit.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
don't really know well of the
heritage natural heritage, what,
what's, is that a nonprofit? Are
they?
An agency quasi.
State agency.
They they're housed at UNM every
state has a a natural heritage.
Um, thank you. Uh, I think
that's all my questions. I, I'm
just, I'm really excited to hear
the story about the um the
biologist, the citizen
biologists recognizecognizing, I
imagine they heard the
southwestern willow flycatcher,
is that how, how did they
identify the nesting pair
because they're hard to find,
Mister Charon and
Representativetez, they heard
the call and then they actually,
as they were exploring the
riverside, found the nest.
Great. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Car.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Stephanics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you all for the presentation and
the work on this. Uh, my
questions are similar to
Representative Ortiz, but first
of all, we have funded some data
collection at uh UNM on
wildlife, uh, New Mexico Tech.
And some other entities, and I'm
wondering about
The coordination of all that
data that could be utilized for
this project. That's just a
comment. And I'm wondering if um
I think getting
Well, you know, several FTEs
across the finish line for this
might be.
Um
You'd need a lot of PR about
this, uh, purpose, and I'm
wondering if you communication
directors at all the different
agencies could start with this,
but also the outdoor recreation
program has grants that they are
giving to
Projects that utilize
volunteers, and maybe if you
have a private funding source,
they could give a grant to that
funding source to assist this
project as well.
I was just trying to throw out
some ideas of how to keep this
going in the event that you
don't end up being in the final
budget. But thank you very much
uh for the report and thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Sidia Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is so
exciting. I'm just, uh, thank
you for all of this work. Um,
one thing, one question I had
about the citizen projects is
I've talked to people who are
very interested in monitoring
air quality, but those little um
Those little devices that
monitor air quality are very,
very expensive, um, and I was
wondering would, would, um, with
the
With
They be able to get these
devices on loan or with is there
enough funds to be able to.
Provide people with the with the
equipment they need to do this?
So, um, I'll take that since I'm
with the environment department.
Um, I, I believe that, um, we
haven't really discussed those
types of details for these
specific projects, um, but I do
believe that um at least at the
environment department that
We would be able to um
utilize the equipment that we
already have, uh, and, and we
would definitely, um, want to
support the citizen science
efforts, um, with, uh,
With the resources that we, that
we already use, um, within the
department. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. I'm wondering if you
might consider thinking about
that in your budget request as
well, you know, helping cause
honestly, people can't afford
some of the equipment that's
required. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Center.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Herrero.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you for a great presentation,
um.
Uh, I wanted to know, so what's
the total cost? Uh, what if, you
know, so for your website and
your 4 people, how much will
that be altogether?
It's nothing.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
Herrero, um, so the, uh,
estimations that we've provided
within the presentation is for
the FTEE is a total of 550,000,
and that was developed off of
existing positions within the
state personnel office
classification series, uh, that
specific classification series
is called a program coordinator
series. It's a range 75 position
program coordinator too. Um, we,
the, the working group had to be
very thoughtful in the
development of what that
position series may be, so that
one would exist. So
We didn't have to create one
with the state personnel office
which would delay the rollout of
the program, um, but because
most of these positions would be
found here in the Santa Fe area,
as you all know, cost of living
and uh competition with other
state agencies here requires
that these positions be at a, a
management level, a program
manager level. And so that's a
program coordinator to, um,
position that currently exists
with the state personal office.
The other side of the funding is
the program money, which is
estimated at 20.
000 and that would be for web
development, um, and, um,
creating products, you know,
whether it be social media or um
uh written materials, uh,
whatever it may be, promotional
items, in order for us to grow
the citizen science program, uh,
moving forward, um, I think
that's, that was the total cost
that we have projected at this
point, uh, with the majority of
that cost being to support the
FTE and uh Representative
Barrera, if I can, uh, maybe
while I have the mic, uh, speak
to vice chair uh Stefanis's, uh,
comments. One of the issues with
These programs is trying to
build and establish a baseline
and continuity.
And um many of these agencies
have taken cuts, severe cuts,
position cuts, uh, that we are
all aware of and um relying on
uh lower level funding or
grants, competitive or
non-competitive. Um,
unfortunately, it places state
agencies in a stop and start
scenario or a stop and abandon
scenario, and I would still
advocate that these FTEs in
order to build a program that we
can count on, like the LWCF
program, um, where it's going to
have the continuity.
Through the course of years and
not require this rebuilding
every, every time there's an
administration change, um, is,
is important, and so that's
where that cost is really the
most invested.
Thank you for that, Mr. Chair,
and, um, yeah, I've, I've always
said when it's everybody's job,
it's nobody's job. I mean,
that's just the way it works. So
I totally get why you need this
for the future. I'm curious, uh,
a director Sloane, uh, we do,
you know, ounces of elk.
And mountain lions. I, I always
have these, you know, farmers,
ranchers, you know, taking
pictures of the mountain lions
that are bothering their cattle
and sending it to me online and,
and, you know, and, and uh the
elk, you know, we have the elk
now in um, well, all over the
place, to say that it's in.
Oh gosh, it's, it's in Dixon
along the river there, and
there's a herd of about 20 now.
Uh, they just keep coming down
farther and farther and farther.
So how, how will you work with
all of these people. I, I mean,
I think you do now, but how will
that impact the elk count.
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't know that we've quite
thought through exactly that
far. We were largely focused on
those species of greatest
conservation need, but certainly
there are opportunities to
figure out.
How to do a scientifically
rigorous count.
You know, the anecdotal I saw
elk here, therefore there are 2
out doesn't really hold up when
you try and do the the analysis,
but we can certainly structure
something that would be
meaningful and contribute to our
overall analysis.
You just haven't gotten there
yet.
Uh, Mr. Chen and everybody, I,
you know, and I, I get it. I get
what you're going after, um, the
endangered species, but really.
The ones that aren't so
endangered are the ones that are
really hurting everybody, um,
and, and there's a need for
protecting those, but there's
also uh we had, you know, this,
it's not like we haven't sat
around and listened to people
scream at us for like 6 years,
so if there's anything we can do
to combine those things, it's
really important to people and
it's important to ranchers and
farmers and, and just kind of
ordinary citizens that are being
overrun by the elk in the north,
so that's all I have to say and
thank you very
very much.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Steinborn. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. Good morning,
everybody.
And first of all, Sue, I wanna
acknowledge the wild friends for
all your great advocacy, pulling
this together, um, this was
really a bottom-up initiative of
your students and and and uh
just totally commendable and so
congratulations on seeing it
through this far. Thank you to
the agencies for for actually
doing this because we can
advocate all kinds of things and
it's rare. Sometimes it actually
happens. So thanks for kind of
looking at it. Um, I
do have a few questions and I
was honored to be the Senate
sponsor of the memorial, and I'm
glad that the house got it all
the way through. I like that
middle picture, by the way,
whoever that guy is, that's just
a really exceptional photo. I'm
just drawn to. Uh, see, I don't
know if you took that picture,
but I would love to get a copy
of that along with 20 photo
releases on the subject. But
anyway, um,
I do have a few questions. Um,
question number one is, I know
their organizations that for
years have helped, particularly
sportsmen's groups with
I think with this kind of work
in essence.
How much
How many groups are working with
you now, I mean, prior to this
memorial of irrespective this
memorial through the years, how
many groups work with you
individually to
To offer to do work and
volunteer to collect data.
Sure.
Not a vice chair senator. I
don't have a specific number,
but what I can tell you is those
groups are largely focused on a
habitat project or putting in a
drinking.
Some source and less on the
science, the, the biology, and I
think this would provide that
opportunity to get folks
involved in what is the natural
history of this species, where
are they on the landscape? How
many of them are there versus a
kind of a one time go out, do a
project and feel good about it.
I I think there's opportunity,
as Toby said, to, to engage
folks more thoroughly, um.
But yeah, certainly we have any
number of organizations doing a
variety of habitat types
projects.
Um, and Mr. Chair and Senator
Steinborn from the state parks
perspective, we have a lot of
citizen science projects, but
there's not a continuity to
them. For example, I have, uh,
office, uh, Scott Chalmers in
the in the gallery here, he's
he's one of our lead uh citizen
science park rangers, uh,
amongst everything else that he
does. And for example, at
Sugarek Canyon State Park in
Colfax County up in Raton. We
have an annual bird count, uh,
Christmas bird count, uh, and so
we have those kind of things
that are happening across state
parks, but it's
It's not a coordinated effort
with other agencies, um, it, it,
it, and it does contribute to
certain data sets, but this
would bring all of the different
efforts that are happening
together. Uh, it would direct it
into the correct data, uh, set,
uh for database management, and
then it will make it more
available to all agencies moving
forward. And so I think we're
all doing a lot of work uh with
citizen, not necessarily citizen
science, but with biodiversity
and, and, um, engaging
volunteer.
in that way, but uh it's, it's,
it's individualized by agency
where this would make it more of
a coalition.
I, I'd like to jump in, um.
At the environment department, I
don't believe we have any
volunteer opportunities at the
moment, um, and, um, my
position, the community
engagement coordinator position
was created almost 3 years ago.
It was a new position and um
personally I would, I would like
to see more opportunities uh for
regulatory agency like the
Environment Department to engage
and um interact with people who
are passionate about.
not just the environment, but
also about protecting the
environment. So, um, I, I
believe this is a wonderful
opportunity for the Environment
department to expand in in that
in in that idea. I don't. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. And then 11 last
question, which is a question I
asked you when, when we first
talked about this, you know, as
somebody involved in in
conservation, the word science.
is a word that that gets
weaponized and gets manipulated
and used by both sides to make
the case for their
No, I won't say pre preordained
for uh bad purposes, but some, I
think absolutely do, and then
they'll slap the word science on
there. So,
How do you ensure that the
science collected through this
is done correctly, that is a
basis of good scientific
management decisions and I'll
use your example, Tovia, the
willow flycatcher.
Hard to determine habitat, took
an expert to be out there to
know something was there or not
there. So, um, I'm just curious
your thoughts on that. How would
you ensure the integrity of good
data collection.
Thank you
1st 1st over, um, Mr. Chair and
Senator Steinborn, um, so the
preparation for that's gonna be
key, uh, to identify the
biologic the biological goal,
and then the execution of the
project, uh, over the course of
a period of time, and so, you
know, the fact that we have
agencies back and connected in
these conversations.
Uh, are key. Uh, usually the
game department uh shares
conversations with us outside of
these, uh, where now state
parks, the state land office,
Department of Cultural Affairs,
everyone else can be brought
into a larger group, so that
that project, depending on where
it's at or what the focus is can
be legitimized through the uh
scope of work and then the
execution of the project. So
it's really going to be reliant
on the agencies to identify the
best biological plan, uh, for
survey or whatever
that project may be, uh, for
citizen science to accomplish.
Senator, I agree that I think
that the role of the coordinator
in this will be critical both in
recruiting.
Um.
Volunteers, getting them
trained, but in coordinating
with that specific biologist
within an agency to ensure that
what they're doing, how they're
doing it, quality of the data
meets the need of the biologic
biologist and the the study
design and so that coordinator
is gonna end up being a liaison
between the volunteers and the
biologists to make sure that
we're not just out there
collecting information, which,
as you say, could be used one
way or another, but we're
collecting valid.
Worthwhile information that can
be put into a, a rigorous study.
Thank you. Mr. Let me ask one
last question, which is, do you
think there is enough work out
there.
To warrant having a coordinator
for each agency.
Would it suffice to have one
coordinator that could kind of
partner with all the agencies as
people were available.
Mr. Chair, Senator,
Yeah, we all do slightly
different things. We all have
slightly different
constituencies, and I think that
having a person in each agency
that can then talk individually
to the other agencies, it's
gonna be a, a better model than
trying to have one person run
between agencies who supervises
that person? Are they doing
their job, all that kind of
stuff, bureaucratic stuff that
gets in the way of actually
accomplishing something.
And Mr. Chair and Senator
Steinborn, I'll, I'll double
down on that, um, you know, for
state parks, again,
3041 decentralized locations,
uh, dealing with multiple
entities, trying to have one
person that could deal with all
of the agency partnerships
would, would, would probably be
a death sentence to the program,
so I would say that it's, it's
vital that each agency have a
coordinator that's dedicated to
that, that understand the
culture and function and mission
of the agency that they
represent, so that they can then
better coordinate with everyone
else. OK, thank you. Thank you,
Ms.
Mm
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Compass.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chair, and of course, I want to
thank Representative Ortiz,
Senator Steinborn, and others
for their leadership and uh this
particularly visionary project.
A few things, a few statements,
and then from there I have a
couple of questions, but to
begin, as an example, we have
established the hotshot crews of
the one located in Socorro,
another one there in Las Vegas.
That's gonna be justification in
part for what we're talking
about.
A forestry center to be
established there in uh Mora
County, that's gonna be another
part of all this. 01 of the
really exciting things and I'd
like to uh compliment uh our,
our director's loan for thinking
and creating, if you will, the
concept of the native uh aquatic
species restoration facility and
Science Center, uh, that in
itself is already tight and if
you will, the studies as to what
we're doing, uh, director, uh,
Alaska says we go forward with
what you've been doing with our.
state parks and how we're
integrating, if you will, the uh
the our water systems, our land,
our species and all that
conservation. So the point that
I'm getting to is they're
definitely is a strong need for
something like this as we move
forward and uh Mr. Chair,
anything that I can do to help
to uh advance this. I definitely
will.
So how does this all tie in and
I'm gonna ask the uh uh
distinguished panelists to help
from the Department of
Environment, of course, or state
parks, uh, game and fish, and so
many others. How do we tie in
and we already know the sciences
and if you will, bringing in
biologists, but
Those people that are involved
in physics, it's a very
important part of everything
that we deal with. How do we go
ahead and tie in someone who has
dedicated their life to the
study of matter and motion and
the behavior through space and
time, and you might say that's
way beyond our reach. The point
I'm getting to is what you all
are talking about is something
very collective, and so, uh, Mr.
Chair, I kind of posed the
question, how do we tie in and
integrate uh the other sciences.
to the move that you all are
talking about.
Mr. Chair, uh, and Senator
Campos, um, I believe, uh, you
know, my, my counterparts here
are speaking very heavily about
biology, um, which is
Probably the most interesting to
uh the everyday person, um.
But at the Environment
department, we also um we also
regulate and think in terms of
uh chemistry.
Uh, water chemistry, uh, air
quality,
Even soil, uh, soil chemistry.
So, um, I'd just like to point
out that, that, um,
We, we also would
Have um that topic as well.
Thank you. Uh, anyone else who
wishes to comment? Mr. Senator,
I think there are certainly
opportunities for computer
scientists, for example, and um
artificial intelligence to for
all of the pictures that we take
to identify species, you know,
you can run through thousands of
pictures and, and pull out
information out of those, um, if
you get the artificial
intelligence right. Um, so
certainly those kind of
scientists, I think that there
are room for soil scientists and
an array of folks that are
interested in habitat.
kind of projects to help us plan
um
How those, what those should
look like and how they should be
implemented.
Again, while we do talk about
biology a lot, I think that it
encompasses a lot more than just
biology. And Mr. Chairman, the
point that I'm alluding to as we
deal with all of this, it's all
encompassing. All areas, all
aspects of what we deal with
here in New Mexico definitely
relate, if you will, to the
science and development of the
clean environment, the
environment that we have chosen
here in New Mexico. And one
final example with the
McAllister Lake uh close to Las
Vegas, and that's a natural
refuge.
if you will, in a national
refuge.
Uh, we're just now starting to
have water, I go back into the
uh McAllister Lake issue which
is very important for so many of
our species that use New Mexico
and their their way if you will,
up north or down south, totally
depending, uh, but with that,
uh, uh, Mr. Director of
Velasquez, you can maybe elude a
little bit to uh the kind of
things that are already in the
works as we deal with the
sciences, particularly with our
youth conservation corps.
We all know that uh that's
another huge investment that we
made in the state of New Mexico.
We continue to put resources
there. And uh that ties directly
into the work that you continue
to do, but maybe you can help us
to better understand how all
this really correlates uh for
the future of a project like
this was to be fully funded.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
thank you, Mr. Was that a
question or a question in a, in
a statement. I'll let you go
ahead and extricate whatever you
wish. Um, Mr. Chair, I have a
brief, a brief
Uh, response and Senator Campos,
um, soil science, fire science,
as we're learning uh with these
fire scars, all of those, uh,
uh, disciplines are integrated
into what we do with a citizen
science program and everything
that we learn from the uh seed
bed being stimulated in the
gainas due to the fire and
seeing wild flowers that we
haven't seen in my lifetime, um,
is part of what citizen science
will be drawn to.
Uh, we have to be charismatic
about this program. We have to
sell it. It's our responsibility
as agencies to engage people and
help them understand why this is
important. And what we have in
Las Vegas, we have a historical
high at Story Lake State Park
right now. Over 20,000 acre feet
of water. It's the first time
that lake has gone into a winter
season at that level in over 100
years.
What does that mean to the
migration? What does that mean
at this period in time, that's
what citizen science is going to
help us do better for, so that
when we have these situations of
fire or flooding or uh great
weather, whatever it may be,
that we have the work plan to be
able to identify and really take
benefit of the citizen science
program in identifying how that
is threatening or improving
habitats across the state for
species of greatest concern
andangs.
species, game species, uh, and,
and so on and so forth. Lastly
with state parks. We have to
continue to find ways to address
the loss in traditional
recreation.
If we have a drought year and
the water drops down and the
rivers go low, boating's not uh
a draw anymore. People pull
back. If we have fire
restrictions, you can't have a
campfire, and I, I'll tell you
what, folks, in my experience,
if you can't build a campfire,
most people don't go. That's
part of the experience, and we
lose visitation, we lose that
connection with the outdoors.
Citizen science gives us another
opportunity to have an option
for people to engage their
natural spaces, even though
other traditional uses may be
challenge from one day to the
next.
And that's important because not
only are they getting the
interaction with the resource,
but they'll help, they're
helping continue the data and
identification of information
that will further support the
resource moving forward.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman. I just want to thank
all of our friends of the
environment. Thanks again.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the program, um.
So I know that wild Friends is a
part of this. Um, what other
like
Clubs or organizations, are you?
You know, as a former Girl Scout
who went out to nature regularly
and participated in in uh
science projects and
And having worked out in the
field in the Sevietta reserve,
um, during my college years. How
are relying on, on those, um.
Data sets and information and
organizations to do this work,
Mr. Chair.
So, Mr. Chair and Representative
Lujan, I'll give you one example
for state parks, and it's, it's,
this will be the launching pad,
right, for building those
partnerships. Uh, we are now in
the 4th annual Girl Scouts Love
State Parks, uh, event that
we've had. It grows every year,
year after year, started with,
uh, less than 100 or over 300
scouts participating every
September. That's another um
demographic of citizen science.
That we could potentially
partner with moving forward so
that the Girl Scouts program
across the state and across the
country can now be engaged in a
citizen science program in New
Mexico or other states. Uh,
citizen science is something
that National Geographic and
many other states through their
uh departments of natural
resources or other setups in
government already have.
This is something that
unfortunately in New Mexico,
we're gonna catch up to again,
uh, as far as having it as a
multi-agency commitment for
coordination and continuity. So
that's really the goal is if we
can get this foundation built is
expanding to um those type of
service organizations and
stewardship organizations that
we have already serving us or
partnering with us in one
capacity or another, at least
from the state parks division.
We can definitely also expand um
relationships with those
organizations, for example, the
Environment Department. We
haven't worked with the Girl
Scouts, but maybe through this,
um, through this coalition,
through this citizen science
effort, we can expand their
opportunities to help a
different department that they
haven't worked with yet.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Woods, briefly.
Quickly, Mr. Chair.
So,
we're gonna hire coordinators.
Are these coordinators going to
be on the ground.
With the data collectors so that
we'll know that the proper
process is being used.
Explain that piece to me if you
would, whoever wants to.
Mr. Chair, Senator, my, I would
envision that the program
coordinator would do a lot of
recruiting of folks and a lot of
training, and then the specific
biologist and potentially the
coordinator would also go out on
the ground to ensure the quality
of the data.
Um
Certainly initially and probably
for the first couple of years
until we had a a stable of
volunteers that we knew were
trained and we're providing
reliable information. I think it
would be the coordinator and
whatever specific, you know,
expertise within an agency was
necessary to make sure,
especially as we build that
program, the last thing we need
is a bunch. So what's that in
thought, so you're gonna build
your budget for a certain amount
of, of travel.
Um
For the coordinator or the
biologist or whoever you send
out.
That would be, that will show up
in your budget under this line
item.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I would
imagine that, that, that, that
would ultimately be how the
budget would line out, yes.
OK.
So
That brings me to question
number 2.
What age group are you shooting
for? And will these all be
volunteers.
I will, Mr. Chair, I, uh,
Senator Woods, I believe are um
targeted age group is everyone.
Um, it, it depends on the
project and the skill level
involved in the training and the
project, so I at least that's my
understanding, um, for the
projects that the environment
department has in mind.
Um, Mr. Chair and and Senator
Woods, uh, that's right. So this
is for everyone. This is for all
citizens to participate in, uh,
of different, uh, experience and
education and uh age, uh, we, we
saw even in the pilot project we
had adults, it's adult
education, adult citizens, uh,
uh, stewardship, as well as
youth, uh, and I think that's
the, the, the draw is that
adults and youth can come and do
this together. It doesn't have
to be just a student classroom,
uh, it can be anyone, it can be
a family on a weekend signing up
to come in and do a a bird
survey at Rio Grande Nature
Center State Park on the Boski
there in Albuquerque. Uh, it, it
can be a group of families that
come in and participate in that
way. So, um, I think the the
real uh hope for this is that,
again, it democratizes science
in that everybody and anyone who
has that interest.
And participate.
Well, the key word then is
volunteers.
Uh, Mr. Terry and Senator Woods,
correct. That's a yes.
OK.
The next question I have.
Will that be put into your
budget this year. Every one of
you have a certain amount of
your budget that are enterprise.
Budgets
Is it going to be put into your
budget this year.
Mr. Chair, Senator, because the
meetings were ongoing and the,
the, the program hadn't been
sort of conceptualized at the
time our budgets were due, they
are not built into our current
budget requests. I believe
there's an intent to have that
included in a separate bill that
would build the program out with
the FTEs and everything, which
I think ultimately gets rolled
into a budget or the budget
bill, but, but at this point
it's not and I don't believe
it's in any of our agency bills.
OK, so, excuse me.
So it's not in, it's not in the,
it won't be in the governor's
request right off the start. It
will be
Uh
It will come through you through
a, a bill being passed.
To include this.
Mr. Chair, Senator, I believe
that's the current in. OK.
The state Land Office, they're
not here today.
And the question I would have
for them, whether this would
come out of their administration
cost.
Uh, is how they would plan to be
planning to do this. And
Unless they want to come forward
and talk. Nobody here.
OK.
So
The other part of this that I
hadn't quite figured out either
is in the state land, I, I
happen to a whole, a lease on
two parcels of state land.
And in that contract, it says
that uh we are to limit trespass
on that land.
So
Uh, you know, they are now even
charging counties if there's
public roads on that land for a
ride away.
So
None of you here represents
state land, but I, I, I
question.
Are they going to, what are they
going to do to uh lease er.
To, to determine.
You know,
You guys got a legitimate reason
for being on the land and, and
it's not like they're
restricting access to the land,
they just don't want people to
drive all over it. They just
don't want to make a whole bunch
of uh roads and fire danger and
everything like that, so that
may be a piece that needs to be
put in your bill, however you're
gonna put in your bill is, uh,
uh, it, it may not matter so
much at the state parks. It may
not matter so much to
To the land that, that you own
that L bar, but
E and Ear.
But you, we do need, it would be
nice to see some of that.
We're all conservationless up
here, and we all want to protect
the land, so we want to make
sure that
Certain
Broad guidelines are set to
have.
These people enter that land and
use it.
So, uh, I would appreciate
seeing that.
Um, see, Mr. Chairman, it, it
wasn't that painful. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, uh, Senator Woods,
uh, Zamora briefly we're a bit
over time now.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will be
brief. So I saw a skid on TV
just a couple of days ago where
we were reintroducing tortoises
in the state of New Mexico on
the, on the, I believe it's Ted
Turner Ranch.
And
Does the state work on private
land also? Is this gonna pertain
to private land also and private
landowners.
And
Is the state involved with the
tortoise, uh, introduction back
into the state of New Mexico and
the numbers I heard on that were
great. There's like, I believe
700 already and they started
with like 30 and was great
numbers to hear.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, um, we
certainly do work on private
lands, um, when the private
landowner is willing and
interested.
So yes, is the short answer to
that. Um, we have been involved
in the Bolsan tortoise
reintroduction program, though
it's largely been driven by um
Turner and the Fish and
Wildlife. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair,
just a little bit of follow-up
for Representative Zamora. Also,
a Living desert Zoo and Garden
State Park.
Is part of the Bolson Tortoise,
um, species of, uh, species.
survival program. Uh, so some of
those bolts and tortoises came
from a state park for uh uh wild
and free reign out at the, the
Turner Ranch. So, uh, all of us
are involved in, uh, again, it's
just, and thank you
representative. It's another
example of how we're involved in
a lot of different things in
different ways together as
agencies, and we're contributing
to conservation, uh, this will
hopefully help, uh, bring us all
into tune with, with what those
that work is.
Thank you for that, Mr. Cha and
presenters, great presentation.
Thank you very much for your
presentation. Um,
Thank you. Appreciate it.
So, uh, as our next panel comes
up, we're gonna do a few
introductions for people who um
Come in, um, represent Ferrari
is not in the room. Senator
Steinborn.
Not in the room. Senator Lopez.
Introductions.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Linda
Lopez, state senator, District
11, which is the southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo County.
Senor Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm
Antoinette Sadi Lopez and I
represent District 16, which is
the CNM UNM Southeast and
Northeast area of the city.
Thank you.
Representative Lujan.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, um,
committee, Representative Tara
Luhang, I represent House
District 48 here in the capital
city.
Represent Montoya.
Uh, good morning, Representative
Montoya from San Juan County.
I'm glad to be here today.
I think that's everyone. Uh,
next up we have the Mexico
Climate Investment Center with
Uh, that Pilla and Christian
Cassius.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
committee members. I'm Beth
Belo, CEO of the CIC Climate
Investment Center, and with me
is my colleague Christian
Casillas.
Chair, committee members, good
morning. My name is Christian
Casillas. I'm the executive
director of the Coalition of
Sustainable Communities, New
Mexico.
Right.
Right.
So we will be giving you an
update, and there is um an ask
that we will include in our
presentation. Um, so to remind
you, we're a um not a typical
financial institution were a, an
investment fund.
Also known as Green Bank.
Um, that fills financing gaps to
accelerate clean energy adoption
in equity-focused emissions
reducing projects. We're not a
bank, we don't take deposits
were not regulated as a bank,
um, and we're unique in New
Mexico, um, in that as a
financial institution, we have
an exclusive focus and expertise
in clean energy.
funding equity, and with
flexible capital.
Um, and we high leverage, green
banks typically um have high
leverage using a small amount of
public funds to attract private
capital.
Next slide, please.
Oops.
Next slide, please.
Oops are niscient, yeah, next,
next one.
Thank you. Um, so our mission as
approved by our board is to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and related pollutants and
reduce the energy burdens in
low-income disadvantaged and
tribal communities and our
vision again approved by our
board is to serve as a catalyst
in the just transition to a
decarbon.
economy in New Mexico. Next
slide, please.
So
We, we know the problem.
That is the high poverty rate in
New Mexico, and the high
proportion of low income
households paying
disproportionately high amounts
of their income on their energy
costs. Um, that is their energy
burden, and so we are looking to
reduce those impacts
prioritizing those most
vulnerable communities, um, by
low-cost loans, leases, and
other financial incentives for
clean energy services. Um, and
we offer immediate savings.
Um
On their energy costs.
Um, we're building a network of
low income serving
community-based organizations to
provide meaningful education on
the benefits of these energy
programs.
Um, and we're also financing
clean technology adoption.
Next slide, please.
Um, and again, we all know the
need to increase the pace of the
transition to clean energy and
related reduction in greenhouse
gasses.
And so we will be financing uh
climate-relatednologies as well.
Next slide, please.
So a bit of our history.
We have hit the ground running,
especially knowing both the
opportunity of the IRA and the
upcoming challenges.
Um, in June of 23.
We filed our articles of
incorporation.
Um, we applied for 501c3 status
in September of 23, and we
received our designation in May
of 24.
Um, we convened our board of
directors, 9 board members, um,
in June of 24.
And um in July of 24, um, the
board asked me to be CEO and I
capitulated.
Um
The as soon as we received our
acknowledgement from the IRS
about our 501c3 application, we
sought grant funding.
And we were fortunate enough to
receive $800,000 in grants.
Um, both 2023 and 2024.
And these are the 4 foundations
that have kindly supported us.
Um
And that has allowed us to begin
operations to build our team.
To build our board structures.
Um, to build with the coalition
of sustainable communities and
education outreach network.
Um, to build
Further operations and seek more
funding.
Um
In the last session, as you
know, there was a legislative
appropriation, 10 million that
went to Amner, and it has not
yet been allocated.
Um, and it's been, it's been
slow because of the challenges
the agency has experienced with
anti-tonation and procurement
codes, um,
So they've had difficulty
spending that money, but I've
been assured it will be spent
before it goes away.
Um, and with respect to the
greenhouse gas reduction fund of
EPA.
Negotiations are ongoing for
those funds were part of a
consortium of green banks.
That are um in a very direct and
immediate negotiations,
especially to ensure that
emerging green banks like ours
get funded.
Next slide, please.
Um, so the funding flows look
like this, um, in the middle is
the climate investment center
with a revolving loan program.
And on the right for operations
and administration, um, again,
the $800,000 is in that budget
and it will carry us through
most of 2025.
Um, the $10 million
appropriation, we are.
Hoping to achieve access to
that, but that is not assured.
Um, on the left side, investment
funding.
We are looking at something in
the order of 40 to 80 million
from the uh federal program of
the IRA and I think we're all
aware of the fact.
That um
Those funds.
Could be clawed back.
Um, and so there is uncertainty
around federal funding. We do
know that EPA is pushing those
funds out as quickly as they
can, and we know that 80% of the
IRA funds are allocated to red
states.
Um, so we, we have hope.
That may be major pieces of the
greenhouse gas reduction fund
will remain in place.
And we're certainly working on
that with with others.
Um
The importance of state funding
is all the all the clearer.
Now that we know that there is
risk around federal funding, and
I think we all, we all know
this. So we may very well ask
for another appropriation in
this upcoming session for 10
million, and that would be for
investments. So if we do achieve
that first appropriation, that
would go toward operations and
administration primarily.
With some of the funds going to
investments, but we would want a
pool of investment funding,
particularly to attract private
investments.
Next slide, please. So these are
typical green Bank projects. Um,
low cost residential small
business, solar lending or
leasing community solar
renewable energy project
lending, um, microgrids for
community resiliency centers,
um, commercial building,
multi-family projects that have
energy performance.
criteria and transportation
decarbonization.
The next slide, please.
However, we're staying pretty
focused on a few investment
areas. Um, one is around
residential solar leases, um,
paired with energy efficiency
and electrification, and I have
loans in Peren, um, and you'll
hear more about that, but we
would look to co-invest in
residential loans with other
financial entities to help bring
down
the cost of interest.
Community solar.
For community or nonprofit owned
facilities. The larger
facilities that are found.
And for the most part will be
built in the investor-owned
utility districts, um, are well
financed. It's the smaller
community owned or rural
electric co op driven community
solar that will focus on
Institutional. We're speaking
with a major university about
financing geothermal for their
campus and solar for some of
their campus buildings.
Um, solar and efficiency loans
for small businesses and for
nonprofits, and we're in
discussion with some of those
entities multi-family affordable
housing, financing for
energy-related upgrades, um, in
new construction and existing
and unbill financing or rural
electric co op members that is
in discussion right now. Next
slide, please.
Um, so what is our investment
strategy.
Um, we are
Seeking a multiplier effect.
By making a few loans to a few
partners that can reach many
low-income households.
As opposed to starting with
consumer of residential consumer
loans directly, which is a high
risk for a new entity. We're
working with experienced
business partners.
Um, and adapting successful
business models to our context
here.
Um, we're recycling capital to
extend our lending capacity and
attract other investors, um, and
Next slide, please.
Um, and we're
Um, building partnerships. We
have a partnership model to not
only leverage the expertise of
partners and expand the green
financing ecosystem. So these
are some of the partners that
were working with.
Um, and last slide for me, the
next one, please. Um, is that
we're levering leveraging those
partners to roll out financing
in these three areas, um, low
income solar leases, providing
35% annual savings, multi-family
affordable housing and community
solar, and I'm now going to turn
it over to Christian to uh
finish the presentation.
Thank you, Beth.
Chair, committee members, um,
before I, I move on just to
reemphasize.
Uh, in this slide here, the
partnerships.
Oh,
yeah, right there, um, that, uh,
the climate investment Center as
a nascent entity is working on
um the uh learning experience
and expertise of close partners
to your rollout, uh, the
projects in 3 primary areas, uh,
rooftop solar leases,
multi-family affordable, uh
housing and community solar.
Next slide.
So just to interject, uh, I want
to keep you on time. We're gonna
have some questions, so please
make sure to leave time for
questions.
How, uh
Chair, committee members, how
much more time should we
allocate to the presentation. So
you're scheduled to 10:45, it's
10:25. We got about 20 minutes
left, if you could wrap up in
the next 5 minutes. OK, great.
Um,
So
Uh
In New Mexico, there's about
330,000, households that fall
below 80% AMI, about 55% of
those households are actually
homeowners. Um, and uh have the
opportunity to uh benefit from
the financial savings of rooftop
solar. However, there are
multiple barriers that prevent,
uh, uh, households from
accessing uh rooftop solar.
Which we know nationwide tends
to be mostly middle and upper
income households that have to
date been installing solar and
the barriers include high
upfront cost of purchasing
systems, lack of access to
financing, especially with the
interest rates these days, um,
risk aversion to taking on debt
for households that are
struggling to make ends meet and
uh inability to take advantage
of the federal tax credits.
There's a 30%
tax credit for homeowners. Um,
there's this uh recent study,
uh, showed that roughly 40% of
households nationwide would be
able to um access any of that,
uh, would have the tax liability
to to access that, um, and 30%
would only be able to access a
portion of the tax credit. Next
slide, please.
Uh, and so, uh, a, a primary
component of the projects that
we're working on pulling
together is a low income so
solar lease program, um, this
would allow a nonprofit capital
good fund to claim the 50% to
70% of the tax credits
available, um, and past that,
uh, vastly reduced, uh, cost of
rooftop solar systems on the low
income households, providing up
to 3
5% annual savings, which would
be something like $20,000 in
savings over the lifetime of the
system for a leased system
through a nonprofit partner such
as Capital Good Fun, next slide.
Um,
Multi-family housing, there's
something like 36,000
apartments with 10 or more
units, uh, um, occupied by low
income households, um, with the,
uh, it's, there's a number of
reasons why it's often difficult
for um multi-family housing to
access financing for energy
efficiency and solar, um, uh,
two of the, the components that
We've seen with our partner, the
Colorado Clean Energy Fund, now
the collaborative Clean Energy
Fund in Colorado is with
pre-development financing, um,
to do the studies to understand
what the the cost savings are
and pull together the financing
and then the permanent gap
financing uh actually for the
construction and installation of
the um of the equipment, next
slide, please.
And then finally, in the area of
community solar, um, we're also
working with partners on this to
better understand the, the uh
finance landscape here, um, but
as we know, there's huge
opportunities for uh renters
and, uh, households in rural
areas, um, to benefit from uh
community solar. Uh, we know
that all rural electric co-ops
have the option to opt in to our
community solar. Um, we've been
working in
conversations with a number of
both, uh, GNT and number of
community solar, um,
Uh, cooperatives that are, have
been interested in pulling
together projects, some of the
challenges include, um, uh, need
for bridge financing, um, while
the ITC credits um are made
accessible, and then as well,
uh, longer term financing to to
buy down the capital, um, as
well as uh as an example, uh,
prosperity works, a partner of
ours, um, when a bid for a
Project and damming New Mexico
will be built by a national
developer, um, but then they
will be looking for financing to
buy that project, uh, at the
appropriate time.
Next slide, uh, yeah. Thank you
very much, Mr. Chair, committee
members.
Thank you for the presentation.
Go to the committee center word.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you, Beth and Christian
for your work on this effort.
Uh, I'd like to follow up a
little bit on the anti-donation.
Issue the $10 million just
what's going on? Uh, again, it
seems, and I just, I bring this
up because it seems like
This anti-donation issue is
being raised in multiple places
with different state agencies,
and I'll just say upfront, I
thought we passed a
constitutional amendment
specifically dealing with
Energy to residential.
Homes, and so I'm curious what,
what is the issue? Yeah, I, I
think Ben Shelton from Emner is
in the audience. Let me check.
Yeah, it's right. Thank you.
There he is. And I think he's in
a better position to answer
that. I'm frustrated too.
Mr. chair, I don't know if
you're comfortable with that or
not. I'll leave it up to you,
Mr. Shelton, would you care to
join us?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. You're
gonna need to get closer to the
mic.
I need both.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Senator Wirth. The issue has
been that the money and the
money that was allocated to us
in the House Bill 2 was for a
variety of clean energy, um,
issues including efficiency, uh,
geothermal retrofits, all sorts
of different things, so, uh, the
view when it came into Edner was
that it was to support uh
program for a whole variety of
things that we just
Never had authority to do
independently. So, um,
The the view at the time was
also that.
Uh
Language clarifying clarifying
budget appropriations did not in
and of itself constitute
legislative authority to go
ahead and do things so you can.
Give us money to
Go do X, Y, and Z, but if I
don't.
We didn't have a statutory
authority. That's, you know, in
another, in another place that
we wouldn't really do it, that
has been a topic of ongoing
conversation in the months since
the 2024 legislative session.
Um, so the, the challenges for
us have been.
Yeah, essentially finding a way
to get that money.
Of the door for the, for the
purposes of the legislature gave
us in the language in House Bill
2.
So, Mr. Chair, what I'm hearing
that is it's anti-donation is
kind of one issue, but you're
saying there's not statutory
authority.
Based on language, I'm sit next
to Senator Woods here. I mean,
the amount of language in the
budget that drives.
policy is extensive, so I'm, I'm
confused by that. I mean, if we
had to come in and pass.
You know, specific statutory
language that would be a whole
bunch of places that we
Run into
Roadblocks, if that was the
threshold. So I'm just curious,
and I appreciate what you're, I
mean, I get it. You're trying to
figure out how to do this the
right way.
But I guess I'm a little bit
frustrated.
Um, as well, that the money's
not getting out.
Mhm
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
think the issue, um,
Senator, was that the scope of
the funds and the scope of the
work.
Looked like it opened a very
large door with a very small
lever, so to speak, $10 million
to your solar loan program. We
don't have it, we do not employ.
Anybody in any part of the lend
money lending life cycle.
Generally speaking, state
agencies go through entities
like New Mexico Finance
Authority to lend dollars and
we're investigating that
candidly this week to get those
funds out the door. Um,
You know, expediently great, I
just think let's try and get
this figured out so that if in
fact we do need some additional
statutory language.
We can do that. I just worry
that the longer this gets
delayed, the harder it is to
roll it out. Just one final
question, I'm curious, um, so
the inflation reduction Act. I
thought it had a whole bunch of
targets that were July of 24,
uh, so this greenhouse gas
funders are still not federal
money is also not out. Is that
what I'm hearing?
That's correct
Yeah, that's, that's correct.
Some of it has been released.
Um, but, um,
Not all of it. Um, and I think
is solar for all money.
In the hands of Amner at this
time.
So for all grant award has been
made, that's those monies will
always be coming to us on a
reimbursement basis so that we
basically get those as we spend
them down. We have the grant
award, we're still working to
Um, work with an increasingly
urgent recently, um, EPA to get
those funds.
Clarified in terms of what they,
what their expectations are,
were in the process of
finalizing, uh, Mr. Chairman and
I suppose be off, um, I think
we're in the process of
finalizing our one of our final
RFPs that we issued administer
those funds, particularly on the
financial side, procuring, um,
financial vendors to.
Deal with the loans, uh, element
of, of that.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Beth, and uh,
I just want to just really
commend you on the integrity of
your work and what you're trying
to accomplish here. I did bring
up the, the issue, the, the
question of the funding last
year, this very time, uh, in
committee and had my concerns,
um, I think we do need to rework
this, but in light of that, how
we can do that, I really wanna
be a part of how we um engage
much to which Senator Wirth is
addressing how are we, how do we
work with the state?
urgency to create the enabling
language so that perhaps we go
into the RFP process and such,
or, or, you know, um, but right
now we don't, uh, I didn't see
them and I don't see now the the
statutory language that would
enable that money to be spent as
allocated.
Um
But it's well worth the efforts
for us to really um.
dive into what that enabling
language or ability we need to
give for this to happen. One
thought that comes to mind for
the conversation, Mr. Chair and
Senator Wirth also in committee
is uh there's been a request uh
for $50 million for community
solar projects through NMFA.
Now that's gonna be a bill that
we're gonna have before us as
well and through NMFA we know
that we have a process that we
can work with nonprofits. I
don't know if this is a
This is a way, uh, but for us to
come together and have this
conversation to go through those
those proper channels and how we
really help you leverage these
types of dollars that we have
and and work with our agencies
as well. I think there is a
great opportunity. I think New
Mexico is just
We, we can't afford to go
backwards.
In other words, even as we're
looking towards a new federal
administration, we have a lot of
money, we have a lot of
initiatives, and we deserve to
perpetuate these opportunities
that we have in front of us. And
when we have talents and we have
integrity like, like uh with
you, Beth and um.
Uh, I think we need to really
look how uh how we can um.
Adjust adjust through um our
statutes in, in order for us to
get the the usage of these of
these fundings and maybe
partnerships and whatnot.
Another thing that comes to
mind, Mr. Chair, is just
Uh, through LFC hearings and
other hearings we've had, um,
and things I brought up.
is that we have so many um
And I don't like to say siloed,
but it, it kind of, it, it
really relates to being siloed
in the types of programs, the
types of uh fundings we have all
over our, our state, state
agencies and those sorts of
things. We have created an
infrastructure office now at
TFA. These were infrastructure
projects. These are
infrastructure initiatives, how
are we, and I asked DFA when
they were in front of us, and I
know Ben, you're still here. How
are we working across our state
agencies to
um
Uh, coordinate our
infrastructure type of uh
funding and requests and
programs and initiatives. I
don't know if anyone here can
speak to that, but that's
something we really need to
start looking at and creating
that collaborative, and I think
that's what this nonprofit is
trying to do. Um, as I see
through your work and I've
gotten to know you during this
interim and uh through the uh
policy, the energy policies
symposium that I, I, um,
sponsored in September, the
efforts are there.
Integrity is there opportunity
is there, how are we going to
really, um,
Come together to really uh
provide those leveraging up to
leverage all these
opportunities, and that's a
challenge, right? Um, but it's
something I'm really willing to
work on with others, um, and see
how we can do that, but we, we,
because of our anti donation
clause in our statute, unless
this session, we change that
which I'm sure we're gonna have,
we're gonna see legislation. I
just, that was my concern, and I
just really think that, uh, we
don't have the time to miss.
this opportunity, Mr. Chair, so
it's more comments if you have
anything to add to what I've
said, I'm gonna end right there.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Luhan, um, just
so that you know, we, we have
been in discussion with NMFA.
Um, in the event that Amner
worked to transfer those funds
through an MOA with NMFA they
will explore the development of
a, it's a a kind of investment,
um, to give to us, it would be
very low interest long term
loan.
Um, that requires capital match,
so it's, it's not a cakewalk,
but um we, we have been looking
at other vehicles for achieving
financing. Perfect. Thank you
for sharing that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
representing some more.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, Mr. Chair, with your
permission, can I read my bio
that you kind of cut me short on
last time. Is that acceptable?
About what goes on on the ground
with solar and, and the issues
that some of the customers have
had.
I have that bio from a
particular individual and, and,
and, and the reason, the reason
I'm getting to that Mr. Mr.
Chairs.
We always hear presentations
about solar and how we need to
get the money out and how we
need to promote solar and
everything else, but we never
hear anything about consumer
protection.
And, and all these companies
that are pushing solar out, I'm
wondering, do you all do
anything for consumer protection
in the state of New Mexico.
Sure.
Mr. Chair, uh, representative
Zamora, uh, thank, thank you for
that, that question. Um,
consumer protection is extremely
important, um, the coalition of
sustainable Communities New
Mexico worked very closely on
the development of the uh
community solar act, um, with,
uh, senator Stefaniks and uh
consumer protection was a very
critical piece of, of that
program, which is still in the
process of.
Of rolling out one of the pieces
that we find very attractive
around the leasing program, um,
if, if you, uh, looked in the
newspaper over the last few
years, you'd see a lot of
articles, um, from, um,
oftentimes senior or lower
income uh households that have,
uh, signed solar leases with um
oftentimes out of state
companies, um, and then have
been, uh, have not
Fully understood some of the,
the small print or the equipment
that was installed was a much
lower quality and, and various
other issues that have, have
come up to uh to the disbenefit
of these vulnerable communities,
and that's a big piece of um why
we're partnering with uh um a
nonprofit organization, um, that
will be able to utilize uh a lot
of these, um, these funds.
earmarked directly for the
benefit of low income households
and certainly consumer
protection will be a huge part
of this initiative as well as
education and outreach and
what's very different about this
program is it wouldn't be
Uh, a state and that nationwide
um for-profit organization, but
uh, a statewide program run
through the climate Investment
Center in partnership with
another um mission focused
nonprofit.
Thank you for that answer, Mr.
Chair, and, uh,
Presenter, so.
What about out of state
companies that come into the
state of New Mexico.
To put up these solar systems.
Uh, is there any bonding or
anything that
That's taking care of those
companies, not just exiting the
state and then not answering to
the problems that might be left
behind.
Sure.
Mr. Chair, representative in
Samoa. I, I believe you're
talking about larger projects
like community solar.
Is, is that correct?
Um, yeah, I, uh,
Uh, so the, a lot of that is,
is, is built into oftentimes uh
local ordinances, um, at the
county and and city level, what
sort of bonding requirements
there, there might be for these
larger projects and I'm, I'm
not, uh, uh, aware of, of a lot
of the finer detail of um the 45
bids that that were won for the
um statewide community solar pro
uh
program, which are, are spread
throughout the state and located
in different um cities and, and
counties.
And Mister Chair, will, will you
allow me to read that bio? So,
um,
He's more, I, I don't really
want to get into consumer
protection issues because I
don't think that's what they do.
And, and, and Mr. Chair, I agree
with you.
And, and, but I'd like the
committee to hear the bio, so
that they understand what goes
on with boots on the ground and
what's really going on with
solar systems and some of the
issues that we have in the
state.
That, so that we can address
them as we, as we move solar
forward. So, uh, Representative
Zamora, I would
Point out that tomorrow we're
hearing about.
Yeah, it's not appropriate.
So more, again, it's just not
really, it's just kind of off
the topic of this presentation.
Uh, you know, I appreciate the
concern. I have heard.
Issues with, um, you know, some
of the solar providers.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, I, uh, appreciate your time
and thank you for the
presentation.
Thank you, Representative.
So, uh, we're about that time
and we still have 2 more, um,
Speakers. So, uh, if you could
uh, woods and representative
Steinborn, Representative Woods
first, if you could be brief.
Senator, Senator. Sorry, sorry.
OK, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, the, the $10 million
appropriation when you don't put
that to an agency that actually
lends money, then it's kind of
hard for uh an agency that
doesn't lend money to do that
and then if you don't put the
strings on that money through
that agency, but we're actually
trying to create here is an
independent state bank of some
kind that given all the money
over to a nonprofit to, to
create a bank.
Which is the nonprofit is not a
state agency. So, yeah, I can
see where there's
You know, problems with that in
the Constitution.
Um,
We have to, there's, there's
certain things that are
required.
To send state money and, and
then when we don't, we don't
follow the rules to spend that
state money. We, we, we have
tried to bypass something here.
It's the way I see this. We have
tried to bypass.
A state bank that we have tried
to pass a few times in the
legislature.
And so it's, it's hard to, you
know, how many banks are there
in the state of New Mexico?
You know, you made your case
that
Uh, they can't even take these
people are so poor they can't
even take, you, you came up with
a, a combination there of 70% of
the people in the state of New
Mexico that couldn't take a
federal tax credit.
Uh, because of their income is
so low.
So
You know,
I know I'm, I'm running against
the clock here, but
This is a very improper way of
trying to spend $10 million.
And I'll just leave it like
that.
You can't do it this way. I
don't see any anyway.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Senator Steinbor.
Yeah.
Thank you, Ms. Chip, and I'll be
real quick. Uh, that, thank you
for all your good work on this
through the years, and, uh,
you've really been a force of
nature, watch you kind of.
You know,
Develop these concepts and make
them happen. Um, I, I just, you
know, listening to the
challenges with the financing, I
was also wondering about the
NMFA as a potential option.
But you know, I, Senator Woods
have been the sponsor of the
public bank initiative, and I
will just put out there that the
good thing about the public bank
initiative, number one, we're
talking about public dollars. So
the concept is that you're using
public dollars for public
benefit.
It's not a profit-driven
initiative by itself, it's about
using public dollars to invest
in things that are in the public
good, which we recognize as a
policy goal, this is in the
public good. In addition to
being a fast growing sector.
But, um, I don't know and I'm
sorry I wasn't able to be here
for your presentation. I don't
know if this, does this generate
revenue as you issue loans and
actually create income for the
fund. Um, yes, Mr. Chair, um,
senator Steinborn, um, first of
all, this is not a bank. It's
not a public bank. It's an
investment fund, so I need to
clarify that. Um, it would have
a revolving loan fund.
So it recycles those dollars and
the hope is that with sufficient
funding, ideally from the state,
we can attract impact investors
who will then um invest in the
climate investment center, um,
so that we can provide for
lending opportunities. And we're
being approached by impact
investors.
But they want, they, they need
to see that there's a corpus
from the state.
And as you point out, um, it is
a it is a public benefit that we
are providing, even though we
are not a state agency.
Interesting. Thank you. Well,
I'm sure it's a great approach.
So I'm not suggesting any other
approach.
Um, yeah. The cool thing about
the public bank, while I got the
mic, uh, Mr. Chairman, we are on
the clock though. I know, yeah,
did, uh.
Anyway, it people should read
the bill, but it is chartered as
a bank and has a lot of
oversight, so, um, this is
another thing that
If for whatever reason this
didn't work out, public banks
like in North Dakota, do finance
public infrastructure, things
like this that can be it. So it
is another option for folks to
know about. It does generate
income for the state. So that's
all I have. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, and
thank you, uh, Ms. Blo and Mr.
Casillas. Thank you for your
presentation.
Thank you so much.
OK, next up we have uh director
Sloan.
Oh, so, um, couple more
introductions, Senator
Steinborn, you want to introduce
yourself?
Thank you Mr. Chair. Good
morning, everybody. I'm Senator
Jeff Steinborn from Donana
County, and my district goes
from the historic downtown,
historic town site of the city
of Las Cruces north through the
Hatch Valley to Sierra County.
Good to be back with you. Thank
you.
Represent furry.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
also from Donana County, House
District 37, which is the
northeast, um, part of Las
Cruces. Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
Director Sloan.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me here today to talk a little
bit about our um budget and
staffing.
As you know, we're an enterprise
agency funded exclusively by our
licensed dollars and um federal
grants, which are derived from
the uh sale of hunting and
fishing equipment and the excise
tax that the manufacturer level,
which is then apportioned out to
the states to pay for a wildlife
conservation.
Um,
our budget request this year is
flat.
We um
have been flat for the past 6 at
least years. Um, we've doing
this because we are.
Needing a fee increase and have
not been able to get one.
Um, we did increase our budget
slightly with the legacy um fund
money by $2.75 million so that
helps us extend our life a
little bit more and and do some
good work on species of greatest
conservation need. We also added
70,000 in um.
To our depredation fund to
assist with with those issues.
Um
What we're seeing is more and
more of our budget going towards
personnel expenses, um,
Just because of the nature of
the economy now and the need to
pay people um to get quality
candidates. We're still um
competing against other agencies
for um employees. We have a
current headcount of 274 with a
12% vacancy rate, so I guess
that's better than a lot of
state agencies, um, but still
higher than I would like to see
us.
Um, getting back to the, the
budget.
So our total budget will be
$53.9 million this this upcoming
fiscal year, at least that's our
request.
Um, again, that's, that's flat,
63% of that budget is made up of
actual, you know, fisheries,
wildlife and um field operations
programs on the ground, boots on
the ground work.
Um
So in in terms of looking at our
fee increase, you know, we've,
we've had bills moving through
the legislature at various
times, um, unsuccessfully, but
right now if we project out our
cash balances and where we
expect to be if we continue on
the path we're on, we expect to
have um significant fiscal
issues in FY 29.
Um, and by that I mean we'll go
below a point at which our cash
balance will make it difficult
to make payroll at some point
during the year.
Um
And, and because our budget is
is flat, I really don't have a
lot more to add to that, but I'd
be happy to answer questions.
Um, director Sloan, if could you
break?
You, you mentioned 53.9 million
total. Um, I believe you have a
different departments, different
programs. Could you break that
out a little? Certainly, Mr.
Chair. Um, the field operations
division, which is our law
enforcement division is
requesting 12.3 million.
Conservation services program,
which is our wildlife fisheries,
um, public information and
outreach is 30.9 million.
Uh depredation program is 1.3
million.
And program support, which
includes all of our facilities
maintenance and bill paying and
IT and administration and that
that whole element is uh 9.4
million.
OK, Senator Woods.
I was chairman, has your, uh,
board.
Approved the
Are they in agreement?
Of the fee increase.
Mr. Chair, um, senator, I think
everybody agrees that the
department needs a fee increase,
it's just what else is included
with that over time and, and
what that looks like, yeah, so
the short answer to your
question is yes, the longer
answer is it's, it's a little
more complicated, um, in terms
of
Just working in this building
with all of the interested
entities that have a stake in
what we're doing and how we move
forward.
But it is a, a policy decision,
is it not?
Mr. Chair, Senator, I, I guess
it would be, yes. So you would
have public comments, you would
have the whole process to go to
policy.
Mr. Chair, Senator, when we did
have our own fee increase bill,
we did have public input. We
brought it before the
commission, we went through that
whole process right now we're
not proposing our own fee. So
what I'm, what I'm asking is
Do you have to have legislation
to increase fees. Mr. Chair,
Senator, yes, uh, all of our
fees are in statute.
That's what I was asking. Sorry,
I misunderstood.
OK. Thank you.
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good to
see you, Director Sloan. You
know,
I heard like I think you told me
or I, I haven't followed up on
this and maybe this is the wrong
question, but you said that
things were going to change, uh,
regarding, uh, regarding
problems in the north and, and
has your agency done anything to
kind of change uh the elk
situation.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
The the we had a population
management hunt, um, last year
to try and reduce uh um elk in
the areas that have been of most
concern. We do have upcoming,
not this year, but next year,
the elk rule, which will be a
great time for those folks to
provide um input about what
they're seeing, how they feel,
what they would like to see, um,
and, and change our hunt
structures, and I, I think, you
know, we were there in in
Espanola and met with
number of folks, um,
And I think there's still a
confusion about where
Over the counter licenses are
available on private land versus
draw licenses and um.
We've had many conversations,
many landowners, and made some
progress in helping them
understand where that line is,
what their options are. Um.
I think it's gonna be an
incremental process, we
certainly have, um, as you know,
Mr. Morales in Canyon, who has
some, some
Big challenges, um, that we've
met with him individually, talk
through his options, he's
considering those at the at this
point, um.
So I, I think what we've done is
continue to have those
conversations and continue to
try and provide options to
folks, um, to address their
concerns.
So I guess the bottom line
answer is probably no.
Uh, I mean, I know you've spent
a lot of time working with
people, but there isn't actually
a change suggested at this
point, is that in, in the
rulemaking process. Is that
correct?
Mr. Chair Representative, we, we
have not developed our
recommendations, yet we have,
but we will be over the course
of the next year and a half,
working with the public to
determine what their interests
are and what our um.
Recommendation will be, but we
don't currently have a
recommendation, that's correct.
And Mr. Chair and Director
Sloan, um,
You know, this is another
problem with the anti-donation
clause. I mean, uh, hopefully I,
you know, I know people are
working on this legislation, but
every time we try and solve a
problem at the local level.
We run smack dab into the
anti-donation clause, and uh if
we didn't have that.
You know, it comes up almost
every committee hearing I'm in
these days is something the
states trying to do the
legislators are trying to do
that, frankly, agencies would
like to do, but they ran up
against that and um
And I, I think we just have to
change that, and I guess this is
a statement more than a
question. I mean, I've sat in on
these hearings with local
people, uh, really small farms
and ranches are getting
decimated by elk. That's all
there is to it. They're running
wild, and I know different
people have different counts,
uh, but hopefully we'll get a
better count. I understand
you're working on that and I'm
just saying it's this, this
issue will not go away. It will
not solve.
So, and it hasn't solved itself.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you representative
representative Ferrari you Mr.
Chair and thank you, um,
Director Sloan, um.
I'm on the fee increase
following up with um Senator
Woods.
You have not gotten that
approved or through the
legislature.
Mr. Chair Representative, that's
correct.
And um, is that why you're um
budget is flat, or is that just
cause the governor wants
everyone to stay the same and
not allow you to ask for more
funds.
I'm sorry, that's really putting
you on the spot, Mr. Chair
Representative, but what I can
say is that we don't have
funds to increase our budget
whether we were allowed to or
not, that, that part doesn't
matter. We, we don't feel
comfortable knowing our cash
balances with requesting an
increase going forward in order
to remain sustainable.
So you are counting on the fees
going up to be able to do the
things that need to be done.
Mr. Chair Representative at some
point they will need to or will
need to significantly curtail,
um.
Our efforts.
OK.
I
I think with all the funds that
we have available that you know.
Increasing your budget as well
as the fees should be something
that would help our state a lot.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
We'll, we'll, uh,
have more discussion about the
fee in a few moments. Uh, but
first, uh, Senator Steinborn.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Director.
How much money do you get from
the enchantment Legacy Fund.
Every year, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, as I mentioned earlier,
2.75 million.
OK, and Mr. Chair, what do you
use that money for?
Mr. Chairman, Senator, as I
mentioned earlier, we use it for
species of greatest conservation
needs, so all of the work that
we do, um, both improving
habitat for those species and
doing the basic biology like we
discussed in the citizen science
conversation earlier, there are
a large number of species about
which we just don't have enough
information to make Mr.
Chairman, Director, do you use
any of that money for anything
other than species of greatest
conservation need.
Mr. Chair, Senator, no.
OK, Mr. Chairman, Senator, I
know, uh, Mr. Chairman,
Director, I know that, uh, you
know, the game and fish is a big
Fungible
pot of money that you basically
move stuff around to different.
Uh, different needs. So as you
have gotten this money from the
From the enchantment fund.
Have you actually spent more
money on species of greatest
conservation need or if you take
As it caused
More money, less money to have
to be taken from other things
now that you have that dedicated
money from that, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, I think a little bit of
both.
A little bit of we have
substituted in some cases and
done additional in other cases.
So I think that's really
important for people to know,
you know, the, the enchantment
fund was kind of sold as we're
increasing it, but in reality,
we just substituted money that's
You know, what's going from the
game protection fund probably
for species of greatest
conservation need and now it's
It's, you know, that money is
going back to someplace else, so
it wasn't that it was maybe a
little bit additive, but it
wasn't.
Exclusively addeded, which is
what we're told in the Senate
floor, um,
And, uh, anyway, just wanted to
kind of get follow up because
we've created this fund and.
We had a certain set of facts we
were told when we did it, and I
wanted to just ask you, and I
think you answered it. I
appreciate it.
And uh
Yeah, we'll just leave it at
that. Thank you, Mr. Chaman.
Sinner compass.
Uh, thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, of course, to the
members of the committee and our
presenter today, uh, just a few
issues and uh questions
regarding the budget itself and
then leading into, if you will,
uh, the use of the uh game
protection fund and where we see
that particularly as we look at
some of the growing needs here
in the state dealing directly
with our.
environment and our game and
fish.
So, so in terms of the
commission itself, are there any
current vacancies, uh, on the
commission.
Mr. Chair, a senator, we have
one vacancy for the um
individual from Berna Leo
County.
Thank you very much then leading
in directly to the operations,
uh, I know across the state
where truly looking at uh wage
increases for our public
employees.
What does that look like with
the current operational revenues
that you do have.
If, as an example, and not the
full amount would be given uh
for those increases. What does
it look like to the department
in taking care of the current
staff, uh, that you have.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
You know, we have
Managed with every increase
that's come through thus far to
ensure that our personnel get
that that funding, um, in order
to remain competitive as I noted
earlier, we're we are struggling
with that competitive edge, the
salaries keep rising, um.
You know, ultimately.
At some point there's, there's
gotta be a give of, of some
sort, whether that's.
We
Pay our personnel, but we do a
little bit less on the ground or
we reduce our personnel, but um
as of right now, we've continued
to um
Give those raises that have been
appropriated by the legislature
and very much appreciated, um,
and still do the work.
So, so, Mr. Chairman, uh, going
back to, if you will, with some
of our other agencies where they
continued to increase wages for
personnel and, and your
personnel quite a few of them
are, uh, are certified, and that
being the case, you may be
losing some to other agencies
because of the difference in in
wages and uh I'm concerned about
that.
In terms of the game and fish
management as you move forward,
particularly in uh serving the
needs of all corners of the
state, uh, with your officers
themselves, uh, do they have
Reasonable areas to travel and
to cover uh all of our, our
lakes, our, our wilderness areas
as we deal with both game and
fish.
Mr. Chairman, Senator, um,
We continue to be shorthanded in
our field operations division in
our our officer corps. We do
have, we have been fortunate to
have pretty good recruitment
classes where we have one about
to set up for interviews here.
End of this month, beginning of
next month, um, so we are making
some headway on that, but we do
still have some vacancies across
the state, um which we're
covering with other personnel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, in
terms of the vacancies in your
department, uh, what's the
percentage that you're, you're
dealing with right now to go
ahead and get uh boots on the
ground, as they say, or if you
will, uh, field personnel out
there to do an effective job,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Senator,
we have a 12% vacancy rate,
which well low compared to many
other state agencies is higher
than I would like.
Thank you and uh
Lastly, and then just a comment,
uh.
Mr. Cherry, as we move forward,
one of the
Here he is, and I mentioned
early on when we start to deal
with our endangered species, and
I really like the concept that
director Sloane has
Brought forward and that is to
establish, if you will, a native
aquatic species restoration
facility and uh science center,
and, and of course, going back
to the game protection fund,
this facility itself.
Not including operations would
probably be in the neighborhood
of around $10 million and that,
that includes where we have
state land, we have access to
water, we have uh university, we
have other programs in the area
to ensure that we do have uh the
science-driven piece, really
starting with physics, uh,
Can the, can the fund itself
sustain additional growth and
Um, upkeep, if you will, of the
current facilities that we have.
Mr. Chair, Senator, um,
Probably not.
At this time.
Thank you. So, so just lastly,
Mr. Chair, I would, uh, reach
out to uh indicate that I would
really like to work with you as
we move forward in trying to
come up with some resolution,
uh, to deal with this particular
issue because in the long run,
uh, we really want to have the
environment in our state, uh, as
strong as possible, and I know
that uh you're very concerned
about that as well. So I just,
uh, it's an overture and I reach
out to you to hopefully as we
move along.
that we're able to continue to
deal with this and other issues
that are related to the game and
fish department. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Campos. I
appreciate that. Um, so we did
have
Uh, there was a bill.
2 years ago.
Um,
that compost is one of the
sponsors of uh pass the Senate,
uh, with a healthy majority.
And we held it up in the house.
Uh, and we held it up in the
house because we wanted to be
part of a larger package.
And that's that larger package
is coming. We'll talk about more
tomorrow.
Um, but I
I guess I'm a little surprised
to hear you say that.
You don't have a fee bill this
year.
Uh, cause I certainly view that
component of the package as your
bill. It is substantially the
bill that passed the Senate a
couple of years ago with some
minor changes.
Um
Are you
Supporting, at least that
portion of the the effort or
because it's attached to the
other uh components, are you
holding back?
Mr. Chair, we, we're, as you
well know, we're still in
conversations about that bill
and its contents with you and a
variety of of stakeholders and
so we have not taken a formal
position on the bill.
Uh, George, I understand that I
guess I'm asking about the, the
fee increase aspect of the bill
a position on it.
OK.
You, you sort of did earlier,
you said you needed a fee
increase. That's the fee
increase.
That is your fee increase,
correct.
It doesn't go to me, goes to
you, go see your agency, Mr.
Chair, perhaps I should
misspoke. It is the
recommendation you're putting
forward in your bill.
as the fee increase.
OK.
And you testified earlier that
You needed the fee increase or
your agency.
would suffer financial
consequences.
Mr. Chair, that's correct.
Um
When, when that fee bill came
through, uh, 2 years ago, and
you had public hearings on it
and taking public input.
Mr. Chair, I don't believe we
had public hearings, but we did
have.
Public input from a variety of
stakeholders we spoke with.
And, and that bill was fairly
well supported, at least in the
Senate.
It was
If it wasn't unanimous, it was
very close to the unanimous on
the Senate floor. I don't think
it was quite unanimous, but I do
think it was close.
OK.
And didn't you receive a, a one
time uh general fund
appropriation, maybe 2 years
ago.
Mr. Cherry did that allowed us
to extend out our, our, um,
Cash balance and how much was
that? $7 million.
So you're, you're not quite
funded exclusively through uh
license fees at the moment, are
you, Mr. Chair, at the moment we
are not up until that $7 million
we hadn't had any general fund
money since about 2005, I
believe, and in 2005, it was
about $300,000.
So yes, we've received a little
bit of general fund we now
thanks to Senator Wirth received
um legacy fund money, um, but
The bulk of our budget is
license fees and federal funds.
OK, so, um, we'll talk more
about the, uh, the reform
package tomorrow, um, uh, I hope
this, uh, you're certainly
welcome to be here. If you're
not here, I hope you're at least
listening. Um, and as that bill
Uh, gets introduced.
And gets heard in committee.
Uh, I understand that the
administration hasn't taken a
position on the bill yet.
Um, but if that's the, the path
for the fee increase, uh, I
would hope that you would at
least
Stand up and say, yes, these ee,
the fee increase is necessary
and appropriate, uh, whether or
not you have a position on the
other elements of the bill.
We'll see what happens during
the session.
OK. Thank you, Director Sloan.
So we're gonna end a little
early before lunch. We'll be
back at 12:45. I don't think our
lunch is here yet.
No, so
our, our lunch will be here in a
few minutes. Our lunch sponsors
are, uh, Rickie Lee Chavez and
Randy Valverde of Capital
Council and consultant.
Um, we are, uh, well, people are
scheduled, I, we're gonna stick
to the schedule, so we'll be
back at 12:45. Thank you very
much. We're in recess.
