I know everybody is happy to see
each other and uh we're happy
you're with us today.
So, um,
We're going to start this
morning with introductions and
we'll just go right around. But
I'd like to let you know that
we're gonna, uh, more or less
fast track today, so we are
finished by 12:30 because
there's another event for
legislators at 12:30, and
there's a committee meeting at
1:30, so we have uh a lot to
cover this morning, and I
appreciate you all being here.
There are actually 48 people on
this committee.
Uh, not all 48 will come, but
that means that when the staff
looks for a place for us to
meet. It has to be a very large
space, not a small, uh,
community room in a small.
Community, it really moves us to
the larger venues like our
universities and some other
places. So please keep that in
mind as we discuss this.
While we do introductions, you
all have been given a work plan
to review and we will ask for
your additional items, but we
have taken everybody's ideas
that you have presented and put
them into the work plan.
Is there not a seat for you,
Representative, up here?
You're sure?
OK, OK, that's, see, that's why
I'm saying we're gonna need to
uh move to larger uh venues. So,
um,
As I said, uh, this is the water
and natural Resources Committee.
I do need you to speak into a
mic, uh oh, mics are coming
around, I hope for the tables,
sir.
Because we are being webcast and
they cannot see or hear us.
That means that probably public
comment will be bumped up to
around noon so that we can
finish by 12:30, public comment
can be in person or by Zoom.
So we don't know how many people
yet will be on soon.
So, let's please start to my far
right and Representative Li.
Good morning, chair, and good
morning everyone. I'm Charlotte
Little. I represent House
District 68. This is my first,
uh, meeting with the committee
on water and Natural Resources,
so happy to be here. Thank you.
One woman.
Uh, representante Miguel Garcia
from Matrisco. I represent some
of the more historical
communities within the Burneo
County and the city of
Albuquerque.
Thank you, Chair. I'm a
Representative Kathleen Cas from
District 44, uh, the Rio Grande
goes right through the middle of
my district. I'm in uh Corrales,
parts of Rio Rancho, and the
northern part of Albuquerque, I,
I have an intern with me today
on Peterson, um, from the Ask
Academy, um, if you guys want to
come in and introduce yourself
to him throughout the meeting
thing.
Good morning, chair. Angelita
Mejia from Chavez County.
happy to be here for my first
time.
What you chair, um, Debbie
Sarignon, I represent House
District 21 in Bernalo County,
Monzano High School area, if you
know the area, um, and it's good
to be back on the committee.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
everyone. I'm Angel Senate
District 30. Happy to be here
with everyone. Not unusual. I'm
not paying attention.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair. My
name is Jim Townsend, served in
the Senate and Senate District
34, I and Otero County. Thank
you.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
Larry Scott, Senate District 42,
Lee, Eddie and Chavez and Ben
this committee in one form or
another or another for quite a
while and really enjoyed the
conversation. Thank you.
Madam Chair, good morning. My
name is Representative Elaine
Senna-Cortez and I represent the
beautiful people of District 62
in Lee County. Um, I actually
took over the old district for
Senator Scott. So I'm the new
Larry, and I'm glad to be here.
Good morning everybody. My name
is Nicole Chavez. I am the state
representative for District 31
in Bernalillo County, and this
is my first time to this
committee.
I'm Senator Brandt, Senate
District 40, Sandoval County,
but really it's just rearrange.
Good Morning, Peter Worth Senate
District 25 in Santa Fe. Uh,
this is my 21st year on this
committee. I don't think I can
compete with Senator Stewart,
but I'm getting close.
Good morning, Madam Chair. State
Senator Mimi Stewart from the
International District in East
Gateway area through Albuquerque
District 17. Yeah, I think this
might be my 31st year, but who's
counting?
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I'm Antoine
Sadil Lopez. I represent
district um 16, and this is my
6th year on the committee, and
it's a really important
committee for our state. Really
glad to be here. Thank you.
We're gonna go.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Rob Montoya, way
back here. Um, House District
One, San Juan County, um, look
forward to, uh, the interim
meeting. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Madam chair,
Representative Harlan Vincent,
uh, serving House District 56
and good to see everybody.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
everyone. uh, Representative
Tanya Mirabal Moya. I'm, uh,
Valencia County, so, um, which
is the town of Berlin and most
of the east side of the, of the
county. Glad to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, Mark
Murphy, representative, um,
representing Rosville and Chavis
County District 59, and I'm a
newbie. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, uh, Jonathan Henry,
um, representative of District
54, uh, that's Eddie Chavez and
Otero. Glad to be here. Thank
you.
Morning, Madam Chair, uh I'm
Anthony Thornton, senator from,
uh, District 19, uh representing
Bernal Leo Sandoval, Torrance,
and uh, Santa Fe County, and
this is my first, uh, time in
this, in this committee. So
thank you very much.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Martha Garcia. I represent
District 6 of Sea Blood and
portions of McKinley County, and
this is also my first term, uh.
You know, being a
representative, I was appointed,
uh back in February and uh
serving on this committee for
the first time also. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Martin
Zamora, I represent House
District 63, covers the south
half of Curry County, the north
half of Roosevelt, all debaca
Guadalupe and touched San Miguel
County.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Representative Joshua Hernandez,
uh, District 60, which is all in
the town of Rio Rancho.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
to see you. One of my fellow
senators that covers an area as
well as uh Senator Thornton, um,
here from District 22, which is
the East Mountains in Torrance
County and Water is super
important because we have a well
that just went dry. Thank you.
Is there any other legislator
I've missed besides the vice
chair. Oh, Senator, please. Uh,
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. State Senator Pete Campos
representing all the parts of 7
counties in northeastern New
Mexico. It's great to be a part
of this committee. Thank you.
Thank you. uh, Mr. Beer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Matthew McQueen, uh, vice chair
of this committee, House
District 50, uh, the southern
half of Santa Fe County in the
this area of Sandoval County.
I am Liz Stephanics. I am um the
chair of this committee. We
trade off, um, every other year,
but we depend on each other
quite a bit, and I represent San
Miguel Santa Fe, Torrance and
Valencia, which is Senate
District 39, um, Sarah.
Can you get to a microphone and
then we'd like to have all the
staff.
be introduced if they can't get
up here, you could introduce
him. Uh, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Sarah. We admire lead
staff for this committee. We
also have Galaxy Dancer, uh, new
to this committee but helping us
out, um, unfortunately, two of
our staffers were sick today, so
kind of a last minute uh cut in
half of our normal stuff, so
won't normally be so chaotic in
the mornings. Could you tell us
the rest of the stuff will be
our drafter this year, uh, as we
lost Tom Kriska to Enemy D. Um,
so Ian Keller drafting and then
we will also have.
Uh, Angela Dayton as our other
support staff. Great. Um, and
Sarah has been with this
committee. She has a water um
resources background, and she's
has some degrees in that, so
she's been very helpful to me in
terms of getting me in touch
with the experts around the
state. So Madam Chair, can I
just before we jump in, ask that
we take a moment of silence, we
lost someone, Ralphie Hill, who
was a champion for Asia as a
member of the New Mexico Sea
Commission.
At age 46, very unexpected, uh,
advocate for the Pecos
wilderness, and I just think
it'd be appropriate for this
committee just to take a moment
of silence and remember Ralph.
Thank you, and he's also my
constituent and his services are
uh Thursday evening if anybody's
here, please.
Thank you very much. And I'd
like to point out that Ralph was
young, and he ignored some chest
pains.
Uh, a week earlier, so everybody
needs to pay attention to what's
going on with themselves. Thank
you. OK, so going on um.
Sarah, who's going to be doing
our
Legislation.
OK.
I know you're trying to get this
organized.
But I welcome everybody and
there are many people I do not
know from outside the Senate, if
you are in your first year. So
I'm gonna be depending upon
staff and others to give me
their names when you want to ask
questions or make comments.
Are you presenting from up here,
Sarah? Uh, I'll be right back,
OK.
If anybody is in their brand new
first interim committee.
There is um two forms that you
must sign and fill out the first
page fully, uh, fill out and
then the second page, make sure
you sign as well. Please hand it
to one of the staff, and they
will make sure that you get
recorded as being.
So Sarah, please, uh, you have a
handout that says 2025 session
WNRC relevant legislation.
Representative Chavez, do you
want to introduce yourself,
please? We've had, uh, you need
to get to that microphone right
there.
It's gonna be
No.
Um, Representative Eleanor
Travis I represent House
District 26, uh, which is on the
west side of Albuquerque and
also includes the Paito Mesa and
the South Valley.
Thank you.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the committee, um,
yes, so the chair had asked me
just to put kind of a a rough
list together ended up being
quite a long list, so of the
bills that water natural
resources related legislation
that did pass, um,
Uh, we had 6 pages, so I kind of
went through and just
highlighted a handful of those
that we touch on more.
Uh, closely, uh, but of course
if any particular ones catch
your eye or you want further
information about, I can be in
touch with the drafter, um, and
we'll get to that also for the
not passed legislation list as
far as setting up potential
presenters for that. Um, OK, so,
uh, starting with our past by
both chambers and signed by
governors. So the enacted laws
from 2025, um, yes, 6 pages,
right? So I'll just touch on a
few of these, um.
Some of the more high profile
ones, for instance, so House
Bill 137, the strategic water
supply, we had a presentation on
this, um, in Sequorro last
interim and had very good
turnout, a lot of public input
on that one, which resulted in
the produced water aspect uh of
that bill being removed and now
it's just the focus on brackish
water to sustain our or to
augment our freshwater
resources, um, so I'll be set up
by NMED and OSE, um, and.
That's sorry, definitely on the
work plan agenda, so we will be
hearing presentations on that.
Um, moving to the second page,
uh, two different bills touching
on POS, which we've had
throughout many committees had a
lot of presentations on this,
um, so House Bill 140 as well as
212, um, both are intended to
bring more attention to PFOS
issues in the state.
And give more regulatory
authority to um to our agencies.
Um, we also have a lot to do
with fire preparation and um
mitigation and whatnot, so
hospitals 175, forest and
watershed buffer projects.
Um, allowing, uh,
Or providing for the ability to
um start those forest thinning
projects, especially around um
more high risk areas. Um, we
have, uh,
House Bill 291, we had a a panel
last year on our uh climate day,
um, about compost and recycling
and the circular economy within
the state, so, um, that was
another one that did pass.
And we had heard about
previously in the interim, I'm
sure we will have another update
on that from NMED is like it's
going.
Let's see, um, we have on page
3,
again, related to, uh, dealing
with our forests and the over um
crowding in their timber grading
Act, House Bill 553.
Uh, will allow for some economic
development around that forest
spinning activity, um, Senate
Bill 5, very high profile one
was on the news quite a bit, um,
and as I'm sure everyone's
aware, there was a partial veto
on that one, so if you see where
the the line strikeout is, that
is the
Substance, the section that she
was that she struck out.
Um, but basically, uh, spring's
more, um.
More wildlife focus towards that
department changes the name, um,
adjust license fees and whatnot,
uh, the partial veto was
removing um the governor's
ability to remove a
commissioner, uh, at will,
basically. Um, moving on, uh,
page 4, we have Senate Bill 8.
we had quite a few in the past
couple interns, actually a few
presentations on that, so I did
highlight that one, the vetted
vet veterinary medical loan
repayment program.
Um, hopefully, going to bring
some more veteran veterinarians
in the state, especially the
rural areas they've had issues
with that, um, so then we have
also another high profile water
bill, the Senate Bill 21, which
was the combo of Senate Bill 21
and 22 in the end, the pollutant
discharge elimination System
Act, um, allowing for more
testing in state and.
Um
Uh
Uh, cutting through the issues
with the, the federal
deregulations there, um,
allowing more state control over
that. Um, so Senate Bill 33,
again tying into our wildfire
preparation stuff, this the
wildfire Prepared Act, um,
Uh, which I kind of also touch
on when we get to our vetoes
because the enactment of that
led to a veto of another bill,
um.
Let's see, uh
On page 5, Senate Bill 169, the
strategic Economic Development
site Readiness. Uh, we also
heard a presentation on this at
the end of last year in Riidoso,
um, allowing EDD to um kind of
prepare sites in advance to
attract businesses and um having
the infrastructure, electricity
and stuff already mapped out in
some of these areas to attract
more business, um, and then last
page on the past legislation,
page 6, Senate Memorial 2. I
also highlight just
as it ties in with all of our
wildfire and forest management
kind of package bills that
happened, um, that study group,
we will be expecting a
presentation from them near the
end of the summer.
So, um, this next page is the
partial veto message. Um, I also
included these for all the
vetoes, so you wanna kind of
look a little more in depth at
What particular issues she had
with these bills if they are
potentially bills that you want
to look at again for this
upcoming uh session or the
following.
Um, this will kind of give us a
starting point as to maybe where
to focus on either, yeah, some
of those veto bills, um, but
yes, this is the only the
partial veto message on that
page, and then we have our Eto
and pocket vetoed list, this
little one pager with.
Not a numbering on it because I
kind of 3 separate documents
that became one document, sorry,
um, so the vetoed and pocket
vetoed the pocket vetoes,
obviously, we will not have a
message or any explanation as to
why those were not signed, um,
that might change after this
next election, um, uh, on the
constitutional amendment, uh,
taken to the voters that might
no longer be the case, and we
would be receiving messages for
those as well, which would
obviously be helpful, so, uh, we
do have the 3 veto message.
s though, the 3 following, the 3
following pages, sorry, um,
executive messages 23, 24, and
26 are the associated with.
Um, house bills 191, 219 and
142, um, Madam Chair, do you
want me to just briefly
highlight what those messages
entail or like everyone just
kind of get into them if they
want to. No, I think that's
enough right now. OK. And um
let's uh take a brief period of
time for any uh questions or
comments, and let's, let me look
at the agenda to keep myself on
time.
We actually have.
A little bit of time, if anybody
wants to comment.
Oh, we have a couple of new
members, uh, Representative
Raybonco Caballer, could you
introduce yourself and then send
her off.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, those
in the audience and those
viewing. I'm Patricia Royal
Caballero and I represent House
District 13, far southwest
quadrant of Albuquerque. Thank
you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Candy Spence's state senator,
District 32, which is Chavis
County and Eddy County, and I
just uh right from the New
Mexico cattle Growers
Association this morning. Thank
you very much. Thank you. Did
anybody else come in?
That we need to recognize.
OK, so let's go to questions and
comments from committee members
about any bills or things that
you would like Sarah to follow
up on.
And I'll just quickly mention
those last three pages, numbers
1 through 3 that are numbered
there at the bottom except page
one. those are the bills that
did not pass but made it pretty
far along their way, so those
might be ones we want to focus
on over the interim if anyone
does have a specific interest in
one of those, um, I can work
with the chair to find panelists
and experts to come and work out
the whatever tweaks might need
to happen to those bills.
OK.
So committee members, um.
There are years that this
committee does not endorse
bills, but we do hear
presentations about bill
requests that will be coming up.
There have been a few bills in
the way past.
That we did endorse, but they
were primarily funding bills,
uh, budget bills that we wanted
to put more money into a
particular area that concerned
us. So, uh, please keep that in
mind as we go through the
session, we are happy to learn
about topics and this we are
going into a 30-day short
session, which means our agenda
may be quite limited in terms of
what we can bring up.
So questions, comments, yes,
we'll start with Reverend
Senator Murphy then
Representative was that the
Samara? OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee and the
audience, um, I note, um, from
last session, there were some 2
dozen bills that impacted the
oil and gas industry in one form
or fashion. Uh, many of them
were not vetted through the
interim process, some were, I
was not part of that process at
the time. I know that some of
those bills received quite a bit
of criticism for, for not going
through that process. I note
here, um, on bills that were
passed by both chambers and
signed by the governor, there's
at least 2.
3 items that directly impact the
oil and gas industry and I note
in the work plan, um, together,
uh, with water, there are 17
items that list uh energy uh and
impact on oil and gas, uh,
second, or tied with the 17
items that list water, and yet
when I go to the last page on
page 7, I know that there are 6
meetings scheduled for this
year, and none are in oil and
gas country.
And I would ask this committee,
and respectfully, uh, Madam
Chair and committee, to
reconsider that schedule because
with the impact of the recent
price drop they anticipate
production drop, uh, and the
impact of the pending the, the,
the past legislation, the
proposed legislation and the
work plan, uh, this committee,
um, is proposing a uh quite a
bit of work that will directly
impact this industry. And I
think it's only fair that
members of that industry.
and of those communities have an
opportunity, um, to voice their
concerns, um, voice their
support, uh, and have a voice in
this process. So thank you very
much for the time, uh, Madam
Chair and committee.
Thank you and uh we will discuss
the sites when we get there, uh,
we do try to have balanced
presentations, uh, as we go
through the interim work plan,
but your point is, uh well
taken, thank you. uh,
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I don't know if I've been kicked
off this committee or if there
was a mistake made or if I don't
sit on.
Cause I'm not on the list or
anything or.
And I just wondering if, if I
was being asked to leave or
We, we, and I
And I'm sure Sarah just needs
some time with it, Madam Chair,
I just wanted to make sure that
I, I, I've always been, and, and
I'm a lead member in water in
the session and stuff.
So, I'm sure there's just a
minor mistake we can fix it as
we go meow. Thank you. So, um,
Representative, I myself have
been uh moved off of some
committees, and I understand
it's due to the decisions that
our leadership makes, uh, in
each house separately to
accommodate new members, to
accommodate old members requests
and I think the best thing for
you to do is to to talk to your
leadership to see if
There can be a remedy. Uh, I
can't really do anything about
it. It's a leadership decision
and I'll I'll do that, Madam
Chair, and, but I did get the
emails that we're having the
committee and everything else,
and I believe my name was on the
list then and all that, so, and
I'll go back and double check.
Thank you. Well, we would like
to have you, but um.
And always you could get your
extra days and come be part of
it.
Thank you. I have Senator, then
Senator Si Lopez.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I am calling to follow up
with what Representative Murphy
said, uh whenever we are seeing
what our schedules are and where
they're located. I too am
bothered by the fact that we
don't have any meetings down in
our particular area whenever we
are dealing with water.
Which is agriculture and food
that everybody eats and the oil
and gas industry, which uh makes
up the brunt of our budget up
here. I have spoken with people
in our tesia at Central Valley
Electric, they are more than
happy to accommodate this
committee down there in Artesia,
which is in the heart of the oil
and gas industry and the middle
of the Pecos Valley, and I would
strongly urge this committee to
make that consideration. Thank
you very much.
Thank you. We are on the bills
first. We're not on the work
plan, so, so Center Cia Lopez.
OK, then I'll, I'll wait until
we discuss the work plan. Thank
you. Anything else on the bills
that Sarah, yes, Senator the
quick question, ma'am, I'd
appreciate maybe represent
McQueen, uh, I see.
House Bill 284, the free roaming
horses, was vetoed. I'm just
curious if you have
Found out why that might have
happened given the amount of
work that went into finally
lifting that bill on a full
bipartisan basis, I'd just be
curious, do you have any
information on that?
Um
Senator, uh, thank you for that.
I, I've had a conversation with
Um
Uh, the governor's staff.
Um, I
Wasn't really a specific cancer,
just sort of
Seemed like a
But reaction.
Uh, I'm a little frustrated by
it, uh, and of course, uh, big
believer in uh
I think it was uh
Each year are two no pocket
vetoes, so, uh, hopefully in the
future, uh, we get a message if
the bill gets.
Thank you. Um, anybody else on
the bills, a question or comment
on the bill, Representative
Lujan.
And you might introduce yourself
as well. Oh, thank you, uh,
Representative Tarahan, uh, has
District 48 here in capital
city. I was just briefly going
through. I did see a bill that
Representative Murphy and I
worked on that would consolidate
uh or bring together um.
Energy like infrastructure like
um uh board committee uh that we
worked with them um Ener with,
so I just wonder if we could
maybe look at that, that just it
just made it got all over to the
Senate, but it just didn't make
it through, uh, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you. Do you remember the
bill number? I'll get that for
uh for you just shortly. Thank
you very much.
And thank you for bringing that
to our attention.
OK, anyone else on the bills?
Thank you very much, Sarah, for
the uh presentation of these
bills, so this you also uh
composite of what we all tried
to work on this last session.
So movie, madam, yes.
Yes, moving on, uh, you all have
a copy of the work plan and
meeting schedule. Let's first
deal with the work plan, not the
meetings uh around the state.
And what I'd like to do is just
do a round robin, please let us
know, but wait till Sarah gets
here.
Please let us know something we
tried to include everything that
people said and sent us, but let
us know your important items, 1
or 2 that you want to make sure
she stars, and let's let her get
ready first.
OK, and Representative Patricia
Royval Caballero, we're starting
with you, and we're just going
around the entire committee, so
everybody has a chance to talk.
Just, you don't even have to
read it, just one or two items
that's so important to you.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you.
The real important items for me
are water security and drought
and how we're going to mitigate
through climate change and um
protect.
Our environment and keep our
water and air and clean, and the
other, of course, is looking at
um industrial agriculture and
oil and gas, and how we mitigate
through those issues concerning
the water, uh, the pollutive
industries and the
Potential contamination of uh
groundwater usage. So for right
now, those are two of my main. I
have a few more, but that'll
get.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I'm gonna be looking over this
list and I'll offer my uh
recommendations here in a bit.
Thank you.
The um land grant they say
and infrastructure. Thank you,
Chair. Um, I would like to see
presentation on um heat-related
topics, um, I know that we, with
the, with the climate changing,
you're also large areas of our
state that did not require air
conditioning and now do,
obviously, there's a heat
differential when there's a a
wildfire nearby, um, there's a
lot of work sites.
that are cannot be climate
controlled, and we have a many
policies in place with regards
to snow, we, we are a state that
is scared of snow, and so we end
up modifying our work schedules,
so, but I think that we need to
have some information from uh
scientists and some doctors, um,
about heat, uh so that we can
look at those policy changes.
And then um my other issues are,
uh, I, I was told I can't use
the word drought because that's
a federally regulated.
word, but let's say water
scarcity due to man-made
infrastructure failure. So, um,
a watershed collapse and Eaka
collapse, uh, a siphon collapse,
a river low flow. We um have
federal programs that determine
drought, um, which is uh and and
and weather phenomenon, I think
that we need to have policies in
place because they are affecting
agriculture and our ability to
grow crops if we don't have
access to water as well as our
potable water for our residents.
Thank you. Thank you. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair, um, water
supply strategies and
conservation and alternatives.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
want to look at electric vehicle
charging rebuild up. Um, I know
the federal government has
frozen $20 million for charging
stations so see what we can do
on that one. And number 16,
methane and ozone rule status.
Um, we just had to think uh in
the Albuquerque Journal, they
talked about student learning in
the Purbbean and San Juan Basin
as far as the emissions that
are are what's being admitted
and uh I'd like to make sure we
look at that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Item 12
Indian water rights settlement
updates. Um, I have communities
in my district right now that
have not been able to open their
assass, um, because of the
limited amount of water that is
available right now.
McQueen. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, there's a lot of good
stuff on the work plan. I would
highlight um fire insurance
issue, uh, we worked on that
during the session and
Just
great.
quite ready to push it across
the finish line, so I think that
could use some attention in the
land conservation programs we
have on the books, um, a lot of
people would like to talk about
updating those. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair, uh,
continuing to keep up with the
uh uh progress if you will, of
the fires and floods that have
affected many of our communities
here in the state.
Also, the uh work that needs to
be done with the uh secure uh
restoration because of the fires
and floods in the air and water
quality issues throughout New
Mexico. And then uh lastly, uh
the uh quality of life and tied
to that, of course, would be uh
monitoring and keeping up with
the improvements uh that uh have
been recommended if you will,
through Senate Bill 5, which
basically would be the uh uh
wildlife agency, the game and
fish department. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, thank you very
much. I too am concerned about
the veto of the bill regarding
the feral horses, they are a
problem. They're a nuisance.
They are going to get somebody
killed. There's been another
accident in the Ridoso area just
very recently.
I'm also concerned about.
The US Forest Service and what
they have done to our state and
with that comes the fire
insurance for homeowners and
property owners in those
particular areas and the
outlying areas of that. I would
also like us to take into
consideration the oil and gas
royalty rate changes, uh, we
have an industry that is under
siege, it seems like, and they
are paying the bills of our
state and uh.
Why are we adding more rules and
regulations and that their fees
on this, so I do have a problem,
Madam Chair, thank you very
much.
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
something that is sort of over
Overarching is um
A presentation on what the
implications are of the federal
changes to the EPA and just
federal changes in general on
what that means for New Mexico
and the protection of our air,
land and water.
So I, I just think that would be
helpful for us to see that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, I, I
wanna thank Sarah for this
Herculean process of putting
this all on paper, uh, so under
section A, um, I'm interested in
numbers 1, 13, and 15, so that's
the uh water quality permitting
program that we're starting
withenate Bill 21. It's Texas v.
New Mexico settlement updates in
Colorado River basin a man who
chair.
I want to remind people that
we're actually gonna have 3 days
of the CSG West Colorado River
Forum, the week before our last
meeting, and it'll be all about
the Colorado River Forum, and
everyone will be invited, so
that's exciting under B, I agree
with Representative Saagana, I
want to hear about that
electrical vehicle
infrastructure and building out,
um, and number 16, methane and
ozone rule status and the last.
one under C number 15, the role
of states in climate action, uh,
dealing with greenhouse gas
emissions.
Thank you.
Thank
Uh, thank you, Ma. Just
reiterate two things the pro tem
just said. Item number one, it's
important that we have a report
from NMED on exactly where they
are on the implementation of the
permitting. There was a
commitment to have folks at the
table and I just want to
reiterate that. And then the
other one I'll just highlight is
13 again, Texas v. New Mexico. I
understand that they're
Very close to settlement. I just
want to know what that is that
we, we've had the opportunity to
have briefings from both um
The Attorney general and um.
Water
experts working on this in
executive session. I just, I
think it's really important we
know what's going on with that.
Thank you.
Thank you.
T
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and, uh, thank you, Sarah for
getting my two things on here
and uh and a number 6 and 7,
when working with the governor's
staff on the desalinization as a
as a resource for our water
issues, and then number 7,
looking at really where, where,
where are we on the 50 year
water plan and especially if we
could add to that the water
mapping project that tech is
doing, um, having some uh
difficult time getting real
answers from there.
for
the committee. How many people
here on the committee have never
seen the desal plant in our
state. Could I see your hand?
Because we're considering, OK,
we're considering a visit.
We'll get there
Representative Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
there are so many on this list,
but I also a number 5, the water
security plan and an update on
the 50-year water plan and then
Several of those topics on the
concerning energy, so obviously
talking about the electric
shutdowns and then the economic
and regulatory impacts of the
Clean Fuel Standard, and then
discussing on number 9, A and B,
the increased fees and
penalties, um proposed by House
Bill 259, and then the oil and
gas bonding enforcement reform.
Thank you so much for asking,
Madam Chair. I go by
Representative Senna Corte.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes,
ma'am, I'd love to see a
presentation on the reclamation
fund to clean up old wells.
During the session, we did see
some bipartisan support on the
proposal. Thank you so much,
Matt.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
couple of things.
It appears that the regulatory
process with respect.
the clean fuel standard is
moving forward at a.
Reasonably.
I'd call it swift pace.
And I would like to see.
An unbiased report.
On the impact.
To the cost of New Mexico
consumers.
As a consequence of those.
Clean fuel standards on
transportation, motor fuels.
I've recently seen calculations
that show when fully
implemented.
We could be looking
At 50 cents per gallon.
In addition to that,
There have been a number of
regulatory mandates, some of.
Which could not pass this
legislature, and I'm talking now
about
The requirements that electric
vehicles constitute a very
significant percentage of the
total vehicles sold in the
state and then mandates.
With respect to charging
stations on all new
construction.
And I believe both of them.
Those issues have the potential
to significantly increase the
cost to New Mexico consumers,
and we should be fully aware.
Of those consequences. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um,
Just a couple to highlight, um.
On page 2,
Items 89.
Um, or water rights
administration and, and
increasing water use penalties,
so
Uh, SB 210 and 348, I think
we're both bills that
Uh, ran through, um,
Of committees in both chambers
and both of them got locked up
in the same location. And um
they are
Are issues that the
administration was supportive of
that the state engineer was
supportive of and uh we
If we're gonna address water in
Mexico, exactly.
Where we are with water rights
and
And penalties for um misusing
those rights should be of utmost
importance to all of us
regardless of where we are.
Second, um,
Uh, the economic regulatory
impacts of the clean fuel
standard, they are
And a slid through without
really knowing what its impact
and as we go into a
Um
Time of lowering fuel prices,
uh,
Adding tax to it and keeping
those savings away from the
people of New Mexico is
I hate to, I hate to see a slip
in attacks while we have a
chance for many people to while
they're hurting in New Mexico,
not to be able to enjoy lower
fuel prices.
Um
The other thing that I think is
happening all across New Mexico.
That we have to address is the
insurance uh impacts all across
the we have people that
Quite frankly, are going to have
Insurance premiums imposed on
them that they can't afford.
That they don't pay and then
you're gonna have lenders that
start calling loans because they
have no insurance and it's just
going to spiral, and it hurts
those that are need the most
help in the Mexico and we're
kind of turned out. I would, I
would suggest we look at that
and look at it in some detail.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I
Actually, there have been a
couple of my priorities have
been mentioned already, so I'm,
I'm good. Thank you.
You want to let people know that
if the staff of either party
gave us ideas they were included
in this work plan. So going down
to the audience.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my,
my two priorities, um, along
with Senator Brant would be uh
desalinization, um, and really
with the rise in technology and
the demand for it would be, um,
how water and our water future
in economic development is going
to play out with the rise of
data centers and demand and um
everything else, so that's I
think an important thing we
should touch on. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. There's
so many important things in
here, but I want to reiterate on
the homeowner's insurance, mine
was recently canceled.
Everybody's being canceled in
the East Mountains during the,
uh, because of fire, the same
fire threat. We're literally all
getting calls every day that
your insurance has been canceled
and it's been hard to find other
insurance. Um, on a personal
level, the stancia Basin, I
think is super important, as you
know, swayback Farms closed
because of water issues. So when
we're looking on page 5, number
D, agriculture issues, uh, the
impact.
of weather on our rural is very
important because we just lost a
huge farm out there.
And the city of Estancia is
losing their wealth, uh, due to
lack of water. So we have some
severe water rushes which ties
into
Something else I'd like to hear
from the state engineer's
office, how they go about giving
out well permits because when
I'm finding they're gonna build
this huge, as you know, and, and
one of my districts this huge
community of housing that we
cannot sustain, and I know the
state engineer is going to go
ahead and give out permits for
that, but we don't have enough
water, so that's an issue.
And the last thing is we have
PIA now and the Ogallala
Aquifer, that's kind of a big
issue, uh, because that could
spread to the world's largest
aquifer, and I wanna make sure
that those wells are being
monitored out into the east, so
that people will know out there
if they are having pes in the
water that's going to the cattle
and to their own drinking water.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, uh, chair.
Oh
What I am interested in most of
them has been uh
Uh, included in the statements
that were made, but uh the ones
that I would like to hear more
about would be under the water
security Planning Act, there's
ABC, especially in
Uh, sea water security tribal
advisory council, like to know
more about uh what all that is
about, and then, of course, the
update on the governor's 50-year
plan, that will be coming up,
the Indian water rights
Settlement updates and then uh
the other one would be the New
Mexico water supply strategics
and conservation alternatives,
uh, we need to know uh what what
is there and what is available
and
uh we can do, uh, here in New
Mexico to uh look at the climate
changes that's uh has an impact
on all of these.
And then the other one that I
see up here is uh with the
wildfires that are happening and
has happened here within our
states. What are the updates on
the forestation.
And this, I guess there is a
study out there that we need to
hear and uh see what's going on,
especially now with the
wildlife, our wildfire funding
has been decreased uh through
the federal government, uh, this
past spring, uh, our community
was was ready to send and
Get the uh uh people trained
again on a yearly basis. They
were on the site for only 2
weeks and they were told that
they were no longer needed
because of the impact from the
executive orders. So we need to
know what are we gonna do about
those, uh, those are, uh, some
of the issues that I have. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, so
the key things that are
important to me fall under topic
C, which is page 4, primarily
with regards to wildfire
mitigation. I think that's the
issue that is most important to
the folks in the East Mountains,
uh, we'd like to see a buffer
program where we could defend
our, our communities from the
forest and really like to see
that implemented and uh secondly
like to talk about maybe
revitalizing the timber industry
so that we can truly manage our
that they need to be managed as
opposed to just letting them
grow and die and creating uh
areas for large fires to occur,
but if we actually have a, a
revitalized timber industry, I
think that would make a big deal
in terms of reducing our costs
that we're seeing in insurance
rates right now. Thank you very
much.
Thank you Henry.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, just
a couple of quick things, most
of them have been, uh, already
discussed, but I too would like
to see uh more discussion on
that reclamation fund, uh, I
think Representative Murphy had
a great bill that had good
bipartisan support, um, I'd like
to see a lot of discussion on
that. Uh, I also would like to
see the economic and regulatory
impact of the clean fuel
standard. Um, I think that's
really important for us to
understand, um, as Senator Scott
said, I would very much agree
with uh having a better
understanding of how this EV
charging stations on new builds
is impacting, um, I happen to
wear two different hats. Uh, the
other hat I wear is a mayor.
This is an impact on my
community, um, and I would like
to understand how it's affecting
the city or the the state uh on
new builds on housing and on
commercial, uh, so that would be
something and then as Senator
Thornton just said, uh, that
some of the area that I
represent, uh, we are getting a
lot of notices that they are not
uh.
They're getting their insurance
canceled, um, so between that
and the buffer program, I think
would be very interesting for me
to try to help those folks
defend their homes, uh, as
they're trying to figure out how
to insure their homes. So those
would be some of my priorities.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Um, most of
the topics have been touched on,
but I too, I think it benefit
the committee uh to hear about
Representative Lujan's bill 394,
I believe it is. And then
there's been a couple of
mentions of House Bill 403, the
Reclamation fund, um, unless
you're, um, involved in the
discussions and the energy
committee, um, you probably
don't have the benefits of
really getting into the weeds
and the details of that, but
with the help of the vice chair
and the chairman and all members
of the committee.
bill passed out of the House
Energy Committee unanimously, if
I recall, which uh isn't, is a
fairly rare thing. Um, the other
thing I think we need to have is
a robust discussion on B4, the
oil and gas price and production
declines. It's something I
talked about a lot in committee
and, and on the floor. And I
think, uh, it's really important
for this committee to, to
realize that, that while we're
also facing a, a, a price
decline. We're soon gonna be
facing a production decline as a
result of it. So this state's
gonna get a double whammy in
terms of
impact, um, if prices don't
improve, and I think it'd be a
benefit the committee to, to
have some discussion on how to
prepare for that, um, the, the
only other item uh that I, that
sort of caught my eye is B17 on
page 4, and it's talking about
wind turbine copper and critical
mineral recycling opportunities,
which I certainly support. I
think that's it, an excellent
idea now that we've done away
with the pennies, maybe we can,
uh, we can generate a lot more
copper, um, but I'd also like to
hear perhaps about some of the
mining opportunities.
the state. So, um, being a
geoscientist, I'm probably
somewhat more familiar about
those than than many people in
the room, but I think it benefit
the committee to have a short
presentation about how
mineral-rich New Mexico truly
is. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I'm
like many others, um definitely
interested in the desalinization
as a tool to resolve water
issues and as an answer for
economic development or possibly
uh bringing more uh more um
industry to New Mexico and so
not using our aquifer water, uh,
but I'm also, um, on topic C
with all things fire, uh, not
only for post-fire restoration
efforts, but force management,
um, prevent, preventing these
fires.
Uh, especially now hearing that
a lot of these, uh, a lot of
these areas are getting their
fire insurance, um.
Canceled because of the risk,
um, we need to better manage our
forests so that they don't have
as much of a risk. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
Without rehashing everything.
I was very happy to see that a
lot of our wildfire legislation
was passed this year and with
the bipartisan support that it
did receive.
I would like to see as far as
the uh New Mexico State
Forestry.
Talking about their mapping
program that they were wanting
to get and how to get that
mapping in place to where they
uh risk management team can come
in and really study.
Uh, a lot of the areas that's
gonna be impacted by fire.
And um just to echo a little bit
what Senator Thornton was
talking about is possibly
getting economic development,
the EDD and maybe start figuring
out how we are going to start
A thinning program and maybe
they could do some research on
how to bring a thinning program
in and possibly be able to do
some 0 or 2, some low interest
loans on equipment so that
people could come in there and
possibly, you know, have a
robust system to where we can
get a lot of this done, um, in
my area, I, I know everybody's
been to Cloudcroft. It's, it's
on my mind, it's in my dreams,
and it's kind of turned into a.
nightmare, and I think that that
place is in, in dire straits and
um
I'd love to see the first
thinning start happening in that
area. I want it to go all over
New Mexico, especially in
Uh, the communities where we
need these buffers areas put in,
and then also um the insurance
um, there was some good news
yesterday, and the fair plan did
raise their, their um caps to
750,000 on residential. So
everyone that's getting
canceled. I know that there's a
ton of people in my area that's
being canceled. Hopefully, the
state will be able to help them
out and get them some insurance.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Let's go to this
table and then we'll do
introductions of a couple people
who came in.
These are priorities. People are
talking about their 1 or 2
priorities for the work plan,
please. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. So, um, under uh B, uh,
one of the things that I'm
particularly interested is
Blackstone and their acquisition
of um PNM and the questions that
I have in terms of that is
Blackstone is a private equity
firm, and how is that going to
impact um PNM and our ability uh
to um maintain.
Um, electricity. The other piece
is with regard to mining.
Um
And the impact mining's impact
specifically uranium is one of
the uh pieces that I'm thinking
about and the impact on water,
um.
The health of the communities
and also the environment. Thank
you, Representative Lujan. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I think you've
developed quite the plan as we
see every year, um, a few things
I would add to the plan, um,
that I saw during the session,
whereas the study on nuclear
energy, uh, commission and just
a nuclear energy panel
discussion, um, and then I
would, I'd focus on having um
secret uh Kender Dine, for
Emner, uh, give a presentation
on our energy demand and
overview and.
would include the geothermal
projects and economy that we are
building out, um,
I would, I would, I just second
on the um, the federal
information, particularly the
IRA infrastructure.
Um
At um and knowing where we are
with our investments, um, what
are the impacts of, if there are
any, to our state right now, um,
and just an overview there and
Uh, what else do I have here?
Uh, would you to have to be
circular economy. It was one of
the bills we passed as well, and
I just like to get some um
further discussion and waste
management circular economy.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Could I have the two
members come up to a microphone,
maybe take the seat of
Representative Kadena and
Senator Lopez introduce yourself
and then maybe give us your
priorities.
And then we'll go on after their
comments will go on to um
The um
sites.
Good morning, madam chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, thank you for such
thoughtfulness and an expansive
work plan for us to begin with.
I um like leader worth really
appreciate hearing more and
being kept in the conversation
about the Texas v. New Mexico.
status settlement status, um, I
represent a district south of
EBID just this weekend, we cele
celebrated the release of water
for release from Leesburg Dam,
for those of you that aren't
aware that does mean that the
majority of the year, 9, 10
months out of the year, the same
river that many of you all
experienced the Rio Grande has
no water where I represent, so
we celebrate the release of the
water that the water is coming
back. Um, and actually, as it
happens,
The, the gate where we measure
our obligations to Texas is also
above that down, so we're really
celebrating the release of water
that we're sending to Texas, and
there's so many complexities in
that that I appreciate this
committee looking into. I also
just something that we heard
updates on in the news last
week, uh, Vice Chair McQueen was
pretty familiar with this issue
as um.
Senator Townsend and others, uh,
this session we did pass a
massive tax change that meant
that a particular player in
industry pattern energy could
seek a tax break that wasn't our
revenues impacting local
counties upwards of 250 million,
um, in federal courts just this
week, um, sovereign nations
based in Arizona have one for
now on appeal about what's
happening because of the the
feds mess.
up on the consultation of moving
that project through their
lands. So of course, if you
drive up I-25, you say that
project is built and done, but I
think it's important that we
continue to have conversations.
About the project generally
about the tax implications that
we, um, changed and generally
what that project means moving
forward. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair and
good morning, uh, Linda Lopez,
state senator, District 11, the
Southwest quadrant of Bernalo
County, and I have no additions.
I think the water plan that you
have presented is very thorough.
There are a few areas that I
will say ditto, look forward to
learning more this interim.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I'm gonna throw
in my two cents, um,
Uh, we're gonna focus on water,
we're gonna focus on the grid
development, uh, to.
Tying to the western states and
to protect ourselves from
blackouts and talk about the
acquisition of utilities and
bringing the PRC.
OK, we are now moving on. I know
lots of people have ideas. We
have gone through them, um,
everybody's talked at least
once, and we're going to the
sites now. I would like for you
all to talk about or to think
about this.
We have 45 to 55 people who show
up for the committee and the
staff.
Then we have the presenters.
And then we have the public.
So when you talk about sites, we
need a space for around 100
people.
And we also need a site where
people can go out and find food
and lodging, as you talk about
this.
OK, so I know there are some
recommendations and I will be
happy to go to the ideas and uh
representative Little, you had
an idea about sites. Yes, I do.
Yes, in addition to one of the
piece, but a site would be uh uh
CNM West campus. There is space
available there in an auditorium
that's available. I have reached
out to our um to CNM to see if
they would consider uh
sponsoring.
Um, a committee interim
committee there. So, um,
And I believe it would
accommodate a group of the size
as well, and if not there, they
may offer another location.
OK, so CNM West, OK, so going
back to, I think Senator, do you
want to bring up your idea
again?
Yes, ma'am, in light of reading
for the proposed meetings would
be held, I would like to
encourage that this committee,
uh, let's go down to
southeastern New Mexico. I have
visited with the people at
Central Valley Electric in
Articia meeting has been held
there many years ago. They are
able to get accommodate up to
200 people in their meeting
room, they do have the
facilities, uh, that is in the
heart of the oil and gas
industry, plus the water.
Concerns that we are having
around that area. They do have
um
The ability for Wi Fi and for
the microphones to be used and
they are
More than, more than willing to
accommodate this committee, so I
do hope that we take that one
into consideration. I just would
encourage that it not be done
during September because of the
air races.
So, um, Senator, um, the rates
for the hotels.
Uh, we had 1 or 2 staff tell me,
and I don't know if it was in
that community or somewhere
else, that they slept in their
cars because they could not
afford hotels. So what would be
going on with that.
Madam Che would depend on what
was going on in that area as far
as the industry goes.
OK, but right now there are
plenty of accommodations, and I
think Senator Townsend and
Mayor, where is he? Henry would
also agree with me that there
are plenty of accommodations in
the Artesia area as well as our
neighboring towns of Roswell and
Carlsbad, and they are very
competitive with anything that
is available up here in Santa
Fe, especially. Great, thank you
very much. Yes, Representative
Henry, and then we'll go over
here to Representative Senator
Cortez, Madam Chair, and I'll,
I'll.
Echo what the senator said. The
other building I would throw
into uh a possibility would be
the school administration
building. It's a new building,
it's fairly new building, um,
that can hold a a huge amount of
people, technology and
everything else, so would be
another possible place to hold
the the meeting.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Senator Cortez. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Um, as you
probably already know, I come
from the top oil producing
county in the nation, we
actually fluctuate with Eddie
County with my dear friend
Representative Henry, um, but I
took the the liberty of already
speaking with the economic
development of Lee County in my
hometown in Hobbs, Madam Chair,
and we would have everything
covered financially, and we have
two different facilities to
offer that would accommodate the
large
number that we have in this
committee, and it would be the
core, which is the center of
recreational excellence and also
our uh C tech facility. So I
would love it if you took it
into consideration. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair. Thank you. I
have a representative Royal
Cabier, then Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just want to ask we're on sites.
Yes, I wanna ask you a question
about sites, and then I have a
recommendation. Yes, the
question is, does this
committee, I can't recall, um,
rotate sites around the state
because I know that um most of
the other committees do, is that
what we are
and again.
This it's dependent upon
accommodations and the the last
committee in November will be
back here in Santa Fe, October,
we do have to get permission for
traveling, yes, so then I wanted
just to be clear on that one
because I remember that, I don't
know if it was this committee
but we visited hubs in Artesia.
I can't remember when, but I
think it was this committee, but
my second my other point is, uh,
I've been advised that in any of
our locations.
that we are welcome to use any
of the UNM sites campuses, they
can very well adequately
accommodate us and also
coordinate any possible site
visits that we need to make.
Stemming out of the those UNM
sites, so I just wanted to offer
that on the record because I was
asked to. Thank you, thank you,
uh, Senator Townsend. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair. I don't.
I mean, we all would like to
have our meetings in our
locations, especially a guy that
got up at 4 o'clock this morning
to be here at 9, that really
sounds pretty cool, but with
that said,
Having
Uh, a meeting in Southeast New
Mexico someplace.
I think it's really important. I
mean, there's many facilities in
Carlsbad that have.
I mean, you can go to the real
take the center, you can go out
to the civic center, there's all
sorts of locations that have the
capacity ouresia has capacity.
Hobbes has capacity, so the, the
point is,
Uh, much of what we do affects
the industry that is alive and
well down there, and we owe them
the courtesy of showing up and
uh
And allowing them to give us
feedback. So thank you very
much.
Thank you very much. uh
Representative Mooya.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I am not going to advocate for
my community.
Um, I, I see that there we have
almost an entire page of
energy-related, uh, topics. And
I, I do think it would be very
important to go, uh, to one of
those communities, um, I, I
didn't hear Roswell's name
thrown out there, but Roswell
also has, uh, places that can,
can accommodate this, um, and I
would say that uh if it is held
even down in Hobbs, I'm up in
Farmington and these energy
issues are important to
enough that I will make that
trip. So I don't think anybody
would be sacrificing any more
than me to make an 8 hour trip
down to hops. So, um, I, I think
We had 23 bills, I believe, that
were introduced last year
concerning energy, and I, and I
think that uh if if we're gonna
be uh looking at that industry,
I think it's very important that
we go down to that industry and
find out what the people in the
industry, workers in particular,
uh, think about what we're doing
up here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. So I, I
representative Luhan. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I'm gonna go in
the opposite direction of of
Romanoya and say we should go up
close to the four corners if
we're going to be talking about
grid mod in western states, and
maybe we could get some impact
or um information from those
states. I had an energy policy
symposium where I had other uh
legislators attend from our
Western states, and just a
thought. Thank you.
Thank you. We have looked at the
uh sites in the past two years,
but it does look like we should
go to the southeast, so we will
work on that. Uh, Representative
Garcia, uh, Madam Chair, um, you
have scheduled um July 1 and 2
in Las Vegas.
That coincides with the very,
the very popular 4th of July.
Festivities, so I would
recommend that we start making
reservations like tomorrow.
Mainly because of that uh big
event that happens on July 4th
in Las Vegas.
Thank you very much,
Representative, uh, quite true.
So, we have heard from many
people, we agree that we should
move, one of them, and we will
look, uh, the staff and I will
look at rearranging some things,
uh, we tried to look at past
places. We've already in 23 when
we went to Farmington, so we
probably won't go back up.
To the northwest.
Um
We have been to Riodoso, we have
been to Socorro, so we'll, we'll
go to the southeast, and then
we'll look at uh CNM West that
was recommended a year or two
ago, and we never got there, so
maybe that'll work out. Um, we
were thinking, um,
I know Las Cruces can be very
hot, but we were thinking about
the desal plant in Alamogordo on
that trip to add for a half a
day or so. So, um, the point was
brought up to me that almost all
our meetings are in air
conditioned spaces. It's really
traveling there, getting out of
the car and getting into an air
conditioned space. So if we can
bear the heat.
We'll do it. So, um, we will
take all of your comments into
consideration, and Sarah once
she gets approval for the dates,
the sites have.
Man,
you already met.
The ludge council.
Uh, no, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
June 23rd is the approval of all
the committees. So we will have
a plan, the staff and I will
have a plan ready for ledge
council for June 23rd, but we
will count on our first meeting
going up to Vegas, trying to get
the AG there and some of the
other relevant topics for up
here in North. OK, moving along.
Yes, representative Zamora.
And Madam Chair, thank you for
the giving me a chance to speak,
uh, there was an error made in
the in the.
In the
Paperwork that got done and I am
a voting member on Naginwater,
and I don't know what you all
have discussed in the past 2030
minutes, I was out.
Trying to find out where I was
on all this. So I do feel like
uh Clovis would be uh welcoming
place for you guys to have a, a
meeting. We have the eastern New
Mexico pipeline going on there,
and we also have the POS
affected area, and they just
started filtering that water and
reinjecting it there at Cannon
Air Force Base, and I've had a
chance to tour that, so.
And I understand if we can be
put kind of on the back burner,
but if there's a place that we
need to go or, or look, look at
the meeting at, I'm sure Clovis
would welcome us.
Thank you for the
recommendation. Uh, one last
comment, Representative Royal
Caballero. And then we're moving
to our presentation. Thank you,
Madam Chair. You mentioned the
AG would be at the Las Vegas
meeting we're going to invite if
we're,
yes, if that is um so then
perhaps we could ask him or her
or whoever shows up to give us
an um maybe an update and the
impact of the 2023 Supreme Court
ruling on the Clean Water Act.
Yes, and they did last year and
the year before, we, that's why
we did the 2nd and the bills,
but we will ask them in
particular, we would be asking
them to come for an executive
session on uh any water rights
settlements, but we will take
that into consideration. Thank
you, madam. Thank you. OK, we're
moving on now to our presenter
from
Is Austin here?
Apparently I'm on a different
time clock. I apologize. I was
an hour ahead.
maybe any other comments. OK, so
we have time for other comments.
Yes, uh, Representative Little
and then.
Was a representative Murphy.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I just wanted to add, I did have
a chance to take a look at the
listing this uh this morning and
I wanted to register um uh my uh
priorities would be on the uh
section 5.
On page 2, the water Security
Planning Act report, uh, it's
particular of importance to the
activities in and around the
west side of Albuquerque as well
as the entire valley and the
state, um, the also item C, the
updates from the water security
tribal Advisory Council. I'm
looking forward, I would
encourage that, I think that
would be a very good overview of
what is happening, especially
for some that have not been
involved in these areas.
Um, and I'll leave it at that,
and the others have already been
identified, but I wanted to add
those in there. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I realize that
you may thump me in the back of
the head cause you're trying to
hurt a lot of cats here, and
they're not on my comments
aren't related to locations but
to dates.
And a couple of things to
consider following up a
representative Garcia's, uh,
mention of July 4th there may be
a number of members traveling
over that period of time, so
something to keep in mind, the
Las Cruces and Almogordo uh
dates coincide with a number of
members, uh, maybe in Ireland or
uh the trade commission meeting
and um in September 11th and
12th, um, I, if you are
considering going to the
Southeast, the Rossville Air
show is Reno Air Show, Ross Show
is September 10th through the
14th, so there's a.
respect.
Thank you. Thank you, and I
don't know where Sarah went.
Did you hear all of that? OK, so
first of all,
Legislative counsel for people
who don't know this.
They take all of the committees.
And they take all of the voting
members first, and they have a
software program.
That they identify where when,
not where, when the meeting
should occur.
So we will overlap with some
other committees.
Uh, where members of this
committee, for example, on HHS
and they're meeting somewhere
else. Sometimes we try to get it
together, sometimes it doesn't
work like that, but uh
legislative council does the
dates. We actually were going to
run up right to July 3rd, and we
convinced him to go back to 1
and 2, so I do understand summer
is a time to be with family, a
time to travel, uh, and I
apologize if you won't be here
for every single.
Solitary meeting, uh, in the
past, uh, vice chairs had to
come for me while I've been out
of the country. I have had to
cover for him when he's not
available and that might happen
again. So I apologize for the
dates, but ledge council does
all that sifting to make sure we
can get our voting members.
Senator Townsend, you had a
comment? Yes, ma'am. A little
bit off.
Your subject line, but you said
something a while ago that
jogged my memory when you were
talking about the heat.
There's a new heat index rule
that's coming out of this being
contemplated by the uh
environment slash Aha.
So if we meet in southeast New
Mexico, it would be
It would draw you a crowd of
people that would come and visit
you about visit us about this
heat index rule, especially if
we have it. So, uh, Steve, are
you encouraging us to go then?
I'm encouraging you to do that
and to put it out in the public
that you want people to comment
on the heat index rule, and you
will have a lot of people come
and talk to you. OK, thank you
very much. So because I jumped
way ahead, um.
I'd like to ask how many people
in the audience are here for
public comment.
OK, we're gonna jump to public
comment for those here, we will
make sure that we get the public
comment for the people on Zoom.
So, uh, if people would come
forward, we'll give you 3
minutes maximum norm come ahead
and anybody else who's planning
on coming come right up, sit
next to Norm so that we can uh
keep going. And I know that this
is scheduled for 12:15, but if
you are here, you are invited to
come up and talk. Norm, please
go ahead.
I.
Introduce yourself for the
committee and then make your
comments, 3 minutes. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
water and O Resources Committee
and advisors.
Your charge is incredibly
important.
Water, lack of water is, I
think, New Mexico's preeminent
challenge.
And it's, it's an existential
one.
My name is Norm Gom. I'm
president of the New Mexico
Water Advocates.
I'm a former director of the New
Mexico Interstate Stream
Commission.
New Mexico is on the brink of
another Texas being the Mexico
case in the United States
Supreme Court.
I didn't hear any state
legislature today.
Identify as one of their key
issues.
That they need to understand the
imminent new Rio Grande compact
violation.
That is being caused by
excessive depletions of water.
In the middle Rio Grande.
New Mexico ended 2024 with a
124,000.
Acre foot, cumulative shortfall.
And it's Rio Grande water
deliveries.
Through the Middle Rio Grande to
Elephant Butte Reservoir.
All of this water delivery debt.
Has accrued
Since 2018.
Which is the last year of the
New Mexico ran a credit.
In the intervening 7 years.
We've racked up 124,000 acre
foot of water delivery debt.
All of that debt is caused by
excessive depletions of water in
the Middle Rio Grande.
And no one
is managing those, no one.
The governor authorized the
state engineer to request.
$500,000 last year in recurring.
Um
Budget.
To provide staff, office space,
and to cover expenses.
Staff to deal with this overuse
and the need, the, the, the
The imperative that we
administer water because all of
the individual uses.
All of them in goodwill and good
meaning.
In total, add up to more than
the water resource can bear.
We have to cut back.
I spent about 2 days in the last
2 days, calculating where we
stand on the compact this year.
We have 76,000 acre foot of
buffer until we hit the 200,000
acre foot explicit debt limit in
the compact where 76,000 acre
feet away.
By my calculation, we have
burned through.
Health
Of that margin so far this year.
We have underdelivered about
38,000 acre feet.
We should have delivered.
I remember the exact number.
But we are way short.
I remember that um
That I did calculate that by the
compact,
We're supposed to let 57% of the
water that the native water that
passes the Ottaway gauge near
Santa Fe.
57% needs to go through.
This year so far.
39%.
It's gone through.
House Bill 423 last year.
Requested large appropriations
to implement the water Security
Planning Act, money for the
regions to do the planning, not
the ISC.
He said the regions would do the
planning, yet they have no
resources yet to do that and
won't have any unless you
provide an appropriation in the
coming legislature, and they
won't get that for another year.
We're not funding the water uh
the Water Data Act, we're not
doing any of the basics.
We have to administer water.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We have water emergencies in
this state.
And we are focusing, you are
focusing on marginal solutions
that will make a tiny bit of
difference.
When we have a gap.
That's huge, and you and we as a
society are not even owning up
to that, much less facing. Thank
you very much. Is there someone
else in the audience that
planned to do public comment.
Now is the time.
Pam, please come forward.
Um, who else would like to make
public comment.
Several of you did send I
recognized from the audience did
send ideas to Sarah and I and
the vice chair, so we appreciate
that.
Go ahead and introduce yourself,
please, Madam Chair, committee
members, thank you very much for
the opportunity. My name is Pam
Roy and I'm executive director
of Farm to Table nonprofit based
here in New Mexico. We also are
the coordinator of the New
Mexico Food and Agriculture
Policy Council and Lawrence
Sallegos, our chair, is with us
today as well. Um, we appreciate
you all considering um us giving
a report on uh the diversifying
of the local food and
agriculture emissions that are
happening here in New Mexico
last year.
July, um, Department of
Agriculture reported on the
significance of that increase,
um, in a 5 year stretch over
COVID, we went from 4% of what
is grown and raised in New
Mexico, staying in New Mexico to
10.7%. That's a bandwidth,
right? Um, we understand and we
too are really concerned about
the water issues in New Mexico
and through our New Mexico food
and agricultural Policy Council
have a statement that's
requesting that water be
Focused on local food production
for New Mexico first, as much as
possible so we can continue to
build out those markets for our
farmers and ranchers and meet
the needs of our communities,
food and food requirements,
right?
So that's that piece. The second
thing we would really like to be
able to do is last year we
reported on our very first year
of the New Mexico Food charter,
which looks at food and
nutrition, conservation and
farming and climate issues, and
then the third area is
infrastructure and government.
We'd like to report again on our
progress. We did a um specific
report on the initiatives and
issues across local food
systems, agriculture,
conservation programs, things
like that. We'll have our
2nd round of that, and we are
working specifically, um,
hopefully for you all and also
for a federal delegation to
understand what's happening
between the federal government
issues around conservation,
water, uh, not as much water as
that's a hard one as well, um,
food and nutrition issues and
what will happen if we have to,
um, if we have to absorb more
federal programs into New Mexico
and our budget. So
we were working on a report um
with our state agencies, with
the federal agencies, um, with
some foundations that are
helping us with that, so we have
accuracy in that we'd like to
report on that as well. So thank
you very much for your
consideration of our request.
Thank you. Is there anyone else
uh who wanted to make public
comment that is sitting in the
audience. OK, our speaker from
LFC is here. We're gonna invite
him up.
Austin Davidson is our endlist
from LFC who focuses on some of
our issues, and we appreciate
you being here.
Thank you, madam chair, sorry
for being late.
That's fine. We were early. I
was on a different time clock. I
was driving back from uh
Midland, so I was just at a
produced water conference, so I
can certainly give a brief
overview if you like of that,
but I think we can maybe just
dive directly into the
presentation and then I'd be
happy to take any questions,
madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'll be giving
a brief overview of the uh
legislation recurring and
non-recurring highlights from
the 2025 legislative session,
turning to the second page of
your presentation, you'll see a
brief overview of the recurring
highlights of the collated
budgets for each of these
agencies, specifically the
environment department, the
Office of the State Engineer,
and then the energy, minerals
and natural resources
department.
Specifically, each of those
agencies collectively received
3.7 million. If you see on the
right side of that slide, you'll
see a graph that charts the
budget growth from FY to 15 to
FY 26, and you'll see from FY 15
to FY 26, their collective
budgets have grown by 131.5%,
and you'll see the largest
amount of growth came from FY20
to FY 26.
Turning to the 3rd page of the
presentation is a drill down
into the into the environment
department. Specifically, the
Environment Department did not
request a recurring budget
increase FY 26, they instead try
to prioritize the creation of a
new division within their
department, that would be the
compliance and enforcement
division, a good example of what
that division is working to do
is it's going to separate the
permitting and then the
regulation of those permits. A
good example of that.
Would be the enemy's air quality
Bureau, specifically, they
administer permits for the oil
and gas industry, and then they
also enforced the regulation of
that permit, what this new
division will do is it will keep
the permitting in the air
quality bureau, and then the
regulation of that permit will
then be coming into the
compliance and enforcement
division, essentially separating
the work of it.
In addition to that, they also
dismantled their special
revenues division. Essentially
that was a budgeting aspect.
There's no people that are
assigned to these special
revenues division. It was just a
clearing house. This for the
agency's other funds, create
administrative hurdles, so they
dismantled it and they placed
each of those uh budgets within
each of the divisions that
utilize them.
And if you see on the slide,
there's also graphs that chart
not only the different
appropriations of funding source
for enemyD in the blue on that
left hand side will be the other
state funds, Orange is gonna be
federal funds, green, other
transfers, and then red is the
general fund, and I think that
graph really illustrates well
how much of NMED's budget is
covered through federal funds,
and then you also see on the
bottom part, you'll see an
11-year history of budget growth
for enemyD.
And you'll see from FY 16 to FY
26, the legislature has
increased their budget by 188%.
Turning to the 4th page of the
presentation is a drill down
into the energy minerals and
natural resources department,
they recurring general fund
appropriations increased by 2.6
million or 6.1%, uh, 1.2 million
of the 2.6% went to the hotshot
crew operations costs,
specifically in the state
forestry division and the
remainder of those funds went to
personnel increases for the
program support, energy
conservation and management.
vision, the mind and reclamation
division, and then the state
parks division. And again, on
that right hand side of the page
you'll see in that orange just
how much of Mnerd's budget is
covered by federal funds, and
that has been a really large
increase over the last 5 years.
Turning now to the 5th slide for
the office of the state
engineer, their recurring
general fund appropriations
increased by 1.2 million or
3.4%, and that went to
supporting district office lease
increases, contract work for
implementation of the 50-year
water plan and fuel and field
work cost increases.
Additionally, OSE also received,
in addition to the 4% salary
increase all state employees
received. They also received 1.5
million for agency-wide.
pay increases to support
appropriate placement. You also
see on that left-hand side, OSE
does not have a large federal
funds that are going towards
agency operations, they're
predominantly funded through the
state.
Now turning to slide 6 of the
presentation is the beginning of
a legislative discussion and
then non-recurring discussions,
and I broke it up into different
topics. So starting with energy
growth and modernization, 10
million was appropriated for the
development and investment in
geothermal projects in the
state, 5 million to support
community energy efficiency
block grants, 2 million to
develop a state-specific
quadrilateral energy review and
transition plan, and that's
gonna
be piloted by M Nerd, and then
10 million to administer low
interest loan programs for
weatherization and adoption of
renewable energy technologies in
low-income communities, that's a
mirrored appropriation from last
year, and it was fully utilized
in 2024 and so Ener expects it
also to be fully utilized in
2025.
Additionally, passage of Senate
Bill 83 created the innovation
in state government fund, which
will provide agencies with funds
to create master plans and
increase agency capacity to
achieve net zero emissions, the
legislature appropriated 13.5
million into this fund, 2.5% of
that will go to Mnerd and then 5
million will be going to enemy
D.
Turning to slide 7 of the
presentation is the water
conservation protection and
infrastructure topic.
25 million was appropriated to
the Office of the State Engineer
to support Indian water rights
settlement projects, and that'll
be through F428, 5 million was
for continued work on interstate
water litigations, specifically
Rio Grande Compact litigation, 1
million for uh state regional
water planning, 5 million to 8
in the implementation of the
water security Planning Act and
the 50-year water plan, and then
200 million was appropriated to
the water protection fund.
for water infrastructure
projects.
Additionally, passage of House
Bill 137 created the strategic
water supply fund, placing $40
million into it for brackish
water desalination projects,
passage of Senate Bill 21, if
the New Mexico Environment
Department primacy, which means
that it gave the state's water
regulatory agency, the ability
to fully regulate its surface
and groundwater discharge and
then passage of House Bill 212
created the Pur and polyfluoroli
Protection Act, which defines
which consumer or
non-consumer goods containing
PAS will be removed or phased
out of sale, and they had a
timeline within that bill.
turning to page 8 of the
presentation is a breakdown of
the community benefit fund,
specifically passage of Senate
Bill 48 created the fund, which
will be managed by DFA and Mnerd
to support projects related to
reducing reliance on extractive
industries, specifically an
overburdened communities. The
legislature allocated 209.8
million into the fund and
distributes it to multiple
agencies, including economic,
uh, the economic development
department.
Workforce solutions, public
school facilities, higher
education, Mner and energy
related programs, specifically
in M-nerd's portion 30 million
is aimed at competitive grants
to enhance energy efficiency and
renewable technologies.
Page 9 is a two-parter. It's the
breakdown of the wildfire and
natural resource preparation and
response that was passed in the
2025 legislature, passage of
Senate Bill 33 created the
wildfire Prepared program and
the fire planning task force,
the law and state forestry the
ability to provide technical
assistance and training
regarding how to help structures
and properties in high wildfire
risk areas. The law also created
the wildfire Prepared Fund, a
fund which
will enable enactment of the law
in addition to providing grants
to political subdivisions.
Additionally, passage of House
Bill 553 created the timber
grading Act, which allows Emner
to create and administer a
certification program for the
grading of structural timbers
used in technology, and in
addition to all that, there was
30 million, 20 million in
non-recurring and then 10
million in capital outlay that
was directed, directed towards
wildfire mitigation and thinning
work.
Page 10 is the second part I was
told to separate these two
slides because there'd be too
many words, uh, a passage of
Senate Bill 31 created the
natural disaster revolving loan
fund, which provides zero
interest loans to qualifying
political subdivisions following
a federally declared natural
disaster. The law specifies 50
million to be transferred from
the appropriation contingency
fund to the fund each year and
the law directs DFA to
administer the loan program and
consultation with the.
Department of Homeland Security
and emergency management.
Specifically, the legislature
passed House Bill 191, which
would have created the post
wildfire and wildfire
suppression funds, those funds
would have acted as clearing
houses for funds and
reimbursements and state
forestry receives for wildfire
work, uh, additionally, there
was 12 million that would be set
aside for that fund, the
governor vetoed House Bill 191.
And then the last slide, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
it's kind of a brief overview of
what I touched on in the
recurring budgets for these
agencies, the past 4 years have
seen exponential growth in the
amount of federal dollars and
nerd at NED have access to
specifically federal funding for
enemyD has jumped in that 4-year
time span from 19 million or
15.2% of the agency's budget to
74 million or 41% of the
agency's budget, even larger
than that for MRD, the increase
was from 15.8 million or 26.8 to
now 125.3 million or 59.4% of
that agency's budget, and each
of those graphs illustrate that
point well, and I think to end
on it, Madam Chair, specifically
the recently passed House um
federal budget, mainly touches
on inflation reduction Act
grants, and those have different
ties to each of these agencies,
and with that madam chair, thank
you for letting me present and
I'll stand for any questions.
Thank you. So if you would.
Um
Raise your hand if you have a
question and Sarah is going to
start the list.
There are no questions for LFC.
So Representative Kate, anyone
else? Senator Silvia Lopez.
Represented Murphy, OK, Senator
Charlie.
Center uh Potem.
OK, we have Representative
Little, we have Representative
Sariana.
OK, so we have approximately an
hour.
And so far we have 1234567
people on the list, so if you
would be um cognizant of the
time, uh, that would take us up
to approximately 1210, 1215.
So first person representative
cases.
I thank you, chair, and, and
thank you Austin for this
presentation. This was a, a very
informative, um.
I
I, I can't believe I'm gonna say
this, but this is one of the
things that I was surprised by
this presentation is although
you're saying there is
Um, increased funding and
growth, we are only talking
about a couple percentage when
we know that for decades we've
had um a low investment, it's
called deferred maintenance of
our infrastructure.
Um, so I am interested in the
future to have what is the
budget that was requested by
such well pick on the office in
the state engineer's office
compared to what they've
received. So as a a legislator,
I want to know how close we are
funding what the agency is
asking for the need. I do
appreciate seeing what we
funded.
Compared to previous years, but
just in the future I'd like to
see on what was requested and
what we actually funded.
Thank you. Thank you, Austin.
Thank you Austin. Do you have
any comment,
Madam Chair, representative,
that's a, that's a great point.
Uh, I think there's different
budget documents that the LFC
publishes that kind of go over
each of these aspects, so I can
certainly add that into future
presentations, and I'd also be
happy to send you kind of a a
broken down list of what they
would call like the requested
budget, the executive budget,
and then the LFC's budget, and
then the agreed upon budget, so
kind of 4 different stages of
the process, but I'd be happy to
share it with you.
So members of, there is a
request for information, further
information. We're gonna ask the
presenters to send it to our
staff, and then our staff is
going to distribute it to the
entire committee, OK?
Thank you. Uh, next on the list
is Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
chair, I've been kind of, I've
been very concerned about what's
going on at the federal level
and how that's impacting the
state in a lot of different
areas and so on your slide on
11, um, where you talk about
the, the how the federal funds
have been responsible for the
for the growth, um, that's
really important to know what
kind of programs as the federal,
because what you see here is a
bipartisan infrastructure law
and the inflation reduction Act
funds, and then it says the
current house records.
ci li ation mainly affected
federal funds related to the
inflation reduction Act. So my
question is more is like
drilling down a little bit. What
are the programs that were
created with those funds, and
what did they do?
Just I, I understand it's a real
specific question, but an
overview of the types of
programs if you could, uh, Madam
Chair, Senator, that's a great
question. I think there's some
agency representatives here that
could maybe provide some of that
drill down information, but at a
high level, there's specific
programs within each of these
divisions that have the largest
federal exposure, specifically
at NMED, it would be the water
Protection Bureau
and then it would be multiple,
so it'd be the energy
conservation and management
division, it would be
State forestry, and it would be
the oil conservation division.
So those would be kind of that
high level that you're
requesting, Senator, and then in
terms of specific grants
specifically from the IRA. I can
provide you certainly a list of
what those would be. I think
there's also a new dashboard
that the Department of Finance
Administration has made the
charts each of those specific
grants, and if these agencies
are having any issues uh getting
those grants. So I can certainly
give you that information.
Excellent, I think I would be.
interested, I think the
committee would be interested
because I think it's something
we're gonna have to plan for,
um, and understand what the
impact is. I know that the
agencies are doing that and
we'll probably hear from them,
but it'd be good for us, I
think, to get a heads up.
Thank you, manager. So, uh,
Senator, you are correct, every,
uh, department's gonna be coming
in front of us, so we will be
able to drill down, but any kind
of general uh summary could be
helpful.
Thank you. So Representative
Murphy is next.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'll make my
comments short. The, um, the
thing that I struggle with at
times coming out of the private
sector is how we measure
success. What are the metrics of
success and, in particular, um,
I mean, you could, you could
make that comment about any
number of pieces of, of this
presentation. Money is
appropriated to an agency for
some purpose, and then what are
the expectations for that money.
And I looked specifically, um,
and I don't mean to pick these
out, but they happen to jump out
and it's.
HB 137 and the brackish water
and the SB 48, the Community
Benefit fund. And
To me at times when I've asked
that question, it seemed like
the answer was as well, we spent
the budget, but what I'm really
interested is how many bracket
projects did you really get off
the ground?
Or, you know, what was the, what
were the expectations? How was
the money spent? What was
accomplished? And, and as, as we
go forward, putting that into
perspective, at least for me,
would be very helpful. And so, I
don't know if you have a
specific answer or if this is
more just a general
recommendation.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's a great point. I think
one of the things the LFC
strives to do is to do our
performance report cards
specifically on agencies
recurring programs when it comes
to non-recurring appropriations
and the different aspects of
success that are tied to those,
that's an ongoing conversation,
the LFC is having, and one of my
colleagues is going to be doing
quarterly reports that'll be
giving kind of brief overviews
of how the money is being spent.
Now, in terms of like the
metrics of success for specific
appropriations, that's more tied
to what agencies are doing, so.
Uh, I can certainly provide more
detail from what I can, but I
think that is an ongoing
conversation.
Thank you, Senators uh Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I, I've been trying to make sure
I know what we've done with the
blogs around wildfire, wildfire
suppression, etc. and the money,
so I know that the governor
veto one of these bills, and I,
my understanding is that she
took because there we didn't put
any money into the fund that it
outlined, I think it's 191, but
on page 9 of your presentation.
Um, you say that a total of 30
million was directed towards
wildfire mitigation and thinning
work.
So I'm assuming that is
Part of Senate Bill 33, because
that was, can, can you just be a
little bit more expansive about
where that money is.
That Senator, I apologize for
any confusion I caused, so
specifically that 30
Senator, the, the 30 million is
in two different buckets, so 20
million of that is going to be
within House Bill 2 within
section 5 or non-recurring. So
that's specifically for programs
that exist at Enerd State
Forestry right now, and that's
going towards mitigation
projects. Then 10 million of
that is within capital outlay,
which has a longer time frame of
use, and it's going towards the
same.
Uh, actions then specifically
the 12 million I discussed on
page 12.
That would be going into the
post wildfire fund if House 191
would have been passed, would
have been addition to that work,
but it would have been within a
permanent fund, so it wouldn't
have been tied to the different
strictures that come with
non-recurring or capital
appropriations.
So I hope that answers the
question or maybe I've added
more confusion. So Madam Chair,
the 12 million, are you saying
that wasn't even, that wasn't
part of any of the budgets.
Madam Senator, that was part of
House Bill 191. It's a
contingent appropriation and so
if 191 would have been passed,
it would have gone into the fund
due to the governor vetoing 191,
that that goes back to the
general fund. OK, I get it.
All right, um, thank you very
much and, and thank you, Madam
Chair, for making sure we hear
from uh Senator Woods about his,
uh,
Senate Memorial to he has quite
a great work crew, um, with
Laura McCarthy kind of heading
it up, uh, to let us know uh
what else we need. So thank you
so much.
Thank you, Representative
Little. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you for your
presentation. Uh, my question is
uh related to the um water
conservation protection and
infrastructure, specifically on
page 7, the 25 million to the
office of the State Engineer to
support Indian water rights
settlement projects. Um,
I'm curious, you may not have
this information, but I'd be
interested in finding out what
the status is of those in and I
understand that it's a federal
piece, this uh, this is the um
My understanding these, Madam
Chair, that these are the uh
States a portion, is that
correct? Is that my
understanding correct? And so
what is the likelihood that
these are going to
Um, the expended.
Um,
While knowing, Madam Chair,
being aware that these are long
term, uh,
Agreements that are going to be
worked out, but I'm curious as
to whether we might have, uh,
I'd like some information about
those and which are affected.
I've tried to keep up with them,
but um things have changed quite
a bit and evolved. Thank you.
Madam Chair, representative,
that's a great question. I don't
know if anyone from the Office
of the State Engineer is here, I
think he maybe provide that
information to you, you know,
later today or you can provide
it right now. Madam Chair
Representative, I'm Nat Jakris.
I'm the general counsel to the
state engineer and I oversee our
Indian water right settlement
work. I can provide you a
detailed breakdown, uh, a table,
uh, likely later today, uh, I
will just say in general, um,
you, you are correct, of course,
the, the 25
million dollars appropriation
was for the uh a portion of the
state share of these settlements
that are currently pending
before Congress, uh, we, what we
are trying to do is, is much of
that work as possible that we
can put towards early projects
that can get out and get spent
now, uh, that's what we're
prioritizing and we have sort of
a breakdown of where that's some
of the settlements are
specifically called out for that
money to be for early
settlements, and we're happy to
give you that breakdown.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
madam.
Thank you, Representative
Sarana.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
thank you for your presentation,
Austin. Um, on page 8, you talk
about the community benefit
fund, and I had a um a group of
people come and ask me about
thinning in the East Mountains,
um, and I went to Senator
Stewart, and she said it would
fall under the Community Benefit
fund, but she said it would
probably under Ener and since
Ener is here, I was wondering if
there was a specific department
that that would fall under, or
you may know.
Uh, Madam chair representative,
uh, I can certainly maybe meet
offline with uh Emner to kind of
see if the money can be
stretched to those projects. I
think that the strictures of the
community benefit fund were
pretty broad, though I think how
they're implemented is something
the LFC is very interested in to
see how the money is utilized,
but whether or not it can be
stretched to that, I think we're
still trying to figure out if
that's. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone else?
I can't believe this group is
not verbose.
Yes, Senator Scott and
represented some or did you just
send her Scott.
Uh, Mr. Jackson, looking at the
trajectory.
Of that
Of those two charts on page 11.
And given that the
reconciliation bill is
For long.
What are your projections.
With respect to those two
charts.
As to those federal funds.
That might be available going
forward.
Madam Chair, Senator, are you
specifically asking the
projections as to how these will
impact innered enemy D or to
whether these two agencies can
draw down these funds as this
federal budget goes through. I'm
sorry if I, I just wanted to
understand the question
specifically with respect to the
impact.
On
Enemy D and E. Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, I don't really want
to go over my skis and project
whether or not they'll be
impact. I think it's an evolving
landscape and it's really hard
to tell the direction of things.
I can certainly follow up with
you as we get more uh finality
if the Senate does pass a budget
and how those impacts will then
go down, but I think that right
now a lot of what's being
discussed is the timeline of the
impacts and whether these grants
will go through, so I can
certainly provide a better
answer, but right now I don't
think I can give you a concrete.
So,
madam chair.
Unknown at this point would be
the answer.
OK. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any further, yes,
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Austin, um.
On your page 4.
Uh, 1.2 million for a hotshot
crew operation, how is that?
Being implemented, I mean, what?
Uh
What is that going towards?
Also, um, man, are we housing
hotshot crews? Do we have
hotshot crews?
In our state. I know as of some
years back.
We didn't.
Um
Do you know, man, if we do have.
Our own hotshot crews now in New
Mexico, and if so, how many?
Madam Chair Representative,
great question. I can certainly
provide the detail I have. I
think I'd also maybe direct you
to Mnerd for any of the
follow-up and also uh Steve
Forrester McCarthy could also
provide more detail, but we do
have two hotshot crews and
specifically that 1.2 million is
going towards fully funding
those two operations,
specifically the funding for
those two hotshot crews was kind
of done in piecemeal operations
throughout 3 years. And so this,
according to Ener is fully
funding what those hotshot crews
are going to be doing, so.
I think that's the high-level
explanation of what they're
going to do. I can also
certainly direct you to end and
can provide more detailed
information at a later date.
OK, thank you for that.
Thank you. Any further questions
for LFC analyst.
Thank you very much for coming
today. We appreciate your time
and the handout.
And it will give us a lot to ask
the departments as they come
forward. Thank you. Make you
madam Chair. Um, so we are now
back to the section that has
public comment.
And is there anybody on Zoom,
OK, if you're on Zoom.
And you wish to make a comment,
please raise your hand.
These are for our Zoom
participants.
Sarah does not see anybody.
OK, the last call for anybody in
the room.
Who would like to make any
public comments.
Well, I'll come back to
legislators.
Is there anybody else in the
room that would like to make a
public comment.
OK, now back to legislators,
last call for legislative
comments representative Terra
Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
wanted to make one announcement
that the we are going to here on
the 5th and 6th is the um water
summit of the Santa Fe water
summit's resiliency, the next
generation water summit bringing
together the building and
development community water
reuse professionals and water
policy makers in a collaborative
setting to share best practices
and learn about innovative water
conservation and water reuse
techniques that can be used to
comply with water.
a conservation restrictions
spreading across the Southwest,
um, Mountain chair, it's one of
the, the, I've gone to we all
have, but I just wanted to say
it's gonna be here at the
Capitol on the 5th and 6th.
Anybody's interested, there's
registration is open, uh, learn
tons. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Uh, representative Miguel
Garcia, did you have something
else?
You know, Madam Chair, I think
it'd be relevant um.
For the committee to do a report
on the potential lawsuit.
Which uh seeks to enforce our
constitutional guarantees.
To, uh, clean air quality water.
In a healthy environment and
chair, and also I'd like to kind
of also reiterate the.
Uh, what's already been
addressed regarding the
reclamation fund, but uh we
really need to restore the
integrity of the oil
restoration.
A reclamation fund, and I know
Representative Murphy had a
really good deal at bipartisan
support.
And I should, I think it should
be a priority for this coming
session and chair.
Thank you very much. Any further
comments.
Yes, Representative Roba
Caballero. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Excuse me, I'd like to.
Share a little bit of a concern.
Well, it's not a little bit of a
concern, it's a major concern
that I have, and I'm gonna send
this article to um Sarah and
perhaps she can share it with
everyone, Madam Chair, and it's
an article that came out by the
AP Associated Press just this
last, this last week.
And it's concerning the um
And, and why I think we need to
have a discussion, a serious
discussion around creating
buffer zones for schools.
And um really talk about the
health impacts of extraction.
For the associated Press to
carry an article um of this
magnitude, it's very concerning
to me, and it describes um the
effects of the um emissions that
are occurring in counselor, New
Mexico, around the area of
Lybrook and uh which is in the
heart of New Mexico San Juan
Basin, and the effects that it's
having on our schoolchildren,
and the fact that
um, schoolchildren are
Absent from school because of
continued bouts of nausea.
Headaches and other um
Health-related issues and their
inability to attend school. And
so for me, it is very
concerning. It has been
concerning.
Forever for me, um, the
pollutive industries and their
emissions and the health effects
in general, and also um the
health effects on our aging
population, and um I just
Believe that although we
appreciate and honor and are
thankful, grateful.
Or the contributions of oil and
gas, and what they have made to
our um general fund and our
revenue streams.
We cannot dismiss, Madam Chair,
the fact that um they have
adverse effects in our
communities, and so I think we
need to balance what are we're
being grateful for.
With the fact that um we need to
find ways to, as I said, Madam
Chair, creating um
Buffer zones and inviting the
oil and gas industry.
To work with us in mitigating
the effects. There are
scientific facts related, um,
health related facts related to
the effects of polluted
industries on our children, and
I want to mitigate as much as we
can for the future generations.
So I just offer that, I'll send
it to Sarah and then we'll share
it with the committee. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Any final word, uh, committee
members, I'd like to thank you
all.
For your promptness today and
moving right along, uh, one last
call for public comment before
we recess for our next meeting.
OK, and there are some of you or
all of you have invitations for
a 12:30 event and then there's a
committee starting at 1:30. Some
of you are on. Thank you very
much for coming. We are in
recess until the next meeting.
