Could go ahead and then come up
to the table.
Okay we have two more sessions
this afternoon and then public
comment
or next session is we called it
production strategies
so
cloud seating and water
harvesting and
I think we're sort of massaging
some of those terms and coming
up with perhaps better terms but
a first step I understand we
have rick lead better instead of
my connector right
rick go ahead so ricky at the
push the button to turn on the
mike and then it it's it's been
good practice when you're done
talking to push it again so we
don't get the feedback okay
thank you.
Are a written lead better I am
the
on the sore rose saw road about
solely water contribution
district a mac could not make it
so I did today so.
Well we're just here to mister
chairman we're just here
membership meeting we're just
here to talk about this whether
what brain following hands but
program we currently have a
program going in rose about
county and all the eastern side
of new mexico that we got some
funding from the legislature in
this last session for
with me I have george belmar who
is are a consultant on this
project and he I think would
like to give us a review of how
the process works
thank you mr chairman members of
the committee my name is george
bombard i'm a retired state
meteorologist and I advise the
reason soul and water
conservation and district on its
rain enhancement program that
now covers about an eastern one
third of the state of new mexico
we began operating on the first
of july the beginning of the new
fiscal year and surprisingly
we've had an air craft in the
year seating
storms more than half of the
days in the months of july and
august normally jan july is a a
month where
growing cumeless young
thunderstorms are
rather uncommon and the man soon
kicks in normally and august in
so we projected that we'll be
doing cloud seating through the
end of september assuming that
the resources hold out we've
already
accumulated and unusually high
number of aircraft hours as well
as seeding material
august is not been is prolific
as july in terms of a number of
thunderstorms that whether right
are indicated needed a nurge
that's what cloud seating is
designed to do to enable.
A growing cumulus
they begins to show an echo on a
radar screen it it's built are
produced a load of rain water
but that rain shaft is only in
the last of few minutes and less
it gets some additional
ammunition in the form of
artificial eyes and cloud
seating is designed uh to allow
an aircraft to burn what we call
parallel techniques are flares
that are mounted on the wings of
the aircraft to get more
artificial ice into the inflow
of a thunderstorm converting
more of the cloud water in the
raindrops
we've been doing that in new
mexico often on the last several
years this is the first year
that we've been able to deploy
two aircraft and
for the size of the target area
that we're working which is more
than twenty million acres
there are occasions when we have
so many young thunderstorms that
needed that our in need of the
nurge that we could deploy even
a third or fourth aircraft but
the plan is to continue seeding
through september with two
aircraft one based in portalists
one based in artasia
and that would continue through
the month of september and then
we would resume next spring
probably in mid april and
conduct more operations through
the end of june.
I'm happy to take any questions
that you may have at the
appropriate time
so we'll see if questions for
the end of the in your that's
you're done that's your no I can
i'll continue okay we have a
little bit of time but
maybe some of the
you know my my question while my
questions would be what do you
use to precipitate the
george bombard again
we are using a combination of
what we call glacier genic
material glacio jennick means
ice forming silver I died is the
conventional glacier jenny agent
it's been in use in the western
united states for over seventy
years and by the way nearly
every western state is doing
cloud seating now
most of them are doing it during
the cold season for the purpose
of augmenting snow back on
mountain ranges
but in the south western states
arizona is beginning a a new
rain enhancement program in the
summertime for the first time
ever new mexico as I said as a
limited history of having seated
storms in the past the state of
taxes is been doing cloud
seating since nineteen seventy
and we have five projects in
texas that are nearly thirty
years old we generated a very
substantial data base that we've
been able to analyze and we are
confident that we're putting
additional rain water on the
ground
I would like to say that every
cloud seating mission is
engineered by a experienced well
trained meteorologist who's
operating at a base on the
ground using dopper weather
right our furnished by the
national weather service.
And it's the meteorologist that
is able using dopper where the
radar to essentially do
continue a scans of the sky and
thus able to recognize those
clouds that are going to be
efficient on their own
and which clouds are going to
need some help
clouds for marine drops by using
some of the ice that mother
nature provides
but most of these thunderstorms
we say are any fisher they live
about forty five minutes on
average for all of the moisture
that they bring in from below
they only convert about a third
of their interrain drops that
actually fall through the cloud
and reach the ground as rain
water
and for many years we've been
doing research in the western US
to determine how can we increase
the efficiency with which these
storms generate large raindrops
rainwater that actually does
reach the ground
and we generated enough data to
strongly suggest that we can
almost double the efficiency so
that's going to translate into a
ceded storm
unloading two point three times
as much rain water as an
unseeded store
the research that we did in the
nineteen eighties and the
nineteen nineties with the
involvement of several federal
agencies
allowed us to develop a
conceptual model for summertime
seating and that model is that
said has been applied in texas
and has now been applied in
eastern new mexico
we have well trained pilots that
know
how to keep an aircraft in the
updraft of a thunderstorm
the aircraft actually do not
penetrate the thunderstorm they
want.
A remain below
the base of a storm and because
some of these storms of course
called debate something other
than rain water can run into
group or small hail even large
the key is to keep the airplane
in the inflow area below cloud
base we provide the
seeding material and mother
nature then
essentially swallows that and
converts more of the cloud water
into rain water
we're using the dopper weather
right are not only to recognize
what storms need to be seated
but we're analysing the impact
of seeding after the fact
part of the work that we're
doing now is evaluating
how much liquid water is in the
cloud how much natural ice is
more than nature given the cloud
what happens when we seed it in
a well targeted entimely way
and the results that we're
seeing mirror what their
research suggested namely on
average a typical seeded storm
is going to live about thirty
five percent longer than an
unseeded store
the additional load of rain
water that's going to be
cultivated in a seated storm
is going to cover a larger area
because seated storms tend to
merge with neighboring clouds to
become what we call complexities
and so the
the rain that falls actually is
received over a much larger area
and seated storms
do not grow much taller which is
the most encouraging aspect of
cloud seeding it does not take a
banana cloud and grow it into a
severe thunderstorm that.
Provides things that we don't
especially want to see live
damaging when large damaging
your
even tornadoes we have
suspension criteria that we
enforce
if a storm is warned on by the
weather we don't seed it or if
we're in the process of giving
it some additional artificial
eyes to grow rain water and the
storm becomes intense in his
warndown then we get off of the
store because we don't want to
do anything to a rain system
that's going to do any harm we
only want to do
what's good for the folks that
live
not only within a target area
but even down wind of the target
area.
So we have a simpresentation
from
tb
sweener who is one of our
interesting stream
commissioners.
Good afternoon chair and members
of the committee can you hear me
okay yes.
Okay I was trying to turn on my
camera but it looks like it
won't let me so I will
just
just talk verbally and thank you
so much again for this
opportunity and discussion I
know there's been a lot of
discussion over the last two
days
of water concerns and water
planning and water
infrastructure here in new
mexico
and from
my role on the interseat street
commission as well as my
background in this area
regarding water and high drawing
hearing the mexico I am from two
local problems here in new
mexico and i've been honored in
blast you have some background
and traditional ecological
knowledge and education from our
elders of our communities
hearing your mexico and
understanding whether patterns
and no the entire hydrological
cycle so
I I hope that it can bring a
perspective of as we continue to
talk about these subjects and
ways
I just seem the climate address
in our water resources hearing
the mexical that if we can
continue to ensure that in
digitals
voices are in the room so that
we can bring our knowledge that
we've been here on many many
years since time in my memorial
and really happy unique
understanding about our clown
sisters are water system certain
is ground water and all of the
various points on our
hydrological cycle hearing and
mexico on a weather is unique as
well as throughout the state of
new mexico on whether patterns
are unique we have monston or
rains that are very
sporadic and very hard to.
And and very complex to model
and to
predict as we all know we could
be standing in a forty seven
mile water shed and it could
rain on the north side of the
watershed and we don't get a
spotted rain on the south side
and that when it rains sometimes
we get one to three inches of
rain within thirty to sixteen
minutes.
The other thing I wanted to just
share with our with with this
committee is that.
In the mexico we've also been
having to navigate post while
fired conditions I work
throughout the state of new
mexico all the way down into the
mescaler region with our with
the recent forest fires there as
well as the esim as mountain
region and the model
region.
And
The gulf of mexico
that rain can really devastate
some of our guard areas so as we
navigate this and as we continue
to consider
rain are see clouding operations
I just want to make sure what we
make good mindful decisions and
we factor in also how indigenous
communities are not hispanic
farmers use all
right many of us are still
farmers then we eat from the
crops that we have on our fields
are corn water corn water
knowing chiles a whole hoster
craps I know from my own family
that we have we depend upon the
rain in order or our cops to
grow as well as the surface
water but when we get that rain
it's a blessing and
really i've seen as a public
farmer I can say that when I get
the roomy coming from the clowns
might count field loves it and
so we also want to consider what
type of chemicals renewed alive
and approved on this count
sitting operations with any.
Because a lot of those use the
water directly from the
environment whether it's the
rain following from the sky
even the snow as it falls from
the clouds to the surface waters
and ground waters in the general
communities you know lies those
resources
have been any treatment we use
that right from the source when
they're in surface water ground
water or rain coming down so I
would just urge as we continue
this conversation that we really
do a comprehensive review and
approach and consider all of
these other factors as we.
As if you know if we look at
this and a greater area I know
that
being on interseat stream
commission that we've had some
proposals on the eastern side of
the mexico
and then as we get into the
middle real grand in the western
part of new mexico about we
really consider those indigenous
populations on perspectives I
think you are chair and members
of the committee I appreciate
this time to just provide these
additional considerations thank
you.
Great thank you very much
commissioner.
Much next if we have both
scattered the person calling
guttered from source with
respect thank you chairman
members of the committee
distinguished staff my name is
scott lopez I mean native new
mexican from espanola I may more
inquired veteran i'm also I
register lobbyist I am the
founder of vita me how to
capital we are a fiber one c
three non profit out of okay a
winget publo in espanola we are
also the advisor for source
hydropanels
i'd like to introduce mister
collin gotten who is the
business development vice
president for source to talk
about this exciting innovative
technology for fresh clean
drinking water in new mexico
thank you scott and thank you
mister chairman of members of
the committee for an opportunity
to say some remarks my name is
colin gathered over vice
president of a project of his
development for source to be
honest a more accustomed uh
previous to this role of
addressing public safety and
judiciary committees I spent ten
years on the gun safety movement
after being a student virgin
attack when the shooting
happened there in two thousand
seven and and surviving that
shooting and that brought me
into a world of adequacy and
helping understood communities
and not something I wanted to do
but I was happened and then I
have the science and climate
background and so when I heard
about our a new capability
that's providing clean drinking
water to understood communities
that that need assistance I
wanted to get involved and i've
been with the company now nearly
since it's seption in two
thousand and fourteen and that's
what i'll talk to you about so
source global we are certified
public benefit corporation based
in scots arizona that was found
it out of research initially
conducted it arizona state
university in the early twenty
and together we have or have a
power point slide here to follow
along and you should have a copy
of it as well um.
Our mission is to help me clean
drinking water and unlimited and
renewable resource because clean
drinking water access in new
mexico and many parts of the
american southwest is really
challenging we never variety of
challenges which other members
of a discussing today regarding
drought regarding the impact of
fires and changing claim
regarding the impact of water
quality and contamination and
unfortunately what most
the often the most common
strategy that is engaged after
those to provide clean drinking
water is to provided in a
plastic bottle that has its own
layer of environmental
challenges cost and burden on
families and this was really the
problem set that are founder in
ceo and his team of graduate
students talk to say how can we
take the principles of renewable
energy and apply to drinking
water and leap frog centralised
water systems and create
drinking water exactly where
it's needed and what they
developed is the core strategy
called will be called solar
atmospheric water harvesting
which means there's opportunity
here for the state to utilize
the abundant solar resources
here in the state of new mexico
to access the constantly
replenishing volume of water in
the atmosphere to provide
drinking water to new mexicans
anywhere in the state
and the one of the core ways
that can be used to be access
that strategy is through
hydropanel it looks like a solar
panel but instead of making
electricity from the sun it uses
the son's energy but really the
sons he to convert water vapor
in the air to liquid water so
the capability in a strategy
like this you can quite
literally harvest your own clean
drinking water directly at a
year that you that your family
needs to survive and these are
fully offered systems so they
don't need power they don't need
water connections at all you put
them down you put paint point
them towards a son and you could
eat your own drinking law supply
straight out of the air and you
don't need to buy water in a
plastic bottle you don't need to
go hall it you don't need to
have it delivered to you anymore
you can harvest it yourself for
that purpose
how it works.
Is a an solar energy power spans
that pulls in air onto a
absorbent material that it was
good at absorbing waster and
then we used the heat from the
sun two take the water vapor on
the material out and put it back
as water and then when the water
baper is concentrated in really
increases that's where the
raises the two point inside the
hydropanel and condenses water
back into liquid form and so
when you use this passive in
water harvesting process in
conversation process you start
with really high quality clean
water similar to distilled so
with an adminerals to raise
their kind of taste of the water
and then have an onboard
sterilization system to keep a
clean as it's being stored and
then dispense it to drink in a
fully offered system.
And today we have over ten
thousand hydro panel systems
providing drinking water in a
variety of applications from
everything from a small resident
to an entire community schools
remote work sites some key
cities all get into next on on a
smallest scale when you put two
units on your home that will
harvest the approximately about
a hundred bottles of water a
week for about sixty gallons of
water a month on average in a
dryer environment like here in
new mexico just to give you a
sense then you can put eight
hundred of those in an account
space and harvest about an acre
foot of water a year on a large
scale.
This is a map of all of our
existing operational hydropanel
sites in the us southwest today
we over three thousand homes
each one of the starts is a site
with source hydropanel systems
as providing those families with
drinking water access majority
of those are residential systems
but a few larger you see that
most of our california and
arizona although we do have a
number in new mexico already
principally all on other
honation which is our principle
partnership it were very proud
of which i'll show
next but it just an example of
the kind of breath and the
deployment already had scale
with the capability like this in
the communities that are using
the strategy to provide drinking
water words needed.
So the nomination on partnership
started the start of the covered
pandemic when they were ground
zero four the viral spread and
they were encouraging their
members to shelter in places
very hard to shelter in place
when you don't have access to
clean drinking water in your
house so we partner with their
department of water resources to
upgrade five hundred homes in
rural parts of november nation
with their own individual
residential drinking or systems
to provide those families with
their own drinking war supply
right at the house they didn't
have to go into town they didn't
have to get in that drink
something unsafe and just
earlier this year we signed our
face two agreement with november
nation department of what it
resources and will be stalling
another six hundred homes with
his your panel systems many of
them here on the new mexico side
of the eastern agency of
novonation and the satellite
chapters over the course of this
next year so by the by this time
next year we should have got a
thousand residencies across
novonation with a clean drinking
war supplying their home many
for the first time enabled by a
solar atmosphere water
harvesting
and in another key study there
that those are places without a
water supply there many other
places with there is a water
supply but it's just not safe to
drink and most of our work in
california center valley a big
agricultural part has water but
it's really poor quality a lot
of a natural occurring and man
made contaminants in the supply
particularly for rule of
communities which is our focus
it's really challenging with
centralized infrastructure
upgrades to enhance the drinking
water availability so this
communities like alan's worth
that about a hundred homes right
they've been trying to figure
out centralized upgrades for
years as a result nothing's
happened and they've been
essentially relying on bottle
water for decades and now we
have no north of three quarters
that community now with her own
individual residential drinking
water systems using the stolen
atmospheric water harristing
capability to get that drinking
our supply at a convenient tap
inside their home for the first
time
so in some up your there's a
massive opportunity here for the
stated in mexico to utilize
seller atmosphere quarter
harvesting to ensure every new
mexican no matter where they
are.
Has clean drinking on a supply
and available at a tap
conveniently in their home it's
going to clease increase their
resiliency to a change in
climate and public health while
decreasing the reliance on
pulling more water out of the
ground of plastic bottle waste
and risk of contamination and
unsafe water access we have a
good amount of local interest
now engaging with local
communities in rural parts of
the state uh that one used to
strategy to help provide
drinking water that's from
community level
I mean it's a palidies i'm
tribes and then also even said
agencies we have a a not an
effort under way that new mexico
department of transportation for
a number of their remote patrol
sites that don't have a water
supply for their staff cause
it's really hard to get out
there they're going to you want
to utilize a strategy like this
to provide drinking water to
their employees.
And our conversations I have a
lot of enthusiasm but there's a
lot of
questions and we are seeking
guidance from this committee
around
the two principal hurdles that
were facing one is around the
states anti donation class that
may prevent the deployment of
the strategy on residential
homes which were still trying to
understand and also the funding
programs available for those
types of entities to be able to
utilize the strategy like this
in a capability like this within
their communities you know we
don't nicely fit into existing
programs and so with that
uncertainty right it makes the
kind of conversation's harder to
keep going to develop new
project and actually provide on
benefits to populations so thank
you again for the opportunity to
speak mister chairman of the
members of the committee have to
take any questions thank you
great thank you very much first
up for the many we represent the
home.
Observer i'm strong
thank you mr chairman and think
if you are presentation I have a
few questions so first is to
george I wondered what are the
next steps
to to to really implementing
this across the state of new
mexico the cloud seating part
what are your next steps.
Mr chairman the representative
aren't strong
with the technology
having been developed and
applied now and eastern new
mexico
we invision
having the technology b
taken to the mountainous areas
in the state where snowback
augmentation could be achieved
during the winter time
there's certainly a lot of new
mexico that is not in the
current target that gets most of
its morse you're from year to
year from summertime
thunderstorms so that target
area could be expanded as well
but if we were to expand we
would need to have more access
to more than just two aircraft
the winner time snowback are
mentation effort would not
necessarily involve aircraft
that could be accomplished by
using ground based generators
that are strategically located
along the slopes of mountain
ranges it's a lot cheaper to do
that snow pack argumentation
program than a summer time
raining enhancement program
because
the biggest expanse in the
summertime is use of aircraft
thank you for that information I
really wish that we could see a
video of it actually in action
and happening so just food for
thought that next time because
we I think all of us would
really like to see how it
actually works so thank you for
that now to mister
how
how long do these panels last
mister chairman representative
thank you for the question there
operational life of a source
hydropanels currently fifteen
years other word we are in the
efforts to double that in our of
the course of our rending path
okay thank you for that and
then.
How did how do you they actually
collect the water and how large
are they.
Well i've made mainly not
collect but how do they dispense
the water yes mister chairman
representative thank you again
for the question
the
the systems have a pressurized
waterline that runs one water
line from the hydro panels to
attack so they don't need to be
gravity fed right they generate
their own pressure when we
during the installation process
and that's how it gets from
hydropanel generation point
typically on the ground are on
the roof to inside the residence
to to attack to supply
and they're roughly about four
feet by effie about the size of
a piece of sheet rock for a
single hundred panel thank you
for that so it's it couldn't run
a whole household but it could
be just a tap for drinking or
cooking as that correct
mr chairman and representative
yes that's the intention where
we're highly focused on
supplying that part of a water
for consumptive purposes or
drinking cooking and oral
hydration is specifically where
we don't incomplement two other
bulk water supplies that don't
need to be same high quality for
a toilets and showers and other
uses like that
thank you for that I
how many actual panels do you
have distributed in the in the
state of new mexico do you have
a number
of mister chamber representative
we have approximately I think it
is somewhere between ninety to a
hundred residences in the stated
into mexico with two to three
hydro panels per residents or
approximately you know two
hundred or so individual units
across about hundred homes
okay thank you thank you mister
chairman
thank you represent represents
the moral
thank you mr chair and thank you
president everybody's done a
great job i'm very interested in
the panels but I do have a
question for you mister chairman
the rest of the members on the
committee is when do we have
legislators or how do we draw
the line about selling a
particular product
to me were or here.
And in a love your product don't
get me wrong
but
where we're almost selling a
product here and to me that's
not what the job of the
legislature is is to do and
maybe you can but shed some
light on that for me
represent some more I don't
think i'm selling anything
nothing for sale here today I
think we were learning about
technology that until ten
minutes ago I didn't know
existed
okay mister chairman and i'm we
had cloud seating for a while so
I guess I am referring to the
source
that but this is
this could change a lot of
things so the fact that it's
coming from one particular
company
yep it's not something that
concerns me
and and
I guess is as a things like this
move forward and and I would
love to support these kind of
programs but as as they move
forward you know I think one
other time I saw as as may
time in serving that we're
trying to force a product done
on to the agricultural part of
the state and to me with its
it's you know and maybe it's a
fine line and then and i'm glad
they're here I i've seen some
other products
been
shown to us before but to me
it's almost it's almost passed
that line and just just to
comment mister mister chair
I am interested in your product
it's very interesting i've heard
before that the navy could
Desert what we've turned about a
quarter acre of space into an
asset for them that generates
approximately
two her downs a water week
and so they're actively looking
at this capability for a remote
installations i'm large
footprint bases with ranges
posts that are hard to get water
infrastructure out to in our use
in buffalo's to transport it
back and forth so that's kind of
currently where we are think
there have been other things on
ships that have been used to try
to harvest there that is a
separate technology
but you know there is a growing
field of solar atmosphere water
harvesting we are one player
across this growing category and
I think it it speaks to kind of
that the strategy hopefully was
is really the intention to
demonstrate to the committee of
being useful for as a tour
mature belt for a professional
support going forward and thank
you for that mister chaired and
president the
I believe you went into the
minimum that that the system
could produce but what's the
maximum amount it could produce
mister chair representative
these systems can scale just
like solar photo will take
panels rates of similar solar
arrays are in a hundreds of
acres you know that the
united measurement I can relay
to be helpful is that about an
acre of space could harvest
about an echo foot of water per
year so if you did a hundred
acres to be a hundred acre feet
of water per year and then times
fifteen years just with this one
capability right other
technologies you know have
different rates of harvesting
but this is what this one looks
like hopefully that's helpful
sir
and mister chairman president is
this intended for just home user
or cannot go commercial can it
can a guy set it up like solar
panels and and harvest water for
a community happens to chair
representative thank you for the
question our principle
application that were focused on
is at is a rural communities at
the residential level where in
the united states people kind of
want to expect.
Having drinking law supply in
their home but we do have a few
other cases of centralized
systems to your point like that
at remote work sites tied to
that were developing but
those can be require interesting
regator permits that operates in
motor public water system
depending on the jurisdiction
where it's being installed so
that's why most of our work
where we try to make use the
strategy is that the residential
level for to keep it simple in
straightforward that don't need
permits and a rapidly deployable
for example the novel nation
project
from the beginning to the end of
program community engagement and
program enrollment in
installation five hundred
systems five hundred families
were supported in the matter of
six months so did nation really
like using the strategy because
it's so quick right there's not
a is not hydrology assessments
in right of ways and all those
things of traditional
infrastructure it's you can leap
frog that in just harvest it
right where you need it in those
times of emergency or resiliency
or you know really any time that
you know this is being used for
the long period of time in a
much simpler manner to implement
the intrusion of water
infrastructure
thank you mister chairman thank
you for that presentation and on
on the
on the cloud seating level
mister bomar
can you cannot refresh her
memory as to how much money was
funded to you through the
legislature
for clouds eating that you're
doing now and how much of that
money went to product that went
into the clouds
just kinda give us a breakdown
of of how that money was spent a
little bit misturn missed bummer
mr chairman representative
the
last legislative session
appropriated a million dollars
through the new mexico
department of agriculture
and of that amount
approximately.
Three quarters of it went to
contract operations use of
aircraft as well as seating
material
for five and a half months
during physical year twenty five
three months this summer
and then again two and a half
months in the spring of twenty
five
some of the money is also being
spent to look at the feasibility
of seating outside of that five
and a half month window
that study is looking at whether
rate are over the last ten years
to determine in a typical year
how many seedable clouds will
present themselves
so that we can do better
planning in terms of window
began in window and operations
thank you for that visible more
and thank you mister speaker
mister chair
mr chair can I add to that sure
german members committee more
representative we also spit part
of that money for inms you to do
a study of the episode seeing
they are a statement of roll
so german I have the remote
ability to turn your mike off
but i'm not we're in my glasses
I turned off the wrong mike so
okay
anyways some of that money went
to mask your state for that
there is some of the money
that's going to rose about st
for administration but the
majority of that money over
ninety percent of these being
used for actual operations and
and the studies there come with
the out operation thank you for
that mister speaker miss mr
chair mister mister lead better
do we have any data on one how
much rain we produced with their
clouds that we seeded.
Mr chairman represented if we
have not got any that to date we
will compile that information
after these three months are
over with I think we're going to
do that and have some good
analysis someone cd clouds
versus nonsenior clouds in what
happened in this that any other
we're hoping to have that ready
because we want to come to the
legislature next year and try to
secure some more money because
this needs to be a program to go
year after year after year
and I also wanted to make a
comment that I didn't do while
ago we have to get
a last the contractor has to get
licensed through the issue for
these programs we cannot operate
as weather or rainfall
enhancement program without a
license from the issue so there
they know of everything that
we're doing that's for a winter
time snowfall enhancement and
the summertime rainfall
thank you mister thank you
mister
thank you reps
thank you mister chair thank you
everyone that's here and
ms swinger who's on video with
us my questions i'm going to
just start refers with the
clouds sitting to you started
the staff
so
you might have said how many
you have done this for twenty
six days here in new mexico so
far is that correct mister.
Yes mr chairman representative
since the first of july we've
operated
we've actually sent aircraft
into the air on the number
twenty six days thank you for
that and I know that you
mentioned with this the
substrate was that you used to
load into the clouds for the for
the disperse so that they
produce thirty percent more
precipitation
my question is over time how
much of that substrict is going
to be collected on soils and the
other issue chair that's it's
it's foreign two or soils now is
that correct
yes mr chairman representative
when you take the amount of the
additional rain water that is
measured by weather right are
actually falling out of the base
of a cloud reaching ground level
and we use rangage data to
corroborate what the radar is
telling us
we seed systems individual
clouds and cloud complexities
clusters
where mother nature puts them
out cloud seating does not
manufacture or produce clouds
out of thin air we go with the
clouds just naturally develop
some areas over the course of
the season are going to get
several inches of rain and there
will be other areas that may get
only a quarter or a half an inch
that we know came from the cloud
seating effort but when you take
all of the observed additional
rain water that's produced and
you spread it
uniformly over the entire
targets that comes to between an
ancient two inches per growing
season they may not seem like a
lot but to folks that farm in
ranch you get an additional
answer to inches over the
course.
And the season assuming that
rain happens at the right times
it can make a world of
difference thank you mister
chair and it seems like you're
moving towards maybe
having this process done more in
the winter time so that we get
the the snow cap coverage mr
chairs are correct
mr chairman representative and
believe the roosevelt district
has expressed interest in
sharing this technology with
other
districts up in the northern
part of the state where there is
mountainous terrain and where
snow pack argumentation
is the most successful of all
whether modification approaches
other it's been done longer
there's been done a more
research done on snowball
in many of the western states
and so it would seem logical
that
the effort in winter time would
be well done in the northern
part of new mexico thank you I
just hope we have some more
discussions with the communities
and
our securities as I see them
here and others that so that
would be I think more
directly
effective if you will buy their
substrate the the substance that
you use to the the aluminum is
it if you will and what that can
do to those environments just so
we have a discussion about that
and something i'd asked about it
in them when we are passing this
legislation this last year so
offline will talk a little more
that I mean it ask another
question on the other topic here
talk about that but thank you
for your efforts and thank you
for giving us an update because
it's that's what we asked for mr
chair
I think and correct if i'm wrong
this is going to go to source
you said you currently with the
two panels that you use in the
homes that you can it's
equivalent to about two hundred
bottles of water is that correct
a week
mister chair representative
behind.
For a small residential system
is our small that happens with
hydropanels produces
approximately a hundred balls of
water per week
do you know how many bottles of
water each it estimated that
each individual us american uses
a year
mister chairman representative
that's a great question that
we're always trying to seek the
answer for
we know that general medical
recommendations is that everyone
should drink a classes of water
a day which is approximately
gallen ish a debt are sort of
half a gallon a day
and so the small residential
system like that it's kind of
tailored for a four person home
and then they can be made larger
and this but this particular
capability can be made larger to
scale up to larger families as
needed appreciate that I think
this is a really you know as
we're looking at this is as a
source as a as a
as a solution if you will earn
one of the biggest problems we
have and we're looking out or
the the the amount of bottles
that we use in the classics that
we have in and our system are
ecosystem it's estimated that
around
the use of the plastic bottles
here in the US we can
wrap around two hundred and
ninety nine times number past
bottles that we use around the
earth
ear it's that's huge so in
mitigating that I think this is
something we really need to look
at
you know as it as a a way of
of reducing use of a passive
reliability and not to mention
those past the bottles in the
past with the eighty percent of
the pollution in our oceans and
our waters are due to plastics
and majority of those are
positive bottles
mr chair I could think of a
number of other things I think
that we didn't even touch about
and even talking about a
colonials new mexico in our and
our agricultural areas that
we've had.
Panels here talking about our
cattle in in our
the need in our farms and
everything to one conserved
water as we talked about and how
do we get more water out there
so this is our discussion but
also
to have the safe drinking water
because we don't have the
infrastructure for that safe
jinking water and a lot of these
areas so I think this is one of
the the types of solutions we
need to be looking out and how
we get those to those places
because we have
created funds for those those
efforts specifically like I said
for our colonials
in others and so I think I just
want to say I appreciate you and
your presentation in your
product but I appreciate that
continued work in the sciences
behind everything that we're
doing and to feeb swinton who is
whether it's talking about in
really kind of driving home like
what are we doing in our
communities of need
especially after disasters of
what we do now because of
climate change which was a
directly mentioned here but that
is a reason why we are having
and looking at these alternative
methods if you will to help me
us with our drought
circumstances in our state thank
you mister charita I have.
Thank you represent them around
the little short and time
recently cadena did you want to
ask your question
thank you mr cherry I will
actually have a question for a
commissioner sweener
I remember first hearing about
this cloud seating project and
pillar and supposed the amount
of money my state investment was
moving towards this
during the thirty day session
and I had not been on the again
water committee for a couple of
terms and so was filling pretty
ignorant as they stepped back
into these compositions I
appreciate the update and but in
hearing about these
and
a puzzles that we are talking
about to increase production
strategies I also just
fundamentally through my lens of
ignorance have some questions
about what the overall impact
that is to our hydrologics
systems
it's my understanding that we
exist in a close system
so somebody pulling water from
somewhere sparking water from
somewhere I imagine would shift
what those water systems and
clouds systems
were capable of or how they
existed otherwise and I really
appreciated the inside offered
by by our commissioner and at a
recent water leaders meeting
that she was not even part of
remember someone speaking to her
expertise about how old are
water is connected as so mr
chair i'd like to hear from the
commissioner
in response and potentially
reaction into what it means when
we shift systems in these places
commissioner if you're available
on zoom still.
Yes mister chairman and
representing them and committed
members of the committee thank
you for that question and you
know one of the things that that
learned from my elders but also
has been really enforced in
science and my education up
through my master's degree and
then coming back to new mexico
and seeing first time
the traditional ecological
knowledge that has been carried
down.
And really.
And still then myself and others
within our indigenous community
is how into related.
Are environment is in particular
in this discussion our water
systems and not hydrological
cycle.
Now a days we we look at were no
produces in terms of a graphic
talking that demonstrates all of
those elements of that
hydrological cycle from
transparation the operation to
the clouds to then the rain and
the the
To those points that most of us
are living in a mexico utilized
is you know ground water and
surface waters but all in all
remembering that it is all into
related those cycles are into
related so if we are just are we
pull or alter that cycle it
won't have other effects in that
circle if I can just you never
share that metaphor or that
graphic in your mind so every
pull from one part of the cycle
it is gonna
have detrimental or impact
attention talks all throughout
the entire cycle so as we talk
about as a shared earlier this
cloud called cd or other
proposals we just have to be
mindful of that as well as what
we are putting in into that
cycle in terms of camel calls or
other elements to alter that
cycle and to the representatives
comment earlier
before
this question is when we talk
about those points in that cycle
and if we
should put this if we and for
talking about climate change
were already dealing with.
Really seem first hand hearing
new mexico the impact of climate
change making our systems more
if you well k honored more cold
tomorrow
more rainfall more drown so our
systems are already in us and a
state where they're already
being altered
and so when we add in the new
consideration or new impetus in
their system then we just need
to be mine for at what those
effects are so from a systems
engineering time perspective and
science freeze perspective we
know our system is already and
and what if you well a kind of a
chaotic or uncertain hard to
predict approach or so status
and then we add in something new
that's going to also add to that
unpredictability and so I just
want again want to share that
perspective and you know
traditional ecological normally
each from the elders have always
talked about that since time in
memorial and hearing the mexico
is a beautiful place we've lived
here and balance with our stood
thomas since time in memory so
how do we navigate this is this
chaotics and stumped because of
the climate change and how do we
as living today work to maintain
that balance that something that
I think we need to consider as
we consider new proposals and
what those proposals can bring
and not all silver bullets in
this issue that we're dealing
with more work I think it's
gonna be something we have to
consider and it's on on the
shoulders of our legislators and
so I know it's a big task for
you all in and I hope that all
of those elements can be
considered as you make decisions
pointing f.
Thank you.
Thank you commissioner I have
one more quick follow up
question
I know our chair will get into
some of the dynamics about the
rates to water where wherever it
exists but if you could just
quickly talk me through mister
cown or mr bummer what the
license in process for clouds
eating is and then specifically
whether that process includes
tribal engagement I imagine the
department of ag- is subject to
the state will collaboration act
but just quickly what is that
licensing process that allows
you permission to do this
mr chair representative
it seemed much long processed we
the contractor files the
paperwork with the interstate
stream commission
once a license has been issued
it's more of an automatic deal
after that the first time
through the publications in
every
paper that's involved in the
target area so peep thought the
public and now when and I know
i've sit through one hearing
online where there was a lot of
grief about is a matter of fact
the first time we did this we
were trying to include tas
county because we wanted to do a
a
winter time project at the ski
valley
we kind of stepped into it net
we can learn to shop by the
lesson we really didn't want to
go there again and that's why
we'll be backed off to the
eastern side of the state number
one people in telstra we had no
business in their business.
If that comes about when these
days it's probably something
that the tail s cd or somebody
needs to initiate not us.
But once the license is in place
and and and in this current
license we have we took out I
think it's san mcdell county and
more accounting because of burns
car concerns even though we were
only going to go update twenty
five and we wouldn't have been
in the burns car areas so those
two are out of that and I think
call facts did not we we sign a
joint powers agreement with
every district that we fly in we
don't feel like we have any
rough to be there without there
and everyone on the side signed
that except cult facts and in
san magail and and and we're
hoping to talk with santa magail
and mora and explain the process
and hopefully bring them into
the target at some time but
currently or not and we've had a
even today i've had a another
district in the state ask about
maybe being included in the
target area for the next time
thank you mister chair I
appreciate that and just yes
there no answer in your
experience was tribal engagement
or a tribal consultation part of
that license you processed.
Mr chair reption we did not talk
with the tribes we did
believe it or not there is a
year in mexico whether
modification association based
in santa fe and the chairman of
that group has talked to one of
the tribes up there and
apparently had an agreement to
do some of that kind of work but
we back totally away from that
after the firestorm that we got
into thank you mr chair
thank you represent
the so we are over time and we
have three people on the lists
if you could keep your questions
very brief and panelists if you
could keep your answers very
brief represent dream
thank you mischairman the first
one I went to follow up on a
representative blue hinds
question more of ok rate hours
projecting that this cloud it's
coming is going to give us let's
say attempt to be manage of rain
so we decide we're going to see
this and we received and i'm
just making numbers a half an
hour can you give me an example
like that
mr chair representative
yes the analysis involves not
only assessing how much
rainwater comes from seated
storms we also measure how much
output from adjacent our
neighboring unseeded storms
it's the best we can do that the
most effective way to evaluate
is to randomize.
But folks that are paying for a
cloud seating project don't want
to leave
of the seatable clouds unceeded
they want every opportunity to
to be maximized and so what we
do is we
analyze clouds that are outside
of the target but near the
target on the same day that we
analyze the clouds that have
been seated and over the course
of the summer we get a pretty
good population of seated storms
vs non seated and it's that
comparison that gives us the
additional increase in your side
it earlier.
Thank you and mrperiod chair
one more so the chemicals that
you're using and seating these
are they harmful to the
environment or the soil
mr german representative
there had been several very
sophisticated studies of the
impact of seating with silver
eye though here in the us and
abroad
there is no evidence whatsoever
in any area that said cloud
seating using a an agent like
silver I did that it poses any
sort of an environmental risk.
Thank you mister
thank you so I have a three
quick questions for mr
mister
guttered
what's for like just a typical
household what's the unit cost.
Yet mister chair it members the
committee each hydropanel
currently retails two thousand
four hundred dollars so to put
to him on your house installed
shipped as all around seven
thousand dollars all in which
then level eyes is over the
water it makes over the fifteen
years at roughly about can seven
cents for one of these so we're
gonna cheaper price point then
bottle water but not you know
cheaper like minister supply
that does a whole bunch of
things so we're kind of reading
that in between that still
and is does the unit produce
more in humid clients mister
chair yes the more community in
the more solar areas the more
water can be horroristed with
siller amish require harvesting
yes but capabilities like this
one or designed into operating
dry location specifically even
when it's single digit community
outside okay in the the what are
your horror staying
seems like you're in the
atmosphere of scale a
effectively at the minimum
amount
do you
are there any is there any
oversight or there any permanent
requirements or is just plug it
in your good to go
this cheaping for a question yes
our citizens are off the
citizens or off grades is not
plugging in and
yes and
no there is a vast amount of
water vapor in the air the cost
of repunishes every week with
their standard cycle your
capability straight harvest as
much as they can but it is a
very tiny amount to that or
supply that gets again going to
be plenished every week okay
great german that was very
interesting so thank you all
very much okay
we have one more panel before
our public comment or less panel
is conservation policies and
water management in agriculture
so the panelists could come to
the front.
The.
Okay.
So
before we start our next panel
in mister chile as he is online
so I think we're all here
before we start I have one very
important announcement
if I could have your attention
so bad or it
has some kittens they is trying
to find homes for
so if you're in the market for a
kit in or even if you're not
pleased to talk to bob he's got
kids.
So you get some interest that's
good
okay
do you send you coming back
Yeah.
So a less bin laws a little bit
little bit of the catch all
other conservation policies but
aimed at agriculture first up we
have a chasing casual
mister chairman community as I
apologize I thought I was second
that's why we got water
so I think my presentation is um
up again my name is jason casuga
and the ceo and chief engineer
for the middle of grand
conservative district i'm
actually very excited to talk to
you about this today there's
there's a lot of good work going
on
in the middle of valley
with the middle of your grand
conservative district in our
constituents and the partners
that we have and so the title of
our presentation tastes
partnerships that optimize water
for agriculture and ecosystems
in the middle real grandday the
topic here is conservation and
so but within the district
conservation means a lot of
different things it can mean the
conservation of water but it
also can mean conservation as it
applies on the river scale with
the ecosystem and so we have a
conservation program that kind
of houses all of our
conservation efforts and so i'll
talk a little bit broadly about
that today.
So I won't spend a lot of time
here emission statement um but
just who the real memory of
grandconservancy district is I
want to go down to that on the
ground stuff we have thirty
thousand acres of riperiod right
repairing court or fifty five
thousand acres of active
agriculture and that that can be
can even creep up to close the
sixtieth sixty thousand acres in
any given year we have eleven
thousand irrigators we have
approximately twelve hundred
miles of canal streams in levies
between the coaching reservoir
and the bosco dollar patching
approx me a hundred miles so we
are a conservative district we
are not an irrigation district
so we have different missions.
Then a traditional irrigation
district.
So and we talk about
conservation
within the more gcd where what
we're really talking about is
managing for competing demands
and
whenever i'm talking i'm
specifically talking about
agriculture on the real grand
compact and the
the biological opinion or the
the biology of the river that we
participate and I will be the
first to tell you in our dc
participates in other
conversations that add the
component to this graph related
to a municipal use but in the
instance today i'm really
focusing on my city in the
mission of the mrg city not the
broader topic so i've shrunk
this down to how mr cities
looking to balance and these
three circles of agriculture the
real grand compact and the
biological opinion I really talk
anything about the regular
compact today but it's important
to know that it has to be part
of this conservation question.
So the title of our presentation
start off with partnerships one
of the things that is very
important is conservation on any
scale within the middle valley
we can't do in the emergency
recognizers that we can't do it
by ourselves so we have a list
of partners here I don't have
them are
listed here the partners and i'm
listing or basically things i'm
in a highlight for the
presentation today this includes
a bureau of recommendation
national efficient while I
foundation we have a number of
volunteers who jumped on the
patient leasing program that
will go over we have a system
conservation and in farmers who
have taken us up on an offer on
pilot programs for unformed
efficiency and that i'll talk
about
and the just the creation of the
strategic outfalse sum we talk
conservation part of what in my
city believes conservation also
has to apply to the river we
understand that to take water
out of the river is to mean that
we need to do positive things on
the river as well so that's part
of our conservation program and
when we entered some of these
means there is a broad
scepticism
that this could work I think
part of that was based on a
little bit of history of who the
mrg city was and and how we
interacted in the valley we were
largely unknown and we kind of
kept our head down and and and
quite frankly weren't always
easy to deal with
but I would like to say that I
am and I would like to believe
that it emerges it is is a very
active partner in the valley on
these conservation efforts and I
think whether it's unfar more
are in the river where a partner
that is probably around i'm
either a name already or behind
the same support on many
activities
okay so what are the items that
we talked about is conservation
efforts is a voluntary following
volunteer following program I
know my my friend to my right
here following the word and in
many instances I agree
but we actually have political
program that is completely
voluntary it was actually in and
it started off and still is
today and environmental water
leasing program and it allows
individuals who.
Either are doing something with
their farm or they choose to be
able to make the the dry up the
land of the irrigate and make
that available for an
environmental purpose we know
following is it can be part of
the farming cycle but this is
completely balance voluntary
we've we started in twenty
twenty
twenty twenty four this was a
pilot project I won't see a take
the word pilot project off now
because we have been successful
doing this year and in your out
I one thing i'm proud of as I do
think it is given um smaller
municipal entity or smaller
municipal irrigators and auction
to do something with their water
especially if they're not going
to grow anything and we have a
lot of repeats folks back into
this whole come from our urban
areas and then we also have some
larger farmers who participate
in this but this is a really
important resource for us as we
get later into the presentation
and I start talking about
strategic outfalls how we
support the environment and
habitat along the river as a
conservative to district while
we also draw water from it for
farming.
The one of the other programs
that we've done from
conservation standpoint is we as
a conservancy differently we
need programs for our irrigators
and farmers in the valley to
help them
potentially do things
differently we have a lot of
farmers who
have invested in technology
invested in upgrades to their
farms and but we also have a lot
of farmers and irrigators who
have not and haven't been able
to end need access to programs
for them to be able to improve
their farms and be the most
efficient they can be
in one of one of the areas that
we believe we can make a huge
difference in the middle valley
with this program and be able to
scale it up is our unfound
unformed efficiency program
specifically targeted at smaller
acritic some of the biggest
water waste that we can find at
times within the valley is on
irrigated across of ten acres or
less
often times we can find that
their facilities are
undersized and they can spend
significant amounts of time i'm
irrigating a very small acritile
one of the things that we have
started to do with our own form
efficiency program is is kind of
solicitou and find individuals
who want a partner with them on
g city uh through our
partnership with the national
efficient while life foundation
and the bureau of recommendation
there are there were moneys
available in which are the land
owner could put some funds in a
portion it to the amount of
water we are hoping to conserve
and then we would have these
funds that we could put in to
help them construct
infrastructure on their farms to
make them significantly more
efficient so in this one case
that I I put up here farmers
receive financial and technical
assistance to increase
irrigation efficiency and in the
water concern from these project
is made available for habitating
species this is specifically on
our own farm program to help
support our environmental alpha
in this instance we went from
irrigating a three and a half
acre field in approximately
fifteen hours which is a
tremendous amount of time.
To irrigating that same three
acres and under an approximate
an hour and a half
and just goes to how.
The the the difficulty and does
not having the right
infrastructure anymore for
pushing water and were really
just cycling it through and we
no longer have water to just let
folks crack open to turn out and
irrigate leisurely we need to be
about the business of getting
the water on the field get it on
their efficiently and then move
the water on to the next year
again.
The next piece that that i'm
gonna talk about is is macro
infrastructure so the the margie
city is primarily a
a gravity system we divert at
four diversion dams and we work
our way through and we we've
largely been able to stay that
way but one of the things that
were finding is as we're
urbanizing we are are
urbanization is actually
happening closest to our
diversion dams but we're still
having to move significant
amounts of water through urban
areas and trying to get it to
some of our largest farms and
that's a struggle for us because
there comes a liability of
moving water through urban areas
because the irrigation can I was
inevitably sit higher than all
the land it's being developed
with homes in in commercial cell
the how are we going to do that
how are you going to safely
transport the right amount of
water and then get it back into
the system so through
one education some of the things
that i've gotten to do since I
become the ceo's i've gotten to
go down to ebid and look at some
of the projects that they have
down in but irrigating district
and some of what they do is they
they have to lift the water from
one location and then put it
back into the system and so that
got us thinking well can we do
the same thing can we
strategically transport more
water through one of our drains
and then strategically lift it
back up to a community that's
really difficult to get water to
because of
liability issues associated with
transporting it through urban
areas and we found a project
that we're going to do exactly
that we're going to we're going
to
insell upon station off of one
of our drains be able to lift
water from a river side drain
that we divert water into a
diversion damn and lift it back
up to serve approximately forty
five hundred acres that are.
We're designed for more water
because were of the liability of
moving water to an urban area
again we believe this is a
conservation effort because
we're trying to move water to
irrigators more efficiently get
it to them when they need it and
then get and then move on to the
next irrigator and use the water
while we have it in the most
efficient way possible.
The.
I talked a little bit about
strategic outfalls this is some
infrastructure improvement that
we have done again the emergency
we draw water out of the river
to deliver for farming but we
have a responsibility to do good
things by putting water back in
the river in one of the things
that we do through our
biological opinion is we put
water back into the river
extrategic locations hopefully
to make the biggest impact
possible for the environment the
i'll show you some photos of
projects that we do on the river
but what I want to show here is
some of the investment we had to
make from an infrastructure
standpoint just to get
facilities
in order and had to have control
and have measurement modern
measurement on these facilities
so we know what we're delivering
down string to farmers we know
what we're delivering back to
the river at a specific point so
we can very accurately
communicate to
the public and to the federal
government and to the state what
we're doing with the water that
we have.
The strategic outfalls are part
of a
creative water management
strategy that is is older than
me that this idea of string of
pearls along the river where
we're gonna be able to create
pockets of habitat especially as
we as that section of the river
experience is more drying
and annual drying the reason why
I say anyone I think it's
important for us to remember the
the real grandday is a river
that has always dried.
That is the history of the real
ground it has been it was it was
an is a feast or family river at
times and that's why we built
infrastructure to be able to
increase the reliability and be
able to develop along the real
branding but this new this idea
of the river drying is is not a
new phenomenon but as water
managers and as people who use
the what along the river and
needing to be able to sustain
the river sustained habitat we
can do that in pockets very well
i'm versus a conversation that
goes on at times about ten can
the reor grande beautifully
connected river I I don't
believe a fully connected river
three hundred and sixty five
days a year is a history of the
real grandy just from a
geomorphic standpoint so how do
we support the type of river
that we have for the values that
we have to create the habitat
that we enjoy.
We believe in our I think that
we we can see it along the rear
granted at this string of
process is possible that we can
create pockets of really really
good habitat continue to put
water there and that's where
this concept comes from.
I really like to turn down there
on my conservation manager he he
says this regular emergency's
infrastructure but plus
conservation of agwater plus
federal funding has created this
partnership where we're doing
good things on the river it's
interesting for me to be here as
the ceo of the mgc and in the
last five or six years we've
created some of the newest
and habitat on the river and I
think we're up there close to
maybe the entity that's
potentially created some of the
most in the last five years
along the real ground.
So the results i'm I know these
pictures are hard to see their
dark on but what you can see is
you you can see
a flood playnets inundated with
greater channels that we can get
water into when the real
grandday comes up and has higher
flows with the real graduate
then I can access the slot plan
but what's unique about these
and i'll show other photos is as
the real grand it goes down
we're then able to support the
habitat in this area because we
can put water out the strategic
outfalls and then sustain the
habitat that comes up around
here that the river has created
in one of the things that
obviously have attacked needs it
needs water and so as the the
natural hydrograph happens and
the river rises there's there's
habitat that's being created
along i'm some of the areas that
were working but then as the
water receipts were able to
strategically put water out
those outfoss almost skip
because I just got the two
minute warning so it's in your
hand out you can see the results
of that so i've skipped through
some of those habitat photos the
why would like stuff at the
species impact so if you look at
this this these are locations
that were putting these outfalls
and our contractor swca goes out
there and measures these
outfalls for whether minute
whether they can find men was
there whether this habitat is is
good for avian species and i'm
i'm happy to say the answer to
those two questions have been
yes and the longer that that
habitat stays there I think the
more that we will see the use of
these facilities as mrgc
sustains this habitat along the
river.
So in there I covered a lot of
ground really quick but the the
the photo on the left has agged
the photo on the right as the
river and the two in the middle
valley are in inner linked i've
heard somebody had auto bond his
name's politashin regularly say
the middle valley is an agro
ecology I think is the word that
he uses the agriculture that we
do and the and the environment
along the river they go together
in the loss of one is leads to
it diminished of the other and
the last thing I don't is my
only reference to the real gun
compact our two ability to do
these things on in ag and in the
habitat this is all with native
water need of real brand new
water and.
To have the highest and best use
of that need of reopen under
what we gotta be in complaints
with the compact
to do all of this good things
that I talked about
thank you very much
I guess we're going to miss burn
mr chair members of the
committee apologize they don't
look very much like curious
linger today so mister did had
did have to run back down south
we are in our flood operations
period of our management and we
got a storm last night so he's
at home and I will cover this
for him today we're gonna talk
about the depletion reduction of
that program within the elephant
muterigation district this is a
concept that started very early
in my career in the two thousand
eight time frame carrying
forward it was developed further
in around the twenty fourteen
and twenty fifteen time frame
and you're looking at the
foundational
principles that were developed
during that time again dr king
is still sitting in the room and
he is a good person to be able
to answer some of these
technical questions if we have
them
this is a program that will go
hand in hand with the state of
new mexico's following program
in the lower real ground it was
actually our intention to put
the following program out before
the state of new mexico did and
that's why we developed this
going as far back as two
thousand eight however we didn't
like the concept of following is
it played out on the pickers and
so that's why we created our own
version and the primary issue we
had with the package was first
of all by andrei has a major
impact that's long lasting on
the irrigation district and the
other farmers that try to stay
alive within that irrigation
district and then by android
didn't achieve the purposes we
tried to achieve over there so
we were looking at how do we
take that and make it a lessons
learned sort of situation and
move forward and make something
that actually works.
So our motivation here was
obvious I talked a lot about
this yesterday municipal and
industrial water uses have risen
over time while ebid's water use
has remained constant
but we rely on the surface water
and when the surface water is
not there were all relying on
ground water then and so we all
know the issue of groundwater
depletion and we're trying to
again if you go back to drop it
means depletion reduction and
offset program and you can think
doctor king for that term also
in addition to double wammy and
many others he's given me over
the years drop is essential to
ebid survival because this is
how we are going to reduce
depletions over time
there are some key issues though
in the low real grand like for
starters ebid is the only
authorized user of real grand
project water in new mexico and
the only authorized use of real
grand project water in new
mexico is for irrigation
purposes so we would have to
change under federal law through
federal contracts the purpose of
use for which the water can be
applied before it can be used
for offset purposes
however the problem is municipal
in industrial and even
agriculture users can't continue
to expand our water use with
hydrologically connected ground
water without further impairing
surface water and we can't
continue to expand our economy
if we don't have a means for
reducing depletions and
offsetting our impacts so this
would provide that market based
means for m and I users to swear
up with the real grand project
and to help new mexican state
contact compliance the
obvious core of the united
states complaint we can skip
over but this is where we are
today texas versus new mexico
has driven this to the forefront
of the issues we have to address
and were no longer simply
running from the litigation it's
important to know where talking
about reality here
hydrologically connected
resource means that we have to
manage it carefully.
Especially when one portion of
that source isn't showing up so
now that the surface water is
coming in to our system in
different ways we have to be
much more careful about how
managing the ground water.
Some of our considerations of
course were um
the things i've just recently
gone through that we have to
allow non project water users to
become quote project contractors
to use project water we need the
support of municipal and and
industrial users in this process
and we also need this to be
supported by the ad community
and one of the things back very
early when we were creating this
program that we were dealing
with was a distrust of both the
federal end state governments by
farmers and age users and so
they have somewhat more trust
for ebay being the local
entities we figured that would
be a good way to go about this
this would not necessarily mean
direct use of surface water by
municipal and industrial users
because of the erratic nature of
our surface water system in the
lower real grand it would be far
more realistic to assume that m
and I is going to continue to
rely on groundwater because
that's where they get their
certainty
but depletion reduction directly
addresses the effect on
interactive surface water and
grandmother systems and it
reduces the stress on our
awkward for and that's what
everybody's ultimate goal is we
also know that excessive
following or corley managed
following can threaten the
viability of our entire economy
in the lower real grand
agriculture is the largest
sector in the lower real grand
followed closely by government
so if we rural in our
agriculture sector we are
ruining or entire economy down
there so this is a slightly a
little dated and doctor king and
I will work on insuring that you
have updated numbers soon but
this just gives you an example
of what we're talking about
primarily yesterday in the
context of texas versus new
mexico this is total groundwater
withdrawals in the lower real
grand in the period two thousand
nine to twenty sixteen and you
can sort of see
obviously you'll remember from
yesterday that are groundwater
withdrawals increase if surface
water availability goes down and
so you can kind of see what
that.
Looks like here buy sector
then this is the percentage of
total lower real grand
groundwater withdrawals by ebid
and we are in blue and non ebay
those are an orange and
obviously the farmers used most
of the ground water but again
we're working on depletion
reduction for everyone and we're
working on off setting impacts
for junior ground water users on
the real grand project so when
we're talking about the latter
the offsetting impacts by junior
groundwater users where
primarily looking at those
orange bars the non ebay deal
this is municipal and industrial
groundwater withdrawals in the
lower real grand and you can see
most of our most of the time
stay pretty constant there are
pretty standard water uses in
other words in the lower real
grand and while we've said that
imminent has increased over two
hundred and fifty percent since
the d two period which you
learned about yesterday we also
know that the increase in water
use is not continuing to go up
exponentially like it did in
that period of time although
with some of the economic
development at the border and
some of the water issues were
dealing with currently it's not
unheard of that we will continue
to expand our use down there.
So part and parcel with what we
did starting a few years ago in
front of the legislature and
working with the federal bureau
of reclamation we also went to
usda and we asked us da for help
and the idea here was too
pronged processed that again we
at this point in time we're not
working well with the state of
new mexico like we are now and
so we were under the impression
we would be creating our own
following program now we are
working more towards melding the
two together or providing
farmers with multiple options
that's also a possibility but
our goal would be to continue to
work on this with the state of
new mexico however we as a
federal reclamation project
often poorer energy into working
on the federal level with our
federal partners that's where
contracts are authorizing status
lots of things that impact dvid
and so it's natural for us to
work with federal entities like
state entities and just a couple
of weeks ago august first we got
a big huge announcement we are
one of eighteen irrigation
districts in the west eleventh
veteran district that received a
grant from the usda that
invested up to four hundred
million dollars in these
eighteen irrigation districts
for the purpose of a dressing
drought through conserving water
but also ensuring continued
production of commodities to
enter that enter the market and
so a couple of key things here
this will not be the
government's way of controlling
for example the type of crop you
grow the idea that you can
mandate that a particular farmer
growly particular type of crop
or not grow a particular type of
crop is very unpopular so what
we will be doing is
incentivising farmers to do
different things with the water
they have available to them
instead of mandating and the
opposite side of that though is
when you mandate of farmer to
perform some sort of action
often times he will have a
better solution for you.
Then what your mandate is if you
let him figure it out on the
ground on his own form and I can
give you examples on my own form
as I sit here today I can tell
you in the lower real grand we
aren't having quite the level of
issues with on farm efficiencies
for example that the metal real
grand conservative district has
but we have our own separate
issues and we have our farmers
know how to adapt and so this
grant is intended to give us
some flexibility and setting up
a new program that will be the
programmatic side of things so
yesterday's sixty million
dollars that we talked to you
about and the money that we
talked to you about with the
state in the partnerships were
hoping most of that will go to
infrastructure restoration
habitat flood control public
safety all of those types of
things this is gonna be money
that goes directly into the
hands of farmers to incentivise
water use in a different way
now our most resent grant we all
know there's increasing demand
for water and usda has said this
isn't had all hands on decks
sort of approach we were chosen
again as one of eighteen
irrigation districts because
over the last few years we have
made the case that we are one of
the districts in the west that
is on the cutting edge of
technology of metering and
measuring and monitoring or
farmers use of in general just
what the farmers are doing on
farm what we're doing with an
art district and usda looked at
us and said you are far enough
advanced that you should be
helping advise us on how to set
these programs that so this is a
gift to us because we get to
fund our drop program and play
around with it and sort of twist
and turn the knobs to see what
works and what doesn't but not
on state taxpayer dame so that's
going to be lovely first
this is a partnership and again
the partnership is intended to
support using water efficient
technologies to maintain.
Or increase commodity production
while we decrease water use and
consumption and so again four
hundred million dollars and it's
from the commodity credit
corporation this this is a
particular fund within usda and
so because of this particular
money we have to show we will
continue to put commodities into
the market at similar levels or
higher levels than we currently
are while also showing reduction
in water use and again that
sounds like a monumental task
but ebid was determined to have
been on the cutting edge of so
many good ideas that they felt
like it was appropriate to give
us the money to start running
those to ground and figure out
what will work and what what
we understand that is part of
the whole effort usda is
targeting a reduction of up to
fifty thousand acre feet of
water across more than two
hundred and fifty thousand acres
of irrigated land and that's not
just on the colorado river again
were one of the ones that are
outside of the colorado river.
So we will work with usda then
we will turn around and work
with farmers directly and the
payments will go to voluntarily
reducing water consumption while
maintaining
production and commodity
committed is but what we also
are going to do is meet
individually with farmers and
set up internal programs within
the larger program so that if
rotational following doesn't
work for a particular farmer but
for example if my representative
from donator wants an
opportunity to have machinery
available to her to pull out
certain types of crops that may
be she doesn't have the
machinery to accomplish that
with we can make that available
to her one of the things that we
know farmers struggle with is
the idea of we have the
countries I purchase this
property there's but countries
they're not doing great I don't
have enough water to properly
support him but i'm continuing
the water and because they don't
know what else to do I also
don't have the machinery to go
in and remove those but on crops
alfalfa crops chilly crops they
all take a very particular as
type of machinery and if you are
trying to transition from a high
water use crap to a lower water
use crop it's in the machinery
it's in the production side of
things that really gets you you
don't have the right implements
for your tractor you not have
the right machinery to run this
product through your own plants
for cleaning or for sorting or
for distributing to essentially
semi trucks that are going to
take it off of your farm so
making things available to
farmers that they don't
otherwise have an opportunity
for so that then we can make
those farms more viable and more
sustainable over the long haul
using less water to do it and
again really is a diversity of
strategies we are not bound to
just following with this program
although we are going to use a
lot of our money to study that
so what is drop because they
don't want to run too far into
this i'm too long this would be
m& users being motivated to
offset the impact for their
groundwater use on the surface
supply of the real grand
project.
By entering into voluntary
following agreements with our
farmers so nobody would be
required to do this
hent hence along as there's not
a compact issue rate we don't
want to actually say there will
never be a requirement because
there may be some requirements
that come down that then force
people into what would have been
voluntary following but now
feels a little more restraint
and that may happen because we
still have to get our apple for
under control for purposes of
the compact but the farmer
entering this agreement would be
paid by an m and I user through
ebid's program to rotationally
fellow land eliminate the local
hydrologic depletion that would
have occurred on that lan and
then we take that number based
out of the
lower real grand adjudication to
be two point six sacred feet per
acres so we mult to play that by
the amount of acriticate and
that's how you get to what their
reducing and will walk through
an example of that but this
would allow junior m and I users
to keep pumping their ground
water but also off separate
impacts on the apple firm.
Without necessarily taking all
of agriculture out of production
and again we have several
contingencies already built into
our board policy and a lot of
them are up here i'm not going
to read them to you but all of
these contingencies are intended
to ensure that we are not
checker boarded that if we do
have to follow someone at the
long tail and
you know everybody on this long
and you know tale end of a
lateral is valid except the guy
on the end how do we efficiently
get the guy on the in his water
we can't just take his moderate
we can't deprive him of his
delivery we have a legal
obligation so how do we ensure
that those people following
along the way aren't harming the
district or other farmers so
this is the example I wanted to
rush through and get to you this
is a fifty acre farm and it has
in this year a twelve inch
surface water a lot meant and so
if you take twenty percent of
this farm or ten acres out of
production and you put it into a
for barents agreement or
following agreement there would
be no service water or
groundwater used on that ten
acres so that would be the
yellow portion on this chart
did the depletion reduction then
are the offset would be two
point six which is the
adjudications number
x ten acres in this instance or
twenty six acre feet but then if
you go to the green portion
which is the farm that still in
production we have forty acres
instead of fifty eight percent
production so the surface water
allotment over that forty acres
is now instead of twelve inches
fifteen inches because you've
taken the water off of the
orange or the yellow piece and
moved it onto the green piece
but you've also reduced the
amount that you're going to pump
on the rest of the farm that
green peace so fifteen inches
minus the twelve inches is three
inch remaining so that's how
much it's going to reduce ground
moderise on the forty acres or
by ten acre feet so and total
you have thirty six acre feet of
savings.
On this fifty eight are there's
fifty acre farm in one year
that land then would have to be
brought back into production and
rotated through the rest of the
farm now the reason we don't
call this following truly
following its rotational
following is because this is
what farmers and ranchers
already do we idle ground when
we need to I can tell you on my
unranted we rotate pastures
right but we're not getting paid
for that but in the lower real
grandfarmers are already doing
that because there's not enough
water but that's because their
water is going to other water
users this would provide the
mechanism to actually get them
compensated so they can stay
right side up in the eyes of the
bank rate sighed up in her own
eyes to be able to provide for
their family and keep this
ground into production
so I will skip over some of this
i've already covered it and
again i'll scan for questions at
the end thank you mr terry of
the floor
thank you next up we have done
this
thank you very much
mr chairman and members of the
committing my name is don boost
those and I I come from a little
village in in northern new
mexico called santa cruz.
Ah i'm a farmer I named my farm
after a r a church the santa
cruz church and I named it after
the santa clues they look
another landgraph there's
established over four hundred
years ago my family has been
farming that same piece of land
on the santa cruz landgrad for
four hundred years in our
conservation in watership
management is to allow families
and future generations to farm
for another four hundred years
it's a key piece of what we do
in order to new mexico it's our
economic bread basket a lot of
us don't have big time jobs or
anything we depend on our farms
in our small ranches to be able
to provide enough money in a
substance so that we can feed
our kids in our grandkids for
future generations I live on the
aliana assector the second was
dog with nothing by wooden
sticks and shovels
in a seven miles long you can
think about what it took four
hundred years ago for these
folks to get together and see we
need water from the real santa
cruz which is in a different
water shed then the rio grande
how in the hick are they going
to sit there and figure out that
they're going to do that secure
seven miles away get that water
to flow north
when only two seconds in new
mexico left long north the water
flows north and it feeds and it
waters is beautiful bearing
ideal of baron area and the only
reason that land is productive
is because those people had the
insight to dig that a second and
use that water from a different
water shed no water should is
that real sunday could use water
shed its mandate by the santa
cruz irrigation district can you
salasa dominate martinez and ron
gay english
it was built in the nineteen
twenties and completing the
nineteen twenty nine it was
designed to hold five thousand
four hundred ecofita water.
The company went broke before it
ever finished the job so it was
only able to hold about four
thousand three hundred eight or
feet of water this is a
privately owned down each member
of the senate preservation
district in the nineteen
twenties agreed to tax
themselves in nineteen cents a
neaker that was a lot of money
in those days but they saw the
value of being able to conserve
and use the water a very limited
resource of water that has not
been made more anymore that
creators and making any more
water but more people are moving
in and then through a
judiciations in the state
process they want to add more
users to the end of that river
system
we live on a water short state
three are every on a ten years
there's seven years of water
they're seven years of not
enough water in a three year
period so we're a water short
state at the best at the best
we could hope enough water for
everybody irrigate three days a
week so the irrigation district
functions is that water
regulations system it releases
water depending on how much snow
pack there is up in the
mountains and how much of a
monsoon we've add if we're
fortunate if we're really lucky
we get water three days a week
and then some of the summer
drought in the climate crisis
that's a great occurring in a
few years ago we only got water
two days a week and then they
had to cut it down to one day a
week and then we went down to
one day every two weeks as folks
our growing green children and
cue conversation squash to be
will take to the markets and
sanity will solve an inespanola
we were struggling to get enough
water to be able to under all
our crops and be able to get him
to the field just to pay our
taxes I mean if we don't pay our
taxes a government comes in and
they're able to take our land
and in our water so it's really
important that this water is
used in a really.
Efficient in a real manageable
way and the way the irrigation
district in the way we believe
in northern new mexico if one
person gets a drink of water we
all drink water there's nobody
special where all equal in the
ice creators and we all should
be able to get a good healthy
drink of water it's a human
right and that's what all new
mexicans should be going
entitled how we're doing it in
in santa cruce in the area there
we formed a real comma though
watershed group where we formed
a real the real commodore real
three holidays real media real
santa cruz water shared group
from there that's to address the
adjudications with the city and
the public from there we spun
off and we created the south
atros water shared restoration
group
a bunch of husband together were
working with state and state
agencies federal agencies are
too preblosed the city b I a
bureau of land management forest
service to create this water she
had to really be able to address
the knees of our water shared
and not let them go to hell what
happens as people don't take
care of their water ****
correctly there's a big fire
happens catastrophe shake you as
get runned out and you can tell
all that's happened across new
mexico well as santa cruz area
doesn't want that to happen we
want to be pro active and we
want to be able to adapt our
water shed to the climate crisis
that are occurring now by
managing the forest in a way
that allow us to continue to use
the water in a productive way by
being able to address the bad
land areas or the outroyals were
nothing grows it rains big water
**** come down those are royal
drawn it comes into the rivers
and it floods down the santa
cruz straight down to the real
grand it carrying all sorts of
debris trash anything that's
along the foothills are longer
ever gets washed down the river
names up in the real grand well
we got a small bill are grant
the water she had grant.
And thanks to connie maxwell and
weary I want to see a big
coudles to the new mexico a
second association because they
really helped in instrumentary
instrumental in setting up these
kinds of plans and building the
capacity of regional
associations that allows them to
proceed forward well we got a
water shed grant so we can start
to address of how to we manage
these thunderstorms that are
happening more on predictable
how do we manage that water shed
how do we make sure that water
slows down it either percoletes
back into the aquifer it goes
back into the river can phil up
the asset yes and then it'll run
down the second daily on all a
nirth in a second and then it
percodes back into the soil and
recharges are shallow awkward
first so there's a whole system
system we want to list its
system we're looking at a whole
listing system and hotel address
a very limited resource within
our specific water sheds so that
means water she had management
account for recharge cleaning of
the water for using in the
fields of season growing we're
learning more and more than the
importance of running water
through a second in the winter
to read charge the opportunity
is almost more in port is just
as important as irrigating your
feels in the summer because if
you don't recharge on shellow
occupiers are domestic wealth
dry up are you initial wells dry
up and without water to drink
and will all want it to be to be
the whole northern new mexico
just rise up switched so
important for us to be able to
take care of those water shoots
and what I like about what we're
doing it's all locally
controlled
the decisions are made by local
folks in their communities the
jobs are designed to be
implemented in create jobs
within the community so we're
not hiring some experts from
master two sets or somewhere
somewhere else to come in and
tell us what to do and take our
jobs away the job recreated for
our people in our communities
for the benefit of northern new
mexicans.
And i'll stand for questions
thank you very much.
There thank you very much for
business
our final prison tation on this
panel that is online mister
chile.
Are you there
yes.
Mister chairman thank you.
And we appreciate the time that
the water and natural resources
committee is offering us
and we being the
limits ago food agriculture
policy council a food and egg
subcommittee
I am chilly yazi I am from ship
rock.
And we need to present to you
over water statement today I
want to first of all just come
to on the concerns that the
farmers and other presenters are
making here our concerns as
farmers and those that care
about nature or universal
foremost we have great concerns
with our limited water supplies
here in the state.
And as so a statement that we
want to present here is
in that
in that vain thought
water statement.
Preamble water is life.
It is impaired of the low these
words are a recognition of the
profound nature of water to
indigenous peoples new mexico's
first water stewards as well as
many of us water is a living
entity with a female spiritual
personification a miraculous
life form that all life needs to
look in no one is truth we flow
with her to strengthen clarity
of our purpose to protect our
water in digital snow it says
given this recognition promotes
the power and authority of water
given us the greatest advantage
to improve our water use and its
protection though not give this
recognition to the santander
water involves irresistance that
compromises be beneficial
conclusion we collectively
strive for a living distrust we
have the grace opportunity to
protect water for our future
grandchildren it is of combat on
the new mexico water
forums to educate for policies
to ensure that our waters are
used to the optimum for our life
system it's and to meet the
needs of our citizens to provide
waters food security through
agriculture water is one of the
greatest resources new mexico
has and it deserves or utmost
commitment and vigilate advocacy
policy statement.
In your message food and
agriculture policy council
values clean water for the
cultivation of nutritious
culturally significant local
foods thus water in the state
must be protective and sir and
expanded upon where possible the
policy council is committed to
responsible and sustainable use
of water our waters must be
protected with a focus on
ensuring it continued adequate
supply for new mexico farmers
the policy council believes that
planning for use of all in new
mexico or any contemplated
strategic initiatives developed
by public agencies now and for
the future must place a prior
already on providing adequate
clean water for a look of food
production by number school
farmers called the beaters and
growers by doing so he is
producers or economically and
environmentally resilient.
And able to continue
with healthy foods and working
courtese golds the policy
council identifies the following
task and objectives.
The policy counts a well support
and participate in the fall one
ensuring that agriculture water
uses
social political and economic
excess to all processes to
protect their water rights and
eliminate in the threat of loss
of of a water right through non
use often smaller agriculture
water users do not have the
financial means to participate
then protect their water rights
too supporting and promoting the
promo a prudent use of water
through a conservation projects
the development of new
technologies for efficient water
use while recognizing and
respecting indigenous and case
yes cultural practices and
traditions three expanding and
funding the evolutary placement
of conservation eastman
overforms insuring that those
properties remain an
agricultural production and have
water rights and perpetuity
expand the eligibility for cost
for the conservation is met tax
credit for the for the
protection and conservation of
productive soils and farm lands
for providing input who
discussions about alternative
water use agreements between
competing stakeholders as
needed.
Fine participated in strategic
water planning discussions that
will serve all what users and
uses in new mexico six.
Insuring that those persons are
entities that allude or waters
are responsible for returning
any such a ludic waters to it
same condition prior to the
pollution and holding such
persons and entities the
cardible to the full extent of
applicable law and regulations
finally insuring that in new
mexico state engineers offers an
other appropriate agencies and
water a stories regulating all
water with and the state of new
mexico or accountable for all
water uses mister chairman and
honourable committee members we
appreciate this time to add our
voice to the concerns that many
citizens across the state of new
mexico have for disvery sacred
imprecious water that we have
and to do all we can within our
political social and financial
circles to protect our water for
the sake of our grandchildren
into the future thank you mister
chairman.
The.
I'm going to use the committee
for questions and kids
thank you chair and and thank
you presenters thank you very
much
for
your statement and so I have a
couple questions one is
is the eleven view irrigation
are you providing grants for
farmers for water efficiency
up mr chair members of the
committee representative the
idea would be that we are going
to interface with our farmers
and determine what they need so
yesterday I had some very good
feedback from my own
representative on some of those
potential needs on the idea
would be yes that ebid would set
up a program using this federal
money that could interface with
the states following program but
also ensure that there are
direct payments to farmers under
certain scenarios that would be
a ultimate goal to think thank
you mister chairman thank you
for your answer so who really
would I am looking at night just
the following program is water
efficiency or is this funds or
other funds is the irrigation
distract awarding grants to
individual farms that will
increase sufficiency could be
soiled preservation and seating
the orchards or water sad from
the buildings as well as the
family
mr chair members of the
committee in representative kids
know not currently but that's
the goal we would be moving
towards trying to for example
get a grant that could cover
machinery for say a co op of
farmers who want to join
together to pull out per
countries or to switch to a
lower water use crop and we're
in those discussions currently
we are not giving those types of
grants out our irrigation
district is very well covered in
terms of those on form
efficiency grant.
Already through nrcs programs
thank you then you sure so
are is the four hundred million
only for your districtors for
the state
mister chair representative
kate's the four hundred million
is going to be divided up among
eighteen irrigation districts
and i'm still in competition
with those others for exactly
how much we're going to end up
with and I can't get too far
into that those are embargo
discussions with the federal
government I cannot say that we
are even committed to receiving
any dime of that until we have
fully gone through the rate
process rate but the idea would
be that that money is coming
directly to ebid not going
through the state of new mexico
okay thank you I have to quick
other questions as when you were
talking about incentifies in the
farmers arm instead of
penalizing them in the moving
towards low lower water use
crops
my suggestion is going to the
state
consumer such as the public
school system that are now one
of the larger customers for
agricultural are community and
seen whether or not there are
produces items that
Just went down
just a minute ago
we're not done
we still have a public comment
in.
We're working in getting the
webcast back up
maybe it's back at what.
Okay we're working in their web
pass back up we do have just let
me
sort of a give you preview we
have public comment I have a
list of
about ten people here in the
room who want to get public
comment and then after we're
done with people in the room
we're gonna go online every
people raise their hands on zoom
I guess i'm gonna have to repeat
this as the webcast comes back
up.
Internet here went down that's
what i'm hearing
the recording is still happening
we lost our connection to the
internet is what happened.
Okay and they're working to get
it back up so we're gonna go
ahead and do the public comment
in the room okay we're back up
okay so for people who are
online
now i'm gonna repeat the same it
so we're going to do probably
comment
i'm gonna read a list of the
people and this is the order
will take you in we're going to
three minutes each you'll be
timed how do we know if I them
that
wave at you when you're done
so it's sort of note where you
are in the list
and when the speaker head are
you is wrapping up if you're
free to come on up so we can do
it efficiently so we're gonna
start with the silly roasecall
we have
asked in david soon we had a
name they read the hard time
reading it might be add
something with an each perhaps
leonard how pam ruined picket
callie perhaps body and neither
current go
she only share okay okay so
that's ordered so cecilia you're
up first
nope come on appear to take the
table.
And there's a there's a lot of
person button on the make then
you post the burden per some
button in the red light comes on
and he pulled right up so you
can talk into the mike
thank you
please yourself I am to see the
roadside and the director of the
real ground agricultural land
trust a non profit organization
that protects land and water for
people and while the right are
focused areas the middle way
your branded from sandable
county down to a county we were
found it at my kitchen table
twenty seven years ago when
farmers and conservation it that
came together to consider ways
to protect the middle real grand
I am also in farmer and
irrigator in the middle of your
grandday in public dargest ten
miles up the road
I grew up on a form and northern
new mexico just down the road
from done boosters and we
irrigated off the santa cruz and
just like his family i've family
depended on land and water for
sustaining ourselves.
I worked with many of you on
land and water conservation
issues and I thank you for your
support over the years
time is it is of the assets I
think we all know the fraud is
boiling it has been boy link we
just closed on a conservation is
met and told me
the historic community of the
farming community of tomato we
did this to an error cs
egricultural land easeman
funding this was out third nrcs
agricultural conservation is in
the last eight months one we
finished closing on this project
the land owner sent to cba we
can't do this fast enough we
need to go faster he said my
sister marie was working on the
ditch this morning and there's
fancy acves filled the people
and fancy clothes driving on our
ditches and she asked them what
can I help you and they said
yeah we're looking to buy land
and water rates
and she said well my family's
own this foreign this foreign
land hundreds of bakers for
going back to the tommy land
grant and I can tell you that
we're working to protect onland
and water with conservation
easements and there is nothing
for sale for you here
so we we I don't know if you
know that new mexico ranks
highest in the nation and um
according to american final
interest highest in the nation
and foreign land loss we also
work rank the worst in the
nation and policies that protect
foreign land there are some
legislation
programs in place
like the natural heritage
conservation act program which
was enacted during the
richardson administration but
has not been funded until just
this year due to the passage of
the land of enchantment legacy
fund that program has some
challenges and like all state
funding.
We all find the anti donation
class as a road block and
getting conservation on the
ground and so I know i've I
understand that there was an
opinion on the anti definition
clause that would help get state
funding to land owners impacted
by the wildfire but we need an
opinion on that to help us do
conservation on land and water
number cost efficient timely
manner and I think our partners
in the room would agree it's.
Other states not how they aren't
I don't need class and we are
losing ground because of it
I can say much more
thank you
thank you very much they are
asked and david said.
Any anyone want to be added
something.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for allowing me to speak uh two
things my my wife and I are
owners and operators of a ranch
in northeast in the mexico and
quake county i'm the third
generation my grandchildren are
fear well you start by
introducing yourself out I made
use i'm sorry
appreciate that
and I really appreciate the the
concern about water on on our on
our side where we are it's
ground water we don't have
surface water and the it's
pretty simple ground waters is
decreasing the levels of
decreasing we lost a well last
year and it's primarily because
of increased permitting use in
the last short very few years
you know we're a hundred percent
cattle we could go on for
generations doing that but the
representative mentioned of
talked about introducing bills
that's coming session increasing
money for for water different
things that have been brought up
here I very much want to
encourage the uh we're under the
similar on district engine state
engineers district they don't
have enough people to even
administer what they the duties
are given now much less the
increase that there will happen
as times change and I know the
state engineer has has
the ability to put funds where
they they didn't want to go but
I would like this committee to
encourage the state engineer and
give an increased funds to
increase the the number of
people employers employment
employees in these districts so
that they can really administer
what they what they need to do
plus you're also need to be some
regulation changes are are a
water use laws are generations
and need to be revembered at
actually give some teeth into
another thing that I want to
bring to attention this
committee this is a natural
resources committee and raising
land as a natural resource.
The partner of energy is
identifying at least eighteen
million acres of land in mexico
in the northeast mexico as a
national interest electric
transmission quarters for siding
into regional international
you'll take a scale transmission
lines infrastructure and battery
storage these quarters gear
private companies back by the
federal government all the power
they need to override any other
permitting authority and take
private land through imminent
domain to cite their
developments most of this land
is private with some state the
reason they're doing it is
because it's easier than taking
federal or or tribal land and so
this is a real concern I just
want to make this committee we
were to surprise that a lot of
people were not aware of this
when we found out about it two
months ago so i'm just spreading
the word this is a real concern
has gone to have a real impact
on us as a state thank you
mister chairman and members of
the committee
thank you mister hughes next up
we have lettered how and then
after that will have pam.
First of all person
good afternoon thank you for
allowing me to speak today I am
lindered however I am the
distinct manager in east torch
solemn water in a stance in new
mexico.
I've been right in stuff for
three days
on how to bring all this up with
you guys and in this is too much
so i'm gonna i'm going to try
and just get to a few points
that the issue we're having
right now and I wanted to be
clear we don't have an issue
with canabas canous is fine it's
a it's a legal substance right
now you guys pass we're good
with that what we're having a
problem with is the unlicensed
growers and the growers that
have had their license taken
away but
ccd does not have the power to
shut them down there there are
things that I think that you
guys need to look at seriously
and passing some lives so they
have the teeth to go after these
farms that are abusing the water
there growing more plans and
they're supposed to
december thirteenth this year of
of twenty twenty three
one of the phones were shut down
in the stance here whenever they
did the plant on the mature
count they had forty thousand
plants they were supposed to
have four thousand plants
there's a mature plans they had
over fifty growing
the difference in that when you
start talking about a water
resources four thousand plants
is about twelve thousand gones
water a day that's not much when
you're talking about the size of
these areas
but when you start talking forty
thousand plants now you're
talking
a hundred and twenty thousand a
day you're talking to and half
million dollars a month this is
coming out of us a closed water
basin there is not replenished
the way it used to be and if we
continue to allow these guys to
keep pulling water like that and
we don't shut him down and we
don't
get them under control the
damage that that's going to
cause the torrents county and
our neighbors is
something we're not going to be
able to recover from so
whatever you all can do and and
listening last couple days to.
Um the new state engineer and
talking with
sorry go to your name.
Anyhow the lady from the ccd
they're underfunded
and their underman and I I think
i'm not i'm not being a
cheerleader for anybody but I
think that that those guys needs
a lot more people in a lot more
money I think that the
statements in earth's office has
got to have people that can go
out read these meters on these
wells that are supposed to be
moved from agricultural to
commercial wells they're
supposed to be metered and
they're supposed to be read
monthly or every six months I
don't know what the criteria's
but something needs to be done
so you guys can see exactly what
is happening with these forums
thank you
thank you mister how um they
suppose payment royal and after
that will have team picket again
so for people online uh we lost
internet for a minute there and
I think everyone got kicked out
if you're online if you're back
on zoom you'll have the
opportunity to speak at when the
time counts we'll ask you to
read your hand on zoom they will
recognize you on zoom and do it
that way we're gonna go through
the people in the room first so
next that we have pam roy
mister chairman mr chairman
committee members thank you so
much for the opportunity to be
here this afternoon really
appreciate everything you all do
my name is pam royal executive
director of farmed table and
also helped to coordinate the
new mexico food and agriculture
policy council I just want to
share just a few things that
follow up from mr chile yazi who
just presented our water
statement our focus is following
and wanted to thank you all is a
committee for having us last
month many of us to talk about
are agriculture as a local food
system and many of you brought
it up even a more recently today
and yesterday
and we want to also offer our
food charter the report card
that we.
Is a follow up from our
presentation last month i've got
copies here hard copies and
they'll also be online for you
and it represents million tens
of millions of dollars of
investment in new mexico food
it's farmers it's ranchers and
it has been stated just a little
bit ago today that we now have
it just in the last two years
approximately ten million
dollars of economic
opportunities that have gone
through with our farmers and
ranchers and our schools are
senior centers hundred thirty
three senior service now twenty
five early decare summers
hundred and sixty school food
authorities purchasing new
maximum grown and raised foods
at the same time we're working
with farmers and ranchers who
are focused very much on water
conservation on the healthy
soils program we re generating
their operations by doing things
like cover cropping underneath
and we witness that mr wagner's
firm last last month under his
orchard where he's holding water
in that land by seeding it
underneath that crap and doing
his best to hold on to his
orchard just two other things so
again many thanks for the
connections that we get a chance
to make around growing out
permanent agriculture also last
month shared out that ten point
seven percent of what is grown
in raised in new mexico stays in
new mexico and speeding our own
local communities at our local
economies as for the wealth and
health of our of our communities
lastly just want to share very
quickly last night I received a
letter from uh the consolidates
firming family in the coralist
area and I think you all might
have had a conversation about
this yesterday a little bit
around these big issues they are
asking for equity in water water
accessibility and they've been
turned off because of some very
specific things that are
happening.
They need the water turned back
on in their region I know
represent cases very much on top
of that about they speak to even
their farmers market to could
allow us for market one point
three million dollars through
that farmers market last year
some of that was double up food
bucks the supplemental nutrition
assistance program tens of
millions of dollars in the state
over the last few years just
specifically to that program so
we are making an economy here in
mexico we're expanding our
economy and we're focused on on
health of people in our
community through food that it's
grown here thank you very much
for everything you care about
and for the continued support
and again um we have a reports
here for you to take home fear
evening reading
thanks
thank you very much next step we
have you jean pick it and after
that it might be called the
chair a body of d d y
test
mister chairman of committing
members those that I know and
then knows that I will get to me
the representative arm strong
property gets loaded out twenty
eighteen and that's when water
became a it's always been
significant but it hit me upside
the head of what it can do when
it's out of control and in in a
really appreciate I think seeing
so many over the water advocates
from around the state here and
or our work at a
more on the governing board of
the food neg policy council my
local business is black formers
and ranges in mexico and arm or
national movement is with the
latino farmers and ranches
international so with that we
found in in engagement on two
levels with the usda one in
access to disaster relief the
other on twenty two zero zero
seven.
The discrimination peace where
you
have heard of the
four billion dollars
appropriation result with a
black farmers across the country
in in there we got the interview
so many people and one of the
things we found in the climate
crisis the california was going
to have thirty percent less
production in planting the next
season well the farmers out
there because of the drought
have opted
down fifty percent you know so
there's in our region in the
southwestern region uhm there
will be less production so it's
very significant I think with
the new mexico
and then the local control
because there are groups outside
in the mexico they will come
into studying mexico and they
take those resources back to
these costs you know I think
that like you know just being
here in an in listening that at
least one of the thoughts you
know to local grown local
production local
focus because what are we gonna
have as we lose
grazingland wild fires
floods you know that means less
access to planting in unless
access to our own resources
though the focus for local is
extremely important it is it is
good to hear that here you know
so they have as real line um
are production cycles with a
realistic approach that the
committee offers all those
combining alignments or probably
going to be extremely important
as we got moved into the future
everybody everybody kind of like
knows pam is a high energy
person who doesn't allow
session.
She she came back to committee
meeting because we need every
year monday during the session
and she was really
passionate about water in the
statement that we probably
needed to make a my thought was
like would you know what would
you you know what is this energy
about you know why is it so
when I digested that and I
thought to myself were work
talking about then we had the
very next day there was the.
Press conference on the
repurposing of water that was
contaminated in the south and we
said you know where we need to
look at a seriously so the
statement they are chilly
presented that's a part of our
preemble in our water statement
in and you have it in your
packet it's kind of positioning
ourselves they like as a policy
council where we are going to be
and where we're going to be
advocating during the session so
if you take that in and we see
as an always would be open for
questioning and thank you very
much for the opportunity
thank you mister picket next up
someone with the last name body
PO d d y.
And after that will have a need
a crunch
high mister chairman in
committee members my name is
kaley body i'm currently a
senior here at new mexico
textile in chemical engineering
they also I was coming to talk
to you guys today about some of
the stuff we do in my lab I work
in the p double rc and I focused
on produce water filtration so
in our lab we may call off I
rememberings that go into
filtration systems we've also
used that technology for lithium
extraction but we have lab set
up everywhere from small lab
scale things that we can test
all the way up to commercial
skills we have a whole mobile
laboratory that we use and we're
seeing a lot of data that's
really promising that we can
with our members we can make
some of this pure this water
that's coming out of you know
the oil fields or whatever
really really pure that's our
whole goal you know we have are
set up so where you know they
last a long time they're really
easy to make their generally
cheap to make and we would love
to see more of this technology
you know out there for real
world use it's a really cool
thing we'd also love to have you
here at the p double rc and I
also brought our deputy director
to talk for the remaining bit of
our time
thank you for me thank you
mister chair members the
committee and thank you I we are
so proud of students like
healing at our researchers I am
jetter for radium the deputy
director of the petroleum
recovery research center so the
reason i'm here and the reason
that keiley brought me along
today is to to refute some of
the concerning statements that
have been made about the state
of our technology what were
capable of and what's being done
here in new mexico as cailey
eloquently stated we are doing
this we are capable we have had
demonstration projects
throughout the state and in the
region we invite you to come see
our labs we invite you to come
receive a tour from a industry
partners.
Who were able to help
commercialize our technology we
provided a tour to the lfc last
year at our unit up in permin
ten it's a skid mounted unit
currently it's capable of
purifying up to hundred and
twenty gatherings a day a
produced very very standing
brackish water but also we can
scale that up to up to five
hundred gallons or barrels per
day rather so we are trying to
meet the demands and needs of
all communities in new mexico in
this very water start
environment but the technologies
here so we ask that you
acknowledge are over hundred and
twenty five pure reviewed
scientific articles and journal
publications that directly
address this information
statements have been made that
this does not exist and that is
categorically false I understand
that scientific articles are are
not easy to come by sometimes
there is a pay wall with some of
these journals so if we can help
support you in making that
information more readily
excessively please let us know
we are here as a resource but
most of all we want to
disseminate our technology and
our information to empower the
lives of people who live here
and to meet the the demands in
the needs of or saying
throughout mexico so again I
please would ask you to question
statements that are being made
that does not rest on sound
science and facts and physics
and that is what I stand by and
so researchers like kailey and
the other researchers that
dedicate their lives to this
work that is why we're here so
let us help serve you better
thank you
thank you next time we have
neither cronko
no understand we're going to see
a perhaps a short term version
of your video yes mr chair i'm
gonna make a brief statement and
then we can watch part of the
video
and you should go ahead to she
suffers well thank you good
afternoon mr chair madam vice
chair and members of the
committee my name is nina congo
and i'm a program officer the
water foundation.
The water foundation works on
clean water river health and
natural infrastructure and new
max account i'm here to share
information about a new public
education campaign we are
supporting called water can't
wait this campaign is driven by
everyday new max accounts who
are directly affected by the
water crisis today they are
calling on us to make water
issues a priority in the next
legislative session and as
you'll see in this video their
communities need urgent action
on water issues now thank you
for the opportunity to get
public comment I know a lot of
people have signed up so we're
only going to watch about a
minute or two of one of the
videos on water can't wait dot
org
if we could please start the
video thank you.
We make yeah.
Yeah.
We're working on the sound.
So so if we can get the sound we
should just move on this video
is available on your is that
correct yes mister chairs of the
website as water can't wait
these videos are on the voices
while page i'll just briefly
state there's four different
videos I including this
compilation video and they have
voices from out new at new
mexico so there's individuals
from eastern new mexico silver
city pablo as well as an
individual from northern new
mexico who represent cs
community so please go ahead and
take a look and
thank you for the opportunity
again today mr chair
thank you very much and sorry
about the job at the sound now I
appreciate serious help today so
thank you for the opportunity
next to we have tom person.
Thank you mister chairman
committee members my name is tom
hatterson and the cattle rancher
from catchment county I service
president intellect of the new
mexico cattle growers
association thank you
for holding a two day meeting on
water the attention is warranted
as i've listened however it
seems to me that we've not
addressed here the role that
many of our private land owners
and in particular are ranchers
play and could play in
conserving our water resources
on private and public lands on
our public lands for example
it's not the forest service that
puts in stock tanks or cleans
them out when there is a fire in
the tank fills up with ash
another fire debris it's the
rancher who works to provide
that resource for a live stock
and for a while life it's not
the forest service that
initiates water distribution
projects so live stock and
wildlife can grays in previously
unwatered areas outside right
period zone it's the rancher
ranchers are doing that type of
work across new mexico not just
in the rio grand quarter where
we focused so much of our
attention from a policy stand
point we would urge you to do
two things to facilitate that
work first provide funding to
help pay for the materials and
labor that guentest smaller
shovel ready water projects like
pipelines do so with minimal
oversight and monitoring just
get the project done arizona
game and fish does this
routinely there's a two to three
page application they come out
they take a look they make a
decision and they send you a
check when you have completed
the project.
Put a cap at say twenty five
thousand dollars per project
absent special circumstances
second there are also big
projects that ranchers do or
would do on private land if it
were not so complicated to do
them i'm thinking in particular
about the right period
restoration projects my family
has done on center fire creek
were over the course of almost
thirty years and a million
dollars we've raised the creek
level by ten feet back to an
historic level from the eighteen
eighties
with help to restore that a
hundred and twenty one square
mile water shed those projects
however may involve dozen were
more agencies
they're expensive they take a
long time to get done their
overwhelmingly complicated but
they are necessary if we're
going to recover some of our
water sheds and stop our storm
water from gushing down our
creeks and rivers to our
neighbouring states laden with
new mexico soil
what we need are water project
advocates who are committed to
restoring our water sheds
through riperiod restoration
projects and who are willing to
work with private landowners
from soup to nuts from
conceptualising the project
through grant writing through
dealing with agencies and
permits to recommend in
engineers and contractors
through s execution and project
wrapper such projects with
spread the water out slow it
down deposit this settlement
recover our right period areas
they're severely in size and
slowly released water downstream
for longer periods of time but
these projects are hard work and
they require continuous
monetary they're much harder
than using money to buy a
planned and take it out of
production but their essential
if we're committed to being wise
stewarts of our la.
If the legislature does these
two things small project funding
and water project advocacy you
will have vastly expanded
meaningful water conservation
across our entire state thank
you
thank you mister paris so never
gonna go online and I don't
actually know how this is going
to work because I all have a
list of people with raise towns
okay
are these the yes
okay so uh first of all we have
scrubbed shrug scrap.
Okay
says that i'm unneeded and mute
it thank you mister chairman and
committee my name is samuel
shrop and the commissioner
representing torres county store
district has everyone here knows
torrents county overlays a large
part of the associate basic we
are entirely dependent on
subserving water but portable in
irrigation water the levels of
architect are falling with
increasing speed I have a well
walking device on my consumptive
use well and I sure that they
would need mexico back
hydrogeologists I watch my well
level rise and ball as much as
twenty feet throughout the
irrigation
might well also made her and
that information goes to the o m
s e quarterly so that data can
be crossed reference with my
well levels at the present time
we are experiencing a boom in
industrial scale green house
agriculture in particular
marijuana grow operations as
well as water being said that
the wind urban projects for
construction uses in the county
so the demands on the occupier
in the assound basin are
increasing
some of those operations are
transferring paper water meaning
changing a point of diversity
not actual water to wells may
have which had been out of
service for years all from which
water has been drawn in years
rather than what
the sale of an actual point of
diversion apology transferring a
point of diverse into a new
location opening the ability to
begin pumping water from an area
in which irrigation wells
haven't been used because those
wells could not support
irrigation operations
a commercial marijuana grow
operation or whatever being sold
for construction projects will
negatively affect neighbouring
domestic wells.
Another example is the news
applicant for an osce change
ownership in the county that
change of ownership will enable
the permit upon two hundred
ninety nine her annum someone
which has been out of use center
d e a f b IT f raid and twenty
eighteen even with a change
abused to a commercial permit
and half the irrigation water
used that new permit will affect
water levels in the valley bill
critical management area
my concern is that because of an
incomplete
ding a lack of leader waiting or
well is being an active os
estimate of available water in
the bags and are an error I
believe that there is less water
available to be pumped out of
the ground then the ossee data
shows the well which I mentioned
previously has not been in use
so that two hundred ninety nine
a repeat have not been called
from the ground if o s e b is
dependent on an estimate of how
much water is being pulled based
on that two hundred ninety nine
acre feet number then the data
from my well and others in that
area are indicating and
acceptable level of god down
then the data is in error we
have the overseas calculations
are based on paperwater
estimates and not what water use
all of us in the astancia basin
our faster approaching a
humanitarian crisis domestic and
irritation wells in torrents
county or failing at an
increasingly rapid rate with no
relief insight
the new director of the osc miss
anderson the order of a review
of the method of data collection
to ensure that permits are being
approved based on accurate data
I heard the legislature do in
greece funding for the osse.
And to give the osy the people
needed to read meters on site at
random in order to ensure the
estimates of available water in
the stock
are actually.
But I understand what they will
be alone
have too much water is used by a
permanent holder in one year
older mr.
Can you.
Yep.
One
by the food of the comments this
water is
used and a beags that has to
change thank you.
And for the remaining members of
the public we are asking people
to limit their promised at three
minutes we don't have a time or
visible on the screen we are
timing it uh but i'm sorry need
you time yourself next step we
have syrah n m c r m.
Hi can you hear me yes great my
name is site analysts stay and I
am the program co director of a
nonprofit in the mexico called
the american friend's service
committee of new mexico and I
work with small scale family
farms i've come today because I
want to talk about a concern to
have about the strategic water
supply which seems like it would
be a proposal to take public
money to pay private industry to
to purchase treated produced
water and then we'd have to then
sell it possibly at a huge loss
and this is the way it's like
helping oil and gas with their
waste problem and I don't I
don't want the public to be
paying for that i'm concerned
that produced water is highly
crossive it's salty it's toxic
it can be radioactive and
although there have been studies
that we haven't yet figured out
how to
protect safely treat produce
water at the scale that the
strategic water supply envisions
and i'm really concerned about
studies that are showing
about treated ways that has been
released that can so
accumulation of cancer causing
radiation and there was a study
done i'm in april of two
thousand and twenty four by the
produce what are consortium a
researcher name pays you that
found that even the process of
cleaning the fracking waste
itself can create a whole new
source of tax the city and i'm
concerned because I do work with
farmers and there's talk of
using this produced water in
agricultural use and i'm also
concerned as a resident of new
mexico whose daughter has
cancer.
I don't want anyone to be
exposed to more cancer causing
our radioactive waste I don't
want anyone to go through what
my family has gone through
since december two thousand and
twenty two when she was
diagnosed today we actually
missed a call from the cancer
center because she had a ct test
earn a c t scanned checking for
cancer embarrasses really
stressed out waiting to hear is
it good news or is that bad news
and i'm sure everyone here knows
someone who
has cancer and I I really
encouraged this committee I
appreciate you serving
interstate legislature and to to
be really careful about
protecting the health of our
forms of our people of her water
when you're considering this new
technology of produced water and
the studies showing the taxi
city thank you.
Thank you very much
next up we have an ee.
The.
Good afternoon insurance
committee members I apologize
that I did not figure out how to
change the name on my screen but
my name is serious what he calls
a
I live in a spin yola I have
three children and our house is
directly across the real ground
firmware of royals washed down
from las alamos
recently a report came out that
samples from those downstream
areas contain extremely high
levels of plutonium which has a
half life of twenty four
thousand years and now we're
hearing that this strategic
water supply is going to use
public funds to treat fracking
waste which.
From the permeant there was a
study that should have had a
hundred and ninety five peco
curious at radium on average in
a permian waste that's a very
low estimate and that's three
times the amount of radium to
qualify liquid as radioactive
waste so I am very concerned
about how this proposed
strategic water supply will
affect our water I am very
concerned that there has not
been research at the.
Scale and level of treatment
that's being proposed to prove
that it's safe
and i'm familiar with the
legislative process to some
extent I know that last year the
strategic water's play filled
after several attempts to pass
bills enabling funding
but this year I saw that their
house appropriations and finance
committee created its own water
sub committee and i'm concerned
because the budget process is
one of the places in the
legislature where very few
people have the expertise to.
Um two engaged with it in a
meaningful way and i'm very
concerned that this proposal is
going to like slip through their
house appropriations and finance
committee without the public
actually getting too way in
not to mention other legislators
so.
I'm asking you as legislators to
please.
Speak for us.
An insurer that that's
experiment on our water this
potentially radioactive
experiment
does not pass through without.
Proper.
Public scrutiny and engagement
thank you.
Thank you very much next up we
have
any e n i.
That's hello good afternoon
committee members my name is
annie hannah I live in albert
key and I have four children i'm
very concerned about the long
term original crisis in new
mexico at my house I spare a
well with my neighbors and so of
too much water is being used our
pump immediately shuts off to
protect our motor.
And on a recent sunday it was a
hundred degrees and my kids were
showering and I was running a
load of laundry and my neighbors
were watering their peace tree
and that was just way too much
water on the system and are
water immediately fed off and
that's our water warning and I
would say that new mexico the
warning bells are chiming our
ground water is being depleted
and our our covers need to be
mapped measured and monitored
our water should be conserved
for people and not for corporate
profits in valencia county out
of state corporations like
niagara bottling company are
depleting ground water by
overpumping and bottling our
water in plastic for their own
profit and they're using the
paper water leases taking it
from burn a lio county and using
it down in valencia county
hundreds of residents have
spoken out and i've attended
these meetings but three village
counselor is gave niagara the
green light to expand going
against the problem of his
latter and also local mayors who
have spoken out many times
against expansion
our water is not up for grabs
similarly oil and gas
corporations have massive
cracking waste problem and now
they're looking to use public
money to buy their treated
fracking waste for reuse.
And that is crazy I mean let's
be clear on their terms it's not
a strategic water supply it's a
fracking waste real supply it's
not produced water or new water
it's simply racking waste as
communities like a last year and
I go in santa fe have recently
experience contamination of
wells with peafous chemicals can
develop state a community and p
first pass pass or I known
chemical and fracking waste so
why would he allow further
contamination why would we use
public funds to potentially
contaminate our water
new mexicans are saying loud and
clear no instead we need a fund
and staff our water agencies
fond the weight water data act
and find and implement the water
security planning act of twenty
twenty three and look very
closely at water leases to
corporations that are grabbing
up our water thank you so much
for your time.
Merchant accept way of sharing
urgent right.
The.
Good afternoon mister chairman
members of the committee both
present and on zoom my name is
sharon archer bray I have an
opposition to testing or
experimenting with using oil and
gas drilling affluent this
proposed strategic water supply
plan I have been a nurse for
over forty five years masters of
science prepared and retired air
force nurse mother grandmother
the nurse's job is to make
assessments come up with an
initiate plans and evaluate
results it's been twenty years
and science stalled a multi flow
water recycling system for my
household I reuse all my
household water sometimes twice
I have had more than ample to
keep my forest service trees
which I purchase and plant to
suck up greenhouse gas and shade
the earth I am a well aware of
our need to protect the
environment and minimize climate
meltdown I am aware of super fun
clean up sites all over the
country I am aware of ashpet
cancers and ruined lives I have
seen the green cloud of methan
over farmington by satellite and
now the permean base and
overload I believe should be
sealed and casks and capitalited
guarded and production of two
cease or situations consider our
climate is dying as a nurse I
recommend clean up of the oil
and gas waste it will happen
when the oil and gas industry
takes responsibility surely
there are federal super fund
clean up site moneys available
the choice can be to close up
and seal for all perpetrating
all oil and gas affluent the
choice will conserve precious
new mexico natural resources
biased a little time on climate
preservation.
An emergency preparation please
vote non produce water
experimentation choose life
sustaining conservation of our
precious new mexico water
resources thank you so very
much.
Thank you for that next step we
have carlos motivates.
The.
Thank you very much my name is
kettle's mother this I am the
new next looking in the advocate
for pre levels I would keep my
comments very brief thank you
very much mister chairman and
committee members for hearing
me
the discussion i'd like to bring
up is on.
So called produced water this is
a euphemism or toxic waste that
is produced by the oil and gas
industry I do want to
acknowledge the clothes from new
mexico tech who talked about the
research that's being done and
if answers in filtration
technology that's fantastic I do
want to point out that we have
roughly one billion that's bill
you're going to be barrels of
toxic water and sailing wells in
the state of new mexico let's
just go ahead and assume that
there might be a way that we can
achieve let's say.
Fifty percent.
It a viable water spiltered
through.
And let's just ignore the very
real issue of having to
transport that.
Brashly cleaned water from those
wells out to the rest of new
mexican.
Even if we were to do that and
based on
the researchers estimation that
right now they can do about five
barrels a day.
Fifty percent of that one
billion barrels five hundred
million barrels of water that
would need to be claimed would
take a roughly one hundred
thousand days.
They cleaned up just not another
water this is not a solution.
The dates point that i'd like to
bring up is that we just don't
know what's in frank and water
and that's because those
ingredients are a treat secret
in the state of new mexico.
So we don't even know what is in
the water that we're trying to
clean this is just.
Quite frankly
as other commercial brother
there's also traceable
radioactive material in those
waters.
Which is done something that can
be filtered out.
The strategic waters why has
very very major problem and that
is trying to jump it water on
the rest of our states.
I implement.
This is not a solution for
article issue.
What stop the selling is.
I just say no the strategic was.
Thank you very much.
Thank you next that we have a
lane.
The.
Good afternoon chair can you
hear me yes.
My name is a lane hammered and
i'm a retired chemist attorney
and regional water planner and I
reside the november
I was unable to listen to
yesterday but want to make a few
comments with regard to the
situation melaria grand so any
redundancy just hopefully adds
to the sense of urgency
last year the mrg consume more
water than this is entitled to
under the rear grand compact
again
the debit together with the lack
of storage available in their
water rest of our and mother
natures
whimsies has resulted in surface
water users having less supply
than before however that has not
stopped groundwater withdrawals
it's easier to talk about
shortage sharing when the users
and uses are similar however as
it was painfully learned in the
lower real grand increasing
withdrawals leads to increased
riverflow depletions
in part that's because we play
the word games such as calling
treated wastewater entering the
real grand every turn flow it's
not returning to the aquifer
from where it was pumped so that
hall continues to be in large as
more as pumped depleting future
flows and intern requiring more
offsets rather than enabling the
water to be returned cycled
increasing
or even maintaining deplations
as unsustainable in light of the
fact that the flows are already
declining with a projected
twenty five percent less water
in the rivers in recharging our
equipment by nineteen twenty
seventy if not even earlier
another game involves water
rates and permits the state has
acknowledged that the mrg was
fully if not over allocated by
nineteen oh seven and you have
the state engineer aware of tens
of thousands of acre feed a vest
of water rest urban areas
representing the water use prior
to the base and being declared
but usually after nineteen or
seven and more importantly.
That usage doesn't have to be
offset together with the sa
requirements the margie is
really over allocated now as
part of her reduction in the
place programs why not require
an offset provested rate
beginning in the nineteen
sixties the osce also handed out
some two hundred and thirty
thousand acre feet of water
permits to urban areas in the
emergy we needed those permits
will require water rights to
offset them while not all of the
permits have neutilized to date
the usage would represent a
complete drawing of non trouble
irrigated lands as it would
require transfers from all
currently or irrigated lambs
with water rates to offset those
permits why not recall some are
all of the outstanding permits
before my ground water users and
uses are allowed in the mrg a
robust depletion's model should
be developed and utilized by all
in that way to place can be
followed and reduced to comply
with compact and treating our
obligations whatever right
should be included in the plans
which will attract owners to
participate in regional planning
process when transfers are
proposed the impact to the
rivering system should be an out
analyzed with the most senior
rights most likely supporting
the system the most unless the
least likely to really want be
moved also in needed is a water
budget which includes water
rates in that way conservation
measures in regional water plans
can take into account the users
as well as the uses as well as
be specially faced targeting the
best recharge areas etc I hope
that funding will be targeted
toward those set type of
projects and thank you for your
time.
Thank you next up we have.
Three sisters collective.
Oh oh can you hear me yes
I sorry it wouldn't let me
change my name but I wanted to
talk about the strategic water
supply hello chairman and
committee my name is doctor
chris sena m castro I am tough I
blow him as public and I live in
a wingay also known as can open
new mexico and see where
territory i'm a mother community
organizer farmer and founder of
three sisters collective aggress
roots and digital centured women
lead organization with the focus
on rematuration which is
fostering our connection and
reconnection with the land and
effort to preserve our unique
life ways as publo and
indigenous people I come from a
long line of farmers medicine
keyboards and land care takers
i'm here to speak it defense of
the water water is sentiant how
we use or misuse water will have
lasting impacts
community but when I got my
doctor it I do have a doctor I
have no idea i'd be using my
education to fate state systems
and corporate interest as that
attempts to normalize the most
egregious and insulting
processes like using public by
need to find the reuse of
fracking way swatter and then
creating terms like strategic
water supplied to hide what
they're doing and coded language
and attempt to turn around and
sell death water back to us sell
us what kills us how very
american we say no to our state
and in and it's inhabitants
being sacrificed for greed and
comes in consumption the
toxicity of protroduce water has
already been well stated by
previous commenters as well as
concerns about technological
ability to mitigate it I am not
convinced that the swatter is
safe for any any usage and I
echo which all yazi says when he
says that water is life we are
water water is us water is our
first environment we need clean
water not only to live but for a
grarian culture as public people
to survive and thrive.
We need to be doing everything
we can to conserve the water we
have here we should be having
discussions about divesting from
boston fuels creating new forms
of hydro electric energy solar
energy versus continuing to sell
our souls to gas and oil no one
is immediate until the lasting
effects of these industries as
we are seeing here in new mexico
with a drastic weather patterns
we've been experiencing so I
speak on behalf of my
communities all tribal
communities always
disproportionally impacted for
all people who live in new
mexico and who don't have the
knowledge or the capacity to
come to these meetings but are
still subject to the decisions
of those empower I speak for
animals and all other and well
increasures I speak for all my
answers to support value of
maintain our beautiful life
here and I ask you to consider
your children unborn children
and generations to come in your
decision making water is secret
water is life water is us we are
sacred we are one and the same
thank you for your time.
Thank you next if we have.
The.
A long time.
The.
Can hear you.
Okay when I start there and
committee members thank you for
the opportunity to comment today
i'm gonna use my time to comment
on the state proposed to do a
quarter supply my name is lease
giant and I am a first
generation at the university of
new mexico where I focused on
the fundability and
environmental justice this year
I advocate and organize the
development of your name some
possible field and for the
protection of our water
restaurant which are very
interesting
going on my father always
improvised the importance of our
water resources
to me if I always be there been
a dinner more power not than a
month
a lot but in english that is
what of his mind if we don't
have water we don't have life so
protect it and concerns they're
not abstract they were routed in
the live experiences of our
community we constantly worry
about water fifty bearing then
at any given moment to be the
one when our water runs out and
the steer is not unfounded new
mexico is grappling with water
intensive indicators like oil
and gas negatives the confirm
reading of the conservation
these indicating particularly
oil gas are creating a weight
problem getting better being
held accountable they stand to
benefit from how it is that the
burden of their waste on to the
public.
Mr jerk waters apart because all
could result in the public pain
huge amount which creep produced
water from these industries with
no guarantee of recovering those
cots the oil and gas in a few
which make the billions each
year would be responsible for
for paying for their own way
solutions not the people of the
mexico not the people who call
this land their home the
governor and the new master
firing until department are
framing produced water use as
part of the solution to the
projected twenty percent water
shortage by twenty fifty but the
numbers of stone add up even if
we could transfer all of the
fracking way currently injected
into salt water or the wells and
recover
that waste as usable water the
state would only get about sixty
four acre of water per year and
this small amount is far from a
real pollution to our water
store to charge and I just can
produce water is growth in the
pocket second radio active and
even oil and gather industry
buying things have yet fined a
faif way to treat it at the
skill proposed by the general
water supply to plan
and studies of areas where
treaty treated produce water has
been did charge those dangerous
accumulations of radioaction
radiation and downstream
stagements public significant
restaurant both are limited
water and public health we're
using produced water and a large
gill industrial projects without
rigorous safeguards not only is
not only record but it make
bareman on our health.
And our future this is that
mentioned that increase handling
transportation and potential
bill of the pack the grave
across the date which is the
risk of that we simply cannot
afford the preparation of our
water respecting the interest in
environmental jack in the few of
the matter of the bible and so I
really urge the committee in
everyone else here
when thinking about the
protection of our communities in
the future of our water thank
you so much for your time
considering.
You and last up is illinois.
The.
Thank you at elementary bravel
I am the retired southwest
director of food and water watch
and I live in corallas and we
are
water irrigators of from the uh
we participate where the mrgcd
I too would like to acknowledge
the student who came from new
mexico tech and in her word she
said that there is research
going on and it's promising and
i'm glad to hear this but.
At present we have no commercial
infrastructure for purifying the
billions of gallons of produce
fluid I don't like to call it
water because it's no longer
water and so at the present time
we we really can't promise that
this fluid can be returned to
the evolutionary cycle
i'm not going to reiterate what
my colleagues have already said.
Our water is too precious and
two scars we can't gamble with a
natural resource which by
statute in the state of new
mexico belongs to the people of
new mexico so please don't give
a blank check to the oil and gas
industry and give them an
alternative revenue stream
please do not
give this precious water
resource away with out the the
real respect that it deserves
and that we know we live in a
desert and this is such a
commodity which which belongs to
all of us water should never be
commodified it is a comments in
a belongs to us all thank you so
much.
Thank you we have one more I
think rough.
Good afternoon representative
chairman matthew queen and
remaining members that I can see
in the art in the the tables
there are thank you for the
opportunity comment my name is
ralph rons I live in alba kirky
constituent of house district
twenty four and senate district
eighteen.
My comment for change to the
strategic water supply I want to
say I appreciated that this was
in quotation marks in the agenda
of this interest committee
meeting.
When needs are so great now news
roost said the fifty year water
action plan is largely unfunded
but when they are so great now
for water conservation according
to the governor's plan this
provides more than eighty
percent of the identified means
of meeting the seven hundred and
fifty thousand acre feet per
year shortfall seeing in the
next fifty years
when the needs are so great for
water conservation across the
mapping and water should
protection and the fact that the
water quality control commission
won't be making a final decision
on the proposed rule by enemy
until the january february
twenty twenty five time frame.
I urge this committee to please
dismiss the ocean that the
legislature must take up funding
this sws to speculate
speculatively clean toxic
fracking waste water as you've
heard in other comments this
afternoon
to find this in the twenty
twenty five legislature.
By the way I appreciated that
twenty twenty four legislature
rejected it.
I urge you to please spoke us on
programs a and sea of the fifty
year water action plan thank
you.
Thank you for your committee's
work.
The.
And I think that brings us to
the end of our meeting i'd like
to think everyone who stayed
with us to the very end think
you members of the public the
staff in our legislators and
thank you for I think a very
