Thank you. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Rebecca Rus from the
governor's office and the
governor's infrastructure
advisor, and I'm gonna just kick
off uh the this portion of your
agenda, um, before the state
engineer and director of the
Interstate Stream Commission go
over their budget proposal. Um,
we've got a couple of slides in
the presentation that I'm going
to review with you that cast a
bit of a larger net around water
funding and priorities for the
state.
in a moment.
Um, but the 11 actions are owned
with a with an agency lead by
office of State engineer.
The Mexico Environment
Department, the New Mexico
Department of Ag, the Bureau of
Geology and Mental Resources at
New Mexico Tech and energy uh
minerals and natural resources
department on the watersheds
action. So 5 different agencies
involved in implementing the 50
year plan, so that's part of the
reason why we know you're going
to be hearing it individually
from different agencies. This is
just a little bit of a wrap up.
Um, the total proposed new
investment, new investment in 50
year water plan implementation.
Uh, while we're still actively
working on the executive
request, uh, it's looking as
though we're gonna be over $200
million of new investment in 50
year water plan implementation
funding.
And it's some no, uh, we've had
some conversations in front of
this committee, in front of
other committees during the
interim, um, and in, in other
meetings and discussions, we
were exploring the possibility
of creating a new fund to
support ongoing multi-year
implementation costs associated
Of a new fund or expanding on
one of our existing funds, but a
concrete proposal did not come
together in time during the
interim, um, for the executive
to really feel ready and
comfortable to advance that.
We're interested in ongoing
conversations about the right
approach and mechanisms to
ensure ongoing and sustainable
investment in water programs and
projects for the long term in
New Mexico, um, but for this
year for the 60 day session,
really focusing in on how can we
ensure that our agencies are
getting the funding they need
for the programs that are that
are so important and directly
tied to the 5th year water plan.
All right, so onto I'm gonna
slip gift slide 4, that's your
refresher if you need it on what
is in the 50-year plan. So on
this slide 5, it says water
conservation at the top.
This is the first of 3 buckets,
and I'll just walk through
really quickly. Um, at a high
level, the types of investments
that I expect you to see in the
executive request and capital
conversations going forward.
So for education, that's action
A one, in each of these columns
you'll see there's a lead agency
identified and then some notes
about new funding or in some
cases ongoing existing funding.
So for education, um, we're
looking at um base increase and
special appropriations for
public education campaign and
the regional water planning
program, uh, again, the
executive request is still under
development, and so you'll hear
some more specific numbers from
agencies this afternoon. I'm not
presenting specific dollar
amounts for these items, um,
with, with few exceptions, um,
because they're still ultimately
in deliberation.
The next one, a 2, ag water
conservation.
Uh, we are proposing a new
special appropriation to launch
a new grant program at the New
Mexico Department of Agriculture
to provide additional funding
for agricultural producers and
growers and ranchers in the
state, uh, to adopt water
conservation measures, and so if
funding is a barrier for those
uh producers, this would be a
program that would provide some
additional sources of funding,
and that'd be a non-recurring
special appropriation that could
grow in out years.
If the program is successful.
Uh, also a capital
appropriation, uh, like we had
last year, uh, for another
infusion into the community
ditch improvements.
The next column is water
conservation, but in the
municipal side, and the lead
action here in the 50-year plan
was to find and fix leaks at our
drinking water systems across
the state, um, so there's a few
different existing programs that
fund drinking water
infrastructure projects and um
we're looking at additional
infusions and or um continuing
to support state dollars for
match for federal funding like
the drinking.
Moder state revolving fund.
Under action 84, water storage
and delivery with OSE as the
lead agency, uh, you should
expect to see another special
appropriation request to support
Indian water rights settlements
that catalyze um
Infrastructure projects related
to those specific Indian water
rights settlements that really
contribute meaningfully and very
important ways to our overall
water storage and delivery
systems in the state.
Also, additional capital
appropriations um are in the
queue for flood control projects
and water metering technology,
all of which helps to manage our
water resources more
effectively.
And just like uh 5, I'm not sure
about the numbers here, but this
one also should say.
Yeah, OK, good. Um, new water
supply at the top.
So action B1, this is 3 actions
associated with new water
supply. I call it the three
legged stool of new water
supply. There's the strategic
water supply program, a new
initiative combined with uh the
existing aquifer
characterization, um, mapping
and monitoring program at New
Mexico Tech, that's B3, that's
to continue to invest in
understanding our aquifers, and
then in the middle there is the
regulation and policy component
that leg of the stool, um, so
incentivizing and
realizing produce water and
brackish water projects through
the strategic water supply,
ongoing and accelerated
increased investment in aquifer
characterization and ongoing
work to establish regulatory
certainty and uh safe and
effective uh rules and policies
to protect public health and the
environment as we advance water
reuse.
Uh, so in strategic water
supply, it's $75 million special
appropriation for for projects
under the strategic water
supply.
That is a change, uh, from the
placeholder that was in the
environment department's
September 1st request, they had
a placeholder for $250 million
for strategic water supply, um,
what we're talking about most
intensively right now is 75
million instead of 250 million
because the next piece of this,
um this point is, uh, you'll see
that it says a new fee on volume
of produced water generated,
that's something you
I'll be hearing more about
tomorrow from the panel on
strategic water supply, um, but
the idea there is we have
decreased the overall general
fund contribution to strategic
water supply to 75 million,
while through the proposed bill
would establish a new fee on the
volume of produced water that
oil and gas companies generate
in New Mexico and that fee
revenue would go into the
strategic water supply fund and
then be available to fund
strategic water supply projects,
um, based on
2023 volumes in New Mexico, um,
Ener has estimated that the new
fee that you'll hear more about
tomorrow could generate
approximately $68 million of
additional revenue to the
strategic water supply fund on
an annual basis.
And we're an ongoing
conversations with um a number
of different stakeholders,
including industry stakeholders
about um that proposal.
In, uh, going over to the right
side, uh, aquifer
characterization, so, uh, the
New Mexico Tech Bureau of
Geology, Mental Resources
program for Aquifer
characterization led by Stacy
Timmons, and they've done a lot
of work to calculate what
additional level of funding they
need in order to scale up their
existing programs to move more
quickly and do more aquifer
characterization work across the
state on an annual basis, uh, in
In order to support full
characterization of deep and
shallow aquifers, freshwater and
brackish. So that's the scope of
what we would be investing in
through additional uh
significantly increased funding
to that program at New Mexico
Tech. And so, uh, I think what
we're gonna see here is uh a
hope that we are meeting.
With the executive request, the
needs of this program as
articulated by the program, uh,
for how much more work they can
do in terms of drilling more
wells, gathering more data, and
really moving much more quickly
on aquifer characterization than
they have been in the past,
where they've mostly been
relying on private foundation
funding to support this program.
Next page and in the last bit
from me before I turn it over to
the state engineer is the 3rd
bucket of the 50 year water
action plan, that is water and
watershed protection.
4 different actions there, uh,
NMED is the lead on the 1st 3 I
nerd on the last one and uh
you'll hear more from the
environment department this
afternoon about their special
appropriation request for site
assessments and clean up of
neglected contaminated sites. So
these are all the polluted
groundwater sites across the
state that we've identified that
are never gonna get on the super
fun list for various reasons,
and there's no responsible
party, so we can't go after.
the polluter.
And as of today, there's no
state program and dedicated
funding source to clean up those
contaminated sites. Uh, and so
this, uh, uh, special
appropriation would really uh
hope to and
Get that program going and
situate the environment
department to build on the
research that they've done about
where those sites are and
actually get to work on
conducting site assessments and
starting clean up projects.
The next one, surface water
discharge permit program. Um,
thanks to to members of this
body, the Environment department
got a nice infusion into the
water quality management fund in
House Bill 2 earlier this year.
I'm not looking at any
additional requests, uh, as part
of the executive request as of
this time for that program, um,
not because it's not important,
it's it's incredibly important.
That's why it's in the 50 year
plan, but it's as of today, um,
adequately funded.
And then, uh, action C3 again,
this is an infrastructure
investment piece and there are
existing programs, state and
federal programs to support
those projects, um, and so
there's additional funding to
make sure we're using and
leveraging all those federal
dollars that are available to
our communities for wastewater
infrastructure and stormwater
infrastructure projects. And
lastly, uh, the watershed
protection and restoration, um,
we have, uh, Enerd has
presented already to the Capitol
Committee earlier this fall, uh,
requests for additional funding
for watersheds and wildfire
protection. So across the board,
there's something in the
executive request for nearly
every part of the 50 year plan.
Again, I'm expecting the total
once we we finalize all the
numbers to be over $200 million
and uh as of that amount we're
looking at 75 million of the 200
that would be for the strategic
water supply. So, um, really
wanted to emphasize to you all
this roll up of how it's all
starting to fit together as we
think about water investments
more broadly.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I will
turn it over to the state
engineer to continue her slides.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for
having me here today. I'm Liz
Anderson. I'm the state engineer
designate and um thank you,
Rebecca, for that great
introduction, I feel like
everything in the 50 year water
plan is perfectly in alignment
with what we're asking for here
in our budget, so it's a great
introduction, um, and saves me a
lot of words, so thank you for
that. Um, so we do feel like
this budget request is in
alignment with the 50-year water
action plan, and also with the
water.
infrastructure, um, task force
recommendations, um, that were,
that were developed in broad
consensus for many stakeholders,
so we feel like these all these
requests are very, very well
supported in alignment with
those documents. Um, I, we're
gonna go through each and every
one of these in more detail on
the next slides. So I think I'll
just leave it with that on this
side, we can move on to the next
slide.
So, um, we have our corrective
salary adjustments, um, to
recruit and retain technical
staff here on flight 8,
there's, this might be the most
mundane of all of our requests,
but is absolutely the most
important of all of them, our
staff are the backbone of our
agency. Um, I wanna thank you
for the generous support in the
last session that you provided,
we've done a lot with the
positions that were provided,
and it's really good momentum
moving forward. So thank you for
that. We
Um, our, our agency, however,
was affected um by the, the
salary studies, um, more than
80% of the positions in the
agency were affected by slow
salary studies. Those are the
water resources professionals,
engineers, attorneys, IT
professionals and HR
professionals. We have a lot of
technical professional people in
the agency really um really
excellent staff and this funding
request um of $5 million will
Um, will help us to bring those,
those people to a salary and
alignment with the salary
studies closer to where they sat
on the pay scales um prior to
the salary studies. That's how
the um the
The estimate was provided for
the 5 million, um, we get our
staff, we train them, they're
excellent, and then they leave.
We would do a lot of work to get
people in the agency to be
proficient and it takes years to
get people that are qualified to
administer water rights and to,
you know, and to go through the
the details that it takes to do
these transactions. John Romero
here in the office, I want to
acknowledge him here today. He's
our rap director and um I know
that he, he lives and breathes
this every.
day. So this is absolutely our
most, our biggest request. Um,
and we need the, the funding,
um, very much so Hanna, would
you like to add anything to
that?
Yeah, thank you. Uh, Mr. Chair
and members of the committee,
Hannah Risy White, uh, director
of the New Mexico Interstate
Stream Commission, the state
engineer and I are gonna sort of
tag team these slides because
they're relevant for both of us,
um, and we're working really
sort of lockstep between the
agencies and across the natural
resource agencies, um, on this
particular point, I just want to
start by emphasizing the context
in which this presentation is
occurring. As you all know,
we're facing 25.
% less water in our streams and
recharging our aquifers by 2070.
I know you've heard us say that
multiple times, but I wanna
emphasize the urgency of this
moment in time. We are seeing
critical impacts of prolonged
drought in many parts of the
state, um, forest fires and
post-fire flooding impacts, and
so action now is critical. The
good news is there is amazing
leadership at the governor's
office and tremendously.
leadership and expertise,
particularly represented by this
committee, um, to move forward
these initiatives, um, and so we
have a state engineer Anderson
and Ms. Ruth highlighted, uh,
put together a package that we
think reflects the broad
consensus amongst water experts
across the state, the 50-year
water action plan, the water
policy and infrastructure task
force recommendations to bring
to you this, this set of of
requests this legislative
session that as Ms. Ruth said,
we're still working on the
details with the governor's
office and the executive rec.
Certainly for the state, uh,
engineer's office and Interstate
stream commissioned this
corrective salary request is is
very important. I can just say
for our staff at Interstate
Stream Commission of our
technical staff, which is
essentially all of our staff. We
now currently only have 3
individuals who are at or above
midpoint, so being able to
retain and recruit qualified
staff is critical, um, and I'll
hand it back to, oh, should I
take the next slide actually?
So, let's go on to the next
slide 9, which is related to
implementation of the water
security Planning Act, uh, as
you all know, and thank you so
much for your support on the
champions in this committee in
the 2023 legislative session,
you will pass unanimously the
water security Planning Act, you
have in front of
You a colorful little bookmark
that I've handed out. This has a
QR code, uh, that takes you to
the website that has all the
updates on the state's
implementation of this act, um,
I'm pleased to say we've engaged
in very robust public engagement
over the course of this year, we
had 16 open house events, um, in
all of the existing planning
regions.
Many of you attended. Thank you
for your participation in those
events. Uh, we also had over
27,000 respondents to our online
version of that or shouldn't say
respondents responses over many
hundreds of respondents to the
online version of that open
house. We are, we've collected
that input and we are now poised
to release what we're calling a
discussion draft of the rules
and guidelines called for that
by that act in January, you will
be hearing about that. We will
be encouraging you.
and your constituencies to weigh
in, um, we are on track to
finalize the rules and
guidelines called for by that
act, uh, by the middle of next
year and then work to stand up
those future planning regions
and so I think as you all know
that, uh, statute was
essentially a complete rewrite
of the original um planning
regional planning statute. We
see it as a real opportunity for
us as New Mexicans to support
communities across the state and
preparing for and responding to
climate.
change impacts to water
resources were very excited
about the engagement we've
received of all of those
participants that I just
mentioned earlier, more than
half of them said that it was
the first time they had engaged
in regional water planning or
water planning at all, that's
exciting. We're hoping to
continue to build on that
momentum, standing up those
future regions and helping them
craft plans that hopefully
substantively address outcomes
on the ground related to water
resources will take additional
funding.
And so that's what's, uh, asked
for in this this request here.
So thank you for that your
consideration on that, and I
think I'll hand it back to
Sadener Anderson on slide.
9, 1010, 10. All right, thank
you. Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, um,
the, the next slide here is on
modernizing water management in
New Mexico and water Data Act
initiatives. I want to start
this one by thanking you for
passing the Water Data Act. I am
so um excited about the
opportunity to get into the
agency and help find ways to do
things.
Um, using the tools that that
are out there and available, but
not yet accessible to the
agency. We, um, the, the work
here that we're looking at
doing, um, is an ongoing effort.
There are a number of of agency
databases that are underway and
they're they're being updated
right now, um, however, this
funding would provide funding to
update the water's database, um,
to replace that database. It's a
$3 million ask. This is the
interface that people see when
they
they come to our website and
they want to access their water,
water rights data. This is
something that we use daily
within the agency and it's, it's
to my understanding, it's about
30 years old. So, um, that's,
that's about as old as it gets
when it comes to databases. That
was when they first came up with
the idea, so, um, so updating
that is absolutely critical.
It's a big ask, um, but it
really will make a huge impact
both inside the agency and to
our customers outside the
agency. Um, also the modernizing
real time measurement systems
for 3.
million dollars. This one is um
gonna be providing a lot more
access to the, the metering data
that we get online, so this is
another great, great innovation
and something that's really very
much needed. Um, the $250,000
increase in the general fund is
going to increase the agency
capacity to make data and
information accessible to the
public and water managers across
the state. This is just another
need in order to help us
implement these, these other
asks.
So, um, like I said, thank you
so much for passing the Water
Data Act, and um for the, the
support that we've gotten from
you so far, um, one of my main
initiatives in the agency is
modernization, um, there's,
there's a lot that's needed in
order for us to really
administer the waters of the
state, um, and so much of that
can be supported through tools
that um that we, that we are in
the process of developing and
need more funding to develop. So
thank you. And I'll go ahead and
um
Ask, do you have anything that
you want to add to that one?
Um, Mr. Chair, I would just say
in parallel to implementing
water security Planning Act,
this effort to um organize and
improve data and data access is
going to be critical for us to
make management decisions at the
state level and for those future
planning regions. So again, see
this is as a super important
ask, thank you, yeah.
Alright, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, the next slide is
um slide 11, Indian water rights
settlements, um, this is the
Completing these settlements,
um, and passing them through
Congress. This is an
Huge initiative for the state
and and a huge priority. Um,
this administration, um through
Governor Michelle Lujan Gresham,
and your support has been able
to um past 76 settlements that
are now moving through Congress,
and we're working diligently
with the delegation and with the
governor to move those through
in the lame duck session, those
are a very big priority. A lot
of work has gone into those,
those will leverage
approximately $3 billion in
federal funding with about 200.
$40 million in state funding,
um, much of that state funding
is going to be aligned to
non-tribal um projects and
entities that are um partners in
these settlements, and it's
absolutely critical for us to
have that funding to be able to
leverage the federal funding
coming in. Um, last year, I
believe we received $20 million.
If that's correct, from the
state. So thank you for that.
That was a huge down payment.
Um, we need more there in order
to meet that 240 million, we um
there's, there's, you know, this
is, this is an ongoing process,
so request this year is $40
million and um and that will
just help us keep that momentum
going. Um, it sends also having
this funding, some people say
why have the funding now before
we have these settlements
approved by Congress, and
honestly, the reason is
They like to see the funding
there. They like to see our
commitment. They want to know
that we're committed to funding
the state side of the of the
settlements as well. We sent
that message last year and we
want to continue sending,
sending that this year. Um,
there's also a number Indian
water rights settlements that
are still underway and we're
gonna, we're very committed to
continuing that process of
moving those funds settlements
through. And we can go on to the
next slide number 12.
This is the Middle Rio Grande
administration and enforcement,
um, as you know, the Rio Grande
is the largest river in the
state. It supports our major
population centers to critical
lifeblood for New Mexico, um, we
need to do more work to
administer water in the Middle
Rio Grande, um, and enforced
water usage, that's gonna
include mete metering and
monitoring that's needed. We
need to expand our local
capacity to do the work.
There, we haven't really had to
administer in the same way
previous, but now as director
Wesley Wright laid out, um, so
accurately we are really seeing
in our future less water, and
what that means is more
resources needed in order to
administer water. um, and water
rights to make sure that people
are, are using the water that's
afforded them and making and
we're protecting the waters of
the state to the extent.
every extent possible. Um, we
also need more space in
Albuquerque and Las Cruces in
order to make this happen. So
this is a two part request. We
have 500,000 for the general
fund for expansion and then 500
towards the general fund for
office space and um I'll go
ahead and pass it over to
Director Wesley Wright to expand
on anything else.
Thank you, state engineer, and
thank you, Mr. Chair. I would
just say we're, we're working
very closely with partners up
and down the Rio Grande, um, and
also working very closely with
our federal partners and being a
strategic as possible to use
state funding to leverage
federal funding for these
efforts. There's a number of
projects underway with the US
Bureau of Reclamation, um, and
US Army Corps of Engineers, um,
that will be, we think very
impactful and that funding the
state funding we've received so.
far we'll we'll go a long way in
supporting those initiatives,
uh, and to say, uh, an in
parallel to the planning
activities I mentioned earlier,
we see the middle Rio Grande is
particularly critical. There are
a number of things coming,
including potential negotiations
and settlement of the 6 Middle
Rio Grande Pueblo's water rates,
endangered Species Act issues,
compact issues, it will be very
important for us to be able to
work with that region to do
planning, um, to help
constituencies.
understand the hydrologic
reality that we're facing, as
well as the administrative
reality and having the resources
to do the enforcement and
planning for potential
alternative administration as
stated Anderson is is mentioning
will be very important, so we
this, we see this request as
important and in the context of
of the broader work that we're
engaging in throughout the
basin, um.
I think I'll go to the next, go
ahead and take the next slide
slide 13.
This request is a request to
replace agency dependency on the
uh trust funds, including the
irrigation works construction
fund and the improvement to the
Rio Grande Income fund with
general fund.
So as I think you all know, uh,
over a decade or so ago, much of
the agency's budget was moved to
be sourced from those trust
funds that has created issues
with trust funds sustainability,
but also has removed the ability
for the state to use those trust
funds more fully for their
originally intended purpose, and
so the request here is to uh
replace agency dependency on
those trust funds with general
fund that will help ensure the
long-term sustainability of the
trust funds and also
en able us to to use those funds
for their originally intended
purposes.
And next slide, slide 14.
Want to highlight just a couple
of the other special
appropriations moving in this
year's budget request. The first
is additional funding to support
the state and continued
interstate discussions,
including our interstate
litigation in the lower Rio
Grande, but also be prepared to
respond to ongoing discussions
in the Colorado Basin.
I'd like to say I think we're
very well positioned, uh, in
both of those instances, we have
excellent coordination across
our office, office of the state
engineer in New Mexico
Department of Justice, excellent
legal and technical experts
supporting us in both of those
initiatives. We are headed to
Washington DC in December for
mediation in Texas v. New
Mexico. We are fortunate in that
we are still locked up with our
other states, so we in Texas are
very much aligned, um, and we
working closely with Colorado,
so we're hoping that we can
expeditiously resolve that issue
and then fully get to work and
focus our attention on
implementing solutions, but in
the meantime, this request is in
place in case that funding is
needed depending on where, where
that case in particular goes.
The next request is pay
settlement activities, as you
all know, the 2003 Peco
settlement agreement, which was
the state's response to
interstate issues on the Pecos
has been hugely successful in
supporting our compact
compliance on the Pecos we now
have almost 150,000 acre feet of
credit on the Pecos, however,
implementing that agreement
comes at a cost, and it's been
exceptionally dry in
southeastern New Mexico, except,
of course, a month ago, we got
torrential rains, uh, good
indication
of the need to think creatively
and plan ahead for when there is
water, especially big storm
events. How are we capturing
that and using that to recharge
our aquifers, that kind of
thinking is really actively
occurring in all basins in New
Mexico right now, but we've seen
exceptionally dry conditions in
southeast New Mexico in the last
number of years, which is
required us to operate the
augmentation well fields that
were part of that 2003 Peco
settlement, and so this ask is
additional funding to support
those those ongoing.
efforts. And I should also just
emphasize that the water pumped
from those well fields goes to
users in New Mexico and the
Carlsbad Irrigation District.
And let's see, next slide, I
think we're wrapping up here I'm
very much looking forward to
your questions. Again,
appreciate the tremendous
expertise on this committee and
commitment from this committee
to advance these efforts, uh,
um, I just wanna say this is,
this is the moment. Let's seize
upon this moment to lay the
right foundation to support New
Mexicans as we, we grapple with
climate change, and with that
I'll hand it back to state
engineer Anderson and and Miss
Ruth for any additional comments
before we wrap up.
Thank you, um, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for your support and for
your time. Um, we are, as you
can see, very motivated to act,
and um continue making progress
on where the the work that's
already being done. Um, so thank
you so much and I just want to
close with the statement, water
can't wait, we have to do this
now. So thank you. Thank you for
your time. And I'll pass it over
to OK, we'll go ahead and close
it out with that. Thank you.
And we stand for any questions.
Thank you for that. Uh, before
we go to the committee, what's,
what's your uh overall budget,
just ballpark.
What
Yeah
Mr. Chair,
do you mean our current year's
budget, our requested budget.
OK, so our current year's budget
overall total all funding
sources is uh 50 million, the
request for FY 26 is 59.
OK. Thank you for that. Members
of the committee.
Representative Herrera.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh
I guess I want, I wanna go back
and say how much is this?
This request in front of us, how
much you're requesting here?
Is that 9 million? I thought it
was more like, well, I'll let
you answer that.
The request for this year is 59
million.
Is that like you're asking?
I guess I heard somebody say
that we're asking for 200
million.
Was that you, Rebecca?
Mr. Chair Representative
Pereira, hi, nice to see you.
Um, I spoke about over 200
million that is across multiple
agencies for implementing the
50-year water action plan. Sorry
if that's confusing to put that
um at the front end of their
agency presentation, but the 200
million is cross-cutting across
all agencies that uh require
additional funding for water
plants.
Plans, programs and projects
related to the 50 year water
plan. This chair Rebecca, thank
you. That really explains
something because I, I was just
getting lost in these numbers,
which I can't get lost in the
numbers sometimes, but I
appreciate this and I, I
certainly appreciate.
Uh, the priorities for um for a
lot of these things. I, you
know, I, I recall last year when
the governor came in for 500
million for the strategic water
supply, and there hadn't even
been one hearing on it, and um
was kind of dead on arrival, um,
but I, I get the need, I get the
need and I, I just wanna say,
um, I like all these things
being broken up under your
different agencies so that we
can see what what you're
planning, but there
currently are no numbers
attached to it, and it's, it's,
is that what I mean? This is
what you'd like to do depending
on what you get, we still don't
know exactly how much money
you're going to put into each
one of these pockets. Am I
reading that right?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Pereira, um, in part, so based
on how the executive, the agency
and executive budgeting process
works.
You're going to be hearing more
specific numbers from agencies,
uh, like you did from uh state
engineer designate Anderson and
director Riley White, and you'll
hear more from from other
agencies later, um, they're,
they're gonna be speaking to you
about the uh dollars that they
requested when they submitted
their agency requests September
1st, because I represent the
governor's office and the
governor's executive request is
still a work in progress. There
aren't numbers attached to the
slides that I gave you.
on 50 year water plan. Those
numbers are very much um under
development and informed by the
agency requests, but not yet
final. So as soon as the
executive request comes out, we
would be able to provide an
updated breakdown of how that
executive request is reflected
across each of these 50 year
water plan action items with
dollar amounts attached to each.
And thank you, Mr. Chair, and I,
I, I won't take up too much more
time, but I guess my last
question is really about the
aquifer mapping.
And, and that study and how
much, how much we're gonna need.
I, I've been sending that out of
capital outlay like a $100,000 a
year for the last, I think 2 or
3 years, just because in the
north, we have no idea how much
is in the, how much water we
have in our um in our aquifers,
and you know, it's starting to
come back, starting to have a
good results. We're starting to
see what's really what our water
looks like, uh, with the
minerals are, what the problems
are, and we've really never had
that before.
We've never had it, and
especially in the north because,
because in the north, we don't
have an EBID and we don't have a
middle Rio Grande Conservancy,
and I realized we're talking
about, I'm glad we're putting
money in the agency structures
so that we can start getting
staff to look at these things,
but, but so I'm very curious.
What you're thinking about
aquifer mapping statewide.
Mr. Chair representative, um,
appreciate that and just to be
brief on uh we could elaborate
on this further, but um the the
number that the Bureau of
Geology has uh come up with as
to their non-recurring budget
need to cover them for the next
3 years to significantly ramp up
the amount of studies that
they're doing in wells that
they're drilling is 28.7 million
for three years. Um, that is the
number that we're discussing in
the governor's office.
um to feed into the executive
request. Again, no final
decisions, but we understand
that need, appreciate the work
that the Bureau of Geology put
into coming up with those
estimates and uh as you can see
by that being a dedicated
priority in the governor's plan,
um, we know we need to fund it
more effectively. Um, Mr. Chair,
I really thank you for that
number. Uh, it's, it's, uh, we
can't wait. You're right. We
can't wait any longer to even
begin this operation, and I've
Where I've worked closely with
Stacy to figure out, you know,
how we're gonna do this and what
we're gonna do and how we're
gonna make this happen. So, um,
That's a lot. And I, and I've
said for years is I cannot
capital outlay my way out of
this stuff. So I deeply
appreciate that kind of money
going into that, uh.
to that purpose. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Senator Sidilla Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I just
want to congratulate, well, I
want to congratulate you on how
impressive this collaboration
is. This, it's just, it's
incredible. I'm so excited. I
haven't seen a report that has
this much planning, this much
thought, this much
collaboration. So I just have a
few little um little things just
curiosity except, you know,
whatever, um, so this the
produced water a new fee on the
volume of produced water
generated, um, how much do you
anticipating?
I mean, you estimated 68
million, so how much?
To the
Uh, producer of the produced
water, are you looking at? What
kind of fees would that look
like?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator Sidney Lopez, uh, the,
uh,
But we're talking about right
now and the fee amount that is
factored into that $68 million
revenue estimate is 5 cents a
barrel.
On total volume of produced
water generated excluding
volumes that are either recycled
or reused. So while we'd be
generating a fee on produced
water generated that's going to
be disposed of somehow, and in
at the same time incentivizing
the oil and gas industry to
increase their recycling of.
Produce water because any amount
that they recycle wouldn't be
subject to the feed. Um, so with
that framework, which again
you'll hear more about from a
strategic water supply panel
tomorrow. Um, the 5 cents per
barrel is what we're starting
and and that's what led us to
that $68 million revenue
estimate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I hope that you consider
connecting that fee to maybe uh
increases that would be
considered after 3 years or
something, um, to match uh
Consumer price index, because
what happens with these fees is
is over time, they become just
the cost of doing business. And
I was wondering, and I'm sure
you consider it, but 5 cents a
barrel looks like compared to
the cost of
Doing something with it, cause
now they're drilling and then
they're putting it very, very
deep into the earth, um, we're
hoping deep enough and in the
right aquifer so it doesn't
cause earthquakes, but
Um, I don't know how 5 cents a
barrel compares to the cost of
doing that. Um, and my worry is
that 5 cents a barrel looks like
a bargain compared to doing
that.
Um, and so that, that's my sort
of little, well, I shouldn't say
little, it's actually a
significant concern about this
fee because somehow, sometimes
we've done that. Um, in fact,
that's why I'm supporting the
bill, the state engineer bill
that will increase the fees um
or sponsoring that the increase
of fees because now industry
just looks at it as the cost of
doing business, it's so low.
Um, and so I hope you, I hope
you look at that and also um
I hope that the state by doing
this feat does exactly what you
say.
Give them an incentive to
produce less.
Um, and to recycle more, and I
just worried. Um
But thank you. The other, um,
The water data Act. I'm really
excited cause that was the first
bill I ever passed ever in my
tenure here, so I was very
excited about it, and it, it
limped along for the first few
years with our little capital
capital money, and now it's a
recurring um
Now it's, it's recurring. It was
my first lesson and you can pass
a law, but if you don't have any
money, nothing happens. Um, so
that was an important lesson and
my, um, I'm just wondering if
what you're asking for is enough
for what we like, cause the
vision you, you have about what
that could do is incredible and
very exciting. Is this enough to
do it? I know you said that,
that you um relied on their
estimates.
Um, and I guess that's all you
can rely on, but what's your
guess about whether that's.
Mr. Chair, Senator Sadilia
Lopez, thank you for that
question. Um, this is definitely
just a start. You're right. Um,
this is the, the funding that we
that we outlined is for two
specific um databases and, and
systems. So, um, so there is
more, but I currently at this at
this time, don't have an
estimate or what that looks
like, um.
And I also want to thank you for
sponsoring the enforcement bill,
that is critical and as you said
that sometimes they uh those
fees are just kind of rolled
into the cost of doing business,
and we really need them to be
more meaningful and impactful.
Thank you. Yeah, yes, um.
I guess I thank you. Thank you
for that. I have a few more
questions, but I'll talk to you
offline.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator Representative Cates.
Uh thank you very much for your
presentation. Um, and thank you
for your clarification and
numbers. I was kind of confused
as well. Uh, I'm still confused,
but I'm knowledgeable of my
confusion, let's say that. Um,
my first question is on slide 4,
when you're talking about uh the
governor's initiative on the
drinking water, the revolving
fund, is this in addition to
what NMFA is doing for the
drinking water.
or is this what you're referring
to?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative Kate, uh, the
drinking water state revolving
fund that's listed there on that
slide is managed jointly by the
Environment Department and the
New Mexico Finance
Administration, essentially the
Environment department does all
the technical aspects of
reviewing projects and and
considerations and NMFA serves
as the bank to the lending
agency to actually move the
money, so they, they work
together on that and that is a
federally created program that
is.
administered by those two
agencies in New Mexico with
annual infusions of federal
funding and a certain uh
required match component at the
state level that we always
historically have met at the
agency level, so that that match
requirement is not passed on to
the individual communities that
are financing their projects so
that match is met statewide, um,
and so the way that that match
uh for drinking water so
revolving fund has been
appropriated by the.
legislature the last few years
has been from the public
projects revolving fund, and I
expect that will be the where
you see it come up in the
upcoming session as well.
Thank you so much. Um, that was
uh clear. I, uh, uh, I
appreciate, um, uh, well, that,
that your, your water uh can't
wait uh slogan. Um, I often say
that, uh, as we as legislators,
we worry about tax and education
and healthcare and courts and
corrections, but water has to
come first. Uh, water first for
New Mexico. Um, and so I do
appreciate this. Um, you're, you
of it, the, there's a request
for 3 years of 28.7 million in
the aquifer, uh, mapping
project. This will, this will
get the 100 new drills, the
wells drilled with the sensors
and that it'll take us to that
point of the project. Is that
what the 28.7 million will do.
Mr. Chair Representative Kate's,
um, I don't have the specific
number of wells that is is
underneath that uh state
engineer designate is saying she
thinks it's 100 balls over 10
years, so this would 28.7
million is what the bureau has
identified as 3 years of
funding, um, to incrementally
fund those non-recurring costs
over time, and, um, so maybe not
the full 100 wells that you're
talking about. What I can speak
to um confidently is that
the bureau has received a task
from the governor in the 50 year
plan to characterize all
aquifers steep and shallow,
brackish and fresh.
In the next 12 years, and they
have gone back to the the board
to say how much funding do we
need for the next 3 years to
ramp up our progress to meet
that twelve-year fully
characterized target and that's
where they got the 28.7 million.
There's also a um non-recurring
request to the Bureau of Geology
has made. I don't know that
exact amount. I think it's 1 to
1.5 million is of recurring
request to staff up.
Cause most of the work that's
going to be done to drill new
wells, gather the data, etc.
will be done through, um,
professional services contracts,
um, but they need additional
staff as well. So I, I hope
that's helpful and we can follow
up with more details from the
bureau directly. No, thank you,
Mr. Chair and thank you very
much. That was very helpful. I
very much appreciate the
attention and the priority that
the governor is giving this. I
mean, as we say, we can't, we
can't do the conserve and thrive
on our bookmart unless we do
plan and we have to.
know what we're planning, so we
have to know what water we do
have. This, uh, I, I very much
appreciate that this being a top
priority on the on the list.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
we've got about 10 minutes left
and 3 people on the list, so
maybe start to keep our comments
short, said Lujan.
It's not in the room, uh,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you um for your
presentation. I heard a little
bit of this in uh appropriations
or legislative finance
committee, I wanted to, um, just
talk a little bit about the
watershed and wildfire
protection and hope that we're
expanding um to make sure that
we're uh actually doing some of
that, more of that in the state
of New Mexico because I, I think
that can help with our wildfires
if we actually take care of our
forests more frequent.
ent ly Uh, one of the things I
wanted, um, Senator Sadillo
Lopez kind of touched on it that
produced water. Uh, tell me who
all uses the or, or
Who makes the produced water.
Mr. Chair of Armstrong, nice to
see you. Um, the produced water
is generated by the oil and gas
industry as a byproduct of their
um oil and gas production
operations. Thank you for that.
I just wanted everyone to know
that that it's, it is, uh, this
fee will be uh taxed to the to
the oil and gas industry. Um,
and $68 million. That's, that's
a lot, 5 cents a barrel doesn't
sound like that much, but uh
apparently it's a lot of barrels
and so.
This is a new fee is that and
there's, and you're going to try
to, Mr. Chairman, incentivize uh
recycling. Is that correct,
Mister Cherup was in of
Armstrong. That's correct. The
new, it's a proposed new fee
that will be included in the
governor's strategic water
supply bill that we're
developing for the 60-day
session. And uh yes, it would be
a new fee and uh yes, thank you.
OK, thank you for that. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I just
I just think we're we are seeing
them to death and we're, we're
looking at all kinds of fees um
for the industry in New Mexico
that actually funds the majority
of our budget. Just bringing
that to people's attention. I, I
do like the Water Data Act. I
was a co-sponsor of that bill,
and uh I'm glad to see that I, I
personally think that it's
something good for New Mexico.
The aquifer mapping, uh, I'm,
I'm all for that because if we
don't know what we don't have,
then how do we
manage it. Uh, and I'm, I'm
impressed that you're trying to
keep it all in one area, which
is New Mexico Tech. I do not
represent New Mexico Tech
anymore, but, uh, I, I really
like the fact they've started
it. They've done it in our area,
uh, Stacey and, and her whole
team do a phenomenal job, and
I'm, I really hope that we keep
it in one area because what
happens is if you let you and
them do some and New Mexico Tech
do some and then they're not
doing it the same, then you get
different uh information.
And so, um, I just wanted to
make sure, you know, I was
supportive of that. I'm, I'm uh
I'm not supportive of the oily,
uh, you know, fees for oil and
gas once again, but um we could
talk about that.
When it comes time. So thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair and
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, we're gonna talk more about
strategic water tomorrow, so I'm
gonna reserve that. I just, I
did though want to state that I
very much appreciate.
The governor's slight pivot from
a $250 million initiative to a
$75 million initiative with most
of the balance going to
something that we just don't see
enough of, which is investing in
the long term.
Water needs of the state. And so
I really appreciate kind of
laying the groundwork and
starting.
What I hope is a precedent. It's
hard for administrations come in
and then they're gone and these
are the, these are the tough
things that the water planning,
the, the mapping, these are the
things that don't get done. And
so I just wanted to flag.
The importance of that and
really appreciate the direction
on that. I just one question,
which is to follow up on what
and, and part of it, you're
formulating the budget. That's
what's hard about this. But the
$200 million.
Sounds like it's mostly
non-recurring one time money. Is
that a fair statement? Can you
just break that down for us?
Yes, uh, thank you, Mr. Chair
and Leader Worthy, uh, 200
million estimate for new
investment is vast majority of
that is going to be one time
money either through special
appropriations, fund transfers,
or a statewide capital.
And and a more specific
breakdown, I can't say, but the
recurring requests like you'll
hear from agencies like you just
heard from OSCISC, where they're
recurring requests, uh,
recurring increases lie and
you'll hear more from other
agencies. I know that you'll
hear from the Environment
department that they put in a
flat budget request for
recurring, so really the, the
vast majority of that $200
million wrap up investment is
from non-recurring.
It was just my, my only comment
would be since you submitted a
$250 million request in October
seems like you should.
Stay in the $250 million dollar
window because probably it's
gonna get tweaked and shaped and
you've got room to move and
It's just, this is really good
stuff, and I just think there's
so many things that the state
needs in this area, and so
again, just to, just to
comments, uh, as you come in for
funding, but thank you for the
presentation.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Lujan.
Mr. de passed, I think my
questions have been asked. OK,
thank you. Um,
Thank you very much for your
presentation. Um, very helpful.
Uh, I'm
I'd love to hear more about
what's going on with Texas v.
New Mexico, but.
Uh, maybe uh another place or
another time.
Uh, thank you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
We've had a couple of members uh
join us, um.
And then they left.
Represent kids. You want to
introduce yourself
Representative Kes?
Thank you, chair. I'm just
playing musical chairs for a
little bit. Um, I'm
representative Kathleen Cas from
District 44. That's all of
Corrales, parts of Rio Rancho in
the northern part of
Albuquerque. Thank you.
And Representative Armstrong was
with us, but she stepped out as
well. So for next panel could,
could come on up.
Secretary Ken? No, Secretary
Kinder.
I saw her.
To be here momentarily.
Welcome, uh, Energy Minerals and
Natural Resources department
whenever you're ready. Thank
you. Uh, thank you so much, um,
Mr. Chairman and Madam Vice
Chair and
I'm sorry, looking right at you.
The um the members of the
committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before
you today.
Before I start.
Let me acknowledge that a few of
you have heard most of this
testimony last week. Uh, I will
wake you up when I get to the
new paragraphs, OK, so, uh,
sorry, um, but it's the same
budget, so, um, any rate,
seriously, as you all know, I'm
relatively new to the position
of secretary designate of New
Mexico's energy, minerals and
natural resources department or
inner, as we call it.
Where it has been my honor to
serve for the last 5.5 months.
I grew up in New Mexico, worked
for Bill Richardson when he was
in Congress, I set up and ran
the MIT Energy initiative and
was vice president at the Gas
Technology Institute, that's a
performing laboratory in
Illinois.
I was at the US Department of
Energy for the entire Clinton
administration and for the
2nd uh Obama term. Um, I ran the
Office of Policy in the Clinton
administration and started and
ran the Office of Energy Policy
and Systems Analysis in the
second Obama term.
After leaving DOE in 2017,
Secretary Moniz and I sat up and
ran a think tank to do
technically based unbiased
policy analysis and
recommendations on deep
decarbonization of energy
systems.
I came back home in May to take
this position where I can put my
experience to work to serve my
home state.
I must say that one of the joys
of running Ener in addition to
working with a team of
hardworking, committed staff,
there are several of them here,
um, they're fabulous. It's not
only doing the analysis needed
to ensure effective and
efficient programs, something I
have done for most of my
professional life, but to
oversee the actual
implementation of policies and
programs to meet New Mexico's
clean energy, economic
development, energy security.
and energy accessibility and
affordability needs.
This takes me to the subject of
today's hearing, Eners FY 26
budget request. As you can see
from the slides we have
developed, and I'll go, I'll
point you to the slides that I'm
talking about in a minute,
sorry. Um, uh, as you can see
from these slides, in addition
to the department's more
specific goals I just listed,
the overarching objective of our
2026 budget request is to
position New Mexico as a
national leader in energy and
natural resources.
management, and I think that we
can and we're working on doing
that.
On the natural resources side,
Emert is responsible for
managing New Mexico's 35 state
parks or were working to add
additional state parks. Want to
add to that number? New Mexico's
forestry division is responsible
for fire suppression on 43
million acres of all
non-federal, non-municipal and
non-tribal lands in New Mexico
and for training and employing
approximately 300 emergency
wildland firefighters.
On the energy side of eminent,
our divisions are actively
working to develop and deploy
clean energy technologies to
ensure clean and responsible
production of the state's
conventional energy resources to
mine the metals and minerals we
need for the clean energy
transition and to ensure the
reclamation of lands impacted by
mining and oil and gas
production.
I just saw a story this morning
when I got up at Exxon is
starting to invest in metals and
minerals and mining, and that's
an indicator from my view about
the importance uh for uh these
metals and minerals for our
energy future and also of its
planning for the transition. So
uh uh Exxon is transitioning
itself. It looks like to me.
Inert is also working to
maximize the value of the $1.225
billion it has secured for New
Mexico from the bipartisan
infrastructure law, the
inflation reduction Act and
other federal funding sources.
To put this in perspective, in
just the last 5 months, uh, 5.5
months that I've been the
secretary designate
Energy Conservation and
Management Division.
Has launched the solar for all
program, huge program, the home
energy rebate rebate program,
that's her HER we call it, the
home electrification and
appliance rebate program that's
here and the clean car tax
program and I'll say a little
bit more on these in a minute.
As you know, on the conventional
energy side, Eners oil
conservation division regulates
oil and gas activity in New
Mexico. It permits new wells and
forces the division's rules and
the state's.
Oil and gas statutes.
Make certain abandoned wells are
properly plugged and ensures the
land is responsibly restored.
This is a big job. New Mexico is
2nd in the nation in oil
production, and I looked a
couple of days ago, and uh this
says 7th, uh, I'm sorry, 6th in
the nation and marketed natural
gas production. I made copies
and then looked at the data, new
data, we're now 4th in marketed
natural gas production. We've
gone from 6 to 4th in the last
year, looked at.
CIA's number.
Um, uh, enabling this
significant economic activity
while ensuring that is managed
in an environmentally
responsible way is critical for
the state's future.
In addition, the produced water
from this activity could be a
significant resource for our
state.
New Mexico is estimated to
generate 4 million barrels of
produced water per day. Much of
this is disposed of through deep
well injections, up to 150,000
acre feet of produced water is
available on an annual basis,
and that's 3 times the amount of
that Albuquerque uses in a year,
and treatment and reuse is an
avoided cost for oil and gas
companies, utilizing this water
could lower costs to consumers.
New Mexico also has 2 billion
acre feet of brackish water that
could be utilized for green
hydrogen production.
A quote from the governor in a
December 2023 press release
noted that diverting just 3% of
the produced water disposed of
in injection wells to make
hydrogen could result in enough
energy to fully power over 2
million homes annually. So that
produced water could have
enormous value for the state of
New Mexico.
Also of the key metals and
minerals used for many clean
energy technologies and on which
the US is 75 to 100% import
dependent, much of that's import
dependent from China.
14 of those have been found or
produced in New Mexico. All of
those 14 appear on the US
Geological Surveys, critical
minerals lists, and are used
for, among other things,
batteries, glass, and fuel
cells.
New Mexico is 3rd, sometimes 2nd
in the US in copper mining,
while it's not on the USGS
critical list, it is on a DOE
list of 18 essential metals and
minerals to put the importance
of this in perspective.
An internal combustion engine
vehicle uses 48 pounds of copper
per vehicle. An electric vehicle
uses 183 pounds of copper per
vehicle. That's almost 4 times
as much copper for an EV.
Mining these critical metals and
minerals and environmentally
responsible ways is a key and
growing focus of Emer.
I hope this helps frame and
provides context from some of
our more specific FY 26 budget
requests. Now let me highlight
some of the changes from last
year's operating budget. I'm
gonna start with the division
request and conclude with
operations reversions, and
special appropriations request.
So when you get to its own
slide.
Uh, 454.
Is state forestry, and we're
requesting slightly less funds
overall or for forestry, but a
relatively small increase in
operating funds. It's a little
under $1.7 million and for
authorizing the expenditure of
federal funds where we are
requesting an additional 3.8,
almost $4 million. These funds
will support two new hotshot
crews authorized earlier by the
legislature, it will support
operating expenditures.
for the Pecos River and members
hot shots located in Las Vegas
and Sapporo.
In addition, some of the
portable buildings used by
hotshots need replacement and
restoration projects need
support. These are critical
after fires. Finally, the
funding will support restoration
work at Smokey Bear Historical
Park.
This additional funding will
support existing staff and local
contractors, no duty FTEs are
sought for this division.
The FY 26 budget request for
Emmer State Parks division is
also slightly lower than its FY
25 operating budget.
But there are small increases in
both its general fund and
federal authorized request.
These increases will support,
among other things, hiring law
enforcement park rangers
statewide to promote public
safety and protect natural and
cultural resources.
Filling vacancies to better
serve New Mexicans and grow the
outdoor recreation economy,
providing additional funding to
support overall state park
general operation and supporting
funding to help reduce unfunded
vacancy rates. We have
significant vacancy rates in
state parks and, and uh the um
the uh the, the location of some
of these remote location is a
problem, we need to fill those
vacancies and, and uh we
need to help fund those.
Again, like our forestry
division, um, no new FTEs are
requested for state parks, there
are just some internal increases
to meet key needs.
Emner's oil conservation
division has had an extremely
busy year, as I noted earlier in
New Mexico is 2nd in the nation
in oil production and forth in
marketed natural gas production,
oil production increased 750% in
the last decade, and over the
last year averaged approximately
47.8 million barrels per month
and has over 54,000 active oil
and gas wells. At the same time,
New Mexico.
ranks 9th in regulatory staffing
for managing the environmental
impacts of this production. So
we're 2nd, we're 4th, and we're
9th in staffing.
OCD is also a leader in
implementing federal methane
rules is implementing the
state's produced Water Act has
updated the release spill rule
and a scaling up orphan well
plugging to to deploy roughly
$100 million it has obtained
from funds in the bipartisan
infrastructure law, so this, uh,
division has gotten 100 million
recently from the federal
government.
It is also working closely with
New Mexico's Environment
Department on ways to transform
the produced water from oil and
grass gas production into the
valuable resource for the state
that I described earlier.
Another an exciting thing OCD is
doing seeking class 6 primacy.
This would give New Mexico the
authority over and the
responsibility for classics
underground injection wells,
which are used by the carbon
capture and sequestration CCS
industry to permanently
sequester captured carbon in
underground geological
formations, only 3 states
currently have Class 6 primacy.
That's Louisiana, North Dakota,
and Wy
Getting primacy from EPA is a
lengthy process, and OCD has
initiated a contract with New
Mexico Tech to provide source
support, outreach, and analysis
for this process.
OCD when the state receives its
primacy status will be
responsible for managing
underground injection and
storage of carbon, which will
dramatically reduce emissions
while we work to transition our
energy systems.
OCD is seeking uh funding for 2
additional FTEs to support this
process.
I, I just want to provide a
couple of data points to
underscore how important CCS is.
To make glass, and glass is
critical for solar panels, 87%
of the fuel used for the heat
and processes to produce that
glass is natural gas. That's in
the US and the rest of the
world, it's coal and oil. In the
US it's gas.
Wind turbine blades require 2800
°C of heat and electricity can
give you 4800.
So you need a fuel to get the
heat you need to make those wind
turbine blades, you need it for
the aluminum, for the steel that
you need for the towers, etc.
etc.
And uh but we need these
products now for the clean
energy transition. We can't
wait. We need them now, and, and
we need these feedstocks and we
need the products, and there
there they produce the emissions
when you make these to make
glass, to make steel, to make uh
uh uh turbine blades, they're
emitting carbon. And so we need
CCS, I would say one more thing,
a worldwide, and this is 2023.
year 2022 numbers.
There are 30 operating CCS
projects in the world, 13 of
them. So almost 50% are natural
gas, uh, processing.
And New Mexico, both in the
northwest corner and the
southeast corner has a lot of
natural gas processing. So that
gas processing and reducing
those emissions is important for
making these products that we
need now, hence we need CCS.
Switching gears, in energy
conservation and management
division OCD is also the
recipient and implementer of
significant uh funding under the
breakthrough, this is an OCD,
yes it did, no.
Uh, yes, uh, is also the
recipient and implementer of
significant federal funding from
the BIL and inflation reduction
Act. It's uh not OCD. It is uh
00, yes. What is it?
Yeah, it's, yeah, ECMD, I'm
sorry, I have it wrong in my
written testimony. I just
confused myself publicly, sorry,
um, uh, this fall, as I noted,
it launched the her and He
programs, which received about
44 million apiece in federal
funding and so hugely important
in addition, um, in April 2024,
New Mexico via ECMD. I have it
written right there, was awarded
$156 million for
EPA show for all program, and
that's designed to make solar
power available to low-income
households. It is expected that
these funds will be ready for
distribution early next year.
ECMD is also implementing the
Clean Car Income Tax Credit and
clean car charging unit income
tax credit. So they're very,
very busy, have, have gotten
huge amounts of federal funding,
uh, this year, and we're all
working hard to distribute this,
those fund.
This highlights some of the
recent funding that they brought
to the state to administer these
large high-value programs, ECMD
is seeking an associated
increase in staffing that
includes a mix of permanent in
term employees on those federal
dollars won't always be there,
so we're seeking term employees
to help administer them and, and
use those funds, uh, wisely, but
we don't want to uh encumber the
state uh with those as permanent
employees.
So they're temporary employees
and and term employees, and so
that's part of our uh request.
One position ECMD is seeking is
particularly noteworthy and FTE
to launch a geothermal program,
New Mexico has some of the
highest geothermal potential in
the country, and it has an oil
and gas workforce that has
significant subsurface knowledge
and skills, putting these skills
to work cross walking these
skills to develop this new
resource.
Could be critical for jobs, the
economy, and the clean energy
transition. I would also say
that geothermal is base load
power.
It doesn't need battery storage,
so developing that uh very, very
critical for affordability, for
metals and minerals, etc. etc.
So geothermal is, is, um, uh, a
very important.
Finally, the last division of
focus in our FY 26 budget
request is the mining and
minerals division.
As I noted earlier, New Mexico
has significant potential to
provide key metals and minerals
needed for the clean energy
transition. Many of these metals
and minerals are crucial,
however, they're crucial for
both clean energy and
conventional energy. Tellurium,
for example, and that's in New
Mexico, found in New Mexico, is
used for energy production in
general. Manganese molybdenum
niobium, and vanadium, all of
which have been found or mined
in New Mexico are used for
making.
steel, and that's critical for
both conventional and clean
energy as well. You need the
towers for your transmission
lines, but you need pipelines,
etc. etc.
While historically mining has
had a poor environmental track
record, MMD works hard to ensure
that modern mining and the New
in New Mexico is conducted
responsibly and cleans up legacy
mining hazards.
MMD's abandoned mine lands
program uses federal grant
dollars to reclaim historic
mines abandoned prior to 1977.
This accounts for most of the
federal dollars in our budget
submission for MMD.
MMD's coal and hard rock
programs regulate modern mining
in New Mexico, and industry that
it produced $1.6 billion in
commodities last year alone.
These MMD programs help ensure
that mining companies in New
Mexico responsibly restore mine
lands to productive post-mining
land uses wherever possible.
And avoid unnecessary
environmental impacts, and I
have to say I just had the
opportunity to tour some of uh
our mining sites and reclaim
sites near Silver City, the
Reclamation is amazing, and the
size of these operations is
equally as amazing and so hugely
important for the clean energy
transition for the and for
conventional energy, as I said,
and we're doing a very good job
of reclaiming those sites.
Um, the, uh, the fees
established under the state
Mining Act have not been updated
since 1994, and they have not
kept pace with inflation. I went
back and looked at uh uh what a
dollar is was worth, um, you
know, in 1994 and what it's
worth today, it's over 100 like
112% increase. So, so, uh, so
we're not getting as much money
uh from those fees and federal
funds.
For coal regulatory programs
require a state matched MMD
therefore requests a modern
increase from the general fund.
So our regulatory programs can
continue to ensure responsible
mining and post-mining land
reclamation throughout New
Mexico.
Finally, Emer needs a modest
increase in its program
leadership and support, um, uh,
that's my office. Uh, we have
attracted $400 million in our
divisions this year alone. Um,
this modest increase in funding
would recognize program supports
important role in Amner's
securing of these funds for New
Mexico and managing their
implementation, including
federal and legal compliance,
uh, that's very, very common.
complicated and, and we spend a
lot of time on that in my
office, especially that.
We are also seeking to add grant
flooded climate policy advisor
to our staff and need a new FTE
to address increased demands on
our IT office and I just want to
give you an example of that.
We've added many portals for
public information for all these
funds that were distributing,
um, the range of tax credits,
etc. etc. IT is managing
significant new federal funds
just as I said, $400 million in
the last year alone, and that
requires IT support, and we
need additional security to
protect the associated
information with uh uh with all
of that.
In closing, I note that Emner is
also seeking special
appropriations for a number of
projects including one I believe
is essential for positioning New
Mexico as a national and
international leader in energy
and natural resources
management.
Um, I did skip over, I'm sorry,
the reversion page, OK, uh.
Forgive me.
I have printed out the, uh,
yeah.
It's on slide 10.
I printed out the wrong version
of my testimony. I had the
correct name of my division in
my earlier testimony on the
reversions, um, there were
versions in general are
relatively small. Um, if you see
on page 10, the biggest
reversion, it is a reversion,
but that was money that the
state advanced and was
reimbursed uh from the federal
government for um for a fire
disaster, uh emergency.
see a work that we did. And so
that's the biggest reversion,
um, the next largest is
penalties collected in OCD that
goes as a reversion to the
general fund, and then um then
uh uh uh that's also uh under HB
2 Section 4 appropriation
reversion, the biggest reversion
is OCT. That's, that's penalties
as well. The others are very,
very de minimis, so, so
reversions are are
But those are the large areas
and the rest are very small.
Um, uh, the, and, uh, let me go
back to um to uh uh what I was
talking about, I think, and it's
very important, we are seeking,
uh, you can see the list of
special uh appropriations on
slide 11, OK, they're detailed
and the amounts and one, I
wanted to highlight, um, I think
it's essential for positioning
New Mexico as a national, and I
believe international leader in
energy and natural resources.
management.
Our state has huge conventional
and clean energy resources as
I've described, and state lands
that have seen many wildfires
and other catastrophes. We are
also a water stressed state.
Yeah, I looked at the data in
since 1970, the temperature in
New Mexico, the average annual
temperature has increased by 3
°F. That is very, very
significant. So, so, and that
has an impact on water, it's
having an impact on wildfires.
It's having an impact on our
state parks. It is uh very, very
significant.
How we manage all of these
issues in the days and years
ahead could provide a roadmap
worthy of replication across the
country, and as I said, uh,
around the world and, and, uh, I
worked at the USDOE for many,
many years. I've been to Saudi
Arabia many times. They have no
water. They are more water
stressed than we are. They
really have only they don't even
have natural gas in Saudi
Arabia. They have oil, and they
are working to
develop a hydrogen economy and
they're desalinating water to
use for green hydrogen. So if we
can provide examples and when I
say around the world, that's an
area where I think we could uh
we could set some policies and,
and innovation that could be
critical for others in in in
other parts of the country in
the world.
During my most recent time at
the Department of Energy,
President Obama instructed 22
agencies of the federal
government to do a quadrennial
energy review via an executive
order that noted, among other
things, quote, affordable,
clean, and secure energy and
energy services are essential
for improving US economic
productivity, enhancing our
quality of life, protecting our
environment and ensuring our
nation's energy security.
Achieving these goals requires a
comprehensive and integrated
energy strategy resulting from
interagency dialogue and active
engagement of external
stakeholders. My office at DOE
at the time did the analysis and
coordinated this extensive
effort across 22 agencies. We
did installments in lieu of an
800-page document that no one
read on the first, uh, response
to the first installment of
this.
We are was, which where we did a
comprehensive analysis of energy
infrastructure needs in the near
mid and long term, was the
enactment into law or policy of
36% of its recommendations was a
democratic administration,
Republican Congress enacted the
recommendations into law.
I think New Mexico is the
perfect place to replicate this
review to provide
recommendations for path forward
based on unbiased sound analysis
of energy security, clean
energy, energy affordability,
energy jobs, energy inclusion,
energy infrastructure, and the
investment needs across
agencies, regions, and the
entire state.
Again, we can be as shining
example for the rest of the
country in putting forward a
thoughtful, technically-based
sequenced set of policy
recommendations to help meet our
incredible states near, mid and
long-term energy goals and
needs.
Thanks again for this
opportunity and I look forward
to discussing this and other
issues raised in our FY 26
budget request. Thank you for
that. Um, going to the committee
for up, Senator Steinbor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Designet, welcome to
your position.
You and I have a little shared
history. I used to work for
Congressman Richardson back in
the day. I don't know if we
worked there at the same time I
was up in Washington did you
work there? '96, right
before he became, I married his
best friend from college in
1989, and that's when I
left.
He was very good to me, my
energy and my husband, OK,
he's quite a guy, and uh I work
for Senator Bingham and after
that. Oh, wow. Came back to New
Mexico
Yeah.
So, and I'm from Las Cruces, but
anyway, welcome to this position
and thanks for taking it. I have
a few questions for you on the
OCD you mentioned in your
presentation how much oil and
gas has grown, and I think for a
long time, OCD.
was understaffed, to put it
mildly.
Keep up with the challenges to
the environment and, and just
the impacts of the industry.
I see that there's a budget
request. Now, how would you say
that OCD is staffed now for the
level of demands on the job, the
division.
Um, I would say that
None of the divisions ever have
enough staff, OK? And, and, uh,
uh, again, because production
has increased so, so
dramatically that it is hugely
important that our staffing keep
up with that production, and we
need to ensure that it's done in
environmentally responsible ways
and, and we have all sorts of
regulations and laws that we are
required to comply with and uh
and we could use additional.
staff, um, and
So
Thank you. Well, yes, and I
agree, and I think um.
We should be taking a serious
look at that because there are
real world impacts to the
environment, particularly the
people who live in that
community, um, whether it's
their water, you know, we know,
um,
You know, groundwater spills,
it's just a fact of reality of
cost of doing business, and
anyone who says otherwise just
isn't being honest about the
data, there's air pollution and
I think there was some reporting
in the last year about the error
pollution and pulmonary, maybe
the pulmonary effects. So, um,
Yeah, we welcome the economic
development, but we need to be
really
robust in our preservation and
protection efforts. So,
I would be curious what the real
number is, like, what's the real
number to get to be where you'd
like to be to have.
You know, to be doing a good job
as a regulator.
The, uh, and I apologize for not
going through the chair and vice
chair, sorry, sorry, um, uh,
when I uh uh answered my last
question. One of the things I
would say about this this
quadrennial energy review like
um a project that I mentioned is
those are precisely the issues
that you look at. What do you
need to do?
X, Y and Z in terms of
resources, in terms of staffing,
and it's you go around and, and
when we did the federal
quadrennial Energy Review. We
had regional workshops, I think
that was a huge part of the
success. Um, we are planning
having regional workshops in New
Mexico, we will hear a lot about
the staffing needs and issues
and requirements, um, as we put
all of that together, and I
think that that's one of the
huge benefits and.
outcomes of doing that kind of
deep dive analysis is, is and,
and having a very technically
based reason for needing 10
number of staff or uh you know,
X amount of resources, so.
OK. So that would be one thing,
Mr. Chair, Secretary designate
that I think.
You'd find a very friendly
legislator, legislature to, to
looking at that and.
Um, another, uh, far more
trivial but not unimportant
issue that you may not be aware
of, but your staff might have
prepared you for it is me asking
about the Rio Grande Trail
Commission.
Uh and that is under your
purview. It is under my purview
and and I'm uh Mr. Chair and,
uh, vice chair and senator, I'm
going to yell at my staff for
not preparing me for that
question, but
they can answer that they may
know the answer, but I'll just
put it out here and.
be brief. The department and I
don't think it was the
legislature, the department
requested $200,000 last year
that the department is in charge
of running a commission that is
in law called the Rio Grande
Trail Commission that's planning
a really exciting prostate long
distance trail, I would note for
you and my colleagues here that
many states have state trails.
Arizona has an 800 mile trail.
It's designated national scenic
Trail, um, many states do, and
aside from the famous trails
continental.
divide Appalachian Trust in New
Mexico back in whatever it was,
the Martinez administration
passed a law creating a real
Grand trail, creating a
commission that's an executive
level thing that's run by
The Ener department is required
to meet 3 times a year.
And last, and it has not done
so. OK, putting it
diplomatically. So, uh, now,
last session, the department
requested $200,000.
And I'm just curious, what is
the status of the commission.
What's the status of the
project?
I would like to say that I have
heard of it, but I don't know
the details, so I'm gonna turn
to Ben.
Mr. Chairman and Senator, I
think that we haven't quite
gotten to that part of our
onboarding secretariat, that's
why I apologize for that. But we
are in the process right now of
nominating two additional
members of the commission, um,
their mandate is to get in and
get us going on the State Trails
Act to get that project moving.
So we do have, I, I think at the
department we share your vision
with that trail program and um
it's just a matter of continuing
to
levers and kind of keep the
machinery of government moving
forward to get that done.
I hear you, Mr. Chair, and you
know, this is, this is a
commission meeting 3 times a
year, so it's honestly not that
difficult appointing a few
people on scheduling 3 meetings
a year. So, anyway, I'd love to
hear.
About the progress on that, um,
Secretary Deen it and the law
requires it, so I appreciate it.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Senator. I
apologize for chuckling, I just
know that uh you will never let
go of that issue, so it's good
to be prepared.
Um, Senator Stille Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
welcome.
Um, it's, it's great to have you
back in New Mexico.
Um, so I, this on page.
Is there not that numbered, but
the um the M nerds underground
injection control program.
Um, in anticipation states
classics primacy application.
What I understood you to say is
that we, you, that you've
already applied for this. Could
you tell us a little bit more
about about this program
involving carbon capture
sequestration, like I can tell
more about uh uh carbon capture
and the um, you mean the primacy
application, yeah, the, the, uh,
we are, we have not formally
applied, yet there, that is.
A complicated process. I have 25
slides on that process. It's so
complicated, um, but we are
going through the process and um
and as I mentioned, uh, working
with New Mexico Tech, uh, to do
outreach, OK, and to do um some
of the technical analysis that
we need, and so, so that is a um
a huge undertaking, uh.
inward and for the state, and I
think it's very, very important,
as I said, I think CCS is hugely
important and uh Mr. Chair, so
what is the consequence of
having a classic primacy. What,
what does that mean for the
state? Um, and Mr. Chair and
Senator, the, the um class 6
primacy within certain boundary
conditions that are established
by the.
CPA when it grants Classics
primacy, uh, gives the state
more flexibility and control
over the development of its uh
uh CCS underground injection
control, etc. etc. So it can be
a lot more uh locally focused
and based and uh and uh utilize
a lot more uh uh of our state
expertise and um and uh so I
think it's very, very
valuable, especially with all
the technical knowledge that we
have in the state with the
laboratories and the uh the um
the uh industry, you know, CCS I
mentioned hydrogen and, and uh
and a geothermal having very
significant uh uh need for
understanding the subsurface,
and you have that expertise in
New Mexico's huge oil and gas uh
workforce.
and having that knowledge is
just one example of New Mexico
specific, uh, uh, subsurface,
uh, needs, etc. etc. So it gives
us within certain uh uh
constraints um that EPA imposes
or when it uh it grants classics
primacy, it gives us more
flexibility to use our
significant knowledge. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. I would, if you
wouldn't mind, love to see your
25 slide report, because I'd
like to.
a little bit more
uh, I'd like to make sure you
get a copy of those slides that,
that would be great just to
learn a little bit more about
that process, but it's not been
applied for just doing the the
work. And when is the EPA, is
there a deadline for
Or um at the EPA.
To receive those, Mr. Chair and
Senator, you can think of the
actual application processes
being when we submit our
proposed rules package to EPA.
That's what starts the timer on
their end. We haven't done that
yet. The reason we haven't done
that yet is because there's a
couple of reasons. One is that
we are still waiting on the
Mexico Tech to sort of finish
their scoping and report
writing. Second part of it is if
we develop the rules package and
then the legislature decides to
pass a carbon sequestration
bill, then we go back to our
rules package and it kind of
sets us time. So we, I, I
understand that there is a
legislation around carbon
secret, remember also the other
thing.
It's pedantic, but I'm the
secretary of the attorney, so
being pedantic, I guess it's
kind of my job. We aren't
actually talking about the first
C and CCS either. This is really
just carbon. You don't really,
we're not, um, looking at any uh
part of where the carbon comes
from, we're just be keeping it,
keeping it under the ground once
it gets injected there and
trying to reduce the level of
litigation that's happening.
Surface level by the carbon. So,
um, that'll that'll all get
triggered hopefully sometime
next year. I, I would love it if
we could speed up this process,
OK, it's, it is uh uh uh takes a
long time, OK? But we are well
into it and uh are looking
forward to uh getting our
application and we're just doing
the preliminary work now it's
been said so. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. And then the second is
probably just a little thing,
but um I was curious when you
talk about um the
that you're seeking modest
general fund increases to cover
the declining re revenue from
fees that haven't been updated.
Why aren't we not updating the
fees and increasing the fees,
um, the, you know, the coal
fees. I know, I know, uh.
Was it one of the funds that was
reverting, but I, you know, it
just seems to make sense if the
trees haven't uh been increased
since 1994.
Um, and that now that same one
when you say he has $100 in 1994
is equivalent to about 212.75
today. Seems like a no brainer
to just make the fees, you know,
keep the fees reasonable excuse
me
the members and the presenters
are not going through the chair
and observing process. So let's,
uh, get it together, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
I, I'm sorry. I've been trying
to go through the chair, the um
me too, yeah.
The uh um the one thing uh
I would say is we, we could use,
uh, we need to update.
Those fees, but that is uh out
of our control.
I think it is, it is in the
hands of the legislature.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair, and it
would be great if you want to
build, um, I mean that would be
good, good to do. I think, um,
the other, uh, just
tiny little question is the
critical mineral study, um,
That that you're seeking a
special appropriations.
Is this to find out how many
critical minerals, what kinds of
critical minerals we have, or is
it to look at markets or both. I
I just wanted to know a little
bit more about that study.
Um, Mr. Chair and Senator, it is
To do all of the above, and uh
the uh as I mentioned, uh, the
14
Critical metals and minerals
that have been found and or
mined in New Mexico earlier that
are on the USGS list that comes
from a preliminary analysis by
New Mexico Tech, those data come
from New Mexico Tech, and we
need a lot more information
because, because
We don't, we, we need to look at
the volumes, how much is still
out there. They have been mined
or or uh uh or exist in New
Mexico. What are the volumes?
Uh, what are the, uh, what are
the permitting requirements, uh,
who was interested in uh in
mining them and uh there are
many, many issues that need to
be looked at, and that's what
that would be, uh, would do.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair, and
I apologize if I didn't
consistently go through you.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Barrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Uh, welcome, Secretary. Good to
have you on board, um, I'm
curious about this 400 million,
uh, in new federal funding. I
how, how long is that term for
that funding and is it going to
be subject to any revisions uh
by the incoming administration
and, and I assume when you have
um 400 million, you have money
in those budgets to hire project
managers.
to do the job and to carry that
forward, but I'm just curious
about um how
Is, is that money good for the
state, and will it be good, I, I
guess I don't know what are the
terms of that funding too in in
terms of um years. Thanks, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Chair, and, and
Representative Herrera, the uh
That 400 million is a a very
significant mix of different
things, and, and we are working
very, very hard one.
who looked at
The
Rates at which we can get that
money and how do we expedite
that assuming that some of it
will not be there uh in the next
administration, uh, we're doing
an inventory right now of, of
those numbers and that data, uh,
how much have we received or are
the deadlines, what are the uh
what are the increments that
we're receiving, etc. etc. um,
and so we are hard at work to
try and understand the
implication.
of the change administration uh
for uh current and future
funding and uh uh been, I've
been uh working him like a dog
to try and pull all of that in
the division directors to try
and pull all of that together
and understand the implications
of that funding. We're not done
yet. Um, I did send around a
study this morning uh of
somebody looking at an
organization looking at what the
Implications might be for the
various uh uh divisions and the
federal dollars, uh, in the
upcoming administration, uh,
they could be significant, uh,
in that study, it did
acknowledge that DOE is working
very, very hard to get as much
money out the door, uh, and
encumbered in not, not in
horribly encumbered uh before
January 20th, so we're working
at that, and it does have
implications.
But I think on the $400 million
we are looking at in detail and
I think we're OK at at uh at
getting it out the door, but I
don't know if Ben you're the one
who has been looking at the
details, and
Mr. Chair and Representative, so
to answer your first question,
our term that we get to spend
those dollars down is um 4 to 5
years, depending on what, when
we're pulling, we're pulling
from and right now it's about
400 actually could be more by
the end of the year, Director
Staier literally has a staffer
who does nothing but read and
grant availabilities, not
writing or submitting, just
literally reading and graphic
copying those around. That's the
level of federal activity we've
seen from BIL.
You so most of the staff we've
hired from that our term staff,
so the reason that you are not
necessarily seeing that.
of logarithmic increase in the
money that that energy
conservation and management is
handling in this general fund
request is because that is the
way that we are tending to fund
those staff. One of the problems
that keeps me awake at night
right now is physically where to
put all those people. Um.
What's going to happen in the
next administration? It kind of
depends on who you ask and how
pessimistic they're feeling on
that day.
There are signs of hope for the
IRA. A lot of that.
Legislation was passed on a
bipartisan basis, a lot of the
funds that are getting deployed
are getting deployed in a very
bipartisan way, actually
slightly partisan tilted way or
um towards red district. So it's
At the same time, there's a
great deal of saber rattling and
and messaging around the IRA and
things like this, um.
When we talk to rank and file
federal folks who are actually
administering these funds, there
is cautious optimism that these
programs are going to continue.
A lot of these things are
Ones that we have sort of what
we kind of think about is
encumbered right now, the
vulnerability of that is that
these funds are available to the
state on a reimbursement basis.
So we go and get seats, the EPA
and they, and they reimburse us,
so will the Trump administration
just not pay its bills in that
respect is kind of an open
question, you don't.
It it's hard to say. There
there's also a great deal of
vulnerability involved in simple
foot dragging and slowing down
and sort of dragging processes
down as you try to get.
Uh
I'm simplifying here, but as you
get receipts certified and
things like that.
Mr. Chair and Representative of
many of these things are a law,
and so, uh, uh, laws would have
to be changed, um, and, uh, last
time I read, uh, the last number
I read at 75% of the IRA dollars
were being spent in, uh, red
districts, and uh so I think
changing law might be an issue.
I mentioned the analysis that
I'm looking out to see what the
higher level impacts might be of
the incoming administration, and
it was more optimistic than uh I
might have thought, and uh just
because, because there is so
there is so much attachment, uh,
uh, to these funds, how
difficult it is to change a law,
uh, and especially when, when uh
when funds are being distributed
across the country.
So, uh, but as Ben just
mentioned, the ability to muck
up the works, uh, so to speak,
uh, at the different agencies
could be one way, you don't have
to change the law, but you can
change their internal processes,
and that could be a problem. And
uh, and again, I worked at DOE
for 12 years at high levels in,
in the Department of Energy, and
I know it could, you could screw
up the processes.
for getting money out the door
on a regular basis, uh, but, um,
uh, we are looking at doing a
detailed analysis of the
implications and should have
something soon, what that might
mean for uh the state of New
Mexico and our division in our
department.
Yeah
Uh, thank you for that answer,
Mr. Chair, I um
You know, I, I've only run a $20
million grant over a 3 year
period, and I know how difficult
it is to make sure that you get
it in on time, you get the work
done, the reports ready, and
yeah, if you have somebody who
doesn't like you.
God help you. I mean, I'm just
saying I, I've been involved and
I, I get how that works.
I'm um
Now, I lost my question. Shoot.
I'll have to get back to it, Mr.
Chair. I'm sorry. And it was an
important one too. Oh, I wanted
to say we should have a reunion.
I've also worked for Bill
Richardson when he was chair of
the Congressional Hispanic
Caucus, so there's probably more
people in this building that's
worked for him than not so um
nice to nice to uh welcome you
to the uh to the club, Mr.
Chairman and Representative, I
would love to get together and
tell stories about Bill
Richardson.
That's always, that's always the
captain, Mr. Chair, who has the
best story and there's
limited on time so.
Uh, Representative Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And when
you were talking about um the
classics wells, um, are you
planning to run legislation on
the poor space ownership and who
holds the liability um for
keeping the carbon in.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
um, that is the uh
The, I, I, as I said at my last
hearing, uh, the United States
is the only country in the world
where the surface owner owns the
subsurface.
So, so a lot of care has to be
taken for managing unitization
and all sorts of uh processes
and, and, and structures that
one would go through for
managing that subsurface space,
um, uh, it, it caused, uh,
because the US is the only
country in the world that caused
the uh property owner owns the
airspace as well.
It caused a huge issue when,
when we started developing air
travel in the United States,
and, but they worked it out, um,
and we can now fly across the
country and uh they worked it
out, and I think that we can
work it out, that will be a lot
of time and effort spent on
developing the processes to um
to aggregate that space, uh,
when and and acknowledging that
the uh owner.
of this subsurface.
Yeah
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you, um, but the, um.
Surface owner and the middle
mineral owners, um, but who and
so you're saying the space where
the carbon or where the carrying
can be stored is
Below the surface below the
surface and so
Mr. Chair and um.
Uh, secretary, um, with the
liability, um, like in Illinois
where they had a big CO2 leak,
um, and went into the
groundwater, would that be then?
That, um, subsurface of the
liability issues uh for that
kind of uh uh
that kind of an issue, uh, is
something that you would work
out in terms of uh liability, I
think, Ben, do you have any
Mr. Chair Representative to, to,
to answer your first question,
we don't have the, the
department doesn't have a bill
to that effect. My understanding
is there is a bill.
To that effect. Um, the bill
that
Understand to be in development
or bills maybe, um, kind of does
the same things that the there
was a bill last year that
addressed the same issue. It
required some surface
unitization, some requirements
about um what percentage of the
surface owners over a reservoir
that you want to inject into
need to be notified and kind of
at the table and compensated.
As part of that initialization
process. Um, the long-term
liability piece goes to um
The state, generally speaking,
and that's kind of, as I
understand it, the standard
around the country that, um,
after about 5 years or basically
5 years after the end of
injection, uh, the liability
goes to the relevant state
government. The reason for that
is, um, primarily centered
around orphan well problems, you
don't want companies injecting,
making money, going bankrupt and
then the well sits out there, no
one's paying attention and
tracking whether or not it's
actually successfully holding
all that carbon in so.
Giving things back to the state
gives you some guarantee that.
Um, the state government will at
least hopefully be around for.
Longer, um.
The question for us in in the
last legislative session as we,
as we looked at that bill is
whether or not this resources
are being allocated for the
state to actually do that, to
actually.
Uh, developed the monitoring
equipment or send people out
there with the equipment to make
sure that these formations in
the wells were holding the
carbon down and pulling them
away. We can do as well as sort
of the administrative work like
you, you've got a large carbon
reservoir, you don't want
somebody drilling down through
it without knowing that it's
there, say, if they're looking
for.
Something else.
Um, those kinds of issues of the
long-term liability questions
Mr.
Chair and
and Representative for the um
the uh, I had mentioned earlier
the, the skill sets of the uh
oil and gas industry as we
transition to cleaner energy,
uh, etc. etc. putting those
skill sets to work is going to
be very important. Knowledge of
the subsurface, the practice of
unitization in which the
industry has been doing forever,
um, uh, is they have a lot of
experience in doing that, and,
and, uh, and in storage beneath
the subs in the subsurface, and
so, so I think it's a good uh
use of the skill sets that we
have in the industry, uh, that
we can put to uh put to work,
um, uh, for, uh, sequestering
the carbon as well too.
So Mr. Chair and um panel, um.
It's still to be determined who
owns this, the poor space, and
then the liability for any
spills.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
right now the poor spaces where
New Mexico is under what's
called the American rule, and
we're under some.
judicial opinions that kind of
affirm that for us, that say
that the poor space is owned by
the surface owner, um,
that
the point of the statute is to
get us on a little firmer
footing, especially for things
like carbon sequestration if
we're trying to sign you know
trying to figure out 20 year
sort of planning, long term
planning for this, it's a little
bit easier to do that if we're
dealing with statute, um, the
liability piece is part of a
potential bill that goes to the
unitization process, um.
Long-term liability for spills
or leaks of the CO2 in this
instance would
Yeah, go to the, go to the
state, although, you know, the
legislation doesn't really
assign.
A lot of penalties or criminal
stuff for the state. I think the
idea is that you just want to
avoid it in the first place and
B, stop it. You think it might
be happening? Um, the liability
concerns that you worry about
more are
Uh, landowners coming out of the
woodwork many years later saying
I want my slice of the pie. I
wasn't part of the original
unitization group, uh, you know,
part of this is 10,000 ft below
my property and so of course,
I'm being deprived of property
right I oh dudes, you know,
there are parts of New Mexico
where our title transfer process
is maybe not um.
is modern, well documented
looking for chair to start
nodding at here, um, as you
would hope. So I can, it's it
from a liability perspective,
it's not impossible to imagine a
scenario where.
You've got some title that was
transferred on a napkin between
friends some time ago and then
they show up 15 years later
saying,
You got a trespass that needs
remedy.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah, sorry about that. I was
multitasking. Um, I will say,
uh, there.
Ribsson Dixon has a poor space
bill. It was sort of the last
one that didn't make the cut for
tomorrow. She didn't have the
bill ready, uh, and so we didn't
put on the list for tomorrow,
but I do believe it's coming.
Um, Senator Worth, oh, so we are
short in time on this, at this
point, and we have 3 on the
list, Cenor. Uh, thank you, Mr.
Chair and welcome, Madam
Secretary.
Uh, just to comment about the,
uh, energy conservation budget,
which looks like massive
increase in federal money. I
will just tell you on behalf of
the constituents I represent,
and I think all the folks up
here.
Thank you that that's coming
with lots of frustration. We
pass all the tax credits, of
course, we feel good about it
and then they're trying to get
them implemented and, and really
have some challenges there. I do
have a question about forestry
and parks, budgets are being
reduced. I'm just curious what
the
Why those budgets are being
reduced? Is that part of an
internal overall budgeting and
what's, what's going going away
this year that
You know, existed.
In the prior budget year.
Mr. Chair, Senator, the, the
reason those two divisions are
reduced is, uh, the water, uh,
the forest land Protection Fund
in forestry, they had fun
balance that we used over the
last 2 years to support, uh,
watershed projects, um, because
we've used those funds, we've
reduced the amount of money
coming into those based on
revenues that we have collected
coming into halfway 26.
It's the same thing in state
parks, state parks we've used,
uh, the GGRT fund for
construction projects, um, a lot
of that was to tie into uh
matching and other construction
projects across state parks. Um,
the fund balance has come down
significantly, um, and
therefore, we've reduced the use
of those two funds, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate that and probably
offline get into some of those
details given the timing. I
don't want to take up the time.
I, I would like, I think it'd be
super.
following up with Senator
Steinborn's questions about the
re regulatory staffing.
Can you, your slide talks about
New Mexico being #2.
Uh, in offshore onshore oil
production, but number 9 in
regulatory staffing, I'd be
really curious to see a chart
that shows us the list of
states, how much oil is being
produced, what the staffing is,
so we can really understand that
comparison. So if you could get
that for the committee, I'll
really appreciate that. I would,
I have a slide for everything,
so I'd love to make it. OK, Mr.
Chair and Mr. Senator. Yeah,
absolutely, yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, uh, the chairman.
Um, ma'am, uh, secretary, you,
uh, threw out some figures.
Regarding um the amount of
gallons of a produced water.
I didn't quite get it. I, I
thought I heard 4 million and um
Also, you threw out some figures
regarding uh practice water.
Uh, and I didn't get
How much of that.
Uh, but you did state that um.
That we could light up.
2 million households here in New
Mexico through a um a green
hydrogen process. So the first
question,
What was the, the amount of
produced water that you
mentioned.
The um amount of fruit produced
water is 4 million barrels of
produced water per day. OK, so
that is a huge amount, um, much
of that is disposed of through
deep well injections up to
150,000 acre feet of produced
water is available on an annual
basis, and that's 150,000 acre
feet is 3 times the amount of
water used by.
Albuquerque in a year.
So it's a huge amount of water
it needs to be cleaned up.
Um, uh, and actually there are
some valuable metals and
minerals in that produced water.
And, and, uh, and Mr. Chair and
and Representative Garcia, it
is, uh, I think could be an
incredibly valuable resource,
our environment department is
spending a lot of time, uh,
looking at, at, uh, cleaning up
produced water and uh and uh but
New Mexico doesn't just have
produced water, that's from oil
and gas production, it has huge
brackish water reservoirs in the
northwest and the.
southeast part of the state, and
if we um if we uh develop
thenologies to affordably clean
up both the produced and
brackish water, uh, it could be
an incredible resource. I also
think that it's a resource New
Mexico is going to need, uh, uh,
as I said, the temperatures in
in New Mexico, the average
annual temperature has gone up 3
degrees since the 1970s, that's
a lot, very
significant increase. The other,
and this is a quote I got from a
press release released by the
governor and uh in December of
2023, I think you might be
asking about this too.
Diverting just 3% of the
produced water disposed of an
injection wells using that to
make green hydrogen.
Um, uh, could give us enough
energy to fully power over 2
million homes annually, so
that's huge and uh very, very,
very important resource, so I
think we need to be spending a
lot of time looking at it. And
Madam Secretary, the 4 million
barrels.
Are we looking at 50 gallon
barrels.
I don't know what, I thought it
uh.
I thought a barrel was 26, but I
don't know.
Uh,
Mr. Chair was 56. I think oil
barrel is 42, but
the reason I ask, umpsentative
Garcia, I have no idea.
Good answer. I thought it was 26
gallons, but I, I will get back
to you on that, you know, madam,
uh, secretary, uh, I thought
originally it was uh For million
gallons per day, but um I wanted
to share with you a fact.
Um,
Uh, 4 million gallons of water.
Put in 50 gallon.
Barrel drums.
Lined up stretches from
The plaza in Santa Fe.
To the plaza in Albuquerque.
That's 4 million gallons. The
reason I know that is because I
had uh
Mr. Chair, are
Math genius of the state.
Former rep Tomasa Assad.
Calculate that for me.
Based on what?
The Facebook plant.
In Los Lunas would be producing
after full phase out.
Phase 3. Right now they're in
phase one, but phase 3 is 4
million gallons a day of water.
That plant will utilize.
And the, and those barrels,
again, if you feel up 50 gallon
barrels, uh, with those of the 4
million gallons that stretches
from the Plaza in Santa Fero the
Plaza and Aurerque.
And uh
Thank you for that, madam uh
secretary. You know, I, uh,
The first legislator to initiate
a hydrogen fuel cell project.
Back in 2001,
And uh we uh applied it at uh at
a state park to light up, uh,
the lights in the parking lot
and the lighting inside the
structure.
And it was kind of a, a project
based on hydrolysis.
We were using a solar
photovoltaic to generate.
Uh, this mixture process that
separated the hydrogen from the
water and then move that
hydrogen into a fuel cell, and
the lighting system would then
be powered off of that fuel
cell. So from 2001 to 2024, we
haven't done deadly in terms of
advising advancing the, you
know, the hydrogen fuel cell
development here in our state,
Madam Secretary, and I hope you
can kind of turn that around.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair,
and, and Representative Garcia,
I would say on that.
Uh, again, I have a slide for
this to our original focus.
For hydrogen was hydrogen
vehicles.
Um, so 2001, 2004, thereabouts,
the focus on the use of hydrogen
was for transportation, and I
always thought that that was not
hydrogen's highest value use
especially since we have, we
have perfected electric
vehicles, and uh and I think the
highest value use of hydrogen is
the industrial heat that I
described that you need earlier.
And right now in the United
States that fuel that we use to
get the 2800 °C, you need for
the 3rd stage of making a a wind
turbine blade to get that 2800
degrees, that you need a fuel
for that, that fuel in the US
right now is natural gas that
could be hydrogen in the future.
And so I don't see uh in, in,
uh, uh, in the time frame that
we need to meet net zero
targets, New Mexico has it the
28 states have net zero targets
whether the federal government
uh throws it overboard or not,
um, 28 states have that, and to
meet those net zero targets,
we're gonna need a fuel now,
right now, again, that fuels
natural gas, but it could be
green or blue hydrogen.
Uh, depending on what the
resources of a state or region
are and I think that's the best
use of hydrogen, not for
transportation, and, and the
slide that I have on hydrogen,
it's headlines, hydrogen,
hydrogen, hydrogen, and, uh,
Arnold Schwarzenegger is
governor of California,
developing the hydrogen highway
in the last headline is hydrogen
highway goes bust, and so, so,
uh
again.
Focus on its uses of fuel, not
so much on its use for
transportation. So thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, we are over time
now, our last, uh,
Representative is representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, uh, secretary, for being
with us and for sharing your
vision and and all that that
brings to our state, um.
your background.
Uh, just very quickly, and I
think it's in reference to uh
the line of questions that
senator, um, worth was, um.
Going along with the the
subsidies, I guess, of the, the
Like the $4 million that you
reference, for example, is that
it?
Does that mean that's an offset.
To what your budget request is
because we're getting in the I'm
sorry, the 400, yeah, yeah, 400
million, is that an option? No,
it's what we're bringing in.
It's not a, I'm sorry, Mr. Tay,
uh, Mr. Charon, Representative
Lujan, it's not an offset, it's,
I mean, phrase that differently.
Does that, does that cause an
offset to the budget request you
have for us, does it?
Um, decrease the amount of money
that the budget that you ask for
because you're you're getting
all this, OK.
That was a question somebody
asked for me to ask, and so I'm
just asking no, Mr. Chair and
Representative Lujan, it's, it
actually increased the cost
because we have to administer
those funds. And so, so it's
not, it's, it's not, it is a
supporting some staffing,
obviously, but, but it's
actually an increased uh uh
burden and operational cost on
the uh on the agency as opposed
to any kind of offset so.
Thank you for the clarity. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. That's all I
have.
Great. Thank you very much. I, I
appreciate you being here and
bringing all here key players
there. Thank you. Thank you so
much.
OK, we're gonna do a little
housekeeping as the next panel
comes on up, uh, don't be shy.
Uh, we have minutes in your, uh,
folders from
Uh, the Rodoso meaning, is there
a motion to approve the minutes,
of,
uh, motion for Senator Campos,
the second from Representative
Kate. Any objection to that? OK.
The minutes are improved in our
2nd to last, uh, panel of the
day, uh, is the Mexico
Environment Department. By the
way, we do have, um,
We will have public comment at
the end of today, instead of
having it at the end of
tomorrow.
And the secretary just left.
Secretary Kenny, whenever you're
ready.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, it's good to be
here with you, um, to talk about
our budget and how it impacts
policy. I'm joined today by my
two deputy cabinet secretaries,
Deputy John Roderick over our
sort of policy and programs and
Deputy Danielle Gil Gilliam over
our operations. In addition, we
have our general counsel with
us.
Zachoga, uh, our water director,
Jonas Armstrong, um, our ASD
director Heather.
is right here as well.
And Michael Bowers.
Um, who is our legislative, uh,
interface. I think that's
everybody. I'm sorry if I'm
Forgetting anybody.
Uh, but Mr. Chair, members of
the committee,
We have, um,
Prepared a handout for you, uh,
so you no longer have to look at
slides for our presentation, but
just a four-page handout, uh,
that will go over our budget.
This is typically what I like to
do and present, uh, during our
budget committees, uh, as we
move into LFCHAFC and Senate
Finance, we'll use the same
document as we go forward and
just evolve it along the way,
um, for those who may be
watching, you can find this
document on our website as well
under comments and testimony.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee,
Uh, first, what I always like to
do is just sort of set the stage
on who our department is and our
focus, our mission is to protect
public health and the
environment for current and
future generations. Uh, we use
sort of 4 core values to do
that. Um,
Science innovation,
collaboration and compliance.
And uh we use those in, in
literally everything we do,
decisions we make, uh, on a day
to day basis in the way we
message our decisions as well.
Um, on the right hand side of
page one, you'll see a message
that I try to craft specifically
to what we're about to do in, in
whatever upcoming legislative
session we have, and in there, I
try to focus on key messages or
key points that I know you'll be
interested in, um,
So I'll, I'll go through that as
we go through the document, but
a couple of highlights that are
out of that message, um, we are
requesting a flat budget from FY
25 to FY 26, but we're also
requesting a um
Significant increase in special
appropriations, 218 million
across I think 8 special
appropriations.
Um
Which we'll go over those in a
moment.
Some highlights that I wanted to
just
Share with you all that I think
are really important. Um, when I
started in this role in 2019,
our vacancy rate at the
department after years of being
cut in general fund was probably
in the 22 to 25% area. Um, we've
made significant strides with
the team here and members who
have also served in the
administration prior in the
department, and now our vacancy
rate today is 5.4%.
And I just really want to stress
that, that an agency of our size
of our budget coming before you
from 2019 through the pandemic
and to where we are today has
gotten its vacancy rate down to
5.4%. That would not have
happened, if not for the last
session.
Um, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, in the last
session itself brought $6.2
million into our operating
budget for appropriate
placement, so we are finally
paying people what they are do
under state rules for both their
education and experience. So I
thank you, um, members of the
committee here and then specific
champions, Mr. Chair, Leworth,
um, the pro tem and others who
have really helped us with that
6.2 million in general fund that
actually helped us leverage
another 3.
5 3.7 million in our own
funding, meaning permits and
federal funds to appropriately
place our employees. So, you
know,
The power of
Properly funding agencies like
ours means that retention or
recruitment is higher, uh, and
then I can highlight the other
factoid that's in the bottom
left hand corner of the page
one, which is in fiscal year
2024.
This agency returned more money
to the general fund than it
took.
So again,
I really want to stress that our
rate of return on the general
fund dollars you invested in us,
brought in 18.4% more than we
took.
And I think that's a huge point
of pride, uh, for our agency.
So, on page 2, getting more into
FY 26, and I won't go through
this, Mr. Chair, I want to get
to sort of the policy pieces
that I know you and others might
be interested in, but I won't go
through this in great detail,
but it's here in, happy to just
answer questions if you would
like me to do so, but
effectively, all of our
divisions are listed out for
you, um, with the FTE and the
operating budget.
And then the P code.
Cause we can't talk about
divisions without ape code. Um.
But the divisions are laid out
there of importance that in FY
26, what we, what we wanna do is
a significant change in our
operation in our structure is
breakout those individuals who
are performing compliance and
enforcement work into their own
P code, their own division.
So, Mr. Chair, members of the
committee.
We have stated as an agency that
implements many federal and
state statutes in lieu of the
federal government implementing
those programs here as a state.
We have made uh commitments in
how we will operate and we are
aligning the structure of our
department to those commitments
we made probably back in the
late 80s, early 90s time frame.
Um, and that's one reason we
want compliance and enforcement
broken out. The other piece is
you'll have better understanding
of how this department operates
in the future. Today, you could
ask any secretary who runs this
department, how do you, how do
you instruct your time, how do
you instruct your staff to spend
their time? Is it on permitting?
Is it on enforcement? Here,
you'll see a, a greater
understanding of uh transparency
if we break this out into this
new P code in FY 26. Um, and
again, happy to.
Explain more as we go through
this, this presentation.
Getting into the uh budget for
FY 26, as I said, we're
requesting, um, now I'm on page
3, table 1, as I indicated, um,
our FY 26 budget in general fund
is flat.
So, we are now at 33.3 million
in general fund, uh,
representing about 17% of our
overall budget is about 33.3
million. We're requesting a flat
budget in FY 26, so the same
that we got in 25 is the same
request in 26, and then with
federal funds and special
revenue funds, meaning the
federal funds we receive are
down about 24%.
And the special revenue funds,
permit fees, etc. are going to
go up about 24%. Um, it is not
uncommon before you, you, you
might think, well, are you
losing federal funds? Um, Mr.
Ja, members of the committee,
it's not uncommon for our
department to have sort of 234
or 5 year spending plans for
federal funds, and those funds
are, are not necessarily
fluctuating into the state. It's
just how our ability is to spend
them super fun and other
programs come to mind here, and
special revenue funds. We have a
more aggressive, um, approach to
spending the dollars we've
worked extensively with DFA, um,
to ensure that we're spending
our money more efficiently, uh,
and more quickly. So we're not
sitting on reserves, so we're
spending typically more in
permit fees than each year, um,
than we have in the past, and
that's going to continue in FY
26. So we're looking at about
$190 to $200 million dollar
overall budget for NMED.
in 2026.
And then Mr. Chair, members of
the committee moving down into
our special appropriations. We
have about 8 special
appropriations here. Um, I'm
going to just highlight a couple
of them cause I, I think maybe
you'll ask me some questions
about some of these numbers. So
first, you heard earlier today
from, um, the infrastructure
advisor, Rebecca Russ and the
Office of the State Engineer,
uh, on the 50 year water action
plan, so we had a $250 million
placeholder that I removed from
table 2.
Uh, and, and you'll see that
footnoted at the bottom under
table 2. So with that aside, our
largest special appropriation
that we're seeking is a $150
million appropriation for the
purposes of cleaning up those
abandoned, uh, sites that don't
have an owner operator for us to
pursue, um, included in here, we
will also address some uranium
mining states, and we have some
other irons in the fire to to
gain dollars from the feds and
work on uh
abandoned uranium mining sites
as well, but that's 150 million
is for the understanding, you
know, we've already documented
where these sites are, but so
it's really to get started on
the actual cleanup.
We have a statewide PFOS uh
special appropriation number 2
for 24 million. Um, this is for
twofold one, we're in the throes
of a major groundwater war
happening in Clovis, New Mexico,
Curry County, as well as
Alamogordo, Otero County, um,
And, uh, white sands, um, but
nonetheless, one of the largest
polluters we have in the state
of New Mexico is the Department
of Defense, and this 24 million
is because we're we're moving
both our often well, we're both
litigations for the one in which
the, the federal government sued
us
as well as the, the lawsuit in
which we sued the federal
government. Both are moving
forward. I'm happy to answer
questions about that, but that's
gonna cost us more money.
Um, and then on top of that,
Uh
There are some other PAS
expenses in there, like the, the
POS blood testing and water
testing that we're doing around
the state.
Um
It gets a little bit easier to
explain the next view, so I'll
go through those a little
quicker, Mr. Chair, members of
the committee, but the rural
infrastructure Fund, we tried to
bring this forward in the
special session earlier this
year, um, but the
The $20 million we're seeking is
for an infusion into the rural
infrastructure Fund, the, the
committee, I think, or the the
legislature put 10 million.
In, in, uh, two last regular
session into the rural
infrastructure fund, we've spent
it all.
It's all out the door. Um, it's,
it's our department's version of
the most nimble emergency fund
that we can, we can have. So
we're asking for more there.
We're asking for some bridge
funding in 4 and 5 to sort of
put money into our programs that
will ultimately allow them to
return money into the state and
therefore be more
self-sufficient, so that's what
4 and 5 are. Um, number 6 is
more work in Curry County for
the residents there who the
United States Department of
Defense, um, misrepresented that
they were taking care of the
community in terms of uh
Uh, checking to see if they're,
uh, drinking water was
contaminated with peos,
installing filtration systems,
changing those filtration
systems. We've learned from
spending a lot of time. In fact,
I think I can vote in Curry
County now, um, uh, we've spent
a lot of time, uh, down in Curry
County and have built a lot of
public trust with the community
and what we're finding is that,
uh, what, what the Air Force
said they were going to do, they
didn't deliver on. So that's
what that special appropriation
is for, um, number 7 is
More focus on wastewater
regionalization, um, which is
going really well and, and
number 8 is um to do more
analytical work out of our own
department. We contract a
significant amount of uh lab
work out to private labs, it
just gets more expensive year
after year, and we're not
building capacity for our own
staff, and we're not being
responsive to the community, so
we wanna, we wanna check all
those boxes and start building
laboratory capacity in-house.
Um, this chair members of the
community, it takes me to page
4, so we're just about finished
now.
Um, some other pieces that I
wanted to highlight that I know
I get asked most multiple times.
But before I get to those
statistics on the left-hand side
are two boxes, both performance
reports and a budget one on one
video, um, performance reports,
uh, you can scan the UR the QR
code and, and see all of our
performance assessments. This is
a great way to understand what
our department does, and as we
get into having new members in
the legislature, this is
something that we want to
highlight for them.
Something that I think we're one
of the few agencies that does
its own performance report as
opposed to the LFC report cards,
and we both put um outcomes and
outputs in here, so qualitative
and quantitative information.
And I just think that is a
really good, uh, report to
understand who we are and what
we're working on.
And then, secondly, as I
mentioned, the, the box below
that is our budget 101 video.
And again, this would be great
for existing and new members as
they get familiar with our
department or even budgeting in
general. Uh, we have a snappy
tune video that uh will have you
humming and uh dancing along as
you understand how budgeting
works. So, um, I hope that gives
you enough insight to wanna
check that video out on our
YouTube channel.
But it really does, it really
helps understand how budgeting
works in a department as complex
as ours, where you have 125
funding sources and only one of
those is a general fund.
Um, on the right hand side, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
you know, oftentimes I, I talk
about compliance and
enforcement, because I think
it's a really important um
component to what this agency
does. We are a regulatory
agency, as well as top box here,
we are an economic development
agency, and we've invested some
staggering numbers into water
infrastructure across the state,
87 million in in grants and
capital outlay to communities
that
continues to grow every year,
and then 77 million invested in
water projects in communities,
those are outside of the grants
and capital outlay that we sort
of administered in partnership
with the legislature. Uh, all in
all, we started 175 water
projects last year, and I just
want to highlight that the folks
who work on this in our
department, are managing
probably about 125 projects per
person. So it is not even a
sustainable workload, but yet
they still
get the money out the door, they
still invest in these
communities, and we're really
proud of, of the, of the work we
do. Sort of that being the
carrot, here comes the stick,
um, in terms of the inspections
we performed by program, you can
see that our air emitting
inspections or air permitted
sources continue to be um sort
of the, sort of the worst
performing, uh, segment of our
economy, um, largely oil and gas
has a, you know, is, is making
this number up, of course, like
asphalt plants.
And other sources are, are in
here, but just generally
speaking, we have more oil and
gas sources than anything else,
and this is our FY 24 data, when
you look at it over the course
of the year, we only had about a
30% compliance rate.
That is
Aside from, I won't say anything
but um judgmental about that,
but it is no shock to me that
ozone levels are rising.
When you're admit when we're
finding this level of, of
violation, um, and then
questioning why our ozone levels
rising, uh, you don't need to be
a cabinet secretary, an engineer
to, to sort of put one on one
together. Um, similarly, we, we,
we set arbitrary benchmarks in
the high 80s, low 90%, and you
can see that we, we tend to not
have really um
Great compliance with a number
of sectors.
And then under that table last
few boxes here, uh, as a $200
million agency, I give a ton of
credit to Danielle, to Heather,
our ASD team, you know, to have
a reversion of 0.25% of the
general fund when you're
managing $200 million
altogether. I'm pretty proud of
that reversion rate actually.
Uh, it's only $58,000 out of um
24 million recurring but we're
managing 200 million altogether
uh federal funds and fees, and
then, um,
Our special appropriations, we
did revert about 2%, that's
about a half a million dollars
out of $29 million in FY 24. So
I think we've demonstrated, uh,
year after year and gotten
better and better at how we're
managing the money we ask for
and making sure that we don't
overestimate the dollars we're
asking you to allocate to us,
and we're making sure that those
dollars go to the, the intended
use.
And finally, as I mentioned at
the beginning of the
presentation, just the agency
workforce, you know, we, we are
about a 5% vacancy rate budgeted
vacancy rate, that's pretty darn
good. Um, 606 happy people are
now employed with us across 28
locations that went up, we
reopened our Demming office, so
we've, we've managed to use our
funds in a way that, uh, I don't
have to come before you and ask
for rent money, which feels
really good to me. Um,
You may say, how many uh people
want to work at the Environment
department. Well, when we had 69
positions, we had 341 job
seekers. So our growth is still
like we can go bigger. We, and
we should go bigger because
we're not implementing our
mission everywhere for everyone
at all times. Um, we do see that
the growth area is going to be
Albuquerque. We get about 4
times the applicants in
Albuquerque than we do in Santa
Fe. However, I do have to say
Clovis has been a grower.
for us too. Um, we have more
people in Clovis than we've had
before.
But again, uh, Albuquerque is
going to be that growth area,
and for that reason, we're
continuing to expand our
footprint there and consolidate
from hopefully 3 buildings down
to 1 building, because we do
work better when we work
together.
Um, I think, Mr. Chair, that is
everything that I had intended
to go over, so I and my deputies
in our team are here to answer
your questions. Thank you.
Great. Um, thanks for being
here. Thank you for bringing
your deputies. Thank you for
being prepared.
Um, to the committee for
Representative Ortiz.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Nice to
see you, Secretary Kenny. Um,
thank you for this super
succinct, um, and really, and
walking this story I think is
very helpful. Um,
You know, I love to talk about
my favorite program at NMED
which is River Stewards. Uh, is
there anything in this budget to
support
That work and to get more money
out the door for, you know, for
river protection and uh
restoration and all of that.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, thank you. I'm
hoping my climate bureau clean
fuel staff didn't hear that
favorite program comment, but my
water team is really happy, um,
Mr. Chair, uh, representative,
yes, in the 50-year water action
plan where continuing to fund
our river storage program, um,
both with the ARPA money that we
received that is now, you know,
out the door and allocated in,
in projects happening throughout
the state, um, and then more
money coming in.
through the ICIP process, and
I'll ask my uh deputy John to
just quickly go over the ICIP
request that we put in that
wasn't represented here, so
apologize.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, we, uh,
requested.
10 million
The number changed a couple of
times and we requested another
10 million for our river
stewardship program in the ICIP
request process, um, we
are very confident given the
fact that we were able to get
the 10 million in ARPA money out
the door and allocated that we
can do the same thing, um, seems
like the more money we have, the
more requests we have for that
money. So, uh, we're hoping that
that request will be uh.
Supported so that we can
continue to do these projects.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you so much. That's
helpful. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And 11 more question about the
surface water permitting, um,
nothing, none of that.
Uh, is in this budget, this
budget request, right? Any
funding to support those
programs, support to support the
development of that program.
Mr. Charon and Madam
Representative, there's not in
this request unless legislative
session, uh, we were funded a
little over $6 million for our
surface water and groundwater
permitting programs, we've got
that programmed out over the
next couple of years to support
the roll out of that program,
but we will be back.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you. And there will, will there
be, there will be some bills
that I guess we're discussing
tomorrow about that program. Um,
I'm not sure if I'm gonna be
here tomorrow. Sorry, Mr. Chair,
but can you just very, very
quickly just tell me what those
bills are gonna be about.
Yes, please summarize our agenda
for tomorrow in the next 2
minutes. Real quick, 30 seconds.
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, we would be
happy to go over those bills
with you separately, but we are
going to be bringing some water
quality act changes in
groundwater, uh,
groundwater changes as well, um,
to ready ourselves for the
surface water permitting
program, um, as well as closed
gaps and ensure that the
Groundwater program is more
productive.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary Kenny.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Steinborg.
I think Miss Chair, Secretary,
good afternoon. So good to have
you and your team here. Just
want to, first of all, salute
you and your whole team for your
good work. I mean,
It, uh, for all the challenges
we have in state government in
the world, it is honestly
comforting to have you in this
position fighting for New Mexico
and your whole team, and that
you've done it now over all
these years in this
administration and really
staying in the pocket and
fighting these battles and that
you haven't left, you're still
there, you're still fighting,
and we just really are lucky to
have you and I appreciate it and
want to celebrate number one,
very quickly, some of your wins
of the 5% vacancy rate.
is amazing. I mean, that's
probably
If not unrivaled, very
competitive with any other
agency that would have that low
of a vacancy rate, so you've
raised the bar.
We funded it to some extent,
although more needs to be done,
and you've hit it, you've hit
it, so kudos to you. Um, also,
you know, you got a new permit
with whip, renew the permit with
whip, that's better for the
state and kudos on that, kudos
on the consent order. Um, I
could go on the list, but
You know, all the hard work is
paying off and, and we have more
to do, and I know you've laid
that out a little bit and I, I
wanna touch on a few of those
areas real quick, Mr. Chair.
Very quickly, Mr. Secretary, on
the non-compliance issues in the
chart.
question for you is,
When you say noncompliance, do
you mean that the regulated
entities are not in compliance
with the law. Is that what that
means?
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
correct. OK. And Mr. Chair, Mr.
Secretary, do you feel like in
those areas that you have enough
staff, I mean, one way I look at
that is like, OK, do we have an
imbalance here where we're not
keeping enough eyes on these
folks, and that's why they're in
non-attainment or non, you know,
compliance.
Do we still need more funding
for you to be able to do a
better job regulating them.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, and, and, uh,
Madam Chair, and, and, um,
Senator, I would not let my
remarks say that we're really,
we have a low vacancy rate and
people are appropriately placed
means that we are adequately
resourced for all the
responsibilities we have,
including assuring compliance
with these entities, and to that
point, we didn't put in our
budget request any increase for
our, let's say our air program
because we were, we took a
proposal to the environmental
Improvement Board to raise fees,
which we have the which
this legislature or the the
legislature gave the department,
the ability to do that with the
environmental improvement board
that
The, that, uh, the increased
failed before the board. We
planned to bring it back based
on their suggestion and a little
bit better evidence and having
maybe more consistent counsel
provided by the Mexico
Department of Justice to the
Environmental Improvement Board,
we think we would get it passed.
So, again, long answer to say
that I agree with your
assessment that uh more eyes and
even more technology to assure
compliance would be beneficial
to our environment.
To public health, um, and to the
industry that is complying
actually.
OK. Well, I know, Mr. Chair,
you, Madam Chair, you'll keep
letting us know what we need to
do to support hitting that bar
so we can protect our
environment and people's air and
water and land. Um, on the
number 6, the $4 million for to
address PFAS contamination in
Curry County.
everybody's
Recollection, you know.
Uh, Cannon Air Force Base.
There was PAS contamination that
ultimately they had to euthanize
4000 cows.
Or some some number like that.
And uh threats to groundwater
but there is not any to be
clear, right, that I'm aware of,
um, or not, or not to.
Public supplier or anything like
that, yeah.
Um, Mr. Chair, and, and, um,
Senator, yeah, it was about 3600
cattle that uh New Mexico, the
taxpayers, as well as our
department paid for, to be
clear, for that euthanize, for
the euthanization of those as
well as the composting them on
site, there, there remains still
are on site, um, and haven't
been removed and sent to a
hazardous waste landfill. Um,
But the, I would not go so far
as to say that there isn't an
imminent and substantial
endangerment to the private as
well as public water supplies in
Curry County. That's not to
sound alarmed, but that is what
we've contended since 2019 and
since 2019, the Department of
Defense has cleaned up not one
drop of Phos contaminated
groundwater. Thank you. Yeah,
it's, it's, uh, you know, being
on the radio states, the
legislative radioactive and
hazardous materials Committee.
It's
It's kind of shocking, um,
what's happened there as far as
the response from
From the Air Force, but, so I
guess my, my question is, the $4
million if we spend that money,
is that, would that be
reimbursed ultimately by the
federal government. Is that the
plan, Mr. Chair, and, and, um,
Senator Steinborn, uh, we don't
plan to stop until we win and we
do think we will win and the,
the United States has, um, more
or less admitted to damages are
in order and we're in the
process now of trying to secure
what those damages are, so that
$4 million would be in addition
to hundreds of millions that we
think the state is owed.
Absolutely. Good work on that
and, and that's good to know,
you know, that's 4 million to
kind of
Help people and help the
community and deal with the
threats, but it's money we're
gonna get back hopefully and
then some.
Um, but right now, you're the
only one helping to uh
to take protective action, so,
or
You know, to do what you do, but
anyway, finally, Mr. Chair, I
just want to deal with number
one on this list.
Thank you.
And kudos for putting this on
the list. This is to clean up,
abandoned, and neglected sites
in the state of New Mexico.
New Mexico has a lot of
contamination that, um, it's
just a legacy of different
industries like uranium mining,
we have 1000 uranium mine sites,
I think 300 mines, but about
1000 different sites of
abandoned uranium mine sites.
That have been there for
decades. We have 300
approximately what they call
abandoned neglected sites that
are like super that are like dry
cleaners and things like that.
Would it be fair to say that Mr.
Secretary, that to clean up all
those sites would actually cause
billions of dollars. Would that
be fair to say?
Mr. Chair and Senator, that's
correct, um, sadly, 150 million
is likely a drop in the bucket,
but it is, it gives us the
opportunity to fully assess
those sites and come up with the
plans and develop the costs and
potentially identify responsible
parties to share.
Hold on. Thank you. And that's
kind of the point I wanted to
make is just with the uranium
mine sites we've been talking
about for decades. You're
probably talking billions of
dollars, frankly, the federal
government there again, because
these are all defense related
sites should probably be writing
a check for.
But then we have 300 sites that
are, you know, put land to um
non-productive use all over the
state in most communities. So
150 million of one time money, I
think is just a great thing to
do.
To help clean up some of New
Mexico, so thanks again for
that, and I hope we can support
as much of that as possible.
Thank you all. So all I have.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and thank
you for the great presentation
and I think this is one of the
easiest ones to understand
today, the other ones were kind
of like they really boggle your
hand, or they did me. So thank
you for all the work you do on
the POS and have been doing.
Uh
And going through the sheet, I
don't mean you have discussed,
uh, time and time again and, and
we've been working.
With the governor and, and
Charles Lee and everybody in
discussion with a water
pipeline.
And with the water pipeline, we
intend to keep the PFOS from
getting to the homes that live
close to the affected area, not
only to cover and take care of
the homes that have it, but
To prevent it
Instead of letting somebody get
the POS and then fix it.
Prevent it from, from getting
into their homes. And in looking
at these numbers,
We, we, I don't see the 10
million that we talked about.
And, and I don't remember if it
was 10 or 10 to 12 billion.
And, and I don't see that in
these numbers, and I'm wondering
how we're gonna go about.
Getting that money so we can
keep.
The well-being and the health of
the people in good shape.
And not only that, but their
mental state and, and what
they're losing in their value of
their property and everything
else, and then the state can get
reimbursed with when, when the
lawsuit is settled.
And make the state whole with
this money. Can you kind of talk
about that a little bit, Mr.
Secretary, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair
and, and Representative, thank
you, and thank you for your
commitment and being there, uh,
all the different meetings that
we've had down in Clovis, um,
even, even the last one where we
joined the Department of
Defense, um.
Live webinar and uh they
inadvertently may be
disconnected, um, our, our
participation until we got back
on, um,
But, but that 8 to 10 or 10 to
$12 million you're speaking
about the the when we put our
budget requests together in
September, those conversations
have been subsequent to that, so
the idea of connecting um of
Curry County connecting those
rural residences to the public
water system run by Epco was a
discussion that we had
subsequent to that September 1st
deadline, and it's not reflected
here, you are correct.
Um, I think that is something
that uh both the county
commission, the county um Lance
Pyle, the kind of uh.
Uh, manager as well as others
have raised to us, including the
legislature, uh, from the, the
delegation out in eastern New
Mexico, and it's something that
I raised to the governor's
office. So I think the option
would be that it is included
into uh a capital bill, or it's
included into the department's,
uh, budget going forward, um,
but that's something that I
think we have to watch for and
work on together as we get into
the 60 day session and House
Bill 2 and the Capitol bill
starts forming.
And uh I look forward to working
on that with you and I hope we
get support from the rest of the
legislature and the
To, to make that happen and, and
keep the people of New Mexico
safe and and healthy.
Thank you for that, Mr.
Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, thank
you, Secretary Kenny, um.
Senator Steinborne stole my
thunder because I was gonna
compliment you. I leaned over
him and said, Isn't Secretary
Kenny like
one of the few that has been
with us for 6 years, going on 7,
and he said, yeah, you're right,
and I, so I really wanna thank
you and all of your.
The Leadership in your
department. I have John Roderick
on speed dial, um, uh, there's a
million questions and uh
everybody at your department
always helps me with the answer
and always tells me where to
turn, so I just want to also
compliment you on your continued
leadership because consistent
and continued leadership really
matters, and I think it shows in
this request, uh, because if you
don't understand or know it
takes a while.
to learn what you have to do.
And um and, you know, your
performance speaks for itself.
And that and that of your team.
So I want to thank everybody on
your staff. It's uh
It's heartening to me to see the
progress that we've made, even
though we have billions of
dollars of work to do. It's
important that we have a
direction and we can put first
things first, so I thank you for
that. And um I'm just gonna ask,
is, is your request in line with
the uh with the executive, I'm
with the governor's office.
Um, Mr. Chair and Representative
first, thank you for those
comments, and it's both the
people you see here and the
people you don't, who are, who
are, you know, allowing us to
propel forward, so they make me
look good. Um, and Mr. Chair,
and, and representative with
respect to your question about
is it in line, um, the, the
executive request,
uh,
as far as I know, yes. Um, and,
and, and I say that because the
executive request would, you
know, obviously come after the
agencies submit their budgets.
So my hope is that we submitted
a per, we hit the mark for the
executive request and everything
that's here will be in the
executive request. Thank you for
that, and Mr. Chair, I just want
to note that we had a terrible,
you know, uh, dry cleaning can
contamination in espanol, and
they sent this young engineer
in. I think he was in his
twenties, and it was when
Rebecca Roos was still working
at your department, and they
did, they cleaned that thing up
with.
oil with salad oil. I couldn't
believe it and everybody,
everybody in the community just
rolled their eyes when they came
up with this suggestion, and
sure enough, 3 years later.
They had fixed it anyway, so
they, everybody in the community
has to step back and listen to
these young
Um, scientists really from your
department who, who really,
really figured out the problem
and solved it, so I'm very
grateful. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Ferri.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you Secretary Kenny. Um, I was
wondering with the change in the
federal administration, um.
Are you going to be going
forward with the state um
implementation plan for the EPA,
um, methane rules.
Mr. Chair, and, and
representative could see you.
Thank you for that question. Um,
with the change in
administration, we would like, I
would like to codify our ozone
pre precursor role into a state
implementation plan, I would
like to do that. Um, the federal
regulations that came out, known
as Quaddo, A, B, and C with she
quado she being the one that
regulates methane, um, I think
that is far.
along that we wouldn't see it
roll back under the
congressional Review Act, but it
doesn't mean that the federal
administration won't otherwise
roll it back. Um, so, to some
degree, taking that federal
regulation and codifying it into
state rule would be a.
Uh, appropriate way for us to
move forward, um.
Yeah, there, there may be some
challenges with the Air Quality
Control Act, but I think we can
solve those legislatively
through the session if we needed
to do that.
Uh, but yes, that would be my
intent is to make sure that we
preserve those regulations under
the state.
Under state code and state law.
Oh, great. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Mr. Secretary, also, um, are
you with the strategic water
supply. Are you still asking for
500 million for that and from
whom?
Um, Mr. Chair and, and
Representative, we will go over
that definitely tomorrow um.
But uh, no, we're not asking for
500 million, um, Rebecca Rus
indicated and, you know, we're
all in the same page here that
there'd be 200 million
thereabouts for the for the 50
year water action plan, of which
we have earmarked about 75
million all working numbers for
the strategic water supply in
terms of general fund with a fee
on a per barrel basis that could
generate some $60 million
annually from the industry
itself. So
No severance tax, notes, no 500
million, a much more modest and
sort of um industry pays
approach.
Oh, I like that. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. That's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Garcia.
Thank you, Estimo chairman, uh.
And thank you, uh, Mr.
Secretary, and thank your team
for the.
Incredible growth in the
department and
And staying on task.
You know, really improving our
environment.
I wanted to ask
On the uh air in emitting
compliance in relation to oil
and gas industry.
If you, um,
Have a breakdown.
Uh, on the 30% compliance.
What producers
On state leases.
are in compliance.
What producers on federal
leases.
are in compliance.
And what producers in private
leases.
are in compliance.
Yeah
Um
Mr. Chair and Representative,
short answers, I don't have that
today, and we can, um, I would,
I would suggest, Mr. Chair, and,
and Representative that the
You know, I always look at it
like this state land office
leases land.
If it's state land for that
purpose, um, Enerd issues
drilling permits for anybody in
the state of New Mexico.
And we come in at the back end
and we make sure that they're in
compliance with their air
emission requirements on
federal, state, or any kind of
land. That's, that's what we do
with the exception of tribal
land.
Um
I don't have that data. We don't
track that data in the
department because we're not
responsible for the leasing
component of it or the drilling
permit component that that is
just not within my jurisdiction.
I don't have any oil and gas Act
jurisdiction whatsoever. I only
have air quality control at
jurisdiction, um, but I think
Mr. Chair and Representative
understanding who those 70% in
violation are, and, and whether
or not they're violating state
land office lease requirements.
as well as uh drilling.
Permit requirements over at
Mnerd is a logical question and
a good question to make sure
that we're leasing and providing
drilling permits to those
operators who, who intend to
comply with the life cycle of
the regulatory environment. Um,
I interpreted a little bit of
your question there, Mr. Chair
and Representative, but um I
would, I would definitely take
that question to the state land
office and to Ener specifically
because we wouldn't have that.
it at the Environment
department.
Thank you, Mr. Cha. Thank you,
Mr. Seer.
Great.
Thank you very much uh for your
presentation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
members of the committee.
So last, uh, our last
presentation of the day is from
the public regulation
Commission. Uh, we will have
public comment, uh, after that.
OK, if the people in the hallway
could take their conversations
outside, I'd appreciate that.
Um
Chief of Staff Curry, nice to
see you again.
Uh, I think we've had a few
members step outside, that's OK.
I appreciate you being here. We
do have people watching online
as well.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I was just commenting that boy,
Percy really knows how to clear
a room. So, uh, I don't know
what that says about us. Is
there, I'm sorry, is there a way
for me to control the slides, or
should I just
All right. Well, first of all,
Mr. Chair, thank you so much for
having me here today with me is
our CFO and an ASD director
Miranda Mascares, um, she is one
of our amazing team that really
make everything that we do
possible. So I'm glad to have
her with me today.
Next slide.
I was asked to come and give an
update on our budget request and
so, uh, this might sound
familiar to somebody who maybe
was paying attention last week,
so apologies for that, um, but
just an update on where we are,
how we built our budget, we
built our strategic plan in 2023
when the new commission came in,
and so we prioritize our budget
goals from that strategic plan.
So we really tried to fill
positions. We want to keep them
filled. We want to modernize our
agency to uh.
pre-efficiencies and implement
processes that really make sense
for our modern era, maybe even
including technology assistant
uh processes.
One of the things that we're
always trying to do is provide
leadership opportunities for our
staff and the development of the
industry in New Mexico as part
of that, we just hosted our 2nd
annual uh seminar on on utility
regulation in New Mexico and it
was attended by over 100 people
this year, so we were very
excited. In fact, we were in
this very room just at the
beginning of November.
And then part of our other goals
was to make sure that New Mexico
is recognized in a leader in
this space, and as you can see
through all three of our
commissioners were recently
appointed or elected to
leadership positions in in
collaborative groups across the
nation. So we think that this is
really exciting for New Mexico.
Next slide, please. In 2025,
we've already seen, uh, the
improvements that we were well,
some of the improvements that we
were hoping for, and I want to
say thank you to this body, to
the
the support that we've received
from the executive and the
legislature and the funding, uh,
we saw a big increase in funding
and we think we're putting that
to good use.
One of the things that we're
really excited about is getting
our staff to trainings, um, I
put here as an example, the
Society of depreciation
professionals, which uh is a
very niche thing, but it's a
very important issue in the PRC
proceedings and how we deal with
utility assets, so we were
excited to send one of our
economists to such a uh
training, but we're doing more
than that too. So when we pay to
send our employees to these
trainings, we're having them
come back to us and share.
what they've learned with their
peers, so it's not just them
that we're enriching, it's the
entire agency, and we're doing
this through a couple of
different means. It kind of
depends on what the training is,
uh, where we've implemented a
lunch and learn series where uh
peers teach their peers. We have
a a newsletter, newly
implemented within the agency so
we can share information that
way, um, and sometimes it's just
as simple as a white paper and
sharing that white paper about
what our employees learned when
they went to the.
me.
The other progress that I'd like
to highlight is our IT
modernization. Last year we came
in asking for a 2.5 million in
special appropriation to
modernize our, our filing system
and other processes, uh, we were
supported with a 1.5 million and
we're excited to say the RFP for
our docket management system is
issued, and we do expect to have
a contract in place prior to
January of 2025. So we're very
close, we're moving very fast.
Our staff is
very excited about this, as is
I'm sure anyone who has to deal
with our e-docket system, um,
and we're expecting exciting
things from that. Next slide,
please.
We also didn't let up.
From the gas pedal on proactive
regulation. This is a theme
you've heard from us now for 2
years in a row. Uh, the
commission recently implemented
the first of its kind in New
Mexico reliability metrics for,
for utilities because you can't
improve what you can't measure.
And so we're going to start
measuring and we want to know
where reliability issues happen,
how often they happen to whom
they're happening to so that we
can be smart about our
investment or we can, we can
help the utilities be smart
about their investment.
In power in New Mexico. We also
recently implemented a
greenhouse gas emission limit,
that's pursuant to the ETA, uh,
that has been a long standing
Need for the agency and so we're
really excited that we were able
to do it.
Still to come, things to watch
for, energy efficiency update,
there the statute requires an
update in the energy savings
targets for the years 2026
through 2030, we anticipate that
happening as well as other
energy efficiency um rulemaking
cleanup and grid modernization
and distribution planning, and
distribution planning is
something that we've all heard a
lot about, or at least.
In the PRC we've heard a lot
about this in the last, oh, I
want to say 4 months because
it's really how, um, power gets
to the end user, you know, we
used to have a grid that power
flowed one way from a generation
unit to the consumer, and that
was it. And now we're in a world
where we're expecting power to
flow back and forth and sideways
and all all over the place and
so the commission has opened
just a 2 weeks ago opened an
inquiry into distribution
planning, um, what the
utilities are doing and where we
can grow with that. I know
there's also some conversations
about a legislative fix for
this, but the commission is
doing what it can do within its
jurisdiction.
Next slide, please.
So when we built the FY 26
budget request, we really came
at it with two goals, and that
was to maintain low vacancy
levels through adequate
compensation and growth
opportunities. What we heard
from our employees when we did
our 2023 strategic plan is they
love the PRC, they love what
they're doing, but one, we're
not always competitive and to,
uh, there's not a career ladder
for them within the agency. So
we're focused on doing both of
that.
Last year our vacancy rate got
down to as low as 3% and it
averaged around 5% and we're
very excited about that because
it means the PRC is a place that
people want to work, come to
work and stay to work. Um, we
did budget a 3% vacancy, and we
think that we can achieve that.
The other thing that was
prioritized with our budget
request was modernizing the
agency and increasing capacity.
One of my themes for this budget
is efficiency, efficiency,
efficiency. What you'll see is
that really many of our requests
are targeted specifically at
improving efficiency in the
agency.
Next slide, please.
So you'll see that the increase
to the base budget request is
10.7%, with an increase of an
11.1 from the general fund. I
want to put that in a little bit
of perspective. The 10.7% is
$1.7 million and the 11.1% is
$1.4 million. So the number, the
percentage sounds big, but the
the dollars are relatively
small, so I want to make sure
that we're keeping that in mind.
Um, and as you'll see in the
next slide, the majority of
The increase is in the 200.
Next slide. Thank you.
So the 200 category includes a
request for 5 additional FTEs uh
counting for about 575,000 of
that request. The 300 categories
we kept mostly flat except to
adjust for inflation, what we're
seeing is some of our
specialized subscriptions, like
the S&P global index, uh,
Westlaw, Moody's, those
subscriptions are
Going up and so we have to match
that.
Um, and then the 400 categories.
I'm sorry, the subscriptions go
up in the 400 categories, the
increase in the 300 categories
is to account for inflation and
what we're seeing in, in just
the regular contracts that we
have.
So, um, next slide, please.
Our new positions that we're
requesting is again really aimed
at agency efficiency. So the two
analysts to help the commission,
and when I say the commission,
that's where they fit these
positions would fit on the org
chart, but I wanna remind
everybody that the
commissioners.
And the office of the general
counsel and our hearing
examiners all work together on
what we call the advisory side
of our agency, so, um, they're
the judges, and so these analyst
positions are aimed at helping
them understand the technical
side of the of the records.
There's also a request for an
attorney position in our hearing
examiner's division, that is not
targeted at being a hearing
examiner, that is actually
targeting at being a research
clerk.
So just like judges have law
clerks who help them research
and draft. Uh, we don't have
anything like that for a hearing
examiners, which are tasked with
getting through the record, um,
sometimes talking tens, maybe
hundreds of thousands of pages.
And so what we estimate is that
with one research clerk, we
could see an increase in the
speed through which our
recommended decisions are
issued, ultimately leading to a
faster, more efficient, uh,
adjudicatory process.
And then these next two
requests, uh, I.
I keep coming back for, so the
first is a consumer advocate and
community outreach position, we
requested this last year. What
we're seeing is uh a little bit.
Of lack of information out there
with consumers, what we deal
with at the PRC is incredibly
technical, hefty, uh, subject
matter and our consumers really.
Don't have the time or many of
them probably the inclination to
get into the weeds of it, but we
do need a consumer advocate. We
need somebody who's out there
letting people know what their
rights are, what we can do for
them, how we can help if we
can't help them where they get,
where do they get help? And this
is different from our consumer
relation division staff right
now because those staff members
really act as mediators between
the consumer and the utilities.
If you're a mediator, obviously
you can't be an advocate for one
side or the other, so we.
We do have that need. And then
lastly, we have a request for a
grants manager. This is an area
where there's a lot, a lot of
money, federal, um,
And otherwise,
And we don't have a staff person
to reach out and go get it. We
do have some federal grants
right now, Mascaraneous and our
pipeline Safety bureau chief
Jason Montoya. They manage our
federal grants that come into
the pipeline Safety Bureau. But
again, talking about
efficiencies, there's much more
that they could be doing with
their time if we were able to
have someone whose job it was to
write the grant and then manage
them once we have it.
Next slide please.
We have 3 special appropriations
requests this year. One, the
first one is the, uh, the follow
on to my request last year, we
requested 1 point, excuse me,
2.5 million. That was based on a
request for information that we
did and actually solicited
information so we could make it
a targeted thoughtful request
that um
1.5 million was appropriated. We
appreciate that. We're excited
about that. That's gonna do a
lot, but this other million is
really important for things like
document management. Like I
said, our records are 0s,
hundreds of thousands of pages
of documents right now.
We use PDF.
And f File Explorer, um, so
there are much better ways to do
things, especially when you're
dealing with complex litigation,
uh, as you all may remember my
background is in complex
litigation. I know for a fact
that there are, there are
systems out there that can help
us. And so that's the first
special appropriation request.
The Second appropriation special
appropriation request is for
equipment, and this is a small
one. It's $100,000. What we
discovered through the last uh
fiscal year was that unlike many
agencies, when our vacancy rate
is at 3%. We don't really have
the money to borrow over and to
buy that equipment like many
other agencies would use at the
end of the year.
Uh, last year, because we
started the year with a more
than 20% vacancy rate. We did
wind up with some vacancy
savings, and what we did was we
bought about 40 new laptops
because we're discovering that
some of our employees have 7,
this says 7 since the time that
I wrote this slide, I have
discovered an employee with a 13
year old laptop. Uh, it has a
floppy drive in it. So we really
want to get our employees up to
speed so that they can do what
we're asking.
asking them to do and really
tackle this hefty information.
And then last but not least, our
special appropriation request is
for $700,000 for our community
solar program.
That program, uh, we just sent
you a report on that program at
the beginning of November. It
has faced some unexpected
hiccups, um, and I think the
commission is very close to
issuing some the the final order
that they need to move us to the
next phase. It's a bit of a.
tennis ball back and forth, some
it's in the utilities court.
It's in our our court. It's back
in the utilities court. um, and
I think we're ready, the
commission is getting ready to
hit it back over the net. But
what the $700,000 will do is
essentially be a stopgap. The
first program was uh funded
through application fees, and
that's just over a million
dollars and that got us a
program administrator for 3
years. What we did when we put
this together is we looked at
what the
Program administrator.
time was in the first year when
the solicitations happened when
the bid was out because
That is what it would take if
the commission decides to reopen
another round, so that's what
the $700,000 amount is, even if
the commission doesn't decide to
open another round of
solicitations for the extended
capacity.
This program needs
Some funding to continue
working. The $700,000 is our
best guess of what it would be
to make it robust to continue
for that year.
And uh next slide, the last
slide, it says nothing but
questions and so I stand for
questions. Thank you so much for
having us here.
Thank you for being here and um
For all that you do, uh, panics.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh Ms.
Curry, thank you for being here.
Um, let's just, uh, I think
you're request is reasonable,
but let's focus on the community
solar. Uh, when do we expect the
uh
Accepted
bids to move ahead.
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair,
I was ready for lots of
questions, uh,
That is a tough question. What I
can tell you is on the agenda
for the meeting tomorrow, the
open meeting, the commission
has, uh, a proposal in front of
them to deal with the remaining
issues in the litigated case.
So I
I'm very hopeful that the
commission will vote on that and
move that phase of the program
forward, uh, at that point, it
goes back to the utilities and
the solar, uh, the community
solar providers to do their
work.
And so, uh, Mr. Chair, Ms.
Corey, the um
Litigation issues, um,
Haven't they been clarified by
the courts?
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
When I say litigated case, I
mean litigation in front of the
PRC. So, uh, there was an
appellate challenge to the
Supreme Court that has been
settled. What has been the
struggle, um, now is to deal
with the massive record in front
of the PRC in their adjudicatory
capacity to determine many
things, including what the right
uh calculation is for the solar
bill credit.
OK, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I may be the only one in the
house that believes you need
more money.
You are way understaffed.
You need more quality staff.
And I'm gonna try to do what I
can to get that for you.
I
I understand just enough about
the community soer to become
completely confused.
So I know how hard it is for
you. I've had people calling me
telling me they had.
Opportunity to put a community
solar in, but the upgrades to
the system was way too much to
make it, make it, uh, feasible
for.
But uh that's what the law said.
That's, that's what the law said
when we put the law in, so I'm
assuming we're gonna have to
change the law.
To
Because y'all have to follow the
law.
Way of understanding.
And so you can't just make up
law yourself, so I know, um,
and, and you know, earlier in
another committee, I asked you
about, you know, the 750,000
that you were asking.
For uh that adjudication and I
truly believe
You need help. I think you need
More.
more definition of law.
To, if, if
If this will succeed at all, it
has to, the law has to change.
Um, when you start talking about
socializing those costs.
Uh, that particular one was
$100,000. When you start talking
about socializing that cost, it
kind of defeats the whole
purpose.
Of cheapening up.
The sister, keeping up the fire.
And it really looks then in my
eyes as a
Small group benefiting from the
whole.
And so,
I think it needs more work.
Madam chair and last year, is
what I think.
I think, you know, if the law is
going to work, it's got, it's
got to be done different than it
is today. Now, y'all may pull a
rabbit out of the hat that I
don't know about.
But, uh
And I'm not an attorney, but it
just
When, when someone tells me
that, that they're gonna have to
come up with a $100,000 for
system upgrades. I tells me that
will never go in.
Because it, it can't make that
kind of money.
So, or they can't sell that kind
of subscription.
So, uh, Mr. Chair.
Um
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Woods. Um,
Other question regarding the
consumer advocate.
position. Do you currently have
consumer advocates or would this
be new?
Mr. Chair, we have consumer
relations, um, I think they're
called, their technical name is
Compliance officers, I think.
Um, and what they do is act as a
mediator, so we don't have an
advocate, so to speak, so
somebody who can help the
consumer speak the language and
A system them in making the best
complaint possible, assist them
in
Taking their issue to the
utility, because when you have a
mediator, the mediator needs to
be neutral. That's.
What mediators do, and so we do
not currently have somebody that
fills this function.
OK, thank you, um, I love that
idea. Um, I get
You know, a fair amount of
constituent issues dealing with
the PRC and they don't know who
to call, they don't know who to
talk to or, you know, they're
dealing with a company that you
regulate, and they just feel
lost. Um, so I
I salute that.
Uh, idea, uh, Representative
Garcia.
Thank you so much, Chairman.
Uh, you know, on this consumer
advocate.
Um
In some of the settlements.
That you
Um,
Kind of um
Uh, when
Um
I wonder if there's
kind of a structure within the
PRC.
Uh, especially where there's
issues regarding the harming of
the consumer.
Um
If there's a way to
attack on
Some type of fee.
Or a consumer advocate fund.
In the settlement process.
Um
That way
You
in the settlements where the
entity is found to be in
violation.
Oh
Uh, consumers.
Um
You know, why not have the
entity?
And have also contribute to this
fund.
That creates these advocates.
That can kind of on a daily
basis.
Advocate for consumers.
To where possibly Mr. Chair.
Issues don't have to go to
court.
They don't have to be settled in
the court.
And uh I don't know, it's just
an idea, you know how you can
kind of self fund.
This position.
You know, through
Settlements where the entity was
in the wrong.
And um
Because you're a really
empowering the consumer by
having these advocates in your
office.
You know, and, um, so that's
just an idea. I don't know if I
kind of confused.
No matter more, but it's an easy
fix to do what you're trying to
do to get it from the
legislature.
But sometimes there's better
avenues.
In terms of how to fund these.
positions
Where you can have the culprit
kind of thing for that.
For the positions, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, I'm
excited that you bring up that
idea because one of the things
that we were just talking with
the with another uh legislative
committee was about a
self-funding bill, which is a
part of the commission's
priorities, that includes having
the utilities who already pay a
uh a mill assessment.
Contribute that money instead of
going straight to the general
fund, it would go to fund the
PRC operations. So that is
something that, that uh we
talked about with the LFC and
that the commission is
interested in pursuing.
Any further questions from the
committee.
OK.
We're gonna let you off easy.
Um, thank you very much for
being here. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, committee members, Happy
Thanksgiving.
OK, so the committee, uh, sit
tight. We have public comment.
Um, we have at least uh 2 people
signed up.
First up, we have, uh,
Larry Reagan or Reagan, Larry,
are you still here?
I don't
I think he's here.
Looking out there. Um, uh, next
step we have Norm Gum, who I do
see.
Yeah, apparently we have a
couple online after that
raise their hands.
So people online, uh who uh want
to make public comment. If you
could go ahead and raise your
hands on Zoom, uh, we will see
you. Um, Mr. Gong, welcome. Uh,
you have about 3 minutes?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
members of the committee.
I'm Norm Gom.
President of the New Mexico
Water Advocates a 501c3
organization incorporated is a
New Mexico nonprofit in 1998.
To produce the first regional
water plan for the Middle Rio
Grande. First, I want to comment
very briefly on the state
engineer and the interstate
stream commission's budgeteering
with the legislative Finance
Committee last Thursday. I've
been attending the water
subcommittee meetings this year
and attended their budget
hearing.
A total of 7.
Senators and representatives
heard that uh that presentation
yesterday about the number
that's right here, one more.
Um
The chairman of the, of the LFC
was not president, uh, the chair
of the House Appropriations and
Finance Committee was not
present.
And I recall, Mr. Chairman, the
remarks that Chairman Small made
at this committee earlier this
year about who wields the power.
Well, I'm questioning what the
information basis is that they
have to wield that power if
they're unable to attend the
agency's presentations on their
budget needs.
I've submitted written comments
on behalf of the New Mexico
water advocates.
The plain truth of the Mexico
water is water cannot wait.
rolling down one level, the
plain truth is.
Good water governance requires
the political will.
To enable sound water management
and planning based on science
and data.
And the political will.
Has been lacking.
Expressed in more direct
language.
We must finish what we've
started.
Mui pronto.
And fund other prerequisites to
cause water secure outcomes.
The outcomes that we seek.
Can only be achieved after years
of investment.
And those outcomes are aquifer
and groundwater supply
resilience.
And distribution of wet water,
of physical wet water that makes
life possible in New Mexico.
In accordance with law.
What does it mean? Finish what
we've started.
It means implementing 3 great
laws and 1 program all started
this century.
There's the water security
planning Act.
I've studied the state engineer
Interstate stream Commission
budget uh recommendation, there
is no money for Regents.
Yet this legislature in its
wisdom.
Clearly said that regions are to
take the lead in this planning,
but 3 years into the program, we
have no appropriations to the
regions to begin their planning
processes.
Water Data Act. We have to
finish what we've started.
With regard to core water data,
the bottleneck is capacity
limitations at the office of the
State Engineer and the
Interstate Screaming Commission.
Those bottlenecks are due to
agency capacity shortfalls and
archaic information systems.
The Watergate are critical
because without it, we can't
plan. Water planning depends on
these data, and I want to
emphasize the importance and
sole source of water use data in
New Mexico.
You can't plan to balance water
use with water resources unless
you know both ends.
And we can estimate water use,
but it's not rigorously
measured.
The Mexico does not yet have.
I'm sorry, the most recent
report we have on the Mexico
water use is from 2015.
The report, which comes out
every 5 years for 2020 is not
yet available.
That indicates the need for
major process.
Reform in capacity increases.
We have the opt for mapping
program. You're very familiar
with that. I'm not gonna drill
down into it further.
But the other finish what we
started task is active water
resources management.
The legislature passed 7229.1.
In 2003.
The state engineer promulgated
general rules for active water
resources administration in
2004.
The Supreme Court unanimously
upheld those rules in 2020,
2012.
Holding that that law is a new
grant of authority by the state
legislature to the state
engineer to administer wet
water.
The state engineer has not had
the capacity to implement that
law except in basins in northern
New Mexico, not the basins for
which the law was designed.
Along the main stem of the Rio
Grande or the Pecos River.
The needs for stewardship of our
good water are only practical
path to improve water security
are huge.
Good for the governor's office
of for supporting 3 years of
funding for aquifer, um,
mapping.
But implementation of the water
security Planning Act, the Water
Data Act, and active water
management.
Needs multiple years of funding.
It can't be start and stop.
The 1st 2 programs I cited, the
water Security Planning Act
implementation and the Water
Data Act getting the state
engineer in the Interstate
stream commission, the resources
and the technology to do their
jobs under the Act.
Those can't wait.
We estimate $30 million in 3
years, the equivalent of the
Oxford mapping program startup.
is an appropriate level of
funding. Remember, we need money
for the regions and regional
water planning.
In closing, I want to express my
appreciation and I regret that
Secretary Kenny is not here to
hear it, but my appreciation
that enemy D is no longer asking
for funding claiming.
That treatment for widespread
reuse of oil produced water from
the Permian Basin.
is feasible. It's not.
I appreciate Secretary Kenny's
recognition of the realities
that should drive.
State water policy threshold
funding decisions. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Kim.
Uh, we're gonna go online. I, I
don't have that. OK, uh, Camilla
Feibelman.
Great. Are you able to hear me
at this point.
Excellent. Great. Thank you so
much, Mr. Chair and members of
the committee. I just wanted to
take the opportunity, um, of the
last meeting of the interim to
thank the committee for all of
your thought and attention to
these urgent issues around the
safety and security of our air,
our water, our land, and our
climate.
And I have to admit that I come
to you.
Worried about the future of
federal environmental regulation
and to emphasize the importance
that environmental protections
and particularly climate action
at the state level, uh, will
mean coming from our state.
There was some analysis of the,
at the beginning of the 2nd to
last federal administration.
That if every US jurisdiction
that had committed to Paris
climate goals reach those goals,
it would be enough to meet our
national Paris goals without
federal action.
And that means that the action
that we take as a state to
protect our climate will be ever
more important and especially
given that New Mexico is now the
2nd most abundant producer of
oil in the country, making us
what would be the 14th most
abundant producer of oil in the
world on par with Mexico and
Kazakhstan and of course, it
turns out that by being in the
Southwest, we face outsized.
impacts of climate change, and I
think that we've all felt those
effects, whether it's seeing
flash floods and Roswell or the
fires in Rio. So as I was
leaving your last meeting there,
I stopped for
cup of coffee before I left and
I ran into a Forest Service
firefighter, and I asked him
what the fires had been like for
him and, you know, he teared up
and he said, he and his team had
worked for 36 hours, and he was
pretty sure that his house had
gone, um, but it hadn't burned
down and at the end of the
shift, he and the other guys
bunked up there, cooked all of
his food that it was about to go
bad. um, but you know, this is
what climate change looks like,
you know, some people will
Try to blame these extreme fires
on forest fire or forest service
management, but, you know,
there's no amount of underbrush
clearing that the Forest Service
can do that gets at what it
means to have zero humidity in a
forest because of the drought we
face from climate change, and
that's what we saw in the season
of the Calfs Canyon and Hermit
Peaks fires.
You know, these are our friends
and families whose houses go or
whose agricultural lands are
impacted because floods sweep
away topsoil.
And I think that at this moment,
New Mexico is going to have to
take a real lead on
comprehensive climate action,
and I thank you for all you've
done, the passage of the energy
transition Act, as I mentioned
in my presentation at the last
meeting, you know, the utilities
are meeting and exceeding their
renewables goals, and we've seen
the administration take action
on methane contamination on
bringing more clean cars to the
state on
Updating our building codes and
those things actually put us in
the lead when it comes to
technological um advancement and
economic opportunities. Um, so
as we head into this session, I
hope that each of you will
seriously consider what it would
look like to do comprehensive
climate legislation to really
put the governors climate goals
into law, build that in within
enforcement, um, and make sure
that we're doing our part.
given our outsized climate
pollution, emissions, and the
outsized impact that our
communities, our families and
our kids are facing. So once
again, thank you so much for
your service to each of you, no
matter your view, your
geographic perspective, each of
us appreciate you so much. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Uh, next up
we have Glenn.
Well if you could give us your
name.
Yeah. Hi, it's Glenn Weel your
Zoom system doesn't give me an
opportunity to fix my name, so
it's whatever it came up as.
Anyway, um,
Good afternoon, Mr. Chair and
legislators and 8 empty chairs
and 1 future senator. Um, thank
you for the time and energy you
contribute to protect our water,
our air and our health. My
name's Glenn Weichel. I'm a
power systems engineer and a
member of the National
Environmental Justice Group 3rd
Act. I live in Santa Fe. I'm
speaking in favor of Senator
Stefani's proposed bill to
protect low income rooftop solar
owners from increased solar
energy fees on their power
bills.
That's a presentation on
tomorrow's agenda.
Electric grates are regressive.
Low-income home owners spend a
disproportionate percentage of
their income on electricity and
like groceries and healthcare,
electricity is a basic
necessity. Utility bills include
a meter fee and fixed cost
riders, which make up a larger
percentage of the bill for
households with lower usage. Low
income households in New Mexico
spend at least 20% of their
income on energy compared to a
statewide average close to 2%.
So
My personal pet peeve is that
utility bills include the
regressive gross receipts tax,
and it is gross, um, grocery
bills do not include grocery
receipts.
Electric utilities oppose
rooftop solar because it does
not fund their profits. However,
the state encourages rooftop
solar because it brings many
benefits to our residents. The
benefits include lowering costs
for electric consumers and
making the grid.
The power grid, cleaner, safer,
and more resilient. Every dollar
homeowners pay to install
rooftop solar is a $1 not spent
by the utility to build their
own energy generation plants.
When utilities don't have to
build new power generation,
consumers save on their bills.
Utilities regularly propose new
rooftop solar fees. Most
analysis shows that the benefits
of rooftop solar are not fully
accounted for in the utility
rate case filings. PNM's.
2014 writer proposal was denied
because they are like, uh, it
was denied, but they're likely
to try again. I'm sure they'll
try again. Realizing that low
income homeowners have been left
out of the economic benefits of
rooftop solar, the Biden
administration created the solar
for all grant program, which you
heard about earlier, the state
of New Mexico received $150
million from the solar for all
grant. The coalition of
sustainable Communities
estimates that as many
is 5000 low income households in
New Mexico will receive rooftop
solar systems through this
program over the next 4 years.
Each of these systems could
generate around $20,000 in bill
savings for each low income
household. The purpose of
Senator Stephanic's bill is to
lock in this utility bill
savings by providing new rooftop
solar utility bill riders, bill
riders from adding an undue
financial bur burden.
An undue financial burden to
homeowners who signed on to
Solar for All or some similar
program. I hope you will support
that bill. Thank you very much.
Oh, I did wanna just uh add one
note about Camilla's comments.
Please do take the lead on
comprehensive climate change
legislation. We need states to
take up the lack of federal
support, uh, which is uh
Uh, occurring as the federal
government drops the ball with
the Trump administration. OK,
now I'm done. Thanks. Thank you,
Glenn, uh, and thank you, uh,
everyone who's still watching,
everyone who is here thanks the
committee here at the very end,
we are in recess till tomorrow,
where we will consider a variety
