resurgence what will be the
criteria for closing things back
down and and those kinds of
issues and I'll turn it over to
chair Romero if for any other
opening remarks we do have a
hard stop at eight forty five so
we can all get to our regularly
scheduled Education meetings.
Thank thank you thank you so.
Chair souls good morning
everybody I mean I don't have
anything else to add because we
have an hour and and we can I
want to get into the information
and then questions from members
so without further ado Dr Scrase
Secretary Stewart good morning
and and please.
Thank you everyone and I
appreciate the opportunity to to
be able to address the
committees here and and give an
update on where we are with
school re opening so knowing
that we have a limited amount of
time I will begin The
presentation let me share a
screen.
Find the right one here.
And hopefully you're all seen
this let me go to presentation
mode.
Are you see the full screen are
you are you see in the
presentation mode.
What is the full screen okay
great presentation about
actually Ryan.
Would stand
See if I can change that.
As the better.
Okay
great so
the as you all heard we were
able to announce last week that
based on all the work that we
have done we're equipped now and
ready to begin the expansion of
in person learning options here
in the second semester so we'll
talk a little bit about the data
behind that what the different
options and requirements are and
and to remind everybody the goal
has always been to make sure
that we can welcome our students
back quickly as soon as we could
safely do so so guiding
principles throughout have been
making sure that we're
prioritizing the health and
safety of our educators of our
school staff of our students and
their families and within that
making sure that we're able to
maximize the amount of in person
learning that is available and
really using the science and the
data to to make these decisions.
So the reason why we're we're
making this announcement now is
that when we look at the
expansion of of of in person
learning we we look at the the
mechanisms that we put in place
to ensure that we're mitigating
the the risk of transmission to
the greatest extent possible so
we have some some very advanced
COVID safe practices we've done
a lot of work to make sure we
have the right indoor air
quality conditions to mitigate
the risk of spreading we've
procured and distributed
millions of units of PPE
throughout the state we've set
up and and established a rapid
response reporting system and
protocols we've been partnering
with department of health and
the environment department on
standing up the watch list
program to make sure that we're
able to very quickly respond to
and and intervene if we if we
see an outbreak occurring in
addition we've we've
significantly expanding expanded
our testing program and we're in
the process of the vaccine roll
out as well so when we look at
all of the all of the items that
have played out between the the
closures back last spring and
now we have a a lot that's been
put in place to make sure that
that our school environments can
be safe and also even in the
last week we've seen data come
out from both the CDC and the
journal of the American medical
association and others with with
data and studies are also
pointing toward a both the local
national international consensus
that if you have the right
systems and supports in place
that schools can be operated
relatively safely even during
the pandemic so turnover to Dr
Scrase talk a little bit about
some of the data that we've seen
in the talk a bit more about the
options requirements that's
right yeah thanks very much
Secretary Stewart we've been
pouring through the medical
literature on this or since
March actually initially we had
to rely and data related the in.
The lands that
quality of what the data was not
very good but it's gotten a lot
better I think we've reviewed
over forty or fifty articles
that we consider that articles
on this some of our scientific
summer epidemiologic more you're
just what happened in other
countries and so I we think
we've got some good information
here that reassures us that
you'd say gets to go back to
school so our next slide is now
I show the slides to positions
every week and so the sister of
Science slide on I don't want
you to be like you have to you
know capture everything that is
on here.
At all but this is not even a
one which are in the summer show
that the relatively low risk and
sars COVID to it infections in
schools when they re opened at
you know the trouble with some
of these things this paper came
out I think the past couple
weeks we did see something that
we probably will see our New
Mexico there's about three to
one ratio of staff and teacher
infections the student
infections and there we can talk
about that in detail next slide.
The other one is also came out
last week.
North Carolina here in the
United States again
Transmission from a student to
another stared our students
teacher relatively rare in
schools.
they found seven hundred seventy
three cases of that issue all
thirty two years that was it was
right around that eight hundred
cases but they did not find
cases were children transmitted
to adults that it's not the same
as it's been seen elsewhere but
these are the sorts articles are
relying on small inform
department of education about
what we may be able to the next
slide.
These are the actual cases in
case you're twelve for staff and
students who've been in school
and you can see this goes back
to August second and all the way
through this
pretty closely resembles the
pandemic with very low rates in
both thanksgiving vacation and
Christmas vacation for obvious
reasons and you can see the
staff bars actually look at the
infection rates by different
district and staff are regions
sorry not district of the state
Senator well being a central
region I Albuquerque in
particular on orange being the
northwest Center
and then we have taken these
slides the these drugs and
divided them into students and
teachers so I think those are
next and you can see a very
similar court if you look over
on that Y. axis there on the on
the left hand side of the screen
you'll see the total number of
cases peaked in that week of
November eight to fourteen about
a hundred fifty that we member
that's that's about twenty a day
which sounds like a lot in one
sense but when you remember we
are having fourteen hundred
cases
I day during that period of time
actually a very tiny fraction
which was reassuring next slide
is this you part of this you
look over on the left you see
that somebody did about fifty
that same three to one ratio we
talked about earlier so that's
the data we're seeing and we
also appreciate the CDC coming
out you know usually they've
been about two to four weeks
behind us and we actually have
developed a recommendation about
two weeks before the CDC but
generally there are pretty can
current our next slide I think
J. shows the case Kirby's.
The older version but are there
is a lag here but that would out
of line is the whole statements
continue to come down we're
seeing Case counts one five
hundred six hundred range and I
for the first time you're like
we're actually winning this
battle against rotavirus and one
way to think about this the game
this is a vaccinating eighty
five eighty six hundred people a
day and we are only having five
hundred cases that and so that
is great there is for all of New
Mexico and I will participate we
will see that.
Almost all read mapping server
Representative Chatfield
Countians you others down the
center of the state and the
Representative vows might be L.
as well I think we're gonna see
a lot more yellow next week as a
result of this decline states
and one thing we also now is the
basis was goals that that all
along with cases and not you
know in the community and they
the parallel each others we have
already seen I just a couple
more sides real quickly this is
just one more chairs cases
hospitalizations and deaths all
of them on a downward trend that
has continued since the slides
were prepared on that's really
good news and the next slide is
our our gating criteria the end
of this one is a week old but
now everything is actually great
everything is great except to
our that yes positivity right hi
isn't being given the success
right now yeah but I believe I
projects will creep into the
five percent ranger possibly
below in the next week basis you
know we have that one hundred
sixty eight which is based on
Harvard and some other
benchmarks for I Case counts
that still is not out of the
five hundred Senator range about
four times are good that's
coming down precipitously as
well so good news on all fronts
hospitals are back in grade as
well project tracing doing very
well and so I think your voice
you are seeing somewhere we
particularly with the vaccine
the last piece of great news
that I'm excited about is work
actions seeing improvement in
Case counts that we can
attribute the people being
vaccinated so that we it was
really looking for and please to
say back to you right.
Thank you Dr Scrase appreciate
you taking us through the data
I'll talk briefly here about the
various options moving forward
here as we get into the next
week and beyond and so we have
put forward some additional
options to expand in person
learning which included
expansions of the hybrid model
throughout the state
expansions of our remote program
and that additional allowances
for smallest schools and
districts so when it comes to
option one there we've now
expanded to all schools that's
elementary through secondary and
that's all counties in the
states we even those that having
been read and have stayed red
throughout the pandemic the the
hybrid options now available to
to all schools again that's
based on much of the data that
that Dr Scrase just talked about
about even during some of our
our peak times during their we
we have seen that are are
protocols for in person learning
have been effective at at
containing the spread of the
virus and since Labor Day so the
hybrid model at its core
basically we're still limiting
the number of people in
classrooms so that we can
maintain six feet social
distancing so which means that
schools can bring back up to
fifty percent of their students
out of times all all of our
students who are seeking in
person learning can come back up
to up to fifty percent of the
time I am we're still hearing to
our COVID state practices as
their outlined in our both our
our reentry guidance in our
COVID nineteen response tool
kit.
Now for those schools and
districts that are not ready to
to move fully into a hybrid
model they can still continue to
operate primarily remotely and
then bring in small groups of
students during the first
semester we had that option was
limited just to pre K. through
third grade students and
students with disabilities
that's now opened up so so
schools can can bring back
additional groups of students
beyond just the those two again
our limitations up to fifty
percent but this is an option
for those schools and districts
that are not ready to move fully
into hybrid and then for those
schools and districts who have
fewer than a hundred students
they can bring back all of their
students as long as they're able
to keep them and small
iterations so we know that for
many of our small schools and
they only have three or four
students in a in a particular
class and so there they are able
to bring those students back
again it in in the smaller
cohorts one thing I want to
emphasize is this is a local
decision so we know there's
gonna be very different
decisions that get made and in
different districts throughout
the state and that depends on a
number of things includes the
capacity of our public school to
make sure it's able to to bring
students back in safely there
are lots of complex moving parts
such as transportation and and
and staffing is an is an issue
as well particularly in some of
our bigger districts I know that
they're having to do a lot of
work around around
transportation staffing issues
and so so we do know that that
the time lines will be different
for districts to move into this
some districts will choose to
remain remote and some charter
schools which Shusterman remotes
are while others will begin
bringing back all eligible
students on on Monday good right
so so there's going to be
arranged it is a local option
nobody's.
Enforced able to do it all the
time line that or they can't
operate safely we think that
that's critically important
because if you're not ready to
bring students back in safely
you need to take the time to
make sure you've got the the
systems to do so but as we've
seen through the data for those
who already that that
eligibility now is very.
In terms of sports we are as a
as the ministration making sure
that that we are clearing the
priorities that we're focusing
on getting students back into
the classroom for in person
learning prior to focusing on
getting students back on the
playing field and into the
extracurricular activities so we
are stipulating that any school
moves into the hybrid model
prior to participating in in
NMAA activities and we're gonna
look at in collaboration with
our public health partners
really research how these first
two weeks go as we bring our
students back to make sure that
as we're doing it will not
seeing major significant
increases in the spread of COVID
nineteen so between the eight
and the twenty second and for
the for the two week period for
each school as they as they move
into the hybrid model will
continue to watch make sure that
that not seen major groups of
cases and so long as that does
remain the case the NMAA
sanctioned activities can begin
two weeks after the the February
eighth opening dates or whatever
the date is where a school
chooses to move into the into
the hybrid model so until then
our our sports programs are
continuing to practice in their
small birds the beginning on
that the twenty second they are
eligible to to move into the
full implementation of those
NMAA activities one last thing
I'll say about this is COVID
safe practices will be in effect
for for these activities as well
and and will be providing more
information on that in
collaboration with in a.
As far as vaccine we know that
that this is something that is
top of mind for for everybody
especially our educators and so
we have put our educators into
the one B. priority group right
now our department health this
is working through those who are
seventy five years and older and
those who have underlying
medical conditions but are are
teachers who fall into those
groups are eligible right now to
get those vaccines so are most
high risk staff members can can
be getting the those vaccines
now and we've also been working
with the department help to make
sure all the staff who are
seventy five years and older
getting their first vaccine
prior to the A. as well so both
of those efforts are ongoing and
then as we move through the
through the elderly and for the
medically fragile child those
those educators who
who don't fall do either of
those categories are in that
next priority.
one additional thing to say here
is that that our educators or
health care workers are our
school nurses in our school
health assistance they are their
health care workers in the one
eight so they are in that first
priority group to get education
to get the the vaccines
right now.
So in terms of the requirements
as as schools and districts move
forward.
COVID safe practices remain in
effect and so that includes
making sure that we have masts
being available and utilized by
everybody making sure that we're
maintaining the six what social
distancing both in the
classrooms and our in our wall
concrete spaces that we have the
cleaning supplies and and daily
sanitation protocols throughout
throughout each building that we
have the the soap and supplies
and and bathrooms and also hand
sanitizers in classrooms.
That we have that dismissal
plans to make sure that as
people are entering and exiting
the building they're maintaining
sixty social distance we have
our our indoor air quality
standards which every school is
required to meet before bringing
they're more students and staff
back of the personal protective
equipment that has been again
procured and distributed
throughout the state isolation
rooms signage and other
protocols to make sure that all
of our all of our safety
measures are being fully
implemented at all times.
Is with with with regard to the
surveillance testing program we
are increasing at so we start
off with the five percent
threshold of surveillance
testing we increased it to ten
and now that we're expanding in
person Marie eligibility work or
increasing it again so that we
have monthly testing of all of
our staff in red counties and
and every other month testing of
all all of our staff and our
yellow and green.
All schools will be submitting
assurances about the here it's
the COVID safe practices and we
have a portal that we've
established at the department
to
to to capture any
violations and so that we can
follow up to make sure that that
any violations of our code safe
practices are being addressed
and corrected quickly where we
see this.
In terms of the the the red to
green system so the the primary
implication here is on your
level of surveillance testing so
we're not automatically shutting
schools down if you shifts from
green to yellow or red but we
will increase the amount of
surveillance testing that
happens in those scenarios and
vice versa as you shift from red
and yellow or green which is Dr
Scrase said I I think we look
forward to many more counties
being yellow in rain here in the
next we can be on then we'll
just the surveillance testing
program accordingly but again it
doesn't mean that a school
automatically shuts down.
We do have the watch list
program in collaboration with
the environment department
similar to what we have for
businesses across the state so
where we do see a school which
does experience for rapid
responses within a fourteen day
period that would necessitate a
building wide closure so that's
what we need to be closing claim
to remain in remote learning for
fourteen days and then after
that after that period the the
school would be eligible to re
open
And would be subject to the
surveillance testing
requirements based on the the
color of the county in which
they're located.
So so those are the that's the
the high level overview of the
options just a couple things
that in closing we know that
this is it's both exciting time
and it's a it's a time of
upgrades your business remaining
we know that there are there are
educators who are all of our
educators are excited to be back
with their students but many are
nervous about doing it right now
and and with that we know that
there's gonna be a lot of
different decisions that get
made and I just want to
emphasize that.
More so than any other state in
the nation I think we've taken
our very deliberate approach to
make sure that we've got
practices in place that work to
mitigate the spread of the virus
I'm very encouraged by what
we've seen in our rapid response
data that we really have not
seen outbreaks with with our
hybrid model and with the
measures that we do have in
place it's a real testament to
our school and district leaders
to our teachers for frontline
staff into our students really
have stepped up and won their
masks and say socially distant
and done all the things that we
have to do during this time and
so we know that that pressure is
it's building out there there's
a there's a lot of conversation
around this and and and every
district especially some of our
largest districts it's the most
complex operation to get our
kids back in safely that we have
in the state and so I do want to
just acknowledge that that these
are not easy decisions nor nor
are they easy to implement and
so with that all I'll stop
sharing my screen here and stand
for your questions.
Here and Mr chair.
Thank you Secretary and and Dr
Scrase we don't have lots of
time and so we're gonna open it
up remember questions please
make your question short the
thing And answerable and if
you'll raise your hand if you
have a question if it's alright
with you at chair Romero I'll
have mark hello then a new
people and and and ask your
question.
Hello do we have anybody with
that right.
We do we have Representative
Derek I'm sorry not seeing your
whole name on the list but
Representative Derrick lente.
Yes good morning Dr Scrase I
mean get Dr Scrase and that
Secretary Stewart thank you for
your presentation I have a
question regarding.
Tribal areas that are within
those districts so understanding
that tribal areas have been some
of the hardest hit with COVID
and their death tolls rise and
and rank of mugs the the the
worst in the nation is there a
formal position from PED in
regards to
how they wish to interact with
local tribal orders potentially
being in conflict meaning that
many of our tribal areas now
have lockdown situation in the
students cannot go to their
schools and so you have some
governments potentially being
dictated by a political
subdivisions like the school
board saying that they can open
school senior schools thank you
to school and if they don't send
their kids to school will their
children be able to receive the
same equal type of access to
education that those other
students are going to be
receiving if they're lucky
enough to go into school and so
given again the devastation of
COVID and tribal communities of
tribal multi family dwellings
should should should don't you
agree that tribal orders perhaps
should be given some type of of
a Tory over those of the school
board decisions in terms of of
how they open up schools Mr
chair representative up
throughout the pandemic we've
been clear that our our schools
do need to abide by local public
health orders that are issued by
tribes so if if I tried it has
issued a public health order
maintaining that schools on
their land should remain closed
then the district needs to abide
by that and all districts
regardless of whether or not
they're subject to up tribal
public health order do you have
to maintain online learning
options for families we know
that in most cases you have
about thirty to forty percent of
families who are electing to
keep their students at home of
throughout the throughout the
school year so those options do
need to still be in place.
Thank you hello.
Next we have Representative
Ezzell.
Zero.
He's out my apologies.
Not a problem Mr chairman thank
you very much I would like to
direct this question to
Secretary Stewart could I have
your contact information I need
to visit with you about a
situation that has affected lots
of my rural areas in my
particular district which is
Travis county and the inability
of some of these young students
not to be able to access the
internet so they can get less of
and I if you don't mind sharing
your contact information I would
appreciate it.
Thank you Representative and I
think for or just about anyone
if you've got specific questions
that don't get asked today
I know the secretary and that Dr
Scrase are very of available to
us if you have specific
questions.
And Mr chair representative I
did just change my my name in
the box there to my to my email
address so the chat doesn't work
so I can't thank you what into
the chat but happy to connect
with you on that issue and and
problems altogether.
there it is okay thank you very
much echo what is next.
We we hearing from Senator
Padilla.
Thank you Mr chairman and can
you hear me I was having trouble
yesterday.
Okay thank you and I apologize
at the jump on a little bit late
this morning and business is
busting at the seams and we're
the one little crazy over here
so I have this mask on and from
the people right now Mr chairman
Mr chair and Mr Secretary if
this is already discussed just
let me know and I'll talk to
someone offline in this but you
know we're having all sorts of
issues in Albuquerque with the
school district deciding how
they want to re open and and
what have you and I fully
support their objectives I
support your objectives but what
sort of additional supports are
we are we going to see in the
cities and towns with the re
opening expected to be February
eight that there there issues
related to such having enough
substitute teachers all the way
to custodial staff and others
are you partnering with the
school districts to maybe do a
waived implementation a
reopening how's that going to
happen what sort of supports can
we reach expected the city level
at the town level Mr chair
senator with regard to some of
the staffing issues there there
are no quick and easy answers
because the the the staffing
challenges have been been
amounts especially for some of
our larger districts the good
news is that we do have
additional federal funding
that's coming in that can help
support some of that work and
then we've also been working
with
are some of the HR managers
around the state to look at what
kinds of things can the state do
to support things like sick
leave and other acknowledgments
of of the staff who are being
able to come in in person so
that we're able to maybe
mitigate some of of those
worries but but the staffing
issues are a challenge and and
this is part of the local
decision making that that
districts and schools have to
make and that if if some schools
and districts who do not have
all the staff that they need to
make sure that they can fully
educate and supervise students
on a daily basis they may take a
longer time to come back to in
person learning and those are
very local conditions that they
will that we know that each each
charter school in each district
is is navigate.
And during this.
I appreciate that Mr chairman
and Mr chairman and that Mr
secretary just want to just
double down on the issue of of
this background checks it's
cetera if we were to just work
with say temp agencies are
however gonna make this happen I
think it's their step approach
to re opening is important so
that we have the staff that will
be with the schools for the for
the long term I would love to
see that but I know that that's
in a perfect world but that we
do sort of background checks and
everything we would normally do
for any adult person that are
going to be on the school
grounds so I just leave that in
your lap and I hope that you're
working with the superintendents
on things of that nature thank
you Mr secretary and thank you
Mr chairman Mr chair you thank
you for calling next.
Next we have Representative
joined Garrett.
Thank you so much Secretary of
both of our secretaries my
question some districts have
made a plan to phase in
elementary first hybrid and then
high school however my question
is if the elementary as high
bred could the high school still
start you know that hybrid
sports and then go on February
twenty second two David M. A.
sanctions point even the high
school as a whole was not an
hybrid yet if that's clear eight
it is Mr chair representative
and thank you for the question
we know that the sports issue
has been one that's been a major
conversation point in
communities throughout the state
and and there are some some
pretty folk vocal advocates on
each side of the issue around
whether or not NMAA
participation is how it how it
coordinates so so at this point
as as I mentioned before it's
been the administration's
position that that is
that they getting students back
into the classroom needs to come
first before schools we go to
sports so with regard to your
specific question at this point
that answer is that the high
school would need to be back
into the hybrid we are still
looking into these issues as a
both PED a governor's office and
public health officials across
the agencies and listening to
some of the the questions and
concerns that have come up but
but that's where we currently
stand.
Thank you so much.
Next we'll hear from
Representative Andrés Romero.
And Mister chairman of Markelle
if we could just go to members
and and I just want to be night
knowledge at this time at the
end Mr chairman.
Absolutely next we'll go to
Representative really Madrid.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Secretary
Stewart I have a question in my
district got three districts
three different ones well and
there's a discrepancy right now
with coming back if I miss this
when we first fifteen twenty
minutes I was trying to get in
but
the the question the issue is
that so one one district is
telling their employees that
they have to be vaccinated if
they do not get vaccinated they
cannot return.
The and the other one is left to
open seeing that that it's a
harder question to enforce
because of liabilities your
thoughts or your direction.
Mr chair representative the the
state has not tied to any
requirements for vaccination to
the ability to re open so if if
a local district has has done
that they have done that
independently
with their board that that
there's been no state directive
on.
Okay.
Mr chairman and Secretary
Stewart so there's been there's
no direction what would you
recommend I mean being PED I
think there needs to be some
direction or guidance to this
is it's a of a liability issue
that's left open and Matt Barnes
and not answer.
Mr chair representative six our
our direction on this is that
you do not need to require the
vaccination before before
employee can come back to
working in the building so that
that's that's been our position
very well thank you Secretary to
start thank you German.
That's all.
Right now we will hear from
Senator Shannon Pinto.
Good morning and
but Miller Senator Madrid was
mentioning about the.
Vaccination before returning to
work I thought it was the
federal.
Federal at the federal level
they said that them it can be
required based on the business
Stewart whoever they work for
can require them to be
vaccinated before they return to
work.
Mr chair senator on on that
particular point my
understanding and this could be
wrong have need to consult with
my my legal counsel my
understanding is that you're not
prohibited from requiring the
vaccine as an employer of Dr
Scrase.
I just have some of that.
So I understand that you're not
prohibited from requiring as
employer but but we have not we
have not made that a requirement
here at the at the state level
nor has the federal government
made a requirement that you have
everyone vaccine before coming
back to employment but Dr Scrase
is that the system here in San
yeah it is and I and the reason
for that and the reason the
state's not doing it is the FDA
has not actually approved the
vaccine is available for
emergency use authorization so
be really unusual.
Possibly risky for employers
state government or anyone
actually require the vaccine
when it's not fully FDA approved
same thing about requiring for
kids to return to school in the
fall would would do that without
full FDA approval so we're in
this interim period of time or
preliminary research shows that
it works but we're waiting and
subsequent research the FDA has
to say yeah this is not good to
go as a permanent
recommendation.
I think that's a little bit
to meet to inconsistent
especially for requiring our
employees to be vaccinated to
come to the capital just a
comment so thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and.
Center and I'm not aware that
anyone's requiring employees to
be vaccinated to come to the
capital.
Is that it.
Madam chair a or I'm here I'm
the chair.
I think the requirement is that
employees must be tested in
order to work in the capital not
to be vaccinated and I think it
might be consistent for schools
to require employees to be
tested I think that was one of
the recommendations I is twenty
five percent tested per week and
things of that sort is part of
the re opening but it's not a
vaccine is not a requirement at
this point.
Keller there other questions.
Not that I saw although I would
like to give everyone an
opportunity to raise their hand
if they didn't before.
Thank you and I think it be
appropriate Representative board
chair Romero.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you secretaries for the
presentation I think it's and
and a tremendously helpful for
all of us to hear
my question is about that timing
can you talk about why like the
middle of February it's the
timing for for schools tend to
this hybrid model.
Mr chair on the on this
particular point we as you know
we took a pause in the weeks
after Christmas and new year's
because of what we've seen in
past holidays we knew that there
had been a spike in a surgeon so
we had a a pause in in person
learning during that time to try
to be proactive about containing
spread and so the the the reason
we did February after that is we
gave us a few weeks to to get
districts prepared so we've been
talking to districts about this
since early January saying we
anticipate that will have the
ability to expand in person here
in the near future start
preparing your your schools
making sure all the safety
conditions are in place and so
early February was the the kind
of early a state where we felt
after that pause we could start
expanding the eligibility.
And Mr chair secretary
appreciate that thank you I mean
because part part of the the
issue that I'm struggling with
is is this return to hybrid
model.
And what that means for the
routines that that educators
have established online that
that students have established
online you know where I where I
teach and where I work in the
district that I represent eight
seven one two one eight seven
one I had some of the highest
concentration of COVID right on
the and and it grieves educators
it gives a lot of of the
families in the area a lot of
because to be disrupting
there there online learning and
and when it's brought up about
after the holiday spike in the
in in
mind after potential hybrid re
opening it's it's we have spring
break which is another time for
for potential holiday and people
leaving and and potential spread
just like Christmas break
so so it just gives me a little
bit of pause as to the timing
because after spring break
things are on a slow down hill
to till the end of the year and
when we don't have
educators vaccinated I mean I'm
obviously a teacher in the
classroom and I got a text in an
email yesterday from the
department of health thank
there's a solar shortage you're
cool your registrations there
don't sweat that by
we will be getting to you in the
future and and I think that's
getting a lot a lot of educators
a lot of pause and and just to
take it on the fact that and M.
M. eight and M. eight a and the
participation in sports this is
very much tied like you said
secretary to
Our dissipation at all levels so
I think you're definitely right
in pointing out the importance
of getting students back in the
classroom but I think it's also
important that we maintain the
the routines that we've
established and that educators
and students have worked so hard
to to try to establish over the
past six to seven months in in
their learning
I just I'm just concerned that
in disrupting that we have
I struggle to see where a lot of
the budget maybe when we're
stretching teachers all of a
sudden between students in class
some in class the cohort and
then some students all online
when we're trying to really
build are teacher workforce and
retain our our our teachers and
and grow the profession so
that's a long way of saying that
I I I still have a lot of
concerns especially around the
timing and the lack of of
teachers being vaccinated before
going in the classroom and that
certainly as far as my district
having a some of the highest
concentrations of of of COVID in
in in New Mexico so thank you
secretaries thank you Mr
chairman thank you all for being
here and we are here yes go
ahead please I was gonna respond
quickly if if I may to the chair
I I think you're you're you're
hitting on exactly many of the
points that that that we're
hearing that we know districts
have to consider Representative
on this and so I think that that
many districts will feel similar
similarly to to the way you do
that it's better for their
community to continue some of
the routines and and structures
that they had in place and we
also know and we've already seen
many districts who are very
excited to the expanding
person learning eligibility
quickly in some so we do
acknowledge that those
differences are are going to
exist some some schools and
districts.
Have as I've seen them implement
the hybrid they they they
appreciate that model and even
though it's tough are making it
work and others don't and that's
that's a very local decision
that I think many districts are
going to are going to weigh in
on on that and with regard to
the vaccinations similarly some
some school districts are going
to make that that call because
they're they're ready to come
back even right now and others
others are and and don't have
the staffing so I think you're
hitting on on all the those
issues and and it's going to
play out differently in
different locations.
Mr chair just quickly as a
response if I may is is I think
the NMAA requirement it's really
binding school districts to to
going back I mean that that's
quite a requirement I think in
the in the school district's
decision to to return to hybrid.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you we are up against stop
I appreciate very much Secretary
being here certainly Dr Scrase
being here as well Committee
wonderful questions very
respectful appreciate just the
whole process my final comments
is please make sure that
teachers are prioritized with
the next round of vaccines
coming out we all want our kids
back but we also need to make
sure we're keeping our teachers
say and just hearing lots of
concerns about the athletics and
the NMAA as part of a hybrid and
and how to to get those things
done so again thank you everyone
I appreciate you being here we
are up against our stop and
we'll all head off to our
education committees and again
thank you Secretary thank you Dr
Scrase we appreciate you very
much thank you and into the
house Education Committee
members will start promptly at
nine o'clock so get disruption
grab something the take a
bathroom break and we'll see you
at nine thank you Mr chairman
for hosting.
Thank you we appreciate all the
legislators doing such hard
work.
