And, um, we've got a couple of
advisory members here today, so
let's go ahead and get started.
We've got a lot to cover. Are
you OK?
You got some water there. OK.
All right, um, we're gonna go
ahead and get started with what
works best practices and current
uses of technology in public
spaces. Uh, we'll hear from
Scott first, who is the fiscal
analyst for the LFC and then
we'll be moving on to Deputy
Chief Griego.
With the Albuquerque Police
Department, um, Ms. Escobel, the
director of the Albuquerque
Community Safety.
And then, um, Chief Wessler.
is with the New Mexico State
Police, so Scott.
Take it away.
Can you hear me?
OK, good. uh, good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Scott
Sanchez. I'm the, uh, public
safety analyst for LFC.
I'm joined by Chief Whistler,
and I think we're still waiting
on a couple of folks to make it
here. Parking was a little bit
of an adventure this morning,
um.
Today I'll briefly discuss best
practices in criminal justice
and the the essential role the
technology plays in enhancing
public safety in New Mexico.
When I'm finished, I'll hand it
off to, uh, Chief Whistler or
whoever else joins us.
Pardon me.
So, uh, flipping the slide two
of our presentation, which I
believe you should have a copy
of.
Um
This presentation today covers
the integral role of technology
in criminal justice.
Current technology initiatives
across New Mexico's law
enforcement landscape, crime
trends and technologies
measurable impacts.
Innovations and best practices
from other states.
And specific recommendations to
continue improving public safety
in Mexico through technological
advancements.
Slide 3. Technology now shapes
every part of the criminal
justice system, um, in New
Mexico, crime prevention is
largely managed through, you
know, predictive analytics and
real-time crime centers that are
becoming more prevalent. Yes.
Yeah, thank you. I was just
gonna ask you, is this the,
uh, no, you should have a
presentation
which tab.
I believe the tab, Rachel.
Let me see one moment.
Um, under G, I think it might be
under GAG so we're on tab G
right now, everyone.
Thanks folks. Sorry about that.
So, uh, tab G slide 3.
All right. So intelligence-led
policing, I think so, there we
go, uh, intelligence-led
policing guides strategic
resource deployment for greater
efficiency. Um, that's been a
priority for the legislature and
for the Department of Public
Safety. um, also, technology has
a role in enhancing transparency
and accountability, body worn
cameras have taken off in the
last 1015 years, digital
training platforms, transparent
recording systems, enhanced
accountability and community
trust.
slide 4
Um, through recent strategic
investments in New Mexico, we
can see measurable tangible
impacts. The number of certified
law enforcement officers has
increased 27% in the last five
years from about 4000 to a
little over 5100 in 2024.
Real-time crime and analytics
centers in Albuquerque and Las
Cruces and naval law enforcement
to anticipate and rapidly
respond to criminal activities.
I'm sure you've seen some of
that in the news in the last
week or so.
And uh enhanced training and
certification standards
supported by technology, greatly
raised officer accountability
and professionalism.
Uh, slide 5. Let see here crime
trends and public safety
outcomes. You'll see a chart in
the middle. You have another
version of that, uh, in person
that's kind of blown up, you
know, this shows us, uh, you
know, violent crime rates should
slight downward trend, although
they're still higher than the
national average, notably
property crimes including
burglaries and auto thefts of
decreased consistently. The
Albuquerque Police Department
reports sharper reductions in
homicide, rape, robbery, and
aggravated assault in the
national averages, highlighting
the effectiveness of
technology-driven policing
strategies.
Slide 6. Technology investments
have driven significant
improvements. Juvenile justice
changes have reduced the number
of incarcerated youths from
about 257 in 2012 to about 1986
in 2024 by implementing
evidence-based strategies.
However, high vacancy rates in
law enforcement and courts still
restrict the utilization of some
of these technological
advancements.
And some resources remain
underutilized slide 7.
Investments in technology
directly strengthen police
accountability. Officers now
