The.
The.
Alright
all right good afternoon
we're gonna go ahead and
reconvene want to thank chair
lent and senator for doing
really good work uh in our
subcommittees and really excited
reconvene before we get a really
exciting tour of the gateway
facility this afternoon we're
going right into our
program evaluation for the
matter of medication assisted
treatment public health officers
thank you mister walders and
think you
may for being here madame
secretary great to see you thank
you for being here with your
team
and more ask our evaluators to
take it away
good afternoon my name is doctor
john voldes and I am a program
evaluator at lfc today my
colleague maggie klug and I will
present our evaluation on the
department of health's provision
of medication assisted treatment
or matt.
In public health officers you
can find it in your binder under
tab each looks like this
this evaluation builds on years
of lfc research into substance
use including work on public
health offices and most recently
a twenty twenty three progress
report on addressing substance
use disorders the valuation is
the first on the subject since
the department of health began
providing map to address both
opined and alcohol use disorder
in most public health offices
across the state in spring
twenty twenty four.
Before we discuss our research
and findings and recommendations
I want to think our colleagues
at the department of health for
their cooperation throughout the
civilian they facilitated visits
to seven public health offices
around the state as well as two
impatient recovery centers and
they are also patient and
professional with our numerous
questions and data requests
to begin with misclue will
discuss the background including
the scale of the problem of
substance use in the state the
basics of matt in the states
investment she will also discuss
our first finding regarding the
low number of matt patients so
far treated in public health
offices as well as some of the
barriers encountered since
implementation
next I will discuss inconsistent
outreach and marketing of matt
and public health officers as
well as avenues to reach more
new mexicans in need of matt
including potential low cost
coordination strategies and
providing math through mobile
health units we will conclude
with the summary of our key
recommendations and with that I
will turn it over to misclue for
our background in our first
finding
all right things start about
chair and members if you could
turn with me to page four of the
report i'll start with some
background information on the
state of substance use disorder
in new mexico and speak to speak
to the scale of a problem
looking to table one on page
four as you can see new mexico
has a higher rate of substance
use disorder than the national
average with twenty three point
six percent of new mexicans
estimated to have a substance
use disorder according to the
most recent data from twenty
twenty two this report will
focus specifically on operators
disorder and other holies
disorder as these are treatable
with medication assisted
treatment or a mac which i'll
discuss more materially.
As you can see and table one
alcohol used to sort out is more
prevalent in new mexico than
opera use disorder with twelve
point two percent suffering from
alcohol you should sort of
twenty two compared to two point
five percent with opinion used
to sort
while in mexico has a higher
rate of individuals with the
substance used to just read her
receiving treatment than the
national rate only six percent
of people with the substance
used to sort in new mexico or
estimated to have received
treatment and as we'll discuss
end up in the fresh chapter
approximately nine thousand
people in new mexico need
medication assisted treatment
but are not receiving it
according to the healthcare
authorities estimates
moving to page five looking to
chart to
well you may have seen in the
news that operate over those
deaths have gone down in recent
years both nationally and in new
mexico this is likely due to
successful harm reduction
efforts such as the wide
availability and distribution of
the laxon also known as nor can
a medication that can reverse in
a food overdust and as well as
test trips but while fewer
people may be dying from it from
opera use this does that mean
that operated usage is going
down and could in fact mean that
there are more people needing
treatment.
Turning to page six figures one
in two highlight the regionality
of operate over those deaths and
alcohol related deaths in new
mexico with rural counties like
real riber saquoro and mckinley
hit the hardest
so what do we do about this
harry helping people turning to
page seven
one of the most effective means
to treat substance use disorder
is medication assisted treatment
or map this is the use of
medications that relieve
physical symptoms and withdraw
normalized ones bring chemistry
and black the forecafex of a
list at weights or alcohol to
treat either applies to score
and I want to spend just a brief
moment on the terminology
because you may have heard the
streetment reference in
different ways
the name medication is as a
treatment originally stamps from
the use of a medications in
conjunction with psychosocial
therapy like cognitive behavior
of therapy however research has
increasingly shown that
medications are are effective
and treating substances disorder
on their own
therefore some organizations in
practitioners have begun to use
the term medications for up your
use to sort out more you do or
medications for alcohol use to
sort me to center the
effectiveness of the medications
on their own without suggesting
that those treated with only
medications are receiving an
effective incomplete treatment.
In practice however moud and
maud are often used into a
changeably and we used matt and
this report as an umbrella term
referencing treatment with
medications for both operate and
all the highest disorder with or
without there be.
If you look at figure for on
page
you can see the list of
medications used to operate in
alcohol used to sort of
treatment public health purposes
in new mexico primarily
prescribed the pill form of your
printer the main ingredient in
sabakson that works by
diminishing the effects of
physical dependency to operate
such as withdraws and cravings
without getting the patient
high.
Map has been offered in the last
crucial public health office
since two thousand seven but it
may have last year the new
mexico department of health or
do each expanded this offering
to more than thirty of its fifty
four public health officers
highlighted and read in figure
five on page nine
in general public health offices
offer family planning services
immunizations home reduction and
support for the women and fits
and children program because of
the dispersement across the
state expanding the provision of
met in public health offices was
the strategic way to leverage do
which is existing infrastructure
to try and reach more people
needing substance used to sort
our treatment and provide a
safety net to people who may not
have other providers in the area
they can turn to you
particularly in rural areas
as you can see and figure six on
page nine do which divides the
state into four public health
regions which hopes balance
state administration and
oversight with the need for
tailored public health responses
to the diverse communities
across the state.
To support the provision of mat
as shown and table for on page
ten
dear which has received seven
point two eight million each
year since fiscal twenty four
and make sure above general fund
and operate settlement revenues
one of the focus of this
evaluation I do want to know
that this is not the only
mechanism who which the state
provides medication assisted
treatment as you can see on page
eleven figure seven.
It's important to add however
that most people receiving that
new mexico do so
private providers
but this is efforts are key and
expending access to treatment
and reaching the most vulnerable
populations
to this end do which also
operates two impatient
facilities the turkway's large
hospital and advocacy and the
new mexico rehabilitation center
in raswell that offered detacled
services and map.
The health care authority
certified seven community
behavior a health clinics
earlier this year as part of a
four year federal medicaid
demonstration that aims to
expand mental health and
substance used to sort of
treatment including that and the
state's correctional facilities
have begun offering that though
the program is still being
implemented
this takes us to our first major
finding on page thirteen
the while the healthcare
authority or hca estimates over
nine thousand individuals need
matter new mexico deach has
treated just three hundred and
twenty four individuals and
public health officers
if I could drive your attention
to figure on page thirteen as
you can see the hta estimates
but nine thousand one hundred
and thirty individuals and new
mexico need matt but are not
receiving treatment with the
highest need found in bernalio
center rear riber and stand of
our counties
while matt and public health
officers has the potential to
treat many of those are need
each hca and private readers
were only to work together to
get cared to those not currently
receiving it
further if you turn to page
fourteen
looking at figure nine
as you can see while not only do
a large number of people need
matter new mexico many are
traveling to other counties to
receive services.
This highlights the need the
public health offices are trying
to meet while also indicating
that people may not be aware of
the treatment available in their
local public health office
contributing to the loyalization
in the first year of expanded
implementation beginning in may
of twenty twenty four public
health offices treated a total
of just three hundred and twenty
four people three hundred and
twenty one of which were for up
your use disorder and only three
of which retreated for alcohol
use to sweater
in twenty twenty four around ten
and a half thousand people
submitted a claim through
medicaid from that meaning
public health officers are
estimated to only be treating
around two to three percent of
this population
as you can see and figure eleven
on page fifteen.
Treatment has been concentrated
in two offices and the seven
region of the state with the
last crucials and auto county
public have offices treating
seventy five percent of the
total number of people treated
in public health officers this
is likely in part due to the
fact due to the long standing
mat program operating at the
last cuses public help up is
since two thousand seven.
The remaining twenty five
percent of people treated we're
seen in other offices across the
state with most offices treating
less than ten people and if some
officers not treating any
most of the people receiving
that and public health offices
are covered by medicaid with
around sixty percent of the
visits built to medicaid with
the remainder primarily covered
by private insurance.
For those who are uninsured and
cannot afford treatment due
which covers the cost of
medications with their uninsured
and will you be access program
that is helped twenty seven
people since the program again
and october of last year
if you could now turn with me to
page sixteen and when I now
discuss the staffing and
oversight of the provision of
matt public of offices to speak
to how it actually works.
In most cases the staff
supporting that includes only an
existing click and nurse who
retrained on the provision of
mat the last cruises public
health office is the only office
with a dedicated nurse and clerk
for providing
telemedicine is crucial to the
state's delivery of map
more than half of the public
health offices that are provided
mapped it so exclusively through
telemedicine and which clicks
and nurses complete the intake
and you're an analysis and
instead of patient up in a room
to meet virtually with a
physician
overall almost a quarter of map
visits and public health
purposes where telehealth visits
with clinicians currently only a
few public health officers have
someone in the house who can
provide their repeater map
patience but those who don't
generally try to refer mac
patients to a third place in the
community medications are
effective on their own however
there because i've an additive
effect and help engage
individuals with long term
treatment by focusing treatment
on the individuals particular
needs and barriers to success
therefore we recommend that you
each work with each year to
develop provider lists of seven
used to sort of therapists to
home public up offices can refer
map patience
looking to the bottom of page
seventeen
in terms of the leadership of
the provision of mount and
public health offices there is
currently no central state
coordinator providing oversight
the oversight responsibilities
are divided among multiple
positions and are both a sense
center for access and linkage to
health care and the center for
healthy and safe communities
within the public health
division of viewage
given this fragmented overseas
and separation from the director
of marketing who works into the
separate policy and
communications division do it
should centralise the management
of the program to increase
coordination
loves the analysis suggests that
you has funded but unfilled
positions that would give the
department the capacity to
create a new coordinator
position to specifically focus
on leading and coordinating that
implementation.
Turning to page eighteen
centralized leadership and
coordination could also help
with the fact the dewage is not
currently collecting any outcome
data on providing that in public
health officers preventing the
evaluation of the success of the
program.
As it stands due has performance
measures around map provided on
an impatient basis I took was
large hospital the education of
map for education on map for
patients already see receiving
detail services and measures of
harm reduction how reduce each
does not have any measures
addressing the provision of map
in public health offices and
only collects output data on the
number of unique visits from
that and number of unique
patients treated.
Do which does however collect
data on their outcomes for
patience treated at trick ways
large hospitals in patient
programs and surveys patience a
few months after treatment on
matrix such as the effectiveness
of a discharge plan the
emotional while being physical
health and more this effort as
well as academic literature can
inform the collection of outcome
data on map patient street and
public health officers to this
end lastly looking out of page
twenty
to ensure that the funding is
having the internet outcomes and
that public health officers are
reaching as many people as
possible
we recommend that deal which
work with the lfc and department
of financial finance and
administration to set specific
performance targets for fiscal
year twenty seven and develop
and submit an implementation
plan for the program as part of
their fiscal year twenty seven
budget smission and alternate
back over to doctor well does to
present our next major finding
think you miss clue if you turn
with me to page twenty one I
will discuss our last major
finding the provision of matt
and public health officers lacks
dedicated coordinated outreach
efforts the department of health
marketing of matt and public
health officers is limited with
neither local public health
offices nor the new mexico
pathways website effectively
reaching the communities in need
of treatment this is due in part
to the regional administrative
structure which has benefits in
terms of tailoring public health
responses to different regions
of the state but fragments
leadership and may undermine
accountability in the case of
providing matt in public health
officers that said some local
practices around the state have
the potential to improve
outreach if you turn with me to
page twenty two I will discuss
department of health golden
opportunity
gold and opportunity is a
coalition of public health and
safety organizations across the
albuquerque metro area golden
opportunity connects first
responders with local service
providers so that when they
encounter and revive people with
substance use disorders who have
overdosed they can seamlessly
connect them with matt services.
And provide transportation to
treatment facilities officials
know that immediately following
an overdose people with
substance use disorders are up
in most receptive to treatment
on table on page twenty two we
list the community
the community partners involved
with golden opportunity this is
a new collaboration as of
october twenty twenty four so
only a few people have been
treated and program officials
have noted the need for housing
supports in addition to map to
be able to treat more patience
if you turn with me to page
twenty three.
We discuss the last cruises area
group of providers non profits
as well as city county and state
officials that meet monthly in a
group called opi plus three
sixty this group brings together
local stakeholders from
prevention harm reduction
treatment including mat and
recovery sectors to coordinate
opined response efforts such a
forum includes officials from
department of health's health
promotion teams and helps local
groups optimise their collective
resources by reducing
duplicative efforts and
promoting ongoing and deep
collaboration across entities
plus three sixty provides an
excellent example of a low cost
method of improving the delivery
of mat through careful
coordinates it coordination of
the existing resources of a
community.
In addition to providing matt
and public health offices the
the public health division of
DOH can also explore providing
math through its newly purchased
mobile health units which we
discuss on pages twenty four and
twenty five
public health has outfitted
these specialized vehicles for
vaccinations std testing harm
reduction and other services but
not for map it is worth noting
that most public health officers
do not stock map medications
when they initiate treatment
they write a prescription for
the patient which can then be
filled at a typical pharmacy
this process can be a barrier
for vulnerable patience and
those in rural areas carrying
matdrugs such as the box own on
these mobile health units could
help breach patience in need of
matt in rural and remote areas
of the state which may be far
from a public health office
however to do so public health
would need to acquire a class e
clinic license from the new
mexico board of pharmacy and
register with the national drug
enforcement administration or
dea as a narcotic treatment
program in addition the vehicle
would need to be need to offload
all of the controlled substances
such as the box owned every
night at a home brick and mortar
office which itself would need
to stock the medications at a
level such that
such at the vehicle would carry
no more than five percent of the
total stock some security
measures would also be required
to mitigate the risks associated
with carrying opits on a mobile
unit though matt drugs tend to
carry a lower risk of theft
if you look with me at the
bottom of the end the side bar
on page twenty five we discuss
the new season mobile health
units providing matter oregon
with plans to add units in north
carolina and maine in the coming
months notably new season a
private provider collaborated
with the d e a to license in
equipped their mobile unit which
now physically delivers matt to
matdrugs two patients
eliminating the barrier by
having to obtain a prescription
and then take it to a pharmacy.
And there's a image of that unit
on page twenty five there
another path way to connect
patience in need of mat to
public health offices is through
effective screening the state
collects data on medicated
medicaid funded screening brief
intervention and referral to
treatment or espert
espert typically takes place in
primary care settings emergency
departments and potentially
public health settings however
if you refer with me to chart
five on page twenty six
you will see that this type of
screening is that it's lowest
level since twenty twenty this
means that even as the state has
invested in mat and expanded the
number of energies providing
that and locations where
patients can be treated
referrals from espert some of
which could be served by public
health offices have declined the
twenty twenty four g aa
appropriate fifteen million
dollars to the health care
authority for fiscal years
twenty twenty five through
twenty twenty seven for evidence
based behavioral health services
which it includes desperate
these investments should
increase expert and screening
which should provide more
referrals into public health
offices as well as referrals to
public to private providers
across the state.
Next if you will turn with me
back to page two we will go over
our key recommendations.
First the legislature should
consider reevaluating the
effectiveness of matt provided
in public health offices after
the department of health lfc and
the department of finance and
administration established
specific performance targets for
FY twenty seven if targets are
not met the legislature should
consider diverting the funding
toward other effective
matreatment options
the department of health should
work with lfc and dfa to set
specific performance targets for
FY twenty seven through the
accountability and government
act to evaluate the volume
effort cassie and impact of map
provided in public health
offices
the department of health should
also centralize the management
of outreach and marketing
efforts of the provision of matt
and public health officers tell
focus the department's efforts
and clearly define the
relationships with and rolls of
regional staff
the department of health should
also develop in submit to the
lfc and implementation plan that
includes performance targets in
plans for marketing outreach and
program leadership including
filling a state coordinator
position with vacancy savings as
part of the department's fy
twenty seven budget submission
the department of health should
also expand out reach and
marketing efforts of the
provision of matt in public
health offices targeting new
mexicans with substance use
disorders with direct marketing
and advertising to volte
vulnerable populations thank you
and I will now turn it over to
secretary to blossy for a brief
response.
Thank you mister terr members of
the committee thank you for this
opportunity to respond to this
program evaluation first time
formal someone attacked think
the lfc staff for the
coordination and work I through
this program evaluation it
provided some additional insight
that I think we knew within the
department of health early on
and it's been it's been a a
really good experience so thank
you i'm with that I provided
just a brief presentation this
will be a very brief response
and then we'll open it up to
questions but with me today I
have doctor
excuse me around a durable whose
are chief medical officer and
functions as I deputy cabinet
secretary who this is a passion
project of hers and really it it
really got kicked off in march
of twenty twenty five well i'll
get october twenty twenty four
was when we moved towards this
it was really doctored during
who really pushed this forward
in march of twenty twenty five
and i'll just start off at very
high level as we agree with the
recommendations
and first page
we're going to work on building
our pathways program
with this you know the
department of health has
facilities that provide these
services as mentioned previously
as turkois lodge and a the
behavioral health
and program i'm sorry new mexico
center and additionally
we have an intensive outpatient
treatment programs at a nmrc
that actually are pretty robust
and trickle is large provides
and intensive outpatient
treatment program as well that
we're looking to to build
participation in um we have the
new mexico department of health
hotline I will get into that
just a little bit about the
resource there and how we're
able to.
A support referrals and provides
some bridge prescriptions are
for individual seeking treatment
are through those that
individuals that we have working
or hotline
in the obviously we have our
harm reduction program that has
been are quite instrumental and
working within the communities
and we can see those results in
the reduction of the uhm
desk related to to overdose.
I'm page three
I want to talk a little bit
about some key achievements in
the establishment in this
program forty actually of our
forty two officers that provide
clinical services now provide
moudy which you know is really
the safety net for communities
across the state we've expanded
till a health capacity we have
created the uninsurance access
program to broaden access to mod
that provides supports for those
that don't have the ability to
pay or don't have insurance
we have worked with probation
and per old stuff in
collaboration with the
corrections of department and
have a trained that probation
and pearl staff on the referral
system we have expanded the use
of our of our help line as I
mentioned earlier and it's been
a great
opportunity to improve access to
services when individuals are
are reaching out in and seeking
those services and we have
actually begun a pilot project
to dispense the medications in
three of our public health
purposes
doning a county reariba county
and per county are the three
that were starting hold actually
be able to provide that level of
treatment rather than
prescriptions within those
officers and we've also hosted
statewide training for nurses
providers and support staff arm
through the simple limitation so
on the response to the l c
recommendations
centralizing program manager and
marketing we couldn't degree
more
so we are hiring an mode
expension coordinator that will
have that level of
responsibility to coordinate and
consolidate the oversight of the
program
so we agree we're going to work
on strengthening our
collaboration with the new
mexico corrections department.
For individuals that have come
out of out of correction's
facilities so we can insure that
there's a warm hand off in order
to insure that individuals who
are seeking that treatment in
and need to have it through
public health offices in the
state arm have access
we have scheduled our health
promotions team for training
this is for outrage about our
services for mod and that's on
july thirtieth and thirty first
and we're going to develop a
more comprehensive marketing
plan I think one of the things
that that i've seen are coming
into the apartment is we have
public health offices all over
the state but really who knows
what happens within those
officers I think it's really
important for us to have a
robust marketing campaign when
specific to move day but also
make sure that we don't forget
about all the necessary and
vital services that were
providing across the state out
of our offices as well um we are
in the process of developing an
invaluation plan in the
southwest region we've got
surveys designed to measure
clinical outcomes those are
currently under way and we're
working to include additional
performance targets that just
mentioned by doctor valders it's
necessary and we're looking at
the number of visits patients
and quality of life outcomes for
those that were treating
expand treatment on page five
two alcohol use disorder
we have are established at
department it helps alcohol
misuse offers in its mainly
focused on prevention services
we haven't really focused my
contreatment are so this is this
is definitely a good
recommendation and we can
leverage what we're doing with
moudi and our public health
officers to also support alcohol
misuse treatment.
You know we're working and we're
assessing our clinical protocols
looking at training needs
and public awareness strategies
support the ald treatment with
expansion within public health
and then we're working on our
implementation plan through
community engagement in outrage
the mobile unit plan which was a
recommended through this
evaluation we're also looking at
strengthening our counseling
options because it's not just
providing the treatment but it
is it relates to a medication
but it's also the counseling
that comes with that so we're
also looking at at that as well
am I mentioned the dispensing of
our medication pilot additional
training and espect out of our
public health offices and then
also maximazing revenue because
one of the things that we have
identified the staff is
identified and also department
health identified as well was
really insuring that we are
appropriately billing for those
services where we can build.
On the mobile health units we
purchased them in twenty twenty
five thank you for that funding
I receive some funding for
staffing for this fiscal year
and twenty twenty six thank you
for that we're looking at the
feasibility of providing long
long action injectables out of
those mobile vans
is doctor valdes discussed it's
there some licensing that comes
with that not only through the
board of pharmacy but also for
through the dea and we're
looking at an opportunity or
investigating this whether or
not it's feasible to utilize the
licenses out of the pharmacies
out of the public health offices
that is an extension after the
mobile unit so that's something
that we're working.
And with that that's our formal
response to the program
evaluation and thank you
thank you very much check your
bill does thank you misclogan
thank you madame secretary and
doctor
there will go straight to
questions sorry where center uh
to buy
thank you mr chair wow first
thank you for all of that
information that's a lot i'll at
once
secretary can you explain what
the department of health is
doing to increase up take a
mouth prenator lease
specifically with carer.
Mr chair center device and thank
you
unless a good question I think
what we're doing we haven't done
enough in the community is it
relates to getting the word out
about
mod services and from our public
in our public health officers so
we recognize that we're working
on that with their health
promotions team I think our
ability to be across the state
particularly a ruling mexico
where there aren't as many
services that are available and
working with the local community
the local providers fee hes are
great
provider within the communities
that do provide those level
those those are sources and
treatment but I think that what
we can do is probably just
better coordinate are within
each of those local communities
to let individuals know what
we're trying to do with moud in
general not just specifically
for for pre natal care but
across the board
mr charlie thank you secretary
so when you see you can probably
do a better job can you tell me
specifically what you're doing
right now or are you doing
anything to communicate with
these mothers and and help in
this category
we're working within the
communities I don't have a
specifics senator and mister
chair about what we're doing
specifically for prenatal care
but I think our ability to get
out in identify individuals who
have have a a substance misuse
our pregnant and whether or not
they're receiving their pre
netal chair and opportunities to
work with the clinics that
preferating that to prenatal
care so that we can ensure that
everyone understands that we are
in access point for treatment
mrperiod chairs secretary thank
you so I think we can all agree
that this is a huge challenge in
our s.
State right now i'm essentially
with the governor's resent i'm
directive and in order and i'm
concerned to think that we
aren't trying to get ahead of it
and I hope that that becomes a
big focus i'm in a top priority
for your agency because these
mothers
are vulnerable they need help
and if we aren't seeking them
out right if we aren't going to
where they are going where
they're living i'm in making
sure that they know that the
correct and save supporters
available we're going to see
more and more of these substance
exposed and abused beat is being
born in our state and it's
something that that we really
are to make a top priority so
with with experts specifically
how is your team working to
increase that screening.
Mr chair senator to buy a sin
through additional trainings and
if you would allow me to turn it
over to doctor during them
to to provide more context to
that i'd appreciate it
mr chairs hundred to buy a sin
within our public health system
we are the the office of alcohol
misuse is working on training
our staff and building it into
our e h r to have the expert
training and there may also work
across the state with providers
to try to increase though
implementation of especially
thank you mr chair doctor so
when you say you're working on
it is this something new do you
do you have a fully implemented
strategic plan in in this
category or is it something
you know that you're doubling
out where where is it on the
priority listed in the strategic
plan.
Yeah I
really the answer to that is
that I play do need to get more
details from the
office of alcohol issues but
they do have a strategic plan
what I shouldn't say is
strategic plan they have a plan
around as for implementation and
an increasing um be awareness of
alcohol use disorder treatment
but I don't I don't have others
details
mr chair doctor I hope that you
could get us those details and
by next month when we convene
again I think these these are
just really important questions
that the citizens not just ask
his legislators but citizens
really want to understand her
being worked on
this is a critical category and
it's in the news it seems like
every week i'm and we have
babies dying because we're we're
not making these these
categories in these women and
these children are top
priorities so I would love I
know other people here would but
I would really love to have more
of that detail next time we
convince and then thirdly can
you update our sign carer on the
ground and in what's changed
there since july seventh when
the governor did issue her
executive order
mr chair senator to basin so
the new order then it actually
came out of the vision of health
improvement from the health care
authority with the hospitals so
which changed is that a
substance exposed newborn
particularly with the substances
of a fentinal myth and federal
mean
those are new borns that are on
the alcohol at feed a lock a
whole syndrome
in in a police substance must be
reported to cyfd through the sky
referral.
Um that that that's the new
directive what happens at that
time then is it requires their
yfd complete and investigation
to instant determine risk and
safety prior to discharge for
that for that baby
at that time so that's all
similar to use many times these
new borns are staying in a nicky
so they're not ready to
discharge right away there so
they're they're staying in a
neck you and
with
the same time the
hospital is submitting a plan of
safe care for terror and that is
a follow up
that comes through the caravan
navigators right now it's
apartment of health
to
connect families and
to services and to ensure that
the new borns have with the need
so there is a scene
looking within the home
environment to make a
determination if they're any
concerns if they're any concerns
through the current team they
are immediately notifying cyfd
for an investigation they're
educating on safety practices
are they're providing cribets
if needed
so that they can ensure that the
new borns have a safe sleep
environment and providing any
additional types of services and
supports even if it's a dipers
and formula if you need it
mister share and secretary my
missing something are you
telling me that the babies are
going home even though they were
born substance abused once
they're out of the
mr chair senator to buy a sin
with the new order there they're
petitioning the courts.
Through an affair david cyfdeers
and that determination is done
by a judge
of whether or not cyfd would
maintain custody or whether the
baby would go home with the
family
came as to chair secretary so
you're not seeing that the
hospital is putting together the
the safety plan or the plan of
care and sending them home I
didn't maybe I just didn't hear
that correctly
mister chair senator to buy a
son the plan of safe care are
for substance exposed newborns
those come to department at
health I through the carer
program
substance disposed new bars with
better all method federal and
that are on the alcohol spectrum
disorder at those babies are
mandated to be reported to see
why if d for referral and
investigation then occurs
there's a seventy two hour hold
for that
new born
so see why fd is working in
collaboration with the hospitals
to them determine risk and at
the same time their petitioning
the courts for custody the goal
there is not for cyfi dot to
hold the baby nor is it for
babies to stay in the hospital
waiting for a discharge the goes
relate to ensure there is a safe
discharge whether it's a note
with with a resource of parents
or care giver for the for the
baby or if the courts then
decide that the baby needs to go
home with family we have got a
safety plan in place okay and
then mister chair secretary is
this i'll happen in within that
seventy two hours
especially in relation to the
judge getting in front of a
judge and knowing what the
verdict is that happening in the
seventy two hour period.
Mr chair centered by a sin I
don't believe it's within that
seventy two hours I don't I
don't have this specifics
as I see yfd type of function
over how long it takes for them
to get into the court
so I don't know if it's if with
if it's within the seventy two
hours but they're petitioning
immediately so during that
seventy two hour hold of the
baby stays in the hospital is
that correct mr chair center to
buy a seniors and many times
that are up they are staying for
much longer because they're
typically in the neonatal
intensive care unit thank you
very much
thing you'd sent her to ice and
next we have representative
dunkin then reps with some
dunkin
thank you mister chair I just
have one quick question a
sectory you talked a little bit
about the paylet project to
dispense medications in three
different cities can you
elaborate on that a little bit
more
sure mr chair and representative
dunkin
we currently are mod program
provides prescriptions for
access
are to treatment as they were
using our providers to do that
this pilot project indonesia
rebuild curry county would be
that we will then be dispensing
the medication to provide that
treatment within the public
health office rather than just
providing a prescription
thank mister madam sector can
you tell me was that started two
weeks goals for three months ago
and I was going
mister chair and representative
dunkin it's in the process of
getting implemented
thank you mister chairman sector
so hasn't been started yet
mr chair and representative
dunkin we've started in there
dispensing but we've been
expensive.
Yeah
it's been a process that's
required a proposal and
evaluation by the department of
public safety who has come out
and looked at all three of the
sites that we named to make sure
and they had safety
recommendations for us including
cameras and some door
modifications and so we're
currently working on getting the
cameras installed we do actually
have the men are possession
and then it will take some
reviewed by the board of
pharmacy to change the license
we have drug rooms right now and
and
some working with the de but
we've been
in process for a while on this
project
thank you mister chairman thank
you secretary they think this
may be
in or program that we may see
benefits from simply because
when you're in rural part of the
state and my pharmacy is twenty
miles away or maybe in some
cases even further or if it's
two miles where I don't have a
car
I can imagine this not have been
good we don't
you know and i'm gonna make a
statement here that i'm probably
going to get
the look at we don't
do what I think we should do
with drug dealers in any way she
perform
and so we need to do something
for those who they prey on and
we need to do quickly and
effectively thank you mister
chair
thank you very much some dunkin
representative please
thank you mister chair thank you
the madam secretary and
presenters I have questions
related to page for of your
response to the local
recommendations a specifically
would you please mister I would
like some.
Detail on the timelines for the
first two bullets as well as the
fourth bullet
and
thank you.
Mr chair representative little
we are working to actually post
the mode expert coordinator
so as soon as we can move and
get that position hired or we
will be doing that
we're continuing our work with a
corrections and county detention
so when they were seen
strengthening collaboration will
continue with our meetings in
order to make sure that happens
and ensure that we have the
where my end ups I can honestly
also state that I think it's
really important for us to
understand how many were
actually receiving referrals
from corrections and how many
the weird treating and we will
be collecting that information
and then develop been a more
comprehensive marketing plan
we're gonna get working on that
quickly
and mister chairman uh just to
follow up to that one what will
be the process that you're going
to be using to get this a sim
and I don't want to make
assumptions but i'm thinking the
arab peak process will be
involved or procurement of some
type mr
mr chair and represent a little
eurolies and organization that's
on the statewide pricing plan
that makes that a lot quicker so
that that shouldn't hold this up
it'll be a multi prong marketing
approach in that it's not just
going to be what you might
consider a marketing campaign
because we need to do a lot of
on the ground work in grass
route work within each of our
communities to do that so that's
what we've got some trainings
that are happening with their
health promotion teams
across the state in order to
really just start that are soon
and quickly
thank you thank you for that
information that's the
all my questions
thank you very much represents
little representation
thank you so chair thank you for
the presentation and this isn't
easy we honor the.
We are you know we really
focused these last couple years
now and be health in all these
intersections and so I just
wanted to just commend all of us
in the work that this
legislature has done towards
moving that needle but turn this
been really you know the
responsibility what you're doing
with map is
for me it's it's it's it's
complicated and it seems to be a
bit silo but
we're changing things so as
we're changing an end bring it
you know taking on this really
big piece of legislation there's
been one and sp three which
really
gives us some
changes the roadmap if you will
how are you working
with in a clabbative alford
meeting with the ac but also
with like our health councils
who we have even given more
money this year to to really
focus on the behavioral health
and kind of this outrage and I I
just wanted to take that you
gave us march twenty twenty five
and then october two thousand
twenty four so this is
relatively you know transitional
work if you will can you
elaborate on that situation
thank you
sure mr chair and representative
looking yes so as it related to
the health councils we've
actually I think we've got all
of our contracts out
we've really transitioned that
scope of work is directed
through the legislation to
transition towards behavioral
health services and we've been
pretty
specific on a components of
those contracts as it relates to
working within the community on
these regional plans as well
so yes absolutely and we'll be
work with them as mary fact I
believe i've got a meeting with
the alliance coming up soon
within the next few weeks
any you know you touched down
something that I think is really
important in in your right it's
somewhat silod.
Even you know when we were
as we were thinking about this
are within the within the
department there's a lot of work
that we're doing within our
facilities right through
turkoise large and I rehab
center in her as well and how
are we leveraging the resources
that we have there to really
help support our public health
offices through telemedicine
supports
rather than thinking of of
bringing in some something
different in specific just for
public health for email you do
within our public health offices
when we could be leveraging some
of the the resources that we
have so I agree and we're
definitely looking at that and
how we're going to leverage
those additional supports and I
think it's it's really important
did you anything to add okay
well I just thank you for that I
think that the that i'm not
seeing this through this the
conversation here we are
changing really the road map if
you will and you know the
different mapping that's going
on with what it was she is doing
with the regionalization
planning so how do you fit into
that I mean are how are you
words that collaboration there
because the way I see the the
changes that we we want in these
big changes
you know we're hearing different
things like a especially with
the reinjury programs that we
start in twenty twenty three and
we had a account for it I think
two hundred
current is there but this is
this is an evolution of where we
are and III think that's a
I really I want that view points
mister chair thank you mister
chair representative low high
yes in and so we will be
participating in those regional
planning meetings insuring that
this access point is a safety
net within those communities is
identified as a resource
and we we're working cross
collaboratively with the health
care authority through the hsd.
With corrections and even if you
think about this through
there some of the other agencies
are on how we can insure that we
are an access point for these
services and through this
regional planning effort we we
are identified as search the
other thing is that
we need to be on the list of of
referral sources in addition to
other community providers and
we're not seeing that
thank you thank you and other I
think this is unfolding mister
chair and you know
I just feel like the heats on
you but this is evolution we are
involving on this and
gratefully so as we're reading
to this we need to have it some
strong conversations about this
but I just think that that is we
need to get towards that and the
changes that we we
legislated for you to
participate in how that's
involving and how you're moving
with that thank you mister chair
thank you thank you we have reps
and charges
from some others thank you
mister chair so
I have a question about the
mobile health units
it says mobile health units
purchase but doesn't see how
many
and then the second part to that
is what we're are those mobile
health unions gonna be focused
with cities and sort of what
is that look like
like
mr cheer representative
charities it's it's five mobile
health units
and is it relates to the
location it those those are the
plans that will be working out
we want to make sure obviously
that we've got consistency
with the presence within the
communities of our mobile units
so will be working on developing
a scheduled based on needs
within though each of those
communities
so that's in the works and once
we have this.
The certification in the license
scene in the
access to the injectables on
vans were happy to share that
with that scheduling looks like
and where within the state do
you have an idea mister chair
what time premium for that is
sort of what's your goal to get
this up and running
mr chair representative chavis I
wish I could say that that's
going to happen within the next
thirty the sixty days but I
think it's just gonna take us a
little bit particularly from a
license in perspective so we
need to work through those
through those licensing issues
so you know really michael would
have this up and running before
the end of the year at the
latest
great and then my other question
mister chair has to do with
working with corrections are you
working with carry detentions
facilities and state prisons
when prisoners go in when
someone's incarcerated in their
identified as ninety nine or is
it only when they are released
mr chair and representative
chavez you know that's a really
good question and I don't want
to be remissed on with the team
has been doing that I I believe
it's probably on the latter and
it's when they're released not
on the front end
mr chair do you know why
and mr chair and representative
chavis I don't but i'm happy to
find out and I appreciate that
question because it makes us
real look at this thank you out
yeah I would appreciate mrperiod
chairman you can get that and
then my last question is in
terms of juveniles
are any given hours receiving
mapped services.
Mr chair representative tavers I
don't know up that happen may
have the protocol that we wrote
does allow for juvenile's two be
treated so I could look at the
age of the the people in our
programming let you know that
would be great thank you thank
you mister chair thank you very
much representative travels uh
senator here then.
The.
We threatened to go so long that
the microphones ran out of
batteries maybe we.
So the guy had that that was
aa advertised
thank you mister chairman
I couldn't I could I could just
been like just cut back on
the
clear take responsibility where
it's due center here apologies
thank you mister chairman you
trusted me to co chair or to
chair sub committee but not to
speak in the full committee
that's okay
still love you so if if matt is
not the treatment are there
other treatments that we can
provide for our youth.
The.
Uh mr chair surgery here I think
i'll let the clinician answer
that question
thank you
mr chair senator trickie is is
your question about whether mate
is appropriate for youth or
mr chairman yes the the answer
that we were given
particularly by the medical
staff and the staffing was that
they didn't want kids to be
using there's treatment program
and nobody was able to really
say why was that age in
appropriate umm I I don't know
where the strategies but that's
a that's a state agency and they
just am wondering if it is
appropriate for our use then why
are we not using that
yeah mr chair center to tree
here i'm not sure I can answer
for them but it
would say they're there it's an
acceptable treatment I can see
that
concerns people may have
somewhat are based on
maybe stigma around treatment
you know that it's replacing
wine addiction with another but
I don't think that's how we see
it in the department of health
and
like I said are our protocol
does allow for the treatment and
of course but I mean they're
there are a number of different
treatments that can be used to
your question what else I mean
you could try
not track zone that's
had a bit different mechanism of
action and obviously some people
do it through councilling gets
over three counseling so there
are options thank you mr chair
secretary I would just ask you
to help us if er because it
shouldn't just be a policy issue
and if it's a treatment that the
legislature is authorized in the
department of health has
authorized for youth treatment
then the rest of the state
agencies need to be using that
so.
If there's something that we can
do to make sure that that
not just in this administration
but administration is going
forward is in fact a treatment
that will be offered to just
youth that need that treatment I
would appreciate that I know in
washington state they actually
have matt treatment in grocery
stores and i'm wondering I hear
you talk about the licensing
issues i'm familiar with some
licensing barriers that have
been
come to my attention in the past
and without naming any names or
entities I would hope that that
we can you can help us
understand what law do we need
to change to remove that barrier
because I don't believe it's a
federal barrier I believe it's a
state barrier so thank you
mister chair
thank you very much senator next
we have replacement vincent.
Thank you mr chair and welcome
secretary i'm sorry I was late
and missed your presentation
always traderlinds your hand
whenever I can so that we can
get this thing fixed but I was
just going through some numbers
right here and
i'm not that great amount but I
saw that there was ninety one
hundred and thirty people in
need
and we treated three hundred and
twenty four of those
and as shows I think I just came
up with either three or four
percent
and in my world that be like the
fire department run in four
percent of the calls and those
are emergency calls they need
they need to take place white
why is that why such a
discrepancy.
Mr chair representative incent I
agree
with with with your comment and
and understand the question
as stated previously I think
it's really important for us to
ensure that communities know
that were available for services
we need to have boot on the
ground with their health
promotion team and through other
marketing efforts in order to
provide enhanced outreach we
shouldn't sit back and wait for
individuals that come to us we
should go out in try and find
people and have some warm
referrals coming through that's
what that's through our work
with corrections for for
individuals probably there are
individuals within the community
there that are needed treatment
and I can guarantee you they do
not know that the public health
office is a resource and we're
working to change that thank you
mister chair and we talked about
this last year and
I think you have good ideas it's
the rollout that I think that we
have a problem with do you feel
like there's a rollout problem
with some of these some of these
programs because you have to
roll so much carpet out
mr chairman representative
incentive angry one hundred
percent it's all in the
execution
so
I will say this as it relates to
mode at the department of health
it was stalled a little bit it
started in october twenty twenty
four it stalled in march twenty
twenty five we got their ball
rolling again um so I couldn't
agree with you more about
execution and I can guarantee
you that
we at the department of held
they're really working towards
improving and our execution of
any new programmatic development
or any new programs that we are
responsible with the new all
have taste square to insured
that we're meeting the
requirement in the needs of new
mexicans.
Thank you and mister chair i'm
just gonna make one one request
so we have general agular
which is a command level
military person that runs off of
incident commands system and i'm
wondering if we gave him that
challenge on how to help you
unroll that carpet with the
people that you have and set up
a command structure if that
might help you coz we just want
to help you thank you mister
chair
thank you very much
representative
I don't see any other questions
madame secretary at first to the
evaluators again thank you for a
thorough evaluation madam
secretary and also doctor during
thank you I think we appreciate
the very collaborative spirit
and
the agreement with the
recommendations what will do and
really buried in mind what
center to buy us and and others
have talked about was sort of
rapid and follow up is
asked for a lot of continuing
communication look for the
senior later this year whether
that's next month or soon after
really to the point that just
raised by representative and
sent
and others we we know this has
to succeed in particularly
interested on the alcohol
treatment signed given sort of
the numbers that we saw from lfc
the tools are there but we and
to it's it's up to us to
effectively implement them so
we'll look forward to senior
again one of very much say
appreciate the spirit of
collaboration on this report and
I think it's clear that over the
next few months we expect and
will support a great deal of
progress thank you very much
okay members that reps this app.
For today before we go on
housing field trip
will be headed out to that I
think right away the get you
know members will travel there
there's not a bus so you'll
travel there there's a dinner
afterwards does anybody not have
the address we have maps
okay
we we've gotten outs that are
going to be handed out this is
the gateway
facility on gibson bowl of our
park in the west parking lot and
of course the tour is open
to a look forward to seeing
everybody up at the gateway.
