training in the use of force
enhanced by digital platforms,
tracking compliance. The state's
law enforcement standards and
Training council is actively
working to update the state's
basic police officer training
curriculum.
Um, there's updated
certification and
decertification standards that
reinforce professional
accountability.
And body camera systems support
transparency, allowing public
oversight and improved community
police relations.
Slide 8, examining best
practices nationwide reveals
several effective innovations,
uh, predictive policing,
California and Illinois have
implemented advanced predictive
software to forecast crime
patterns, deploying officers
proactively rather than
reactively, resulting in
decreased crime rates in major
urban centers such as Los
Angeles and Chicago.
The regional data integration
initiatives undertaken by Texas
and Arizona and already underway
in New Mexico. They built
integrated crime centers like
those in Houston and Phoenix,
facilitating rapid cross
jurisdictional information
sharing, reducing duplication
and significantly improving
response times to incidents.
Under cybersecurity and digital
forensics, Virginia and New York
have invested heavily in
cybercrime infrastructure and
digital forensics capabilities,
protecting critical data and
enhancing their capacity to
investigate increasingly complex
digital crimes effective under
slide 9. You can see some of the
progress in Mexico's already
made. New Mexico's taken several
steps to improve its use of data
