Brian, will you?
Sounds good, right?
Testing, OK, um, Madam Cheryl,
go ahead and proceed with item
52.
So the item before you is the
proposed rule framework for
investments in green lenders
from the venture capital program
fund.
As standard
Cover our statutory authority,
relevant definitions.
Investment eligibility, review
and approval processes,
investment parameters,
monitoring and reporting
requirements and administrative
procedures, and um what I'd like
to do is just briefly walk you
through the document and
highlight um what's unique in
terms of the Greenlander
components and the EQ2
components. So, um, starting on
page 49 statutory authority, as
you all know, the venture
capital program Act was created
in 20.
22, that act authorizes NMFA to
make investments in both private
uh venture capital funds, which
has been the the the focus of
our activity to date, that act
also authorizes us to make
investments in New Mexico
businesses.
Um, so this, uh, this new set of
rules is going to activate that
authority uh for us to invest in
New Mexico businesses. Um, that
act authorizes us to make
differential rate investments
for economic development
purposes. So that means that
we're authorized to accept a um
relatively lower expected
financial return for the
anticipated impact or public
benefit of the investment and
um, equity equivalent
investments would certainly fall
in that category, um, deeply
subordinated debt obligations
with typically very low interest
rates.
Um, in terms of definitions, so
you'll see on 49 and into page
50, just some specific
definitions, uh, green lender,
um, so those are New Mexico
lenders financing clean energy
and energy efficiency projects,
um, that links directly to the
special appropriation and the
purpose of that, and then the
definition of equity equivalent
investment, a differential rate
long term subordinated
investment in a lender.
Um, and we also referenced the,
the special appropriation and
its stated purpose in in House
Bill 2.
On page 51, the investment
parameters that are specified in
rule typically, um, we do have
high-level parameters,
particularly if there's some,
uh uh specific in statute
relating to the program, um, we
include those in the rules
you'll see when we go through
the policy and the next item,
there are even more specific on,
uh, investment parameters, um,
articulated in that accompanying
document. Um, but these
investment parameters uh
proposed in rule are consistent
with statutory requirements.
Um
They were designed um by those
that created the venture capital
program to help um manage um
risk um in terms of, for
example, the concentration
limits um those are are prudent
from a risk management
perspective and also help ensure
um the diversification of the
funding uh resource being
allocated to different uh
projects and investments, so
specifically here, uh, any
investment in one green lender
cannot exceed 10% of the total
capitalization of our.
venture capital program fund.
Um, also investments in any one
industry cannot exceed 30% of
the total capitalization of the
fund.
Um, and we also have, um, what
is known as a, a match
requirement. So investments in
any one New Mexico business, we
cannot be more than 51% of the
total investment capital of
that, um, single business. Um,
so that is a, um, an additional
concentration limit that's
established here in rural. Um,
we also have the NMFA um may not
uh fund in excess of 20% of its
available commitment in advance
of um the uh New Mex
go business or in this case, the
green lender, um, uh, uh,
meeting the the match
requirement in the 51%.
Um, we've included that
investment commitments for EQ2s,
um, uh, we'll have a rolling
term, um, that's standard for
EQ2s in this instance, um, we
are proposing up to 15 years,
and that can also be extended um
in the market, uh, typically
EQ2s can be anywhere between 5,
typically more 10 years, and
then, uh, and then longer,
longer term as well. So this is
a pretty um longer term uh uh
proposed.
Maturity for for these, um, and
legal documents, so specified
here are just the um the
standard terms uh for EQ2s also
um requirements uh of the
venture capital program Act and
um in our MOA with um Mnerd uh
the accompanying policy details
more specifically what some of
these are, uh, here in r, we
just have a list of what we
expect or IT2 agreements um to,
to contain.
I'm not gonna go into those now,
I'll go into the detail of those
um in, in the policy where
they're more defined.
And then on 52, um, we have the
IPA protection that's contained
in the venture capital Program
Act, um, where, uh, information
obtained by NMFA, um, subject
to, um, typically subject to
impro is actually not subject to
Iro if it's considered
proprietary, technical or trade
secret, um, we have our, our
standard conflicts of interest,
um, policy provision, and then
on monitoring and reporting, uh,
we've included.
uh reporting requirements for
green lenders that are very
consistent with our other
investments from the venture
capital program fund, um, those
include quarterly financial
reports and, and impact reports
and then also annual audits and
other annual uh requirements
around, um, certifications, etc.
Um, and then sections 9 and 10
are are relatively standard,
having to do with administration
of the fund, um, and accounting
and then also um just that these
rules may be amended by the NMFA
board, um, at any time at its
discretion.
I think that was the extent of
uh what I wanted to highlight,
um.
And I'd be happy to stand for
questions.
Any questions from board
members?
Madam Chair, I, if I could just,
this isn't a question
specifically, but just as a
representative for Em, I really
wanted to thank, uh, Director
Russell, uh, and Ryan for, for
their flexibility. This, this
funding has been a challenge for
us because we are not in the
loan business. We do a lot of
things that energy minerals and
natural resources, but lending
money for, for really any
purposes.
To this point has not been one
of them. So having NMFA be able
to step in as a uh thought
partner and to be able to sort
of use some of the, some of the
flexibility and creativity, in
particular that um that has
emerged in the creation of this,
of this policy set has been
Uh, huge for us. It is precedent
setting. I think we are going to
be asked for
Um, asked to handle more funds
to either grant or lend, I think
specifically of our incoming
geothermal program. So this is
something that uh we view as not
just a great opportunity to, to
make it, you know, positive
impact with this 10 million, but
also something that we hopefully
can continue to uh to use and
just
Um, be more nimble and more
efficient, I think is just want
to take the moment to accept my
gratitude, the staff here.
Thank you.
Any other questions from board
members, thank you and um thank
you for this.
Putting this together is quite
an impressive and complex.
model, so it's very, very
exciting to see and I'm hopeful,
one of my questions was, is
there an opportunity for more
because they have set all this
up for just 10 million.
I like, what a waste, we should
do more. But my question was,
what is the role the
relationship of Mner with NMFA
when it comes to making the
actual decisions about where the
money will go. Is that gonna
play out?
Sure, so, um, Madam Chair, we
have a um proposed MOA um with
M-nerd where um NEd is engaging
NMFA to basically execute on the
investment facilitate the
investment. So, um, in terms of
NMFA's governance around that
decision, Ener has, um, uh,
given NMFA that that authority.
So this is effectively NMFA's
management of, of, of
That mandate, um, and so it
would be, you know, the NMFA
board of directors that has, is
responsible for all the
decisions around, um, you'll see
uh in the policy section, um,
things like monitoring of EQ2
investments and also this
proposed one to NMCIC, so that's
similarly would be handled um
within NMFA at venture capital
Investment Committee Economic
Development, and then the NMFA
board level, and then um we
would uh
as part of our partnership with
Emner, we would also be
reporting them back to them.
Mad, Madam Chair, on that point.
Um, the, the lending rules, that
effectively the only guidance
Ener was under for the money is
the guidance that we got in
about one paragraph of House
Bill 2 from 2024. The guidance
in that paragraph has been built
into the rules that you're that
you're looking at here, so it's
just, it's, it's the same.
And then Madam Chair, we'll just
add on one more thing. Um, Ryan
went over on the page, on the
top of page 51, some of the
investment parameters that we're
dealing with because of what's
in our venture capital act,
which is that we cannot our
investment in any one company
directly can't exceed more than
10% of our portfolio. So we've
received $50 million from the
legislature over two separate
appropriations. We've been
utilizing about $15 million of
SSBCI money for a venture
capital program, and then this.
10 million. So that $75 million
means that we cannot exceed more
than 7.5 million right now and
then any company. So while this
is green lenders, if we never
get any more money and we want
to hold out the opportunity for
that 2.5 million to go to
another green lender, but if in
fact we're able to get more
money into that program so that
we can maintain that 10%
requirement, then this approval,
uh, that you'll be asked to
approve will allow us to then
further
the remaining dollars. So we're
asking later for up to $10
million
and our understanding is that
was always intended to go to the
CIC based on legislative intent,
um, as you, as you followed that
investment, uh, appropriation
through the legislature. So
we're prepared to go have 100%
of the $10 million go to CIC.
But if that additional capital
doesn't come in, we won't be
able to extend that uh last 2.5
million without either a change
in statute or, or anything else.
So we say green lender because
we don't want to, um, lose the
opportunity to utilize the whole
10 million for its intended
purposes of uh Green Bank
investment.
I just wanted to kind of mention
that it is kind of, it'll be
tricky later on because you'll
see up to 10 million, but at
this point, we can't exceed 7.
Thank you for the
clarifications. Any other
questions from board members?
Remember Collins?
Yeah, Marquita spoke to my 10%
question because I was like
that's gonna be a problem, but
she addressed it.
Thank you.
So the, I think we're looking
for a motion on this now, on the
rules.
The motion. Motion to approve
has been made to the rules and
seconded, is there any
discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Although opposed same sign.
Motion carries on the approval
of the rules governing the green
lending.
And now we move on to the policy
governing the Green leader.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yes, so,
um, I 53, the accompanying
investment policy, which has
more specific investment
parameters for the EQ2
deployment of the Special
Appropriation, um, and, uh, we.
We developed these um to be
consistent with the parameters
of the act, standard terms for
EQ2s and um also appreciated uh
feedback we received from
M-nerd, um, and have
incorporated their comments um
into this policy. So, um, uh,
I'm gonna walk you through some
of the highlights on starting on
on page 59, just, uh, so general
considerations, as you know, our
venture capital program fund
historically for our venture.
Uh, uh,
Venture private equity fund
investments have 5 specific
mission and diversification
objectives where we evaluate
each fund that we're um
considering for fit with those
mission and diversification
objective. So in the case of
EQ2s for green lenders were
proposing on language and
objectives that really is very
consistent with um the purpose
of the special appropriation is
articulated in HB2.
Um
And then other um other general
considerations here consistent
with um all of our investments
um in the venture capital
program fund, um, that their
differential rate, uh, these are
early stage investments that um
uh uh have a high level of risk,
um, and our, our standard
conflict of interest, um,
provisions.
In terms of eligibility for
investment on page 60, so we've
articulated that Greenlanders
meeting the definition of New
Mexico business, which is a
definition and statute that has
certain requirements around New
Mexico's substance, um, if a
green letter meets that
definition and also the
parameters of the rules that
you've just approved and the
parameters of this proposed
policy, that Greenlander can
demonstrate potential contribute
to the state's economic and
environmental sustainability,
invest in
low income and underserved
communities and attract
additional public and private
sector investment to the state,
it's eligible for, for, for an
EQ2 investment.
And then some of the more
specific investment guidelines
and restrictions, uh,
Greenlander qualification, so
these are, um, similar to what
we have in the other set of
rules and policies and policies
specifically specific to venture
private equity fund managers.
These I would characterize as
being um uh similar, but, uh,
more relevant for nonprofit
lenders and in this specific
case, Greenlanders. So we're
expecting that they'll have
professional staff.
qualified to develop and
implement mission-driven lending
programs facilitating the
adoption of facility
improvements and technologies,
reducing carbon emissions.
Best practice operating policies
and procedures, reporting and
compliance standards, financial
sustainability as evidenced by
an operating budget and
financial projections, um,
effective mitigation of key man
risk by a succession planning,
um, and adherence to adequate
conflict of interest, uh,
policies. So these are basic um
best practice standards um that
we expect any green lender
receiving EQ2s from the program
to to meet and comply.
us.
Um, in terms of location and
geographic focus, we've included
a guideline that requires that
Greenlanders um receiving EQ2s
be headquartered in the state,
um, and with the majority of
staff located here in the state.
Um, next on page 61,
concentration limits. So these
are the two concentration limits
that also appear in rural that
are specified in statute, 30% um
of the fund cannot be invested
in one single industry, and
then, uh, no more than 10% of
the total fund cannot be
invested in any um one New
Mexico business or in this case,
green lender.
Um
Draw period, so we are proposing
that an EQ2 investment
commitment, um, uh, once closed
on, um, uh, that total
commitment can be drawn for a
period, um, up to up to 4 years.
Um, so the intention of that is
if for whatever reason, um, the
Greenlander is unable to draw up
to the full amount that was
committed, we would then at that
point be able to reallocate the
capital or do something else,
um, with, um, and, and then
we've, we've
specified in here as well, so
emerging green lenders with less
than 5 years of operating
history. So in New Mexico
Climate Investment Center would
fall in that category as a
startup, um, they are and and
we've discussed with them, they
will be required to meet
business development milestones,
um, that will work to to
articulate together before a
draw drawing additional uh
investment capital.
Section E, the match
requirement. Uh, so this is the
requirement in statute that we
cannot exceed 51% of the total
investment capital, and there's
also specificity here that we
cannot fund more than 20% of
available capital, um, uh, in
advance of them meeting the
match requirement. Section F
interest rates, so we're
offering uh 0.5%.
Of, um, uh, is the interest rate
that'll be charged in the 1st 10
years, um, and I'd also like to
highlight that that's, um, uh,
going to be charged on the
balance drawn, so it's not um
calculated based on the total,
uh, commitment made, um, and
then, uh, after year 10, uh, the
interest rate will increase to
1%.
We're also allowing for interest
to accrue in the 1st 4 years,
uh, which means that they won't
have to pay an actual interest
payment until the end of year 4.
Um, prepayment as consistent, as
you all know, with all of our
programs, um, uh, these
investments um can be repaid um
at any time at no penalty.
Uh, H security, so this is um
just highlighting uh the nature
of EQ2 investments. They are
equity like, they're unsecured
general obligations and fully
subordinated to all other uh
creditors, um, Perry pursue with
other equity and equivalent
investments, so should CIC be
successful in raising additional
um EQ2 investment, uh,
potentially from, uh, local
banks or other public entities,
um, they would be Perry pursue
with us.
If they um invested by an EQ2,
um, on the next page 62, so the
term we're proposing is a
rolling term of 15 years that
can be extended um by up to 5
annual extensions.
Jay, adequate financial
reporting um green lenders are
going to be required to um
prepare financial statements in
accordance with GAP and to
report audited financials, um,
and those audits must be
prepared by a qualified
independent auditor.
62 specifies uh events of
default and performance
covenants that will be included
in the EQ2 investment agreement,
um, these, many of these are
standard to EQ2 investments, um,
they relate to, um, uh, for
example, um, lenders cannot
change their primary business
activities, um, uh, without
prior written consent, they
cannot consolidate or merge
without prior consent, they
must, um maintain management and
staff.
Um, with skills necessary to
manage the operations. Um, we've
included in here requirement
that um the uh
That that we receive a board
approved succession plan.
Um
Uh, failure to make timely
interest payments, um, is um is
included here, uh, failure to
meet monitoring and reporting
requirements, including failure
to report unqualified audited
financial statements.
Um, we've also included um
financial covenants that um are
consistent with what one would
expect for a lending institution
of um of this type.
Um, and also failure to maintain
adequate insurance. So all these
would be um included in the EQ2
agreement, um, and considered um
technical events of of default
in our performance covenants
that um will be monitored um as
we monitor the investment.
Um
EQ2 investment agreements,
here's the list of the actual um
uh uh uh terms that will be
included. Um, I think we've
touched on a lot of them. There
will be um on subsection 12
board observer rights, um, so we
intend to allow for NMFA and
also MED if they would like, um,
to, um, have the right to
observe, um, board meetings.
And then section 7 monitoring
and reporting, um, these are
consistent with the rule, the
quarterly and annual um
monitoring and reporting
requirements.
I think that's it on the
detailed policy parameters.
happy to stand for questions.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members on the proposed
policy.
Madam Chair, if I could just add
one thing, uh, before questions,
um, the areas of the event of
default are intent there is not
to at that point start clawing
back any um loan proceeds that
we've delivered to them, but to
then to start working with them
much more closely and find out
what's going on and see how we
could remedy that or help them
uh get over any operational um
hurdles that they may be
encountering. So, uh, you know,
it's a very long list of event
of defaults and it seems um.
Pretty harsh, uh, but the goal
here is for us to be able to
step in and help as opposed to
stop their operations.
Thank you, Member Collins.
Madam Chair, we're, we're on the
same page under the events of
default, um, the financial
Covenants
That require a return on assets
of 3% return on equity of 20%.
Um, and a leverage ratio of 7%.
Um, those seem like a high bar
in granted, I have never seen.
Financial um results for CDFIs.
I don't know if they're
published anywhere.
Um
I wonder if we want to.
Shy away from having a hard.
Number in policy.
Um
Maybe, um, I don't know, put a
period after basis and then
leave it at the discretion of
In MFA
Um
Because I would just hate for.
An example, an institution has a
charge off.
And, in that period.
Their earnings dropped. Um, so
then they would trip over,
return on, um.
Equity, the return on assets.
And suddenly you've got a
You know, a default policy
exception, those sorts of
things, so, um, my
recommendation would be that we
just end the sentence after
basis and not
quite have that much of a hard
number in policy.
Or or with an institution is
starting up and has it ramped up
to have that kind of income.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I think um
that's a that that's definitely
a fair fair suggestion. I think
the intention given there are
gonna be some specific
parameters that are worked out
during closing. I think the
intention was, was just to
highlight the types of financial
covenants that would be
included. These figures um were,
um, came from more longer term
expectations for like a mature
green banking organization, so
they don't represent what we
would be expecting, uh,
BIC specifically to be meeting
in the first few years, um, so
that's a very fair comment. Um,
I think we also just wanted to
balance, um, having, you know,
uh, the detail on the policy
that reflects our expectations.
Madam sure, based on those
comments, it may make sense for
us to say, um, to put that
period after 12 month basis as
recommended by member Collins,
but then say examples of this
may include and so that there
are some, so that you can
understand what those might be
and then give us the opportunity
as you've mentioned, to
negotiate those on a case by
case basis based on where they
are.
Any further discussion?
That was an amendment to the uh
proposal of uh rules.
So, um,
I.
I hear a motion
as a member,
including as amended by member
colleagues.
Do I hear a second?
On that motion.
Is there any discussion?
If not all those in favor.
Of the motion, say I, I, I.
All those opposed same sign?
Motion carries.
Next on the agenda.
Is the approval of the equity,
uh.
equivalent investment commitment
of up to 10 million to the New
Mexico climate Investment
Center.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So I'm gonna, um, share some uh
introductory remarks and then
I'm looking forward to handing
it over to Bethello, who's the
founder of the New Mexico
Climate Investment Center, and I
believe she has a number of um
uh CIC guests as well, a couple
of board members, um, that are
joining us today and um I'm sure
after the last two items, we
will be enjoyable to hear from
them instead of me, um, but just
framing, um, the recommendation
before you so this is a
recommend.
In addition to um commit up to
10 million as Marquito pointed
out, um, based on the current
size of the venture capital
program fund, we wouldn't
actually be able to fund the
full 10 million, um, but what we
are seeking is an approval to
utilize uh that full amount of
the special appropriation and
then um there would be language
in the legal agreement to
specifying um that we can only
fund what what's available, um,
relative to the limits. Um, so
CIC, as I mentioned before, was
found
in 2023, they received their tax
exempt designation from the IRS
just in the spring of this year,
so they really are um relatively
early stage. Their mission is
focused on low-cost lending to
green energy and energy
efficiency projects with a focus
on disadvantaged communities.
They've articulated 3 main areas
of initial focus, which I'm sure
they'll elaborate upon, and
those include loans to small
businesses for energy efficiency
upgrades, energy improvement
loans for multi-family housing
projects.
And tariff-based and solar
leasing products that can
improve the energy efficiency of
single family homes.
Uh, the organization is
currently led um by the founder
and CEO Beth Blo and a
nine-member board that was
constituted this summer, uh,
starting next year in January
will be a full-time qualified
executive filling the role of
COO who brings decades of
experience in local community
development through uh his
experience leading a local
credit union and as a lending
officer with local banks.
Um, and I'd like to also
highlight that in its first
years, uh NMCIC intends to
leverage lending partners, so
they have the uh partnership
model, um, and those partners,
um, they're gonna be leveraging
the technical expertise um with
these specific products um
implementing those programs here
in New Mexico.
So strengths um of, of the
investment, uh, it's highly
mission aligned with the purpose
of the special appropriation,
the partnership approach in the
early years, um, as the
organization continues to hone
its model and business plan, um,
and the governance and oversight
that's provided by the qualified
and experienced nine-member
board, um, in terms of risks,
which are important to
highlight, this is a startup,
um, in a very early seed stage
with no operating history and
the organization has raised.
To date, um, only $800,000 in
philanthropic grants. Um, it is,
uh, still underway, hiring a key
staff, um, uh, ongoing market
analysis, particularly regarding
demand for different proposed
product lines, uh, ongoing
business and financial planning
and continued board development.
Uh, we intend to mitigate these
risks with business development
milestones articulated in the
agreement.
Um, one example before closing
NMCIC will be required to submit
a complete set of financial
projections and statements. Uh,
other risks consistent with
early stage investments or key
person risk and the formation of
a new team that has a little
experience to date, working
together, um, the organization's
success will rely heavily on
their ability to raise
additional capital, um, from
public um and uh private
investors until that's
accomplished NMFA uh will be.
the the sole investor.
Um, all that said, we believe
the risks identified in this
mission-driven investment can be
mitigated, um, and we believe
this recommendation is
consistent with the purpose of
the special appropriation. So
with that, I'd like to hand it
over to the CIC team, um, who I
know is excited to be here today
to present you with our story
and their vision.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the board, um,
I am getting over a bout of
laryngitis. So please indicate
if you have trouble hearing me,
and I'm not sure what I can do
about it, but I will try. Um,
I'm Beth Blo.
CEO of the CIC, um, and I'm here
with my colleague Christian
Casilla from the coalition of
Sustainable Communities, um, who
helped me launch the CIC, um, we
have on Zoom important board
members Anne Haynes, who is our
initiating and current board
chair, there she is.
And Kelly O'Donnell.
Who is coming in as our new
chair as of January 1.
Hello Kelly.
And we have uh Ryan told you
about Mike Athens, who is our
COO who will be coming in in
January as well.
Um, thank you for your
consideration. Let me just put
my timer on.
See if I can, we can stick with
1010 minutes. Um, next slide,
um, let me just say in terms of
the agenda, you have many more
slides then we will present a
lot of that is just for your
information.
And I to know bios of the team
are attached to the back.
Um
The
Uh
The next slide, please.
The CIC is a mission-driven
non-profit investment fund,
uniquely positioned in New
Mexico to fill financing gaps
around our mission.
And you've heard a bit about our
mission. It is to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and to
reduce energy burdens in
low-income disadvantaged and
tribal communities.
And we envision serving as a
leader and catalyst in the just
and equitable transition to a
decarbonized economy here in New
Mexico.
That is our public benefit.
Um, next slide, please 71.
Um, we're addressing the climate
equity problem, and as you are
aware, we have a very high
poverty rate in New Mexico and
the energy burdens for this
population is unusually high
nationally.
Um, as well, the
disproportionate impacts of
climate change are felt most by
frontline communities.
So we're responding to this by
prioritizing low and moderate
income underserved and
vulnerable communities, as well
as small businesses, excuse me,
and nonprofits and underserved
communities.
By providing low interest loans,
leases, and other financial
incentives for clean energy
services.
Which can offer immediate
savings.
Um, we, we will also finance
clean technology development and
adoption across the state.
Next slide.
Ryan covered.
bit of our history. I just want
to point out that we were
incubated in the coalition of
sustainable communities in 2022,
really before that.
But in 2022 it became a formal
project of the board of
directors was convened this last
June, and thank you, Sam, for
being on the nominating
committee.
Um, the board appointed me as
permanent CEO in July.
And as you heard, we received
$800,000 from 4 foundations to
build the entity.
Um, next slide, please.
This is um an extraordinary
And deeply committed board of
directors.
Um
I won't go into detail. This is
for your.
We have a lean team, a lean but
mean team. Um, and with
additional capital, we will be
expanding this team, um, as of
now, I'm the only one on
payroll. Um, my Athens and Zach
Chavez.
will be joining the team in
January 1, and we have leveraged
um the expertise of others
through outsourcing initially,
um, and
We have a great outsource set of
team members, Christian Casius.
Who works with portfolio and
projects development.
Janet Pacheco Morton, CFO and
accountant.
Rachel Rosenfeld, Project
Management, and Paul
Schaffenberger, who is CEO of
the Colorado Green Bank and has
been at our side from the
beginning, advising us on how
green banks function and
providing business advisory
services, he also introduced us
to IDFact Development Fund,
which is a CDFI that we are now
under contract with.
To administer all of our lovely
important for you to know and
provide all back off.
Um, and their contract includes
program design origination
underwriting, loanser.
And they also serve that
function for the Colorado Green
Bank.
Um, next, next um, and let me
walk you through.
Some of our funding flows on the
right operations and
administration.
Um, we've been supported by
those grants and are our budget
allows us to carry through most
of 2025 utilizing those funds.
Um, we're looking at this EQ2
investment.
Um, and would probably split it.
4 60% from operations about 40%
and then to kickstart
investments with the additional
60.
were anticipating being
self-sustaining.
By year 2028. Um the pro forma
demonstrated that you have, but
that pro forma will have to be
changed.
Um, especially given the
uncertainties of federal funding
under the new EPA.
Um
If you swing down to the bottom.
Qualified projects.
We have in the pipeline today.
Um, requests for about $27
million of project funding,
those projects have been
identified for funding in 2025
just so that you know there is
indeed a pipeline.
On the left hand side.
Um, investment funding.
Um, we are
Um, certain, I, I say certain
probably 85% to be getting a $5
million.
Funding from
The greenhouse gas reduction
fund.
That will go to emerging green
banks, um, coalition for Green
Capital, one of the three
national green banks with $5
billion has already allocated
for about 40 emerging green
beds.
Um, and we are one of them, and
we're looking, we are in
discussion about uh providing
pipeline projections and getting
more investment capital.
From the NCIF on it's not NCIA
excuse that, put an F at the
end. So we're applying for
additional investment capital
there. We are looking at another
state appropriation.
Um, in the upcoming session.
Um, somewhere between 10 and 20
and we are, we are already being
approached by private capital to
demonstrate an interest in us.
Um, and with that, I'm going to
turn it over to Christian.
To discuss our investment
strategy.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members, and I know I, I have
just a few minutes, so I'm gonna
um jump through some of these
next slides, uh, and I'm gonna
focus on
Uh, on 3 of the, the primary,
um program uh pieces that are in
development. We can skip to um
slide uh page 77, next slide.
Investment strategy really is
focused on um reducing risk and
increasing impact uh through a
multiplier fact to low income
households for each loan area
and uh that's working with um a
successful business.
models that have been
implemented in other states and
working with experienced
business partners who are able
to, uh, adapt those, uh, those
programs to the New Mexico
contexts.
Uh, next slide.
Um, this shows the 3 primary
program areas, um, that will be
funded through a managed
revolving loan fund within the
uh NMCIC, um, and that will be
uh primarily focused on low
income solar leases and
multi-family affordable housing
and community solar, which I'll
touch briefly upon each of those
next slide. Um, one of the, the
challenges of reaching
individual low income
households.
is their risk aversion to taking
on debt in one of the, the
challenges um that would
typically be seen through a low
income loans as well as their
inability to take full advantage
of the federal tax credit, next
slide.
And so we're partnering with uh
CDFI that has 16 years of
experience, um, uh, mission
driven has made low income
focused loans to over 16,000
households in 12 states with a
97% uh repayment rate. And their
model focuses on a low income
solar lease that allows them to
capture, um, around the minimum
of 50% of uh the federal tax
credits that are um
uh,
creates an opportunity to offer
um low income loans to both loan
uh the households as well as
low-income serving
organizations, um, that would
allow 25 minimum of 25% annual
savings, uh, culminating in
15,000 to 20,000 in savings
accumulated for a household over
the life of a solar system.
Uh, next slide, please.
Uh, with multi-family affordable
housing, we're partnering with
uh IDF is was was already
mentioned, um, they've been
active for 30 years in the Rocky
Mountain region, um, they are
active within New Mexico, and
we'd be focusing on
pre-development financing and
permanent gap financing, um, to
increase access to capital for,
uh, energy efficiency and solar
for again multifamily affordable
housing next slide, please.
And then finally, um, we're
working with uh the Colorado
Clean Energy Fund, um, on the
development of several financial
project uh products, bridge
financing for the federal ITC in
the 15-year permanent debt um
product um that would increase
development of community solar
for co-ops, tribes, and
community based like
And then finally, um, we're
working with uh the Colorado
Clean Energy Fund, um, on the
development of several financial
project uh products, bridge
financing for the federal ITC in
the 15-year permanent debt um
product um that would increase
development of community solar
for co-ops, tribes, and
community based site.
Thank, thank you for your
consideration, Madam Chair.
Members of the board.
We're happy to answer questions.
Thank you. So thanks for your
presentation today.
Any questions from board
members?
So I'm, I'm gonna start.
Just with a couple of questions.
Um,
Obviously, one of the first
things that you're gonna need to
do is raise some capital.
So will you talk to us a little
bit about what your plan is to
raise the matching capital.
Yes, um,
Uh, so we are working in the
application process.
To raise um
Working capital, um, from
The NCIF program under Coalition
for Green Capital.
We are certain we have the 5
million.
So that is a race that we would
expect to get relatively soon,
but it's the additional
investment capital that we are
applying for.
We've been asked to um introduce
ourselves.
Ira's comments to the SBIC. We
were going to go to their board
meeting today, um, but we will,
um, of course, we deferred, um,
we will be presenting in
February at their board meeting
and hope that at some point, we
might be able to get financing
from SBIC.
Um, we have just been
introduced.
To a new sub awardee from
Coalition for Green Capital at
much of our um
Critiquing their sub awards
around the country.
Which then would produce
investments.
Um, or provide investment
capital. We were just introduced
to a new group that is going to
be representing EPA Region 6,
which had been a desert in those
sub awards, um, and we will
continue to connect with them to
see what kind of capital we can.
They can provide to us, but it
sounds very optimistic.
Um, and
We are, of course, continuing to
speak with foundations.
Um, especially the ones that
have funded us andy Foundation,
we, we just, um, uh, completed
that grant, and we've asked for
another.
Um, grant.
follow on.
So we're, we're looking in many
places. We have been approached
by a number of private
investors, and we will certainly
follow suit, and we've presented
to the New Mexico impact
investment consortium.
Um, and, uh, also expect that we
will have a continuing
engagement with that group.
Thank you. Quick follow-up
question, will you talk to us
about staffing? So do you have
someone identified who will lead
the initiatives on raising the
additional capital.
Um
Yes, we do. Um, the
Um, COO and Zach Chavez, who is,
will be director of market
development will help us raise
the capital.
Um, we are
Bringing on a program director.
Um
Uh, as soon as we, we are
assured of more capital.
Um, and, um, a couple of project
managers when we have a few
projects in our pipeline, but
the team that will be looking
for additional funding will
include COO Director of Marlo
and me.
Thank you.
Um, much appreciated. One
follow-up question, um,
The National Climate Investment
Fund. I had to look at it to
make sure that I get that right.
It's a mouthful. Will you tell
us a little bit about that fund.
It seems, it seems that that is
your first available capital,
um, in, in short term. Are they
a federally funded organization
or are they a privately funded
organization, they are funded
through the greenhouse gas
reduction fund of the EPA. It's
part of the um inflation
reduction Act.
And the there were 3 national
entities.
that were created on under the
NCIF.
Um,
how much total fund the GGRF
Madam Chair, members, the GGRF
was allocated 29 billion um
that, that got subdivided into
three parts and CIF had 13
million solar for all 7 $13
billion for all $7 billion and
um
CC CCA and coalition for Green
Capital, which is the
organization that has really
grown the whole green.
Bank ecosystem, um, is the one
that we've supported and uh we
look to them to support us, and
they received 5 billion of that.
set of funds. Um, everybody is
nervous about what will happen
with that funding and, and so
there are lots of discussions
about how quickly to deploy
those funds before their
potentially pulled back.
But that is, um, we've been
working to develop a
relationship with CGC.
For a number of years.
And we are founding members of a
consortium of green banks, the
GB 50, that is negotiating on
behalf of all of Greenbank's in
that consortium, specifically
with CGC to ensure that we get
fair treatment in terms of
investment funding.
Great.
Thank you for that. Um,
Where, what is the, can you talk
about the when the funds are
deployed, so if you were to
receive the $5 million
investment into the fund, once
they are with you, is there a
clawback mechanism because the
funds have come through the
federal government and the EPA
or once the funds are deployed
to you, do you anticipate that
you'll be able to keep those
funds?
Um
That's, that's a good question,
and I've been asking the
question about clawback.
Um, it's, it's
Um
It's unclear about how that
might happen.
I think all of us are concerned
about clawback.
Or about the EPA, um,
Delaying
The release of funds.
Especially if they're on a
reimbursable basis.
So there are a number of ways
that the new administration can.
Um
Create challenges.
Or awardees.
And I know CGC is looking at
that as well.
Um, the answers are
Emerging. Thank you.
Thanks for addressing that. Much
appreciated.
Um, any other, sorry to
dominate. Any other questions
from members of the board.
Do we have any questions or do
we want any
Comments from, uh, board chair
Haynes and incoming board chair
O'Donnell.
So
This is Anne Haynes. Thank you
for that question.
I just want to thank you all so
much for taking this time to not
only hear about the climate
investment Center, but the work
that the finance authority and
specifically Ryan has been doing
in preparation for creating the
uh EQ2 mechanism, and thank you
all so much for your
consideration of it. I do want
to comment on a couple of
things. One is I
the discussion a little bit
earlier about the innovation
that is going into this, and it
is so true. It's really exciting
because I think the precedent
that can be set by each of you
is really something that over
time could become a model for
the country and so the, the note
that was made about that I
completely agree. And then the
other thing is just to go back
to your question a little bit
earlier about the capital
acquisition strategy.
I did want to mention that one
of the committees that we've
created of the board is a
resource development in capital
acquisition committee that
members of the board are going
to be actively involved in, and
one of our board members,
Horacio Trujillo is going to be
leading that board committee
because
All of us understand fully the
uh responsibility we have to
ensure adequate resource
development and capitalization
for the CIC. So there's a lot of
excitement and energy going into
not only the startup of the
entity, but then looking into
the future for the capital
acquisition. Um, and I'm also
happy to respond to any
questions, if any of you have
them, but again, I just
want to thank you all so much.
Thank you, Board Chair Haines.
Incoming chair O'Donnell.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
It's nice to see you again. Um,
I, I just want to echo, uh, the
appreciation that and already
expressed for the work of this
board and for the staff at the
NMFA, um, I'm really, I'm really
honored to be part of this
initiative, and I think we're
going to make a huge difference
for New Mexicans in partnership
with the finance authority and
energy and minerals. So thank
you again.
Thank you for your comments.
Any further comments or
questions from board members,
and if not, do I hear a motion
on this?
Proposal.
Remember Shelton has moved
approval of the project before
us.
Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair.
Motion has been seconded. Any
discussion on the motion, Madam
Chair.
Um, I need to recuse myself from
this vote and discussion due to
my role as chair of the board of
the University of New Mexico
Global Energy Incorporated, UNM
has been identified as a
possible recipient of funding
from NMCIC.
Or the geothermal and solar
projects that I lead and I want
to avoid any appearance of a
conflict of interest.
Thank you Member Constantinisa
uh minutes will reflect that.
recusal.
Any, any other discussion?
If not all those in favor say
aye.
Although the post same sign?
Motion carries.
Congratulations. Thank you so
much. Next on the agenda is um
update on activities from the
public lending Committee.
Remember Alison.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, the
public lending committee met on
Wednesday, December 4th, and we
did have a forum, um, we heard 4
applications from planning
grants for small water systems.
Uh, we recommended all those
items for approval and they're
on the consent agenda today. And
then in addition, staff
presented 4 applications for
financing from the PPRF
Bloomfield School District,
Santa Clara, Pueblo, City of
Deming, and Samoan Municipal
School District. Uh, we
recommended approval of all
those items.
As well.
That completes the report. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any questions for the
Public lending Committee?
If not, we'll proceed onto the
um consent agenda.
Good
morning, madam,
um, the local government
planning plan item 7.1. The
first one is for Elriston mutual
domestic Water Consumers
Association. They've come to our
program for a water asset
management plan, and they
qualified for 50,000.
Um, item 7.2 is for the village
of Columbus, and they've come to
the local government planning
fund for a wastewater
preliminary engineer item 7.3 is
for the village of Magdalena,
and they've come to the local
government planning fund for a
preliminary engineering report
as well. They qualify for
75,000.
Um, the final item for the local
government planning fund is Sur
Sandoval County.
Um, they've come to our program
for a local, I mean, excuse me,
an economic development
feasibility study, and they
qualify for 20 guidelines. Um, I
recommend approval on all of
these and I stand for any, any
questions from the board on
these projects?
So, Madam Chair, good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
board of directors. Item 7.5 on
today's consent agenda on behalf
of the Cimarron Municipal School
District. Um, they've applied to
the PPRF to finance the purchase
of an educational technology
now.
This amount request is for
500,000 and they'll receive 10%
in the form of disadvantage
funding at the 2% interest rate.
This is based on the district's
MHI. This long will carry
five-year term.
With that, Madam Chair and
members of the board of
directors, um, staff recommends
approval of items 7.1 to 7.5 on
today's consent agenda, and we
stand for questions.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members?
On any of the projects on the
consent agenda today?
There aren't no for pool item
7.1 to 7.5 is presented.
Motion for approval has been
made. Is there a second?
I'm sure.
Motion is seconded. Is there any
discussion? If not, all those in
favor say aye.
Although the post same sign.
Motion carries. Next, the
regular agenda.
We start with item 8.1
Bloomfield School District.
OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
board members. I do have the
district's uh finance director
Stacy Babcock online at the
board has a questions for Ms.
Babcock at the end.
Was being presented as a 2025
general obligation bond,
tax-exempt loan for Bloomfield
School District in the amount of
9 million $995,000 with the 12
years uh fully advertised term
and net interest cost is 3.73%.
The district has applied to the
public project revolving loan
fund to finance phase one of
their district-wide capital
investment improvements project
to provide and maintain adequate
educational facilities.
In August 2024, the district
received voter approval of 28
million in general obligation
bonds for the purpose of
erecting, remodeling, making
additions to and furnishing
school buildings, including
teacher housing, uh, purchasing
or improving school grounds,
purchasing computer software or
hardware for student use public
schools and providing matching
funds for capital outlay
projects, uh, pursuant to the
public school capital outlay.
Approval is valid for a period
of 40 years.
And the proceeds will be used to
for but not limited to the
projects that are consistent
with the district's 2024 to 2029
facility master plan over a
3-year period, the 9,995,000
will be used for the demolition
of 3 existing schools.
And construction of two new
replacement schools and the cost
of issuance.
The strengths include 81% of the
loan proceeds will be paid in
the first year. The new
infrastructure improvements
benefit future students and
provides them with a safer and
more secure learning
environment.
The Geo bonds, uh, purchased,
uh, risk is significantly
reduced by the Department of
Finance Administration
guaranteeing the loan.
The weaknesses are the district
had one repeated material
weakness in the uh fiscal year
23 audit, the district has
identified a solution and new
process to limit the same
mistake from previous years.
And below details the district's
plan to take action on the
repeated fighting.
The audit was last completed in
2023, a modified two findings
and 1 repeated material weakness
related to cast controls. The
cash reports provided to the
state were not accurate and not
corrected after the fact.
Additionally, the improper
recording on the bonds seeking
fund, uh, transfer the states
revenues and expenditures on the
year, uh, though they net out in
discussion with the districts,
uh, director of finance, it was
determined that from fiscal year
2021 through 2023, and
purchase order was improperly
created drawing from the wrong
view account.
The district has taken action to
correct the improper posting and
believes the finding uh to the
bond sinking funds will not
appear in the 24 audit.
This is the first time this
project has appeared before the
NMFA board staff recommends
approval, and we stand for
questions. Thank you.
Thank you.
Um, and Miss Babcock, I think I
have that right. Yes,
yes, Madam Char, yes, you are
right. OK, thank you. It's also
online and with us today if you
want to address the board, we'd
be happy to hear from you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the board. Um, I
appreciate your um willingness
to, um,
Hear this out, um, I
Believe that we have um made
some very good um progress in
handling this audit finding that
we received, um, the district
did go through some very
extensive, uh, change in our
financial software um that we
were using which um started this
issue um in working with
incorrect setup, um, have been
continued to um make those
corrections along with
Um, the school board deciding to
decrease our um bank accounts
from 9 bank accounts down to 4,
which also kind of related to um
this finding as well. Um, we
also in, in um conjunction with
that moved from one auditor to
another, um, one of the cash
control findings was a
difference in opinion based on
um both of the auditor.
that we had um changed within
the last couple of years, so I
can answer any other questions
if you have them.
Also have um Kylie Weimer skirt
here with me, um, from RBC
Capital who is our financial
advisor.
Thank you.
Thanks for joining us this
morning. Any questions from or?
Hearing none is there a motion
to approve?
So manager.
Motion is made. Is there a
second?
Any discussion on the motion?
If not all those in favor say
aye.
Although the supposed same sign?
Motion passes. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for joining us.
City of Deney Project 8.2 on the
agenda. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
once again, uh Carmela is
filling under the weather today,
so I'll be filling in for her.
So on page 121. Yep.
Is the uh project on behalf of
the city of Deming.
Uh, they've applied to the PPRF
to finance multiple road and
street light projects.
Um, improvements pursuant to a
general obligation bond that was
approved by their voters in
November of 2022. This load
amount is for 2,500,000, of
which they'll receive 10% at a
0% interest rate based on the
city's MHI and the loan will
carry a 20 year term.
Uh, there are some strings noted
in your write up, but I did want
to mention the weakness that
that is also mentioned and
that's the city's last audit was
in 2021, and they have not, they
have yet to submit their fiscal
year 22 and 23 audits. The 2020.
2024 is also expected to be
late. In addition, the city was
at a special audit conducted to
determine the risk associated
with the city's utility services
and building practices.
To dive a little bit into that,
uh, the special audit was
completed a year and a half
later with no evidence
supporting claims of
malfeasance.
After the release of the special
audit, the city had to wait to
schedule time with an auditor to
begin their work on the 22 and
23 audit, and the city has also
noted that it has been difficult
for them to hire, um, in
securing an auditor.
Currently, the city has
confirmed that they are going to
be meeting with the auditor in
January of 2025 to complete the
fiscal year 22 and 23 audits.
The city has all the
documentation needed and they
have submitted it to a second
accounting firm approved by the
state auditor was scheduled to
complete their review on
December 20th, 2024.
I do have Aaron, uh, Sarah, who
is the city manager for the city
of Deming who'd like to.
OK
Madam Chair, members of the
board, thank you for having us
here. Um, like Mr. Cruz has
said, we've been plagued with
this audit thing based on uh
A request from the state
auditor's office to do a special
audit on utility services. We
had a disgruntled employee that
claimed that we were stealing
money and overcharging people
and
The auditors wouldn't even look
at financials until that special
audit was done. Um,
We have been working with them
diligently. They've agreed to
put us on the audit schedule for
January of 25 to start working
on the 22 and 23 and then move
straight into 24, and obviously,
25 will be coming up at the same
time. So we're fully confident
by the end of 25 that will be
100% caught up on those audits.
There was a couple of findings
back in the 21 audit that was
submitted that carried over into
the special audit, and that was
mostly
on our bank reconciliations. We
had some troubles figuring out
how to do that. We have some new
employees and I think they got
sidetracked on how it was really
supposed to be done, but the new
accounting firm that we hired,
they've developed new software
for us to make it, uh,
computerized, and we're looking
forward to moving forward. The
city of Deming has always been a
financially responsible entity
to our constituents, and we'll
continue doing that and, and I
apologize deeply for the audit
being late, and hopefully we can
Uh, reconcile all that in 2025.
And I'll stand for any
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Manager Sarah, for
joining us today. Any questions
from the board?
Madam Chair.
Um, no questions, but, uh,
requests from staff, once all
the audits are completed, would
it be possible to get an update
just to make sure that there was
nothing uncovered in the audits
since they are, you know, pretty
outdated and, and getting those
submitted, but I'm sure member
to sure.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Any other questions from the
board?
If not, do I hear emotion on the
project from the city of
Demming.
Some
Motion has been made to approve.
Is there a second?
I
Motion made and seconded any
discussion.
If not all those in favor say
aye. I.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the board.
Thank you. Next project at 8.3
Santa Clara Pueblo.
So Madam Chair of the final PPRF
uh project is can be located on
page 138.
Um
And it's on behalf of the Santa
Clara Pueblo, which applied for
financing to construct a new
governor's building. The loan is
a tax-exempt loan in the amount
of 9,770,000 with an 18-year
term at a net interest cost of
3.55.
In your board right up, it's a
very detailed description of the
existing conditions and of the
current building and the need
for and the benefits of the new
building, which celebrates the
unique heritage and aspirational
journey of the Santa Cruz.
Santa Clara Pueblo community.
I'm moving to page 139, uh,
staff has structured the loan
with a 1.30 times coverage debt
service coverage, using a
combination of 4 revenue
sources, which includes
cigarette, gasoline, lodgers,
and
tax. And soory tax is a 5% on
the total value of the interest
owned by the pueblo on public
utility easements.
The additional bonds test will
be set at 1.50 times or 150%.
Also, the loan will be
structured utilizing that uh ACH
or automatic clearinghouse
agreement.
There are the standard
requirements, closing conditions
for a tribal financing also
listed in your write up.
The strength of this loan
include that the construction of
the new governor's building
provides a tailored modern
facility designed to meet
current codes, technology needs,
and sustainable standards and
the building will remediate the
presence of hazardous material
like asbestos and black mold,
which is in the current
structure.
Um
I will mention that the only
weakness we do have is the fact
that the uh pledged revenue
cannot be verified. Um, by any
source other than the Pueblo and
the auditor, but the pueblo and
its auditors will certify.
pledged revenue performance on
an annual.
The last audit was completed in
2023.
2203 was unmodified, had zero
findings. And I do have Elijah
Baker here, um, who can, um,
address the, the project if
there are any questions.
Or with the plumber.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the board. Uh, thank
you for having me this morning.
This will be the Pueblo's 2nd
project with uh New Mexico
Finance Authority funding. We
did a water infrastructure
project that we're finishing up
the payment uh schedule on right
now. So this will be the 2nd
project, the Governor's office
that we're looking at building
would include the governor,
lieutenant governor's office,
along with a tribal council room
where they would be holding
their meetings and tribal
police, and it's the first phase
of a multi-phase project to uh
either move
Out of or remediate portions of
the existing tribal
administration building, which
currently as noted in the
application, have a lot of
issues from HVAC mold and other
code um issues. It's just an old
building. It's been there since
before I was born and where I
went and played basketball when
I was little. So, uh, several
different tax forms that we've
we've allocated towards this
that were similar to the first
animefa project that we did and
uh really excited about getting
this phase of our project moving
forward with that, Madam
Chairman of the board.
questions.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members?
Uh, a quick question for Mr.
Baca. Would you describe for us
the
Revenue generating businesses
owned by the Pueblo that create
the cigarette tax, um, and the
lodgers tags that are being um
used as pledged here.
Absolutely, uh, Madam Chair
members of the board. So the,
the pueblo has its own separate
economic development corporation
that has uh several different
LLCs underneath it for uh
separation purposes, which
include federal contracting, um,
retail environments, golf course
and others, and where these
particular tax flows would be
coming from uh the gas cigarette
tax are predominantly come from
our brand new Avanu Travel
Plaza, which was recently built
on Riverside Drive, which
includes a Fat Burger franchise.
And
that is far exceeding any of the
revenue projections, um, that we
had when when we built it with
our feasibility studies. So
that's where a major source of
that will be coming from. Also
the Santa Clara Hotel, which was
financed with a new markets tax
credit is uh where the largest
tax would be coming from, and
then, of course, the adorum
taxes will be coming from the
right of ways through the Pueblo
with those utility easements.
Great. Thank you for that. Much
appreciated.
Any questions from
Or comments from board members
on this project. If not, do I
hear a motion?
manager.
Motion has been made to approve
here a second.
Um, 2nd, madam chair. Motion is
seconded. Any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Although the supposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Next is our update on activities
from Chair Collins and the
Economic Development Committee,
which has been busy.
Madam chair, yes, we have been
in want to thank the committee
members for participating in the
great deal a great deal of
detail and taking their time
away to do that. It's
Much appreciated. We met on uh
December 3rd, um, things we
looked at were uh proposed $3
million investment into
endurance 282 which we're
recommending to the full board
in the next agenda item. Um, we
also looked at updating the
rules and policies for the
primary care.
Capital fund.
And also um staff recommended a
$498,000 loan.
Or uh Casa de Salud.
An organization focused on
helping low income and
marginalized individuals access
affordable healthcare, including
addiction.
And finally, uh, staff reviewed
the uh monthly program.
I have. Thank you.
Thank you. Any questions of the
economic Development Committee.
If not, we'll move on to item 9.
2.
Casa de salute.
Morning, Madam Chair and board
members. What you see here in
front of you is on page 150 in
your board material. This is a
behavior health capital fund
loan request.
And the um applicant's name is
Justice Access Support and
Solutions for Health doing
business as Cassida salute, I
will be referring to this
organization throughout my
presentation as Casa de Salute.
They are located in Albuquerque,
New Mexico.
Um, honest lady Boulevard, which
is considered to be the South
before I dive into this
particular presentation. I'd
like to introduce you to Doctor
Angeli Tanesha, who's the
executive director, and Michelle
Melendez, who's the director of
growth and strategy. They will
speak on who their organization
is and what they do. They also
speak on their project
description, the loan requests
and why it's important to them
and what it's for. And then once
that's done, they'll hand it
back over to me, so I'll finish
the presentation at that time.
But that mind, I'll go ahead and
hand this over to Doctor Angeli
Taneja
and Michelle Melendez. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the board.
My name is Angeli Taneja. I am a
family physician.
And executive director of Casa
de Salud. Um, I've worked at the
organization for 12 years as a
family physician, and I've been
in the role of executive
director for almost a decade
now. Um, our organization Casa
de Salud is a is a creative
independent nonprofit clinic
that has been in existence for
20 years now, and we've shown
that we can uh do the important
work that we do and and grow. We
were founded to support
primarily people
without health insurance, people
with addictions, people who were
immigrants, um, people who had
been marginalized and othered by
various systems and to support
and lift them up over the last
20 years, we have uh served
thousands of patients in the
community, um, around
comprehensive primary care, um,
around, um, comprehensive
addictions treatment with case
management with medications for
addictions treatment with
with a very strong partnerships
with community organizations,
um, with people coming out of
the county jail with the
university hospitals and
otherwise, and we have provided
a case management and community
health work also for a number of
years. The organization is
deeply rooted in the community.
Uh, we believe very strongly
that health care is a right, um,
and that it is important as a
healthcare organization to also
build solidarity with and.
build power with the community,
so we've also done a lot of work
around advocacy and policy
around helping to change the
structural conditions under
which we all live, um, as a
nonprofit, we have done um uh we
have a creative mix of revenue
sources, um, including Medicaid
revenue, um, patient self-care
fees, and we have extremely
affordable, transparent pricing
for uninsured patients, um, as
well as county funding and other
ways of funding to help cover
costs for people who are
Uh, unable to pay, um, as and we
also have uh funding from grants
and from various contracts at
the local and state level.
Um, this work is, uh, really
important for us, and we know
that, um, heading into the
coming years, um, our role in
the community will be even more
important at a time where, uh,
the primary care safety net um
is, is at, um, in New Mexico is
something that is being worked
on as a state, um, and at a time
where models such as ours are
important to uh expand and
influence, um, we are really
honored to be able to speak at.
To other clinics around the
nation around the model we are
uh providing and we're excited
to also expand our work. Um,
lastly, as part of our work, we
also do important workforce
development work because we
recognize the, uh, the critical
need that New Mexico has for
supporting all of us in urban
and in rural areas, um, and the
ways in which sometimes the
healthcare training systems have
been, have worked against some
population.
so for um 18+ years we have had
a health apprentice fellowship
program where we have done uh
rigorous immersive one year long
fellowships with um young people
from the community surrounding
us in the South Valley who are
interested in healthcare
careers, many who are first
generation or who are from low
wealth backgrounds, um, and we
are working to help change the
face of medicine, um, by
supporting them through their
journeys to be.
become healthcare providers and
healthcare leaders in the
community, um, and there are
folks who are dedicated to
staying in New Mexico and
supporting underserved folks and
in all of these years, we've
trained over 350 young people,
um, and from those who which
we've been able to reach out to
almost 200 of them, um, 60% of
them have gone on to become a
healthcare leaders, clinicians,
um, allied health professionals,
which is really profound, so
that's part of the work that we
do.
too. Um, and, um, I want to pass
this on to our director in
growth and strategy, Michelle
Melendez, for a little bit more
about the organization.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. My name is
Michelle Melendez, and I
rejoined the organization about
5 months ago after working there
7 years ago and came back
because I really believe in its
mission and um.
In addition to growing all of
those comprehensive services in
Bernalillo County, we have a
$2.5 million grant from the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority, the
excuse me, rural healthcare
Development Fund to expand and
open a new clinic in Valencia
County, and we're implementing
that right now as we speak, and
so we'll have the opportunity to
provide comprehensive primary
care, addictions treatment, case
management, and the whole.
of services that we are known
for in our community we'll be
expanding that into Los Lunas in
the coming months and
One of the things that I wanted
to share with you all is that
We'll be servicing the state and
the counties as they go about
implementing laws that have,
that they have passed at the
state level that require
treatment inside inside uh
correctional facilities for
people with addiction and then
to have a continuity of care as
soon as people are released.
This is a key part of trying to
change the
epidemic, we know in New Mexico
for opiate and other addictions.
And so we'll, we're already
involved in the development of
the implementation planning for
that and will be participating
in both Valencia County and in
Bernalillo County in being part
of the solution as we try to
take a, a huge bite out of the
epidemic of opioid and other uh
addictions in New Mexico.
And we're also very much
involved in the opioid
settlement work that's going on,
both the city and the county
have extensive dollars coming
in, and we've been part of the
development of the plans for how
those would be best put to use
to really make a difference in
this uh realm.
So with that, I will turn it
back over to Ryan, or right, are
you gonna talk about the, the
request. OK, thank you. Madam
and board members, thank you
very much, and I think they did
a wonderful debut and things of
that nature. Um, looking on page
150, you'll go ahead and see the
loan description and we'll go
ahead and dive into that now.
You see that Costa deute does
have a commercial real estate
loan request. It is for a loan
amount of $498,000. It is at a
3% interest rate and it is for a
twenty-year term, and the debt
service coverage ratio is 2.
64 times.
Looking at the collateral, the
collateral is the commercial
real estate at the project
location, which is there at 1608
Sled Boulevard, which is where
the clinic operates. They want
to purchase the building that
they're currently in. They have
an appraisal that was performed
and it was in October of 2024,
gave it a value of $630,000 as
is. We performed a discount of
15% on that and provided a
discounted value of $535,500.
And with that in mind that puts
the loan to value at 92.9%.
The lean position, we would be
in first lien with respect to
the real estate property.
And as you see on page 151 is
the borrow background and the
project description, um.
Going on to page 153, if you
look on top of that page, you'll
see that um total project
funding altogether, which is the
sources and uses, and to kind of
break that down, you'll see that
the behavior health capital loan
for $498,000 will be
specifically for them to buy the
building that they're currently
operating in. They do have cash
equity of $50,000 that will be
specifically used for parking
lot improvements from that
50,000. And again, the total
project amount altogether. If
you look on page 153, you'll see
the financial summary. I'll give
you the short version of what
that states.
As delu does have a strong
financial position with respect
to the performer debt service
coverage ratio, which is at 2.6
times, with ensuring that's
including this loan request.
Despite the net income that
decreased by $205,000 between
the years of 2022 and 2023. That
was primarily due to the loss of
COVID-related contracts in the
healthcare provider. Um, the
organization is set to achieve a
$380,000 profit this year in
2024, and that's driven to a
rebound of the contract revenue
and cost of disute is expanding
to La soon as mentioned earlier,
and they're receiving the $2.5
million grant to fund their new
clinic's cost.
And the new facility will serve
Medicaid heavy population and
Casa de Solu does maintain a
strong collection rate and plans
to hire additional staff for
part of their expansion efforts.
Um, on page 154 at the top,
you'll see the lung structure as
a snapshot for your review.
You'll see the coverage tests
that are there for your review
as well that passes all the
policy requirements for this
particular program.
You'll see the obligory is the
loan will be in direct
obligation of justice access
support and solutions of health
doing business as costa to
salute.
On page 154 is the management
team biographies that are
written for your review as well.
And then we'll go ahead and go
over the strengths and
weaknesses on page 155.
Looking at the first strengths,
you'll see that Costa delu is
focused on addressing the
behavior health concerns for the
state of New Mexico, including
currently experiencing growth
and enhancing their service
capacity as you heard earlier.
Um, they are already operating
in the building that they want
to purchase, so this will not
affect their operations
whatsoever, because there's no
construction needed on the
building whatsoever. And also
Costa delu does contract a third
party collection service to
facilitate their collections for
Medicaid claims. We see this as
a strength because they do have
a 95% success rate in collecting
Medicaid and a 90% collection
rate from self-pay patients.
Looking at weaknesses, you'll
see that there is possible
political risk with respect to
continually receiving Medicaid
contract revenues, grants and
state-backed funding due to the
new administration starting
currently Medicaid accounts for
approximately 24% of Costa
delu's pyramids, and as they
expand into Valencia County,
they expect
Um, and project the new facility
that will serve at least 70%
Medicaid.
And as mentioned earlier, they
do receive approximately 36% of
their funding from two different
agencies here in New Mexico,
which represents a high state
funding concentration risk, and
then the last weakness here is
that they have expressed concern
to us around the staffing of
future medical professionals,
citing to us that this is not
only and this does conclude my
presentation. Um, the staff does
recommend approval, and we are
all happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Thank you. Thanks for the
presentation. Any questions,
comments from board members on
this project I'm sure I have a
comment actually, it's uh, I
could say it's been very well
supported in the village of Los
Lunas, Valencia County, and I've
heard nothing but good things
about it.
Any other questions or comments
from the board? just a
background question for my own
information, Madam Chair, Mr.
Roin, can you tell me how the 3%
number is is generated as I said
in statute or is that developed
by by rule?
Mr. Chairman, uh, Madam
Chairman, sorry, it is, um, it's
in policy and we'll be bringing
forward policy recommendations
for the behavioral Health
Capital Fund next month to lower
that to 2%, but right now the
money we have available is still
the existing rules and policy.
Any other questions or comments
from board members?
Darling and mover group manager.
Motion for approval has been
made. Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair. Motion made
and seconded. Any discussion?
If not all those in favor say
aye.
Although opposed the same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Congratulations.
Next, we're back to
Next we're back to rules.
And the um approval of rules
governing the primary care
capital fund.
Madam Chair and members of the
board, so as Marquita mentioned
at the beginning of the meeting,
um, before you really as a
result of some changes that were
made during the 2023 session,
um, Senate Bill 423 NMFA
operating capital, um, we're
bringing before you proposed um
changes to the rules and uh
accompanying policy for the
primary care capital funds, um,
next month we'll be making
similar revisions to the
behavioral health um capital
fund.
as well. Um, I am gonna try and
keep my, my overview brief and
then and then stand for
questions, so the main changes
uh summarized here in your memo,
um, SB 423 amended the
definition of capital project to
include acquisition and uh also
added a new type of project
operating capital, uh, which is
defined in the rule and policy,
so in the past, uh, this funding
program could only be utilized
for capital projects, but now
funding can be used also to
support working.
Capital, uh, needs of primary
care providers. Um, there are
also some administrative updates
to the operation of the fund as
Marquita mentioned, um, the set
of rules previously was
promulgated by the Department of
Health, um SB 423, move that
over so NMFA, this is actually a
new set of rules for the NMFA,
um, governing the program.
Um, and other administrative
changes, uh, for example,
ensuring we can uh recover our
actual administrative costs, uh,
removing warrants and vouchers,
which are no longer relevant and
um and yeah, the last one NMFA
adopting rules. So, um,
specifically in the rules, I'll
just highlight on 159 some
important definitions, so
contract for services, so in
this program also behavioral
health capital fund, um, the
nonprofit.
and public providers of primary
care services that are eligible,
um, can, um, repay loans via uh
uh fulfilling needs or
fulfilling, um, contracts for
services and the services that
they're providing, um,
historically and um for the the
policy before you for approval,
we were, um, we're recommending
that up to 20% of total
principal amounts that are lent,
um, can be effectively repaid or
covered.
by fulfilling um contracts for
services. So there's a
definition here in rule and
policy, just just specifying
what that is, um, these
projects, um, as you saw with um
Casa de Salud for primary care
and behavioral health come
through uh economic development
committee and then um up to you,
eligible entity, so the
definition here aligns with the
statute, um, and some of these
technical, uh, definitions
eligible entity, healthcare
underserved area.
Primary care, we actually worked
closely with the team at the
Department of Health, um, that
works with us on the
administration of this program,
so they advise us on those
technical definitions and
they're consistent um with how
they look at, uh, for example,
primary care providers or define
healthcare underserved areas.
Um, and lastly, sick and and
medically indigent, so um.
161 uh covers application
requirements and also then 162
evaluation and approval
procedures, so important to
understand what this program, we
work closely with the Department
of Health. They play a role in
approving the programmatic
eligibility of um providers and
also the projects and then they
handed it once they do that,
they hand it over to NMFA and
our underwriting team looks at
the credit um of the project and
does the, really the, the
financing piece, um, the same on
the monitoring side, so DOH is
responsible for monitoring the
projects from a service
provision standpoint, um, and
then NMFA is looking after the
the financial covenants.
Um
The rules contain um provisions
for reconsideration if an
applicant is if an application
is not approved, um, also
contains um specific specifics
related to the financial
assistance agreements.
Um
An administration which is is
pretty standard, uh, as we
describe in our rules. So I
think I know I'm being brief,
but in the interest of time, I
don't think there was anything
um else that I, I thought were,
were to highlight in in this
proposed set of rules, so.
Be happy to stand for questions.
Thank you and thanks for your
presentation. Any questions from
board members
for approvals?
Have a motion to approve the
governing and primary care
capital fund rules. 2nd.
Motion is seconded any
discussion.
Not all those in favor, say I,
I.
All those oppose same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
We move on to 9.4%, the approval
of revised policy, or primary
care capital fund loans. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So this is the
um updated policy accompanying
the set of rules that you all
just approved. I'm really
relative to the um existing and,
and relatively outdated, um, uh,
primary care capital fund
policy, uh, this just brings in
elements that are more standard
now for our um lending policies
that just hadn't been.
Incorporated um for this
program. And um I'd like to
thank Ryan Olguin, as you know,
he just presented Casa de
Salute. He and John Brooks have
been very active on our primary
care and behavioral health
programs and um provided a lot
of input to this updated policy
at as did Josh Young, uh, on our
credit team, so I wanted to
thank them for their input. Um,
I'd like to move you to page 173
of the book, uh, a loan
structuring parameters, so these
are really where there's more.
definition included and then the
previous set of policies, um,
and just to highlight previously
these programs were utilized
private for capital projects, we
now.
The use of funding has been
expanded and can be used for
operating capital, so in some
sense, um, we, we think that we
have kind of two products in
each of these programs, there
are loans for capital projects
and then um we've introduced a
line of credit uh for operating
capital. So you'll see that
throughout in terms of the
specific parameters for each
product. Um,
For a uh details eligible uses
of proceeds that are consistent,
um, with the statute and then
also for lines of credit. And
really, the lines of credit are
um intended for short term
obligations uh uh supporting the
expansion of services. So
accounts payable, wages, hiring,
debt service, uh, leases, um, we
did discuss internally the um,
we think the intent of this is
for expansion and expansion of
services and rural and
underserved communities.
Um, we don't intend for it to
be, for example, if a provider
comes to us in a position of
financial distress and, you
know, for that reason, they're
looking for a line of credit,
um, we're not quite sure what
applications will look like, um,
for this particular um product
when it when it hopefully
becomes available, um, but that
is, that is how we're initially,
um, looking at those um
operating capital lines of
credit.
So B and C cover terms and
amortization for uh loans for
capital products so they're
consistent, um, with how we've
um operated the program in the
past and um we're quoting a, a
range of anywhere between 5 and
20 years, and then the lines of
credit for working capital, um,
have a much shorter term of 2
years, the idea there being that
um that's enough time for the
provider to um higher expand and
then hopefully um generate the
revenue required to actually
sustain that part of its
operations itself.
Um, interest rates, so, um, as
Marquita pointed out, we're
actually proposing a a slight
reduction in interest rates. Um,
they were formerly 3% and um
we're proposing 2% per annum on
both um loans and lines of
credit.
Equity requirements were not
explicitly required in the
previous policy, so we are
introducing 10% for loans for
capital projects, which is
consistent with our other
lending programs.
the debt service coverage uh
that service coverage
requirements, that's the
three-part test that Ryan went
through uh for Casa de Salute.
Um, it's actually the same test,
just some language has been uh
firmed up to make it consistent
with how our credit team looks
at those 3 tests. Um,
And then collateral by loan
types, so the previous policy
did not include specific loan to
value requirements. So we have
introduced um detail there and
uh parameters that are
consistent with our our private
lending programs. Um, and
lastly, Jay contract for
services, so right now, um,
we're uh proposing uh consistent
with how we've managed the
program in the past, contract
for services for up to, uh,
maybe utilized for up to 20% of
the original amount of uh
financial.
assistants and just uh some
final comments. So um this
program currently does not have
any capital available to lend.
Um, it's been that way for some
time, historically, we received
$9 million of appropriation, 9.7
was actually reverted back to
the general fund, um, we managed
to lend out 12 million to 20
different projects throughout
the state. Our oversight
committee has endorsed
legislation during the next
session to potentially allocate
25 million is currently what's
being.
proposed into this program, so,
um, if that does not happen, if
we don't get additional capital,
these would stay here, um, uh,
if, if we do get additional
capital, we'll do some
additional, uh, program
development work to um operate
operationalize um that that
funding, so.
Be happy to stand for questions.
Great, thank you. Any questions
from the board?
On the revised policy.
Just a quick question about
public comment. Are we required
to do that? Um, and if not, can
you talk to us a little bit
about, I know you got input from
the health department who were
working closely with. Were there
any external um entities to put
comment in as well.
Madam Chau, that's a good
question. Um, we're not
technically required um to
solicit it. I know in the past
some of our programs we have in
developing them, um, we did, uh,
speak quite a bit with DOH just
cuz they're so close to the
service providers and elicited
feedback that way. Um, we did
also reach out the primary care
uh capital association, uh, the
executive director, um, in the
past has been, um, really, uh,
informative on, on demand and um
I have not been able to connect
with her in the last couple
months.
but expect that we'll connect
with her soon, um, so that's the
extent of the um kind of
external stakeholders we've
engaged thus far. OK, and madam,
one of the reasons we did not is
because we're largely taking the
existing rule, the Department of
Health had entered into and just
moving it to NMFA, they're just
some minor things, the addition
of working capital, the lowering
of the interest rate, all of
which is to their benefit. So we
didn't really feel that that
would be a substantive input
that we would be receiving, so
we skipped it.
this one. OK.
Thank you.
If there's no further comments
or questions, do I hear a
motion?
You have that motion.
Motion to approve the revised
policy for primary care capital.
Loans, is there a second?
Second
Motion is made and seconded.
Thank you. Any discussion?
If not all those in favor, say
I.
bye.
Although suppose same side?
Motion carries.
Thank you one more.
So don't go away.
So next on the agenda, 9.5%
approval of investment
commitment to endurance 28 Fund
2.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the board, um, I'm gonna keep
my comments brief. Ethan is here
to present, um, the diligence
that Nikita, uh, conducted, um,
in recommending this uh
investment commitment to our
venture capital investment
committee, um, the
recommendation is for, uh, $3
million investment in Ender's 28
fund too, um, Endurance 28 was
founded by Consuelo Var Verde,
who is here um today to present
to you about um uh her, her past
success as a.
te ch entrepreneur and fund
manager. She's originally from
Mexico, um, and she's also been
joined here today by um Vartan
Andajan, I apologize for
butchering your last name, her
um, her CFO, so I'm definitely
gonna let them cover their
backgrounds, um, I just want to
share uh the highlights. This is
a, a very early stage preceed
seed, um, uh, venture capital
fund, so, um, this is, they
focus on an area that we
understand there still remains.
Kind of a lack of available
investment capital for very,
very early stage startups, um,
and also, um, institutional
capital, so investors that can
be the first institutional check
um for very early stage
companies here in New Mexico.
Um, the other thing we're really
excited about, um.
Endurance 28 fun too is a
geographically diversified fund,
um, they, um, their geographic
scope is outside the state of
New Mexico, however, they are
committing to deploying our $3
million dollar for dollar here
in the state of New Mexico to
New Mexico businesses. So
they're currently expecting that
that $3 million could um
potentially be invested to 2 to
4, um, uh, New Mexico
businesses, uh, here in the
state, um, and Consuelo, I'm
sure will share more about the
other um commitment.
they've made to coming here and
supporting the ecosystem.
Um, I think that's all I was
gonna highlight just in the
interest of time. I'm gonna hand
it over to Ethan, cuz I'm sure
he's gonna um go much more into
the strengths and the weaknesses
identified, so.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, good morning. Um, I'm
gonna touch on the strategy for
one minute and then the streaks
of weaknesses and then turn it
over to the team to uh get into
detail in the background. Um,
this fund will invest in 20 to
25 early stage companies writing
1 to $2 million dollar checks uh
across companies based in North
and South America, um, in the
climate, health, and economic
opportunity kind of sectors, uh,
target return is 25% net and a
5x net uh multiple.
Um, as Ryan mentioned, it's
really important, dollar for
dollar deployment for a
commitment to this fund will be
made into uh New Mexico
businesses, which we think would
be anywhere between 2 and 4
businesses based on the average
deployment size.
I'm gonna go right to strengths
and weaknesses.
Uh, the strengths here, uh, the
dollars deployed in New Mexico
means that 2 to 4 companies will
get financing from this fund. So
very much, uh, a, a good way to
get your money deployed into the
state.
Second, uh, they have an
extensive network that includes
southern New Mexico, and they'll
talk about that, but we think
it's really important because so
many of the venture capital
groups focus on Albuquerque and
Santa Fe, and I think they'll
look at companies in those in
these areas, but um they have a
very interesting diversified uh
pipeline that includes Southern
New Mexico and it's an area
where we'd like to see more
venture capital flow.
Uh, 3rd, they have attractive
performance from their prior
investments, they've
demonstrated the ability to get
into companies early, uh,
they'll probably talk about it,
but they have a unicorn company
in one of their earlier funds,
um, that's currently marked at
a, at a very high multiple, um,
so really showing the ability to
get into some really interesting
early stage companies, and
they're, they've referenced very
well, um, strong ethics, uh,
great investor, uh.
Company feedback from CEOs.
On the weaknesses side, we've
identified a few key person
risk, uh, you'll hear from
Consuelo and Bartan, a small
team, they're very important if
something were to happen or one
were to leave, it would be uh
very problematic for the fund.
Second, most of the track
record, while strong, is, is
unrealized, and um, that's true
with most venture capital funds
at the moment, but we're hoping
once the IPO market opens up,
there's more M&A that the
tracker would be more realized,
but has not been to date.
A 3rd, limited New Mexico
exposure. They have invested in
the company previously in New
Mexico. They do have a pipeline
in New Mexico, but they will
have to spend time here, part of
what they'll do is, uh, they've
agreed to spend at least come to
New Mexico 4 times a year and
commit the dollars here, so that
should help with that.
For a concentrated portfolio, 20
to 25 companies for a VC is
relatively low number, um, and
we would typically see 40 or 50
companies at this stage, so it's
a relatively concentrated
portfolio. And then the 5th, uh,
uh, weakness would be around the
fundraise. Uh, we think the
strategy is viable anywhere from
15 million and up, uh, and they
are going to be, they have line
of sight to 15 million with a
potential commitment from NFFA,
but they're not, um, you know,
quite there yet. So that is, uh,
those are the weaknesses.
This has been through our full
due diligence process. We've
done reference calls, we've done
background checks and our uh
private markets research
committee believes it to be a
reasonable investment
opportunity for an economic
development oriented investors
such as NMFA.
We'll turn over to the team.
Members of the board. Thank you
for the opportunity to present
uh Enduras 28, um, strategic
plan for investing in New
Mexico's entrepreneurial
ecosystem.
I found that endurance 28, um,
in 2013 to invest in
opportunities where other VCs
were not looking at. It was
still the days when BC,
especially in Silicon Valley,
were saying they would only
invest in startups within a 50
mile radius. I strongly believe
talent is everywhere.
Opportunity is not.
And that bridging the gap on
locks true potential.
And is venture capital, you
know, it makes venture capital
very exciting.
Since then, I've built a team.
It's a hard thing to do, as I'm
sure you know, uh, raise two
funds currently raising the 3rd
fund, invested in 36 companies
at an exit in Van Juan uh when
the company was acquired by
Thermouer, and it allowed us to
return 31% back to LPs. We also
have a multi-billion dollar
company, um, in our first fund.
My background, I'm an electrical
engineer. I have 2 masters in in
science, including one in
science entrepreneurship, how to
commercialize science.
We have a strong team uh where
every individual has an
opportunity to become my
partner. We're very um close and
share very strong values and
work ethic. Baran, who is here,
our CFO, also supports me in the
operations of the firm. Our
advisory board um is very active
and supports not only us but
also our portfolio companies.
Um, their expertise lies in IP
strategy and technology
licensing, scaling, um, high
growth businesses and climate
and sustainability.
Our investment strategy hasn't
changed from the very beginning.
We invest in entrepreneurs that
are tackling some of the world's
uh most difficult challenges
across climate, health, and
economic op opportunity. We
select teams across these three
pillars.
And at the core is the people
that we invest in, those
entrepreneurs who tend to be
very resilient, have strong
values and work ethic, uh, have
no plan B and are motivated for
a greater cause and also they
tend to lack strong BC networks.
Uh, we call them the ambitious
rebels.
We have 22 case studies, um, uh,
two examples of portfolio
companies, uh, Genie Life
Sciences, we invested in January
2020 in the sea uh round, um,
founded by Ritu Lao, Doctor Ritu
Lau. She migrated to the US from
India to, to pursue her PhD. She
then worked, um, went to work
at, um, uh, on the development
of the first, uh, treatment for,
for HIV and also at Rosh where
she uh worked on getting
approval through the FDA for
several uh products and also in
Japan. She's an incredible
entrepreneur and and person and
she, they're currently going
into phase 2 clinical trials.
They tend to be also very uh
capital efficient with they have
raised no more than $15 million
and imagine being on a phase
two, Kosla Ventures also
invested and uh Francois Nader,
who's a board member of Moderna
and has
been um chair and member of
other boards of multi-billion
dollar public companies later
acquired by some big pharma,
just uh became the chairman of,
of Gini Life Sciences.
Aris materials,
um, David and, and David uh
Arriaga and Adriana Vendano
also, they did their PhDs at the
University of Texas in Dallas
and went to found uh artist
materials out of their research
from their PhD.
They're not the typical
entrepreneurs, especially in the
electronic semiconductor
advanced materials space. It was
very challenging for them to, to
raise capital, but they have
broken so many barriers and
we're very proud of their
achievement that
You know, there's no better
validation, even more than
getting investments from, from
some of the top uh VC firms has
been the collaborations and
projects that they have with the
biggest um display and, and, um,
and, um, materials companies
that tend to be in East Asia,
the ones that dominate, they
want also through the Apple
Accelerator and are currently,
you know, with multimillion
dollar contracts and received
very recently an investment.
a contract.
Uh, with Denka, which is a
public Japanese company.
This was also a very recent.
So we are going to search and we
have been actively already
active in this space, searching
and have a pipeline to invest in
entrepreneurs, the ambitious
rebels in the state of New
Mexico. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the board.
Thank you for having us today.
How we view our role within the
New Mexico startup ecosystem is
not approaching it through any
individual organization, but
rather as a whole. So we believe
that connecting with the
organizations, institutions that
support entrepreneurship is a
true way for us to find.
opportunities as entrepreneurs
that can lead us to startup
success and actually provide a
lot of value to the state of New
Mexico.
Also, um, I need some brought up
this point. We have a deep
connection with the South New
Mexico region. I grew up in
Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, spent
most of my life there, which
gives us a deep network of the
Las Cruz's El Paso Juarez
borderplex region, as it's
called.
Um, so what we already, um, even
before this diligence process,
we already spotted that as an
area where our insight as
venture capitalists can connect
with the key value at that that
board provides, and we know that
it really provides a benefit to
New Mexico through the
collaboration of those three
regions. So it's an area that
we're very keen to tap into as a
as a key.
Pipeline generation and as a
component of our value add to
the, to the state.
Um, page 187 really summarizes
what we'll talk about in further
slides, which is that we don't
view our role purely as coming
in as an investor, but rather,
um.
Equally or even more so as
providing time and human
resources investment to the
state, which you'll see from the
from the next few pages of the
book. The
3 million commitment as as Ryan
and Ethan mentioned is, it's
going to be a dollar for dollar
investment in New Mexico
startups.
But we don't view investing as
just providing capital. We view
that as step one in our path as
investors in which we really
because of the stage we invest
in, we roll up our sleeves and
work alongside the founders of
our portfolio to actually help
them as they grow and deal with
the challenges that come with
being so early in the
development stage would be as a
core component of our investing.
Um, and then on the team
capital, we don't, we haven't
allocated a specific individual
of the team to be designated to
New Mexico. We view this as a
whole firm what effort with our
advisors are already tapping
into and scoping out the diverse
institutions that are in the
state will commit to come in as
a team because we view venture
capital as a relationship
building and we truly think and
believe and we've seen that it
is through building
relationships that we can
actually create value and.
opportunities. So we're looking
forward to actually doing that
as a team and collaborating with
the state as we um
As we go forward.
Yes, uh, I'm.
We also are planning to organize
and host a healthy futures
challenge in the state of New
Mexico in partnership with local
institutions, focusing on a
healthy planet, healthy people
and healthy economies in um
these opportunities to provide a
space and uh with structure and
also a framework that would lead
eventually to these um
challenge. I think this is a
great opportunity also for us to
kind of work from the very
beginning with all the key uh
stakeholders in the
and uh research and institutions
and universities or also those
companies and those
entrepreneurs that we want to be
investing in.
We also have um noticed along
the over 10 years that I've been
investing that these
entrepreneurs, the ambitious
rebels that tend to lack those
strong VC networks, they need
more support, obviously in
plugging in and coming into
those investors and, and
building those connections
because typically they required
a lot of time or for someone to
have gone to such and such
university and started with the
son of this, you know, or
someone or the daughter of, of
a, of a BC and
It's something we actively do
also through I'm a Kaufman
fellow as well, so it's a
network of over 800 BCs across
the, the world, very strong,
with very strong relationships,
and that's something that we
also want to do to bring other
investors into the companies
that we invest in the state.
We also are planning to organize
the founder's retreat in the
state of New Mexico. We have
been doing this for, uh, well,
since the
Just after the pandemic 2022 I
think it was the first time
there's retreat. Uh, we have
increased the first one was like
only one day and we have
increased it 2 days because the
entrepreneurs have demanded that
they really get a lot of value
where we provide uh workshops
like resilient, uh, resilience
workshops, negotiations,
decision making, storytelling,
and uh also a space for founders
and entrepreneurs to interact
them on each other. And this has
been incredibly valuable for,
for them, that's.
What we have heard.
So we also open these retreats
to entrepreneurs that are in our
pipeline, even if we haven't
invested. Uh, we believe that at
the core of venture capital are
people, entrepreneurs and
investors, and we strongly focus
on supporting entrepreneurs. We
do this with intention and
purpose. And the consequence of
this approach is a community
where individuals can be
authentic and they can come
together to co-create impactful
businesses.
We also aim to attract talent
and entrepreneurs to the state.
We have um companies that are
based, you know, all over, um.
We don't have a specific
geographic focus, ours is the um
go and search for opportunities
where others are not looking,
and we will some are always
looking to relocate or find
talent, so that's also something
we're gonna be aiming for.
We're looking forward to
expanding our focus and approach
that results in performance and
an incredible diversity of
entrepreneurs.
We want to be part of the
entrepreneurial ecosystem in the
state of New Mexico and invest
and support.
talented entrepreneurs in the
state.
The ambitious rebels that can
create a better future for all.
Thank you very much.
from
the
I'd like to say been to DC and,
uh, I think, uh, having, uh,
No female venture capitalist,
uh, out of Mexico it just a.
economy, it's, it's fantastic
and uh
Which certainly the first year.
That's good. Thank you very
much.
Any other questions
movement.
Motion for approval is their
second.
is state and seconded.
Is there any discussion?
I.
I was supposed.
Thank you very much. We
appreciate it. Thank you.
Next is our update from uh Chazo
from the Finance and Disclosure
Committee.
Madam Chairman, it will be very
brief because I was unable to
attend. Uh, I do see from our
report that uh remember Garcia
chaired the meeting of
Finance and disclosure
committee, so I want to thank
him, uh, for that, uh, I can see
that we went through a
presentation of uh our
investment report, uh, we also
went to President bond issue
forecast.
uh worked on an authorizing and
delegating uh resolution uh for
Senate, uh.
For seniorly in public project
involving
revenue bond series 2025A, uh.
Counselor A mental
Presenting that to us here in
very short fashion.
We, uh, the full contract uh for
the extension of BNSF $50
million line of credit, which
will also be dealt with here, uh
very shortly as well, uh uh
listen to the budget
performance, uh.
Report, so, uh
He was very, uh, rather lengthy
meeting and uh I like that.
Thank you. Any questions for the
um
Committee
If not, we'll move to the next
item of business, 10.2% approval
of the Fourth Amendment to the
New Mexico DOT NSF line of
credit.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. I know
it's getting late. I know you'd
rather be sitting around the
fireplace with some roasted
chestnuts and some wasa, but you
get to put up with me for a
couple more. So, uh, 10.2 is the
extension of about $50 million
line of credit with BNSF. This
line of credit has been in place
for several years. It goes back
to the formation of the rail
runner. DOT was required as part
of their uh
Putting in the rail runner that
they had to have originally they
had to have a $50 million escrow
account where they had cash tied
up over the years, the OT and
Finance Authority work with them
to allow them to put in place a
line of credit.
This is merely another extension
of that line of credit, Wells
Fargo has been the bank, uh,
essentially the only bank that's
been willing to provide it. The,
the likelihood of drawing on the
line of credit is nearly 0 if it
involves, um, as I've said many
times, uh probably the.
Unfortunately, one of the most
catastrophic train incidents
that would have to occur in
order to even get to the line in
years of protracted litigation.
The issue with this line of
credit is that the NSF and um is
a third party that can draw on
the line, but that's just the
agreement that they were that
they entered into as being able
to operate the rail. Uh, this
Fourth Amendment does two
things. It simply extends it for
3 years, and it changes the
undrawn fee, which will continue
to be the same, uh, the undrawn
fee goes from 19 basis points.
The 22 basis points that are the
those are the only changes to
this line of credit, Wells Fargo
will continue to monitor it. Um,
the resolution that is before
you, uh, today for this
extension comes with a couple of
documents, uh, Madam Chair, um,
memberszo, member Nichols, and
Mary Lesson's signatures, they
require wet signatures. I'll
just bring them to you after the
meeting. And with that, um I'll
for any questions, um.
And then we can move on.
Any questions for board members?
No questions. Um, if there are
no questions, do I hear a motion
for approval.
Motion is made is there a
second.
Se manager
and seconded, um.
To approve, is there any
discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
I.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. I'm sure I
should add an important piece
that state transportation
commission does direct us to
enter into this line of credit.
They have not met and approved
this yet. They, they've called a
special meeting on the 16th.
Since this fell in between their
meeting cycle, um, it, it will
be before then, we do expect no
issues within the agenda, so
your approval today is
contingent upon their approval
and then we'll close on the
18th.
OK. Thank you for that
clarification.
And next is our
2025 APPRF bonds, um, with us
today is Lauren Herrera, our
disclosure counsel from Warwick,
Brad Patterson are on council
from Gilmore and Bell Chip is on
the phone, uh, Chip will do the
usual walk you through the, uh,
the underlying transaction.
the sale, um, then we'll turn it
over to Lauren to walk you
through the POS presentation,
and then lastly, Brad, we'll go
through the authorizing and
delegating resolution, so we can
move this forward. So I'll turn
it over to Lauren.
Turn it over to Chip.
I was sure you're saying Lauren
or Lawrence, I thought suddenly
we're getting formal.
Um,
Your audio is is not good this
morning.
Yeah, I'm
very sorry for that. It's uh,
uh, for some reason we're we had
a new computers in my uh.
My uh, AirPods are not
connected. Can you hear me OK,
if I shout.
Actually,
maybe don't shout.
And can you put like a black,
maybe put a black hood on, cause
that would really make it sound
pretty cool.
OK, um,
How was this
Maybe we maybe we suggest that
you log out and log back in.
I think I'm sure if you could
just hit the high notes cause I
it would be distracting to the,
the distortion is distracting.
Yeah, if you, um, I, I can, I
can give it a shot and then
it'll mark, uh, Lovato is here
as well. Again, this is a, a
rather straightforward, um.
on sale that we're doing.
Um, for the 2025 we're breaking
it up into um into two different
components. It's gonna be uh in
uh two different series, A1s and
A2.
Um, it is a not to exceed amount
of somewhere around 125 $million
million but, um, again, this is
um
I don't know, you know, very
briefly, if there's, you know,
maybe one or two high points
that you have, um,
Yeah,
I
We have 2 sub-series, one with a
10 year call.
One of the
farmer's house, Kennedy has
requested anytime calls, so
that's our separating it. It's
an expensive option. We don't
want to impose that option on a
reimbursement or the other 3D
simultaneously over so that's.
The main reason for the uh the
separation.
Um,
the point I make is the reason
that we're
to you this early is that we
need a 30 day separation between
court approval.
I was gonna go
you and given the timing of the
January meeting, we
not have had that 30 days, uh,
in order to
some of the borrowers
want to, uh, needed the closing
to a for in February, so it's
really all.
Yeah
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Um.
We will turn it over to Lauren
and go through the list.
Madam chair, a member of the
boards, um, thank you for having
me here today, um, with your
permission, I'll walk through
the disclosure document, uh, in
the customary manner. So I will
mention um that on page 219
preceding the um disclosure
document itself is a brief
summary of the differences um in
this disclosure document and the
one that was most recently
approved in connection with the
2024 PBRF issue and that close
this um last October 2024.
Um, so then starting on page 220
of your board packet. We have
the cover page for the
disclosure document, um, as
noted, we have both of these
sub-series um broken out and
otherwise they cover um
summarizes the basic terms of
the bonds, um, redemption
provisions, interest payment
dates.
And the um underwriting
syndicate that will assist in
the sale of the bonds.
On pages 221 and 222. We have
preliminary amortization
schedules for the bonds. Um,
this is subject to update on the
date of sale of the bonds, um,
and so the pricing scale once
it's set, um, these amounts
will, will shift slightly.
Moving to page 224. Um, we have
here listed the members of the
board. He officials that served
the authority as well as um
members of the financing team
that assist in the.
page 226. Um, this begins the
fore part of the official
statement again, um, listing
both of the sub-series and
providing a, a very high-level
summary of the basic terms of
the bonds.
Um, on age starting at the
bottom of page 229. Um, we go
into a little bit more granular
detail about the basic terms of
the bonds, interest payment
dates.
on page 230, we have um a
summary of the optional
redemption features for each of
the series, um, they differ here
as mentioned um because of
requirements for the, for to um
to repay and more timely manner.
And so that has a shorter call
date then um would be typical
for the balance of the A1 bonds.
Um, moving to page 232. We have
a summary of the description for
security and sources of payment
for the bonds, including the
trust estate, which secures the
repayment of the bonds through
the um
The collection of agreement
revenues from the governmental
units that are the um recipients
of loans from these bonds.
Starting on page 233. We have 3
tables that provide some um
additional support and
description for the security and
repayment of the bonds.
The table, the table on page
233, um, describes the revenues
um from different
agreement revenues that will be
derived um in the current fiscal
year 2024 to 25.
On page 234. We have the top 10
governmental units, which you're
expected to generate the largest
agreement revenues for repayment
of the bonds.
And then on page 236. We have um
a 5-year
History here for governmental
gross receipts, tax
distributions.
As we do then to page 242.
Um, we have a, a summary here of
outstanding senior lien bonds
that have been issued pursuant
to the PPRF program and then on
page 244, a summary of um
subordinate lien obligations
under the same program.
As we move to page 245. We have
a description of the plan of
financing, um, including sources
and uses of funds for each of
the two series of bonds, um,
both of these tables remain
blank until pricing and
following final pricing, uh,
this information will be
completed for the final official
statement.
Um, for page 247 here, we have
annual debt service
requirements. Um, so this
includes the preliminary
amortization information for
both series of bonds as well as
other outstanding senior lien
bonds, um, and this table
informs the table that we have
on page 249, where we pair those
um total annual debt services
against the estimated annual
coverage ratios in each year
that bonds are expected to be
outstanding.
Beginning on page 250, we have a
description of the authority and
its powers.
On page 252, um, we named the
governing board members as well
as key staff members um that
serve the authority.
Moving to
A 256. We have a description of
the underwriting syndicate,
which will be selling your bonds
and the expected um bond
purchase agreement that will
govern that sale.
And then on page 259, about
halfway down.
We begin a summary of the
continuing disclosure
undertaking that will be
connected with this long
issuance. Um, this is in similar
format as it has been uh the
case for other senior lien
obligations for the authority
and requires um a filing of an
annual report as well as
material event notices.
We go to page 265 um and move
into the appendices that support
the information in the fore part
of the official statement.
Appendix A includes information
on the governmental units
expected to receive loans from
proceeds of the bonds, as well
as the largest repayment
obligations, um, and so pages um
266 and 268 again provide uh
more detailed description on
this governmental units, um, and
the types of projects which are
expected to be financed with the
loans that they receive.
on pages 269 and 200.
269 do you have a summary of
those five largest repayment
obligations which are currently
outstanding.
Beginning on page 270, um, we
have Appendix B, which is an
extract of certain provisions of
the indenture which governs um
the basic financing terms and
flow of funds for the bonds.
We moved forward quite a bit to
page 292, which is Appendix C,
um, appendix C includes a number
of economic and demographic
points of information for the
state of New Mexico. Um, the
majority of these tables are in
final form, but um there are a
couple which you're waiting for
year-end updates from federal
agencies which provide the data.
This will be finalized prior to
posting.
On page 298, we have Appendix D,
which is the form of bond
council opinion which, which is
expected to be delivered at
closing by Mr. Patterson.
um appendix E is on page 300.
that provides a description of
the book entry process, which is
required for any bonds which are
issued through the depository
trust company.
Um, finally we end on page 302
Appendix F and the authority's
most recent audit will be
appended for the version of this
which is posted and made
available to investors.
I know I walked through that
fairly quickly, um, but I stand
for comments should you have any
questions or comments from board
members.
We will turn it over to Brad go
through the authorizing and
delegating resolution that
starts on page.
3.
I have a page 204, so I don't
know.
3, but
Madam Chair, members of the
board. Happy holidays to you,
uh, Brad Patterson.
Um, offering to Gilmore and Bell
bond counsel for the Finance
Authority, uh, what we have
before us today is an
authorizing and delegating
resolution, uh, as the name of
the title of the resolution
suggests we are authorizing
something and that something is
going to be a series of bonds,
the series 2025 Bonds senior
lean revenue bonds, uh, and also
the designates to certain
officials the ability to
determine the final terms of the
bonds, as we've done in past
times, we have authorized the
bonds and delegated to certain
individuals.
The uh the power to go ahead and
determine the final terms of
those bonds as long as those
bonds are within certain
parameters that are authorized
by the board, um, typically, the
designated officers we've talked
about who we would like to have
is that, um, it's a very
interesting process. I don't
know whether or not we have any
volunteers at this time as to
who would like to do it, um,
but, uh, we can always defer to
another time, but it has to be
the chair or vice chair, uh.
members of the board, uh, and
the, the CEO and some members of
the finance authorities as long
as the, as long as the CEO
designates the um the
Members of the Finance Authority
act in that capacity.
So I don't know whether or not
folks would like to go ahead and
make that determination at this
point.
I'm sure, I'm happy to, to sit
down.
Are you during the legislative
session because this is gonna
come up in January, right?
I am, but I, I should be able to
have some time to do it. We
normally don't get too busy
until the 2nd 30 days of the
session. OK. Thank you for that.
Thank you all for that.
And I did have Marcus Trujillo
on my bingo card for that.
So
Um
Very well, um, the, the, the
parameters that are set forth in
this resolution are the uh
maximum principal amount of
bonds as has been mentioned
previously that maximum amount
is $125 million.
The maximum maturity for these
bonds cannot extend beyond June
1, 2054.
Maximum true interest cost
cannot exceed 5.5% and the
maximum coupon cannot exceed
5.5%.
Uh, the
any kind of discount the bonds
may be sold with cannot exceed
2%.
And the maximum amount of
rider's discount cannot exceed
0.75%.
Um, the resolution of also
authorizes a variety of other
documents, including the
preliminary official statement,
uh, that, um, Ms. Herrera just
uh had run through, uh, it also
authorizes a supplemental
indenture, uh, as well as bond
first agreement, uh, and a
continuous disclosure and
dissemination agent agreements,
uh, with that, I will be happy
to.
Any
on the resolution.
If not, we're asking for a
motion to approve.
that's correct with approval of
this resolution that will allow
us to post the POS and move
forward with the bonds that
chips said earlier, um.
the, the reason for the timing
is just because of the meeting
schedules, so. Thank you.
I'll make that, you know, and
I'll second that motion in
Cherokee. This is.
Thank you,
Ma.
I don't know.
is
Motion has been made and
seconded.
Um, to approve the resolution.
Um, is there any
All those in favor, say I.
All those oppose same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you if I may real quick
just say thank you.
everyone.
Really appreciate the time here.
Um, thank you, Marquita.
I make it great.
Oh, I'll come up with something
like, uh, more importantly,
thank you, Brian.
To Charlotte and Christian
brother.
The legal route.
try to surround yourself with.
People that are smarter than you
and I surely did that.
So I encourage you to keep doing
the right thing, keep, keep
disclosing conflicts when they
come up, and most importantly,
keep asking difficult questions
in particularly when John Brooks
presents that is the most
important time to ask those
difficult questions. So thank
you. You're welcome. Thank you.
Good luck in your new adventure.
We'll see you on the other side.
I hope so.
Next item 10.4 the Q1.
2025 budget performance.
Or like, you know.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
we're happy to present.
But
A report through September 30 R
Q1, uh, at this point, there's
not a lot of experience uh in
that period to make us think
that uh we're all.
significantly under or over,
Uh, the only one adjustment that
we have.
Is uh $170 million that we
expected to received last year.
we got excuse me, this year we
got just a few days before the
start of fiscal year, and that's
the only adjustment at this
point, no changes to our
projections.
You're in for either revenues or
expenditures and.
I, I won't go any further unless
you have any questions. I know.
Any questions?
Motion has been made to approve
the um Q1 budget performance
report. Is there a second?
Motion has been made and
seconded, are there any are
there any discussion?
All those in favor say I, I.
All those oppose same sign.
What she carries.
Report is approved.
Now we move to item 10.5, the Q1
2025 disadvantage.
Uh, good morning, Adam chair,
members of the board.
Today is a rare day that you
have a privilege of having 3
Bradleys in the room.
So, I'm reporting on the
disadvantage funding, uh, this
is a provided for in our rules,
uh, specifically it provides our
rules provide that the board may
designate.
to 20% of GGRT.
Less than 35% reserve for
allocated in various purposes.
And my resolution
May amount may approve.
Um, allocate an amount over that
20% is.
Um, we, the disadvantaged loans
are for those communities in New
Mexico.
That are 80% of the median
household income.
of the state.
And so
With that, those are qualified
entities, um.
And then recently, in August, I
believe, uh, the board
Approved the debt management
policy.
Which it states that we will be
contributing 15% of GGRT.
Well if you take
Uh, you'll see what the percent
here.
If you were to take 20%.
Of the 100% minus the 35, you
ended up 13%.
And so in our debt management
policy, we're actually
contributing 2% more than what
the rules, uh, specifically
state, but you're allowed to do
so. In addition to that, uh,
we're also committing
Debt service paid in the prior
year from disadvantaged loans to
the next fiscal year's
disadvantaged loan budget.
And that's laid out in the first
part of the uh memo. Uh, we had
GGRT of 38 million.
15% is 5.7%, uh, in 2024, we
received 2.7 million in debt
service. That would be principal
and interest from priorly
issued.
Disadvantaged loans, bringing a
total budget of 8.43 million.
In the first quarter, we all, we
approved, you approved, a 3.43
million, or 39.6% of the
disadvantaged budget.
We have 5,095,000 remaining for
the rest of the fiscal year.
Now the rest of the charts.
is really where the loans have
been going. And so the first
chart we are showing.
Who were uh what client types we
are, uh, that are receiving
disadvantaged loans, as you can
notice, the school districts
have been growing substantially.
Um, there's a lower bar, the,
the bottom bar. Um,
The 2nd graph, no surprise
because it's school districts,
the general obligation bonds are
the primary, uh,
Revenue pledge that uh is done.
The 3rd chart, uh, what we're
doing is we're showing, uh, the
disadvantaged funding by county
and client type.
That we get an idea of where the
money is going and what client
types it's going to in those
counties.
The 4th chart, that is, uh,
Disadvantaged loans.
Um, issued after 2018.
And there's a reason why that
is, and it tells us how much
Debt surface, we will receive in
the future, and by what client
type?
The reason why I segrerate this
is in 2018 NMFA changed its
policies and separates the
disadvantaged loans from the
entire loan package. Prior to
that, it was all wrapped up into
one loan, and to go in and
actually ferret out.
The disadvantaged portion of all
those loans prior to 2018, um,
It was really pretty difficult,
so what we did is
Um, I did.
In total, get those numbers in
the last chart shows the uh
revenue.
With the loans prior to 2018
disadvantaged loans prior to 18
and those subsequent. So that at
this point in time,
would be the debt service
portion of the budget for
disadvantaged funding going into
the future.
Every new disadvantaged funding
loan that is approved by the
board, adds to this future
revenue.
For disadvantaged funding.
And with that, I stand for
questions.
Uh, Madam Chair, I would just
add the reason we're presenting
this to you is, is because our
policies is required to give you
a quarterly update or report on
how that disadvantaged funding.
Thank you, much appreciated. Any
questions from board members on
the report?
No, thank you. Thanks for your
time and for the report.
Next is our update on activities
from the Audit Committee Chair
Burke. Keith members of the
board, uh, there was not a
quorum present at this month's
uh audit committee meeting. Uh,
however, uh, members, uh,
Shelton and Collins heard uh
reports on the presentation of
financial statements for the 1st
quarter, as well as an update on
the uh the building project, um,
Oscar will be presenting uh the
financial statements for.
approval next. Um, I did have an
opportunity to review the
statements and uh I'll, uh, uh,
you know, for the sake of
brevity, not make a whole lot of
comments, um, but I think the,
the board should know our
allowance uh for bad debts, uh,
related to the small business
recovery, uh, loan fund, um, is
increasing quite a bit, which we
expected those funds came over
from uh the State Investment
council, so it's
It's not a, a reflection of the
general activity, uh, of the
finance authority and uh if you
were to remove it, our bad, bad
debt allowance would be well
below the average that you see
in banks across the country. So
with that, uh, I'll stand for
any questions unless there's
things, uh, executive Russell
would like to add about the
meeting.
Um, no, madam Chair, we just
note that we spent a lot of time
focusing on the new boardroom,
the pictures of the construction
that was about 5 minutes of the
meeting, so it looks good, by
the way.
Thank you for that update. Any,
any questions?
Richard Burke.
If not the last item on our
agenda today for action 11.2,
um, the quarterly financial
statements and performance
indicators.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, uh, do you
have, as we always do at every
quarter present to you the
quarterly report, um, nothing
significant to point out at this
point, you know, our net
position continues to grow. We
went up $15 million. We're about
a little bit more than a billion
dollars at this point, our total
loans receivable outstanding
principle with a loans is more
than $2 billion and, and I just
highlight that because um I
wanted to follow up with what
Chairman
Burke pointed out, and that is
that uh the vast majority and
nearly $45 million of the $49
million allowance for bad debt
is attributable to a small
business recovery loan program,
which by the way, we're going to
be offloading that for loan
servicing purposes next week, so
we'll be coming to a very
interesting uh milestone there.
Uh, beyond that, I, I just want
to point out one thing that
we're very proud of, and that is
this, these are the first
financial statements where our,
our all the the individual
accountants, uh, prepared the
financial statements for their
programs.
Uh, this marks a very
significant milestone for us. It
used to be that the auditors did
our financial statements.
Uh, and then over the years we
have been refining that and then
turned into us doing them, doing
them every month, and now uh
we'll be doing uh our
accountants. There will be a lot
of people that will be
generating financial statements.
So.
You know, should, uh, we be
struck by, by uh by lightning or
a meter strike or something like
that, there'll be lots of people
in the department that will be
able to prepare the financial
statements and we'll never go
back to those days where
one person is a, is the only
person to prepare these very
complicated financial statements
for NMFA. I, I stand back, uh,
for any questions and um and
kudos. I just want to add kudos
to the staff, um, they're
they're terrific staff. These
things are actually a lot more
complicated than they might
seem. And uh they've done a good
job.
Thank you. Thanks for all the
work that's gone into preparing
them, um.
Any questions?
On the financial statements.
Or comments
are for poo.
Thank you. There's a motion to
approve. Is there a second?
Second,
Motion is made and seconded any
discussion.
No discussion. All those in
favor say aye.
Although supposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
So, a quick reminder that the
next board meeting um is
Thursday, January 30th, 9:00
a.m. on Zoom, so, uh, right now
we have scheduled the January,
February and March meetings on
Zoom. There is a chance that we
may go back in person if the
construction project is finished
in March, but that will be
publicly noticed and all board
members will be made aware.
With that, we stand adjourn.
Thank you, thank you.
gonna keep
it's gonna keep quiet. I
it's gonna keep quiet
right.
one for you.
There
that's his last official action.
You know he
likes.
I
Yeah.
