not yet been certified complete,
they must submit the
requisitions by January 23rd,
January 23rd is the deadline to
submit your readiness
application, um, and that is
defined as a project
continuation per water trust
board policy.
In 2023, we also had changes
that require the applicants
reach to the reach out to the
office of the state engineer
during the project application,
so that will allow entities that
are out of compliance with
office of the state engineer,
more time to meet that
compliance by the ending of that
deadline, and that deadline to
meet that compliance to uh for
the applicants, not only on
Office of the State Engineer
regulatory compliance, but also
on environment department
drinking water, that
Deadline is March 14th, uh, with
regards to the office of the
state engineer, those applicants
have already been notified of
their compliance issues and also
notified of when they need to
meet that deadline.
The project management team will
review the waiver request and
we're talking about the
readiness applications, um, and
they will make those
recommendations to the project
review committee. Staff expects
to present those waiver requests
to this board on April 2nd, and
we um expected that this board
will make funding
recommendations to the um for
for the 2025 award on April
22nd.
The project review committee has
reviewed these this
recommendation and concurs with
staff's recommendation and staff
recommends that all 84 projects
on the attached spreadsheet be
recommended to the legislature
for authorization for potential
funding from the water project
fund.
And with that, Madam Chair, I
will stand for any questions.
Thank you, Angela. Do we have
any questions? Madam Chair, I
don't have any questions, but I
guess I have a few comments that
I'd like to make. This seems
like this is the 3rd or 4th year
in a row in which virtually
every project that has applied
is going to be recommended for
funding.
Can you remind me last year how
many of those since we, everyone
that applied, with the exception
of one because they didn't meet
up a waiver, they didn't get the
waiver that they wanted, um, all
the rest of them got recommended
and how many of those got
funded?
So out of the ones that that um
Moved forward, so we did have, I
think 1 or 2 that either did not
submit the readiness application
or remove their readiness
application, um, we should also
note that at the time that this
board made that recommendation,
I think the um gap was like 200
200+% from what we had
available, um, all of them, I
believe, did get funded.
Um, either in phased amounts or
their full requested amounts,
but we also had an additional um
appropriation to the legislate
from the legislature, I think
150 million.
Um, so all of the projects were
Um, funded either in the
requested amount or in a phased
as in standalone we talked about
phase, we talked about they were
perhaps awarded for just
planning or design or design.
OK, thank you, because my
concern about recommending every
project is that we're setting up
false expectations for those
entities that are at the sort of
bottom of the list, but over the
last several years, we've been
able to um get them both
authorized and at least
virtually all funded is.
The majority of them have been
funded or more than the majority
of actually I take that back, we
did have some, I, I, I
apologize. We did have, we did
have a 2nd iteration.
If this board will recall that
um some of those were funded,
but we did have some that did
meet that 2nd iteration with
large dollar amounts that
they've come um on this section
is or on this um.
Uh
Cycle as well.
Um, so, so our expectations,
you, you're absolutely right,
but we have the expectations
also and and everybody has been
informed of what we, what the
amount is and what we have
available. If you look, we do
have quite a bit of projects
that are coming in for plan
design and construct.
Um, we've, you know, reiterated
to these.
I said, it's wonderful that
you're asking for all of it,
but, you know, the, the project
management team will try to
figure out who who actually what
what project are you actually
ready for? Um, we have a lot of
dull uh high dollar amounts for
construction projects as well,
um, but we do have a list from
the Office of the State Engineer
of probably maybe 2023 that have
um regulatory issues that
they're working on.
Um, we don't have the list from
the drinking water bureau
either. We do have
I would say a little bit more
than a handful of applicants
that don't have their audits
that are behind in their audits.
So we took all of that into
consideration to see, you know,
Everybody will have a Hail Mary,
you know, let's get everything
in, in, in place and hope, so I,
I, I know that our expectation
is especially if they go
forward, that they may get
funded, um, but we do have a lot
of
Um, items or, you know, uh or um
things in place that they may
not either submit the readiness
application or may not be
regulatory or policy compliance.
Thank you for that. So I just to
make sure I'm, we're on the same
page. All of these projects will
be recommended, um, the ones
that have been listed, the ones
that are listed here, we won't
have money for all of them at
this point. There may be money
added, there may not, um, and
there's still a number of
hurdles they have to meet. So in
addition to being legislatively
authorized.
ized They have to submit their
readiness application and then
there's at least 3 of them that
have already been identified as
needing to get into good
standing with the Office of the
state engineer and another
handful or two with the
environment department's
drinking water bureau on its
state regulations, so they have
a couple of months until what,
March, is that until March to
get all of that regulatory
compliance cleared up and to
make sure their audits that they
are in uh step with the um state
auditor and then we'll go in and
make recommendations based on
fully fundable phases or phases
that they can do within about a
24 month period. Correct. OK. I
just, there's a lot going on
with this list. I have done this
for many years and I still have
to stop and take a step back and
say, OK, what are we doing
again? That's all cause it's a
lot of projects and we know we
don't have the money for
everything that's being
requested. And we do have the,
the 14, um.
Applicants that um this board
approved the waivers for the
preliminary and a lot of those
if, you know, were high dollar
amounts and not sure that they
can make the project
continuation, um, so we have the
another obstacle that you so
there's one more hurdle for them
necessarily to to clear which is
that they have to show that they
have spent prior awards down to
a certain level before they'll
get another potential chance at
uh getting funded. OK. So this
is a
Good day. Everyone's getting
recommended, but it's not a
great day cause there's still
some hurdles that they have to
meet in order to be on that
fundable list in the spring. OK,
Madam Chair, thank you for the
time.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um, those
are excellent points and good
luck to everybody on the list to
get all the work done. Um.
Are there any other questions or
comments, Angela, did you have
any other projects that you
wanted to highlight or any other
things that we should be aware
of. I did have and you'll look
on the list, we do have um the
city of Santa Fe that is
highlighted, and the reason why
they're highlighted, one of the
requirements in order to submit
an application is that they have
to pass a resolution allowing
them because there is a
financial component or a loan
component, so they have to pass
a resolution within.
They, um, you know, uh,
Uh, they're, they're uh basis to
um approve of applying for an
application. The city of Santa
Fe was unable to pass that
resolution, they are scheduled
to pass it tomorrow, so we had
to highlight it because at this
time, um, they aren't, how do I
say?
In in the paper world, they
aren't allowed to submit an
application until we have that
resolution.
So that's, that was the
highlighted for those two.
Madam Chair and Angela weren't
there
or needed to highlight that real
quick as well. Thank you. Um, we
did have what the list that we
brought before to the project
review committee, we had 2
projects, um, I believe we had,
uh, Riodoso that was classified,
it was a dam project that they
submitted a water storage um
application, but it actually is
a flood prevention, so that was
moved up um to the flood
prevention category, and I
believe the other
one was Rosedale that was um a
concert or it was submitted a
water storage application, but
it was actually, it's a meter
project, so what it actually is
in the water conservation um
category type. Thank you,
members.
Madam Chair.
OK.
This year we have more money
than we've ever bought what I
worry about is
Staying ahead of the curve. We
know in 2026, we'll have
Wastewater asked on this amount
of money.
My question is, and this is to
the board, right? We all have
our stakeholders.
We want to run a bill to back
bill that delta, right? We're
almost what's the best way for
us to do that? Is it just like
last year where it's a cross
board or in
Madam Chair, um, a bucket of
money because there are, as
we've discussed, there are a
number of hurdles that have to
be met and um if you do them by
project type, we may be holding
on to that money for a long
time. So if our goal is to get
them invested into Read projects
then giving the board the
discretion.
to uh a approved award that
money as it sees fit and then
allowing the finance authority
to um
Oversee that as efficiently as
possible is the best way for us
to move forward.
Thank you for that. Um, what is
the best way for the board to
Show their support for that,
Madam Chair, I would say show up
to House Appropriations and
Senate Finance, um, you know,
this is a budgetary issue and
I'm sure water conservation
committee would, um,
Or the water committees would
also be approving of, uh, but
This tends to be a very popular
bill, may be a project from time
to time that people question or
they don't like cause they've
got some burr in their paw, but
this is a very popular bill and
I'll note that we have almost
40.
Um, municipalities.
Last year we had 19.
On, but, you know, we have about
40% of our municipalities are
listed here. It's got broader
geographic dispersion than I
think we've ever seen in a
larger percentage of users being
represented, um, and it was
always popular before that. I
think 3 years ago, we might have
had 6 municipalities, maybe.
Um, 7. So, so I think it's gonna
be a popular bill. It's about
voicing the need for to fill
that gap and using whatever ear
you have to make that message
known. And it appears that every
year we seem to get new um
clients, new applicants that we
haven't seen or that we've never
they've never applied to the
water trust board or some that
the last time they applied was
maybe in 2010 or earlier, and
there are 3 tribal entities. So
we're seeing.
a broad
Diversity of applicant types.
Uh, project types and now, um,
you know, geographic dispersion.
So, I think if we're gonna ask
for it, this would be the bill
to ask for, to ask the support
for in, in Medicare, we'll,
we'll share uh what we pulled
together. We try to pull all of
the data the needs are in the
state, right?
Cities are 10% of the systems
that serve 70% of the
population.
We're going to use that data to
then
I would also say, Madam Chair,
that there are a lot of very
small systems represented as
well. The step the Water Trust
board took a couple of years ago
to allow for um planning only uh
or design only grants, I think
has been very helpful. The small
systems that did not have access
to this kind of funding, have
access as a result of some of
the changes that the board made
a couple of years ago. So you're
seeing more big systems and
folks that never had access
before. um uh, applying to the
water trusts board. So.
This really is the kind of bill
that I think would get a broad
amount of support.
should
should get along. Thank you for
that. I completely agree that
water trust board funding is
critical for our state and there
are so many projects in need as
represented in this list and
like as you said, as we expand
to wastewater projects as well,
um, and reaching out to those
smaller systems that sometimes
don't have the capacity to to
complete grants themselves. I
think there's a lot of
opportunity there to find more
water and wastewater projects,
um, through, through this.
program, so I'm really
appreciative of all the work
that that NMFA has done and
others to, um.
To to make those changes and to
support this and um I agree that
we all need to be out there
speaking to our legislature.
About this upcoming bill. Thank
you.
Um
Are there any other questions or
comments?
Before we move to a vote.
Great.
Um, do we, so I guess we're
voting on movie, um, do we have
a motion?
And this one would require a
roll roll call or no just a
Madam I'm sure that's probably
safest. OK, so let's do a roll
call though.
Chair Anderson
Yes.
Uh, number 40.
Yes.
Parson.
Remember Chang.
Yes.
Remember a deal?
I
Remember John.
Yes.
Remember Royal?
Yes.
Remember Russell?
Yes.
Remember Thompson.
Yes
Van Dyke.
Yes
And remember Maitland?
Motion passes.
Thank you. Thank you. Great.
Um, our next item on the agenda
is to discuss next meetings.
So Madam Chair, at the beginning
of the um
session or the, this cycle,
staff submitted a list of
recommended, uh,
Uh, board meeting dates and
committee dates, and that was
really just for the project
application cycle. So it dealt
with when we would um hear from
applicants for their, uh,
projects it dealt with when they
would, when we'd look at the uh
preliminary approvals and the
final approvals. It did not deal
with all the other things that
the water trusts board has going
on. We talked earlier about uh
wastewater now being added, we
need to amend those rules on the
interstate stream Commission has
uh a.
approved a policy document for
us to move forward on what I'll
call that House Bill 200 effort
and so that needs some work by a
policy committee and then so
that the finance authority can
move forward and then we are
moving forward, as you know,
with the um authority granted to
us under House Bill 211 to
provide small system technical
assistance planning and the
regionalization, um, uh.
Facilitation. So there needs to
be some policy work there, so we
don't have that currently on the
schedule, but we would like to
schedule a policy committee
meeting at least one in November
and have a board meeting
thereafter, uh, remotely, of
course, um, either in late
November or December, so that we
can move forward on those
efforts and start our rulemaking
process in particular. Um, so
that work can come in the spring
and be ready to move forward
then. So, uh, I think.
We don't have that on people's
schedules yet. We will be
reaching out to find out when
the policy committee can meet
and then to make certain we have
a date that's uh as open as
possible for the majority of the
board members so that we can
meet on the policy.
That all sounds good and
necessary, I agree we should be
getting those on the calendars
and we'll look forward to the
those upcoming meetings.
Until then, Madam Chair, this
next meeting for this purpose is
in.
So the next meeting would be
April 2nd. The project review
committee will look at March
25th.
Um, and to look at wa waiver
recommendations, April 2nd would
be this board meets on the
waiver recommendations and
decide on those on April 17th
and also on April 2nd, I
apologize, you will actually see
who the um group of um
applicants that actually
submitted readiness
applications, so you'll have
that on April 17th, the project
review committee will then make
recommendations on the funding
that will be presented to this
board on the 22nd.
And um there we are.
So the next major work for the
board will be done by staff in
the, in the project management
team and then we will meet again
on this stuff in early April and
with the, the recommendations
that there may be some more
recommendations from policy that
will be ringing on April 2nd as
well. OK.
Sounds good.
Thank you. Um,
I guess if we have no other
items, then we can go ahead and
move for adjournment we have.
Oh
Manager.
Yes.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I, I just,
uh, a, a brief comment or
announcement um today at the New
Mexico Infrastructure Finance.
Conference that is led, um, I'll
be making a short presentation
on the water project fund and
the waterrut board under the
utility track uh originally that
was planned for in the tribal
track, but it was moved to the
utility track and I just wanted
to put it out there. I hope I
can do Angela and NMFA Justice
here. I took, uh, um, a little
bit of liberty and um your, your
presentation, Angela, and the
work you do and I hope to.
be able to continue casting a
wider net and as was mentioned
here today is that we've got a
few more counties and a few more
tribes participating and that's
a good thing. And I hope to
continue that in a positive
manner by giving a short
presentation at the um New
Mexico Infrastructure Finance
conference, so I hope I can
represent the team well. Thank
you.
Thank you very much, um.
And thank you for doing that.
So if we have no other comments,
um, do we have a motion for
adjournment?
A move, Madam Chair.
I
All in favor? I, I,
I go one more time.
Yeah.
Thank you.
that
