Um, but as we have encountered
over the last three years, we
have
Um, can consistently have had
units.
Breaking down and we have just
recently replaced three of them
again. We're using extra funds
to support that work.
Um, but that's something that we
will not be able to afford to
continue after September 30th of
this year as those friends do
expire.
And on page 87 again because of
infrastructure because of
roofing and so on. Uh, you'll
see that there we do have some
mold issues on the left hand
side.
Because of leaking roofs. The
right side picture. The intent
for this one is that you will
see that we do lack fire
suppression across the entire
campus support there.
Page 98.
Um, we have had several
instances too, and that we have
addressed already.
Where we have had water leaks
from the ceilings.
Uh and or custodial closets
where we've had, um, mold in our
classrooms and
Um
Obvious spaces, so this has
affected some of our science
labs.
Um, and this particular case, it
was a second grade classroom
where we found the mold when
books were removed.
So again with insurance. We have
been able to get these areas
repaired page 99 just a picture
of one of the ceiling areas
where again we have some
ruptured pipes.
The right side on page 99 is, um
Issues with another heating
units that
Went out and leaked and caused
ceiling damage and well damage
to one of our restrooms. This
was adjacent to our cafeteria.
Huge health and safety concern
that we have with some of these
Uh, heating and unit heating
units. Page 100, is they that
they do not meet code and that
for several years
These units were being bypassed
in order for them to keep them
operating and you'll see that,
uh
There was some fire issues or
some some things that occurred
during that point in time.
In fact, this that's my first
year. That same year. I tried
getting some individuals to go
out and assist us with these and
try to get our units operable.
Unfortunately, some of them
didn't want to touch our units
and said they didn't want to be
liable for such
Um
Significant issues and you know
they'd be liable for for the
work that we had.
But as I mentioned, um we are
working on these slowly but
surely we have replaced. I
believe us six of the units So
far, some of them are. You know
they're still operable. But what
we are being told is that they
are still there on their last
breath, so we will eventually
need to replace them.
Another big concern that we have
in our district is that the
original facilities were built
to accommodate 1700 students as
I mentioned a little earlier,
our enrollment is less than 300.
Ah, we still need to maintain
and upkeep, our facilities and
this particular ph. Ph. 101 will
show a two year cost that we
have incurred. Um
Within our district and one that
I do want to highlight is our
propane costs, And they just
want you to keep in mind that a
lot of the times most of our
Heating units were off at one
point or another.
But last year we spent close to
$250,000 in propane alone.
This year. We're projecting
close to 260,000. And again. It
depends on how how long are
winter is going to last.
Um, we have spent with regards
to boiler systems, replacements
and or maintenance over $90,000
just to keep them running and
trying to get parts for them.
Ah, and then you'll see the
latest. The three replacements
on the far right side. That's
what we have, um, incurred with
regards to cost for replacement
of boilers of
Some of the weather systems at
each of these schools. Um, so
the purpose of this is to
indicate that we do need to
right size. We do need a
smaller, um, area for our
students. We do not need to have
the the the size that we have,
Um, it costs us on
Staffing.
Ah, Utilities insurance and you
know these as these areas can
continue to malfunction, the
mechanical systems and so on. It
is something that we still need
to maintain.
Um
So what we are asking is that,
uh,
Our need to be considered that,
Um uh
And we'll talk a little bit
again again a better finances,
but, um
We? We have some significant
needs in our school this last
school year.
We had a special election for
the bonds we lost by 13 votes.
Um so we pushed again and we we
shifted our strategy a little
bit, and we ran it again in
November. We were fortunate.
To able to get that through.
Um and you know we have
Some money to to put forth on
the table. Uh, for this for this
work.
We do know that our again our
utilization space is is, um,
lower than what we have a need
for the facilities that we have
right now.
Um
We have a long term finance plan
that Mr Venezuela we talked to
in a bit, but through
recommendation of PSF a. You
know again, their their their
recommendation to us was, it's
better to take down and rebuild
them to try to fix your
The needs that you have at this
point in time.
Uh, and the last page that I
will talk to is page 103 with
regards to re enrollment, you'll
see the trends.
That we have had in our district
since 2014. This information
comes out of our facilities
Master plan.
And the Census Bureau, so you'll
see that we're steadily
declining so we don't anticipate
a huge increase in the future
for for for our district.
And so they need for right
sizing and helping our
community. Um, save on some
Some funds. Um, definitely be
I needed a request from you.
So with that I'm going to pass
this onto Mr Valenzuela, the
expert on our claimants. Thank
you, Mr Chairman. Um, For the
record. My name is Mark
Valenzuela. I and the managing
parental principle for advisors
were the only New Mexico
headquartered Bond advisor. Um
and we we support several
cities, counties and school
districts. So thank you for
having us
Um, I would refer to you to page
105.
And just very briefly take you
through the districts. Financial
position. What we provided for
you on 105 is just a five year
history of the revenue and
expenditures from their audit.
And then also some history on
their cash balances at the
district and again, you can see
that the cash balances are not
significant in the debt
accounts, which I'll get into in
a moment in the interest of
time. I'm going to continue to
move forward to slide six or
Excuse me, 106.
This is a history of the
Moscow's, um, assessed value,
and there's been nice, nice
growth in the community, but
it's still a small district $64
million of assessed value their
current mill, Livia's 3.1, as as
superintendent San Develop
mentioned they went out to
voters two times and were
successful in November.
For $2.5 million bond election
and you can see that based on
their their 6% assessed value or
excuse me their capacity, they
would be close to 4 million.
They have existing data of 1.2,
So they're net capacities. Uh,
2.6 after the $2.5 million
election there, there are
essentially matched out on their
capacity.
From that perspective, so moving
forward to slide 108 dig into
the bond program that
Superintendent Sandoval had
mentioned. We're trying to be
efficient for the district and
for taxpayers.
The key piece of the election.
That was just the district. Just
one was that they went to
voters, and they asked voters to
author resident and increase to
their tax their tax rates by up
to four mills so that they could
approach you and this committee
to seek a level of reduction for
their local match.
Given the $2.5 million of
available capacity of $50
million Plus project for this
district is just not doable
without your support. Um and and
so, uh, we have structured this
to ensure that the district will
increase its middle level and
I'll show you those numbers in a
moment up to more than 10 Mils
to meet your 10 mil.
Uh, limitation. Um
The district right now is in
front of the finance finance
authorities so they will be
presenting to the IMF aboard on
in this month in March for
approval of the 1st 1.25 million
of that bonding that bonding
authority that voters gave them.
It will come back in two years
to the finance authority to do
the remaining 1.2 million, which
will exhaust their capacity at
that point.
Um and
The intention is to, um set up
the structure so that it matches
support from from the state and
from this committee, so the 1st
1.2 million War will support the
first phase of the project. And
then, of course, the second
piece will support the larger
construction side of the
project.
Having said that if I can take
you to the last slide, and then
I'll let Superintendent Sandoval
finish and 109
We've projected forward, um on
this chart, and I'll point you
to the green.
Portion of the table below,
Moving from the 3.4 mills for
debt up to 6.18 Mills to again.
Um, take advantage of what
taxpayers in this district have
said that they're willing to do,
which is increased their tax to
support full replacement of the
of their new combination
elementary through high school
project so that they can show
their skin in the game, so to
speak from the community to
match the state's support as
well.
Uh And so you you'll see that by
maintaining their edtech program
by increasing their debt Levy
and then also maintaining their
two mil levy. The district will
now move more than 10 mills up
to 10.2 Mills. So having said
that, let me turn it over to
that over to Superintendent
Sandoval, too.
Um I To be honest, I don't have
anything more to add, but I
didn't have questions from any
of you.
Thank you very much. Thank you
For that presentation is pretty
detailed and and also gave us a
good indication of what the
conditions are now and what
you've done to move forward with
this project, so
Questions or comments from
Council.
Um, thanks for the presentation.
Yes. Thank you. So,
Superintendent thank you for
meeting us out there on Friday.
I believe so, Yeah, we were able
to visit. Uh,
There are issues.
You know these issues and what
we're hoping to do is we're
putting a report together and we
want to be able to get that to
you sooner than later. Hopefully
not there a lot of the issues on
the heating
A lot of the issues are a lot of
fine. You know some of this
stuff in there
Hood similar that stuff as far
as the you know, the roof issues
that trust is Ah, You know those
Madam Superintendent. Thank you
for your presentation was very
thorough. It's obvious that
Your district is very much It's
um I appreciate the work that
your community has done around
your middle laddies. Obviously,
that takes a lot of work on your
community's part to educate your
voters. And this is something
that your community is behind.
So that's great work.
Um
We had towards the end of last
year, Um Children's Cabinet
hosted an event there at Penn
Osco and partnership with
With the spot, which is a family
resource center. Um, really
appreciate that partnership. We
were able to spend some time not
only with your families, but
also with your staff.
Hmm. So I wanna thank you for
that.
Um, also have had the
opportunity recently to hear
from several of your high school
students around work based
learning very impressed by those
students and
I know that you've received
congratulations regarding your
your basketball team, but I want
to congratulate you on the work
you're doing related to your
community Schools your C T E
your work based learning All of
that is really great work. Thank
you and your staff or continuing
to really invest in the programs
that we know.
Sure, Carrot Superintendent. Um
Mr Chairman and and cars. Well,
yes, ma'am, That's correct.
Okay. I do have a couple of
comments.
Ah, one is, uh
Yes, I know you to you your bond
issue at heart.
Especially the second time
around and heard pushing for
that is like Well, thank you for
that question I have is more
along the lines of under
construction. When you're under
construction, you're going to be
doing new construction and
replacement so
Do you have a plan? In place of
how you're gonna handle that?
Are you going to move all the
kids into
What are you gonna do with the
kids during construction? I
guess.
We have had conversation, Mr
Chair with PSF with Miss Thomas
and her team.
Regarding a preliminary plan in
that would be to shift students
from ah, the elementary, perhaps
to the middle school high school
dependent on where that
demolition demolition would
begin.
And where they built the new
facilities would be erected
because as you signed the first
picture there, it's kind of
spread out. So dependent on
where
Then you construction will take
place will be, But we are
anticipating that our students
um
Would likely fit in one area.
Um, and one of these facilities.
Until the needs of the
construction are done.
So we do have some vacant
classrooms around and I'm sure
you're taking a lot of things
into consideration, but it is
important.
That part of the project.
That's all I have. And we
appreciate you coming down and
Making the presentation. I think
we're the project a lot better
now, Consultants. Thank you.
Well, thank you for your time
and your consideration. We
really appreciate it.
Mr Chair and members. Next up is
Berna Leo, which is applying for
Algodones Elementary, which was
ranked number seven in the 2023
ranking.
Um, there are presentation
starts on page 112.
And I'll introduce
Superintendent Math Antonio and
you can introduce his team.
Let me check.
If I can.
What happened?
Yeah.
Second here.
Thank you.
Hmm.
Thank you.
Tanya, Go ahead. Welcome, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee.
Thank you for having us. My name
is Matt McDonough. I'm the
superintendent for the district
of brilliant public schools. And
I have with me today. Dr. Eric
James. He's the deputy
superintendent for business
services. We also have our board
President Paul Madrid. He's the
board president representing
Burn Leo, the area of polio.
And we all are Deputy
Superintendent of operations, Mr
Terry Darnell. So thank you
again for having us and it's
good to see all of you. I'm
always pleased to be on sitting
curing.
Having it somewhat of a pleasant
experience. Was it always my
experience before? Oh, so like
we appreciate the time, uh, we
hope that we were able to
provide a really detailed
presentation for you. It's not
customary for me to read the
details, but I think it's
important for us to walk through
the entire presentation.
In here you'll see the table of
contents. I won't read that. But
if you turn to page 115
Actually, 116. We wanted to
start off with the summary of
successful PS COC awards, and Dr
James went through a great deal
of research to actually pull all
of this information. So that way
you can see that the district of
Berlin Leo in one of the things
that it has done well is
effectively come before this.
This board and
Um, and use the funding that is
allocated to it to adequately
uh, you know, have some capital
projects that that we've put
forward so you go. You go back
to all the way to the mid
nineties with some of this
information, and you can see
that the district has over last
30 years. Put a lot of detail
into how we're, um, um, building
our facilities and increasing
our facilities in the capacity.
Um, I actually think that this
particular request for Algunas
Elementary, um is is it is now
the oldest of the buildings that
has not been remodeled or had
any construction to it, and
we've had changing dynamics that
will kind of build a case for us
to why we're requesting for the
remodel and renovation of this.
If you go to the next page, 117
we We have two different project
scopes who wanted to put you
know being transparent. We use
the tool that the PSF they gave
us to make sure that we were
able to put that into our
application. But we also in our
facilities. Master plan. Um did
have an estimation as to what
the cost of this facility would
Would would look like for
purposes of of the rebuild. It's
a little bit different than what
our tool and PSF a looks like,
at the latter part, But as you
can tell, it's a pretty pretty
expensive project. According to
what we're looking at what we
did with our F M, P and R in our
vendors from F MP that helped us
look for this. It came out to a
total of about
39 million now that was
obviously estimating, among
other projects that this
particular company was pulling
from around the state. They were
occurring.
Obviously us have many, many
projects coming in front of you,
and it's really tough to kind of
gauge what the estimations are
sometimes just because of the
moving targets of construction
at this point in materials and
so forth.
Um, we have we have in our
application requested that we
would renovate and add to all
Jones and will make the case for
why we're asking for that
renovation in addition to the
next slide, 118 I feel like I'm
screaming.
Um, the next slide page 118 has
the using The PSF to tools has
the estimated replacement costs,
um, using the PSV tools, so if
we were to go for a full
replacement, it would run to
about $31 million. But looking
at, um renovation. In addition,
it looks at about $22 million.
And what we do see some benefit
to the renovation. We we are
concerned because one of the
things that I think maybe the
committee is not aware of
When I first came on board, this
was a conversation with the
existing Board of Education
about Algodones. But at that
time we were ranked number 174.
I believe
And but
The board had an interest in it,
So we went and did a re
evaluation of it looked at all
of the issues that had not been
surfaced at that point.
And we were able to resubmit
that evaluation to PSF A and we
moved up from. I think it was
mid one seventies. Now we're
number 10 on the list. Uh, for
for the PSF A list. So, um,
because we identified a number
of deficiencies, including
foundation cracks, including a
number of areas that
Even under renovation. We don't
know what's going to happen when
you tear down walls and so forth
every time with this particular
building. We even replace a
swamp cooler.
It opens up a whole kind of
worms of what we have to do to
just, um just kind of shore up
the region and things of that
nature, So unfortunately,
there's a lot of unknowns when
it comes to this particular
building.
I just wanted to point out some
enrollment trends. So one of the
things that that we're doing as
a as a district I want to be
clear. Our board has brought on
a very intense focus on
increasing or academic outcomes.
Um, and it's a unified board 50
board on everything that they're
looking at for increasing
academic outcomes. And part of
that is redesigning how the
district looks so one of the
things that we've done is we've
tried to redesign what the
middle school model looks and
also what our elementary models
look and for for some time the
district has operated under
having
Kind of a bifurcated elementary
system where you have
K through two systems, and then
they go through three through
five, and we're now moving
toward a K through six system
across the district so we can
have more continuity. More
alignment that are high quality
instruction materials. Are you
uniform and aligned across grade
levels and across schools, and
we're doing some work around
instructions so that there's
that kind of alignment.
Regardless of who? Your teacher
and who your schools are without
being said.
For purposes of
Of population Uncle Jonas
elementary years ago went to a
key five system and then when
they couldn't fit all of those
students in they went to key
four Those students started
getting bussed to burn, Leo
And then, uh, recently since
I've come on board we've gone
from about 92 students that were
enrolled into that school to
last year when we had key
through four were over 190
students. This year we put we
put forth grade.
Into burly elementary school
temporarily while we're looking
at Al, Go on this and we still
have 170 plus students at that
school with knowledge that
currently students that would
normally go to Algodones we have
about 352 students. 358 students
that are from some Felipe Pueblo
or I'll go on his community.
Those are the two communities
that that school serves that are
enrolled somewhere in Burnley
Elementary schools or Carol
Elementary schools so currently
there already displaced because
of room and so we do know that
We have a need.
For bigger capacity. The other
thing that we have is the the
school is actually increasing in
in student outcomes and
specifically something Pablo is
recognizing that it's it's
increasing the student outcomes
they've grown over the last two
years and their student outcomes
and so we have a B. I s B I e
school.
It's currently located on the
Pueblo and a lot of those kids
are starting to transfer over to
Algunas Elementary. And so it's
putting a lot of pressure on us.
Um, for us to create more room.
So when I say 172 in some cases,
we're actually having to bust
them over to brutally. You and
Carol Elementary schools just so
we could fit them into our
building. Um, so this page 119
you see the growth? We also have
a pre K program. It's a four
white program only because of
Limited facilities. We don't
have the room for a three y 333
year old program, but we have
the need in that community
specifically with some Felipe
Pablo feeding into that
community, we have the need for
a three wide program.
Um, and the programs for our pre
case are all tied to the program
in Bergoglio called less quickly
to, but we still need the
facility. They're closer to
simply put Pablo for purposes of
serving that community.
If you go to page 120, you'll
kind of see what the population
trends look like. And we
obviously estimated, if if we
were going to have a key through
six school in 2425, we would
have over over 350 kids in that
K through six school, and those
are students that are currently
inner Berlin element in our
Berlioz's school system.
That are are from either
Algodones or or sample pueblos.
Those are the two communities. I
just want to clarify that those
are the two communities that are
served there.
Okay, going to the actual
facility. Um, if you go to page
121 of the presentation, you can
see where the
Were the facility. The
Variola shots of the facility
are you can see the parking lot
one of the things that we have,
with this particular facility
built in 1990 is we also have
some pretty significant safety
concerns when it comes to so if
you look on the bottom of page
121, and you can see that road,
that road is 313.
New Mexico 313. It's It's a
pretty major thoroughfare for
that area as traffic that goes
through pretty pretty quickly
and you can see the parking lot
that's right next to it.
Two years ago about this time of
year.
We had a fugitive coming from
Santi there was leaked they had
had hijacked a car insanity when
a 25 got off into an colonias,
and they actually hijacked one
of our staff members in the
parking lot as they were getting
out of their car. It's so close
that the road is right adjacent
to that to that parking lot.
Part of our limitation is where
do we move the parking lot? We
don't actually have a ton of
room to move that parking lot.
And with all of these issues in
mind, we have limited space.
If you look on the same picture,
and I'll have some future
pictures to show it, there's uh,
if you look at the parking lot
just to the left of the parking
lot is a tree that's south of
the parking lot. There's a big
tree. That's where our Busses
enter.
They drive right past that tree
onto the south side of the
building.
And they turn around.
Where they turn in, is also an
easement for other houses that
that are back in that area on
the other side of the real
tracks, So our bus drop off in
order for our Busses or Busses
to get to the drop off point for
our students, they have to
actually go through an easement,
which is open to all of the
people that are going back and
forth.
To the community members back
there if you go to the next page
122. I think we actually
duplicated that. So I'm going to
save you one slide. You go to
123. You can start looking at
some of the roof systems that we
spoke about. Um, As I said,
every time we have an issue that
happens on that on that
particular school, we
Either pulled down a wall or we
pull off a swamp cooler that's
rotted out and you have to take
out the bracing or what have
you. It opens up another can of
worms that we're having to deal
with, as far as just kind of
patching it up, so we don't have
roof leaks and so forth. Just so
you know that particular school,
the entire school is still cold
with swamp coolers. Um, and as
you can imagine, that's not very
popular with our with our staff
when it comes to late May and
August, September and early
October. It's we We can't
adequately call the school.
Around. It's been a real
challenge since I've been back
in in the school district.
You go to the next page 124 you
have the swamp cooler systems
again. We have 19 swamp coolers.
A lot of them are antiquated.
And so they're rotting out at
the bottom. So we're actually
coming up with the solution to
temporarily serve it while we're
going through this phase of
construction and figuring out
how we're going to cool those
we've started thinking about
doing many splits because one of
the ideas that we have is if we
Are able to get the funding in
order for us to, um, to start
the construction process. We
need to be able to replicate.
Don't want to do something that
we're not going to be able to
use in the future. So we're
looking at all types of avenues
to make sure that we can call
them because we need those
students to have a cooling
system when they start school
again. Um I won't believe her
The point where you can see kind
of the issues that are continued
throughout the pictures. 120.
Five page 125. You have more
more cooling system issues.
And then got in page 126.
Um, we have a number of issues
that have been highlighted here
that are are showing some
concerns that we have for both
safety. Um and other factors
that are
Are
Issues that the school one of
the things that we have been
doing over the past 15 years is
as needs arise, and I'll talk a
little bit about academic needs.
as we go through the the
program.
But as needs arise.
Because you don't have more
facility. We don't actually have
more room for a portable. We
currently have one portable. Um,
that is a partnership with some
Felipe Pablo to provide social
emotional mental health services
as well as language caress
language services to the
students about 95% of our
students in that particular
school or from supply Popolo.
Um, when we think about all of
those needs that have been
emerging over the last 10 to 15
years, there's not more building
space, so what they've actually
done in some cases is they've
actually
Cut spaces that were built for
like classroom spaces. They've
cut them in half put up
temporary walls and so like our
special education classroom,
half of its especially
classroom, half of it is a
terrorist language, classroom
and ancillary service classroom.
If you know how we work with the
ancillary services, Sometimes
those services have to be by
themselves, sometimes their
inclusion settings. It really
sets up the school system to be
In a real problematic situation
to even provide the basic
services to our students. It's
not set up even with just 100 72
students right now it's not set
up to adequately served them
with the facility and we don't
have places to
To provide more classroom space,
moving onto page 127. You'll
just see kind of ongoing issues
that we found. Obviously, these
look like superficial issues,
But when you have leaks like
that, you know that some of the
foundational issues could become
problematic. And so once we
start opening up walls so forth,
we know that there's going to be
more issues.
The same. The same issue and
page 128. We just have some of
these ongoing leaks that have
have started to emerge and what
we started looking for all the
things that we need to identify.
We've been able to find more of
those issues. If you go to page
129 want to talk a little bit
more in depth about that safety
concerns. Page 129. You can see
the arrows. That's where the
Busses that's the easement the
roadies meant to some properties
that are
Um actually, on the other side
of the tracks, there's actually
a real track, right? Um, west of
the campus. That is an easement
where the red arrows are.
The yellow highlight with the
green nose is actually the bus
drop off.
So our Busses have to go through
that Eastman. They drop off
kids.
In an area that is, we've put
some securities fencing ups in
the last year to make sure that
we can fence off that area. Once
our kids get in, we can fence
off that area and when the
school days open, but it it's
legitimately a very small space
that the kids can get in and
then spend stuff so that they
can so we can keep outsiders
from coming in.
But you can see how Busses have
to turn around and they have to
cross an easement of traffic.
So, um, that's just that's a
daily occurrence. And if you
think about we've been dealing
with the number of
transportation issues, the
uniqueness of our of our
district.
I got I got to. I think Mr Ortiz
would would appreciate this. I
got to read the National
Transportation Safety Board
manual and got to know a little
bit more about about Busses, and
we're having to do things that
would not be recommended by the
National Transportation Safety
Board. And this has been
something that we've been doing
ongoing for years and years. And
just that alone is is a problem
for us and so with lack of space
Um, we don't really have a place
to move our our bus drop off at
this point.
Um, you can see page 130. You
see safety concerns that
continue. We don't have a secure
office space.
It's really kind of built in an
old time built in 1990, right,
so the the needs of safety
around schools have changed in
and really changed In the last
10 years where people have
become more aware of them, so
having having safety space
before you get into the office,
Uh, office space is critical. We
don't have that currently in
this, obviously, that wouldn't
be the only thing that we need
to address, but we actually have
limited safety spaces around as
soon as you get from an external
door. You're right into the
heart of the building.
No matter what side of the
building you enter on, they
really are next to classroom
spaces, so there's not a way for
us to kind of create buffer
zones between our students and
outside intruders as they would
be in this current facility
Because of that, we've actually
started armed security program.
It's not just that something or
it's all going to school. But at
some of our other non town of
Berlioz's schools.
But we actually have a retired
state police officer who is an
armed security guard on our
campus to make sure that they're
patrolling and so forth to to
try to deal with some of the
safety concerns. This is just a
closer look. 131 is a closer
look at the bus loop again. Just
wanted to give you an idea of
what that what that looks like.
It's actually a very tight turn
so and there's not. There's not
any room to expand that without
doing.
Damage to programmatic aspects
that we have with our garden
program and so forth.
Going to page 132. I really want
to, um, make sure that we
emphasize what our goal is as a
district and the academic
programs. Obviously, our primary
role within the school is to
provide, um students from their
community school with the
highest level of educational
opportunity that they can
That we can As a district. We
have done a ton to actually
provide more services to that
school. That's our highest risk
school. Of all the schools in
our district. There are the ones
that received the family index
funding through the risk factor
formula. Um and so we have a
number of needs that are there.
But one of the things that we
know is you know when we think
about
Um, the Indian Education Act and
Yossi Martinez for many, many
years, the district has
struggled to meet the needs of
that particular community
suddenly been in all bonus as
well, Um, one of the things that
we've implemented as a caress
language program, which is a
requirement of the of the Indian
Education Act for us to provide
that if the interest of the
tribe is there, it is also one
of the recommendations within
Yossi Martinez to provide
language.
In in, um, the language home
language of our students.
Um, we provide caress language
to 100% of our sample. Db
elementary students Because of
that, that's actually put more
pressure on us to have more
classroom space.
And so we actually have two
teachers that accursed language
teachers that share a classroom
space with other teachers as
they do specials as as you're
familiar with specials in the
elementary schools, we provide
those, um, services, but they
don't have a permanent space. So
when you're thinking about
adequate teaching of languages,
languages shouldn't really be
taught out of a textbook and in
the indigenous languages there
never taught about a textbook.
Um they need to be more
experiential. But if you have
teachers, borrowing spaces,
they're never able to actually
create those spaces to be
authentically reflective of the
communities that they're
serving, and so what with with
this model, we're basically
doing the best we can, but not
what we're able to do, like
Santa Domingo School where we
actually have classrooms and we
have teachers in their
classrooms, and they build that
classroom around the language
and culture of the students that
they're serving.
So that's become a problem for
us. Special education needs. Um,
currently we don't have the
facilities to adequately provide
special education needs, and I
just want to say that with the
covid pandemic
Um, probably not unique to the
district of brilliant public
schools, but definitely
something that we become aware
of is, um, During that time
period, we had a number of kids
that when unidentified there
were kids, younger kids that
were maybe
Pre, maybe three years old, four
years old and didn't get
identified early on like you
normally would, because of
limited limited ability to get
into the problems and and for
child child find purposes, and
now we're starting to see an
increase in number of kids that
are getting referred at this
particular school, so our our
number of referrals are going up
even more. That doesn't
necessarily mean all of them are
going to be identified and have
an I e. P
But our ability to serve them is
already limited. And with
increased numbers, we're going
to have even increased
limitations with those
Um, going to page 133? I just,
um
I wanna make sure that that we
emphasize the fact that we have
a unique partnership with our
pueblo, a sample the school
happens to be in Algodones. But
90 like I said, 95% of the
students are from somebody
Pueblo. We offer Paris We have
an MOU to offer carrots. We also
have an MOU with with them to
offer project aware and project
venture, which are experiential
programs and mental health
support programs that they
provide services. Because of our
limited space. We have a bunch
of people doubling up on spaces.
Is so they're not being able to
serve the kids.
In unique areas where we have
mental health concerns where we
have them. We actually have to
find areas and kind of sometimes
be key areas so we can bring
kids into places because they
just don't have the facility for
serving some of the mental
health needs, and I think it's
really critical that we know
that, um many of our public
because they were isolated for
such a long time.
They have some of the kids that
are struggling the most because
of that isolation as they came
back into school. Some of those
kids are struggling more than
many of our other students, So
it's something that we're really
working urgently, with the
public's ability to to to serve
those students.
Um, as you can see, we we did,
um, on page 134. We did indicate
that we had moved up
significantly to number 10 as
far as need for the state with
Algunas elementary.
Um, we did implement adopted
five year Our board adopted a
five year facilities Master plan
last year. Um, I'll go and this
is the top priority in the
facilities Master plan, which I
think you have have in front of
you, um or had available to you,
but that is this has become kind
of our priority area.
I'll talk a little bit about
where maybe in the questions
There will be some questions
about that. But, um, I think
when one of the things we want
to do is emphasize that if you
go to page 135, we are one of
the school districts that is
property. Poor.
Um about 52% of our students are
from one of our pueblos are
indigenous and living on the
reservation and basically our
property or taxable property for
purposes of general obligations
is pretty limited. And most of
our students are living on on
tribal land so that
Makes us really reliant on state
funding for certain areas. And
as you know, even though we're
an impact date school district
impact it doesn't actually
completely reimburse us for the
revenues lost through general
obligations, so it's really
critical that we take that take
that. We also don't have a meal
Levy that is high as we would
for a district our size.
If we had more students than
were in taxable property, So I
think that that's really, um uh,
something that we would like for
the committee to
To recognize and consider as we
move forward with this, uh
Finally, I'll turn it over to Dr
James, who will talk a little
bit about our financial summary.
and then I think will be close
to ready for questions.
Good morning. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here and
address you. We appreciate you
taking the time to hear its
sound. Um, we did have a bond
election in 2021 run year four
of that cycle.
And we were authorized for $18
million and bond cells, which we
have sold all those $18 million
worth of bonds. And so we have
one more year with no cells
before we can go out and
reauthorized for additional. We
did get their property values
back, and we've seen a modest
increase about 2 to 3% across
the board, but
Um, that would have to be
approved by the voters, of
course to increase that are
Current meal. Levy sits at
approximately 11.9%.
For non residential
And, uh, as Superintendent,
Montano pointed out, we do have
some serious shortfalls from not
having the ability to have
industry and other type of non
residential
Basis that we can receive income
from
Um, we have had terrific support
from our voters, though we had a
76% of voters supporting the
bond election.
And then we also had 67% of
voters supporting our 2023 SB
nine election which is always
comforting to know that our
voters do support the efforts
that we're making.
The local match, as you can see,
is 63%.
And our current projected costs
of 22 to 33 million was still
require a waiver.
From our local match to be able
to proceed forward on this
project.
Um, our houses in order
financially.
We continue to reduce the number
of findings especially new
findings, and, as indicated in
our audits and
Um, we're working hard to
continue to maximize rpm plans
to make sure that we're taking
good care of everything that we
have and that we have adequate
staffing to make sure that all
of our our buildings are
properly cared for.
To go through the next, okay?
And then, um, just as as we're
talking about what our current
bonding capacity is, and, um,
our availability of funds we
also do have is is, um
I stated we we have a few
buildings that are are aging
that the district is going to
have to take into consideration.
Coach D School is a little bit
younger than Algodones, and
we've actually had to engage in
re roofing the entire school
because of leaks throughout in
we just had to re roof it. We
have to change the parapets
because that's where some of the
roofing or some of the leaking
was coming in.
Through the parapets, and so
we're upgrading the roofing the
parapets, and now we have to go
through a complete stucco
because the stuck over the years
has actually been, um has been,
ah, really depleted, And so
we're actually getting moisture
coming into the building from
the stucco as well, Um, that,
along with some issues that were
Um, not not known. We had some
gas leaks that we were able to
identify this past year that we
had to address that actually had
to read. We had to rerun gas
lines to the entire school
because of these gas leaks and
just a number of issues that
have emerged there. We also have
a warehouse in which are
Our nutrition services keeps all
of our food. The warehouse used
to be the old high school
cafeteria. The district opted
that instead of tearing that
down to use it in and make it
into a warehouse, and but the
issue is it has some pretty
significant issues as far as
roofs and even capacity for
coolers.
And so for us to be able to use
that warehouse effectively. We
actually have to resurface the
roof in a number of things
around that, Um, and then we
also have our warehouse for our
operations department that has
roofs coming or the roof is
actually fallen in and so,
essentially, we we can't even
keep inventory of things, so
there are a number of projects
that are coming around.
The district that includes other
facilities, Um and you know
The we? We haven't even touched
The district office, which is an
is an older building that has
some pretty limited at aspects
to it, and we have some major
issues. The board and I have
been an agreement that we should
never touch the district office
until we get everything else in
order, and that's been you know,
a priority for us, but we do
have some needs at the district
office for purposes of having
professional development
opportunities for teachers, you
know.
A lot of school districts have
created spaces for teachers to
have professional development
opportunities. That district
office. We don't have that
currently. And so that's an
ambition that we have, but
that's not an immediate thing.
We have a list of things on page
130. I think it's 1 38 1 38 1 of
the things that I'd like to
point out is continued upgrades.
Of our safety, The board has
prioritized safety, a matter of
fact, the standing board agenda
on a monthly basis is a safety
report out both to talk about
our training. Talk about our
newly acquired, um
Armed Armed Guard program and in
the armed guards and where they
are, but then also the hardening
of the facilities, including
cameras, fencing, Um all of
those things that need to occur.
We still don't have a badge
system in all of our schools
that we can actually enhance the
security of our systems because
that's one of the mechanisms
that you would do to limit
access is having a bad system so
authorized personnel can get in,
and we're far off from that
because we're enhancing some of
the other safety and
Areas that we need to do. I'm
not going to go through
everything that we're working
on. But you can see there's a
number of bullet points pages. 1
39 1 40 have other border points
that we have that we're working
on to either.
Repair and then established We
were part of our F M P was to
establish an enhanced preventive
maintenance program. We actually
have hired a person just to
oversee that process because we
believe that having prevented
maintenance will will, um, limit
costs in the future. But you can
see that there are a number of
issues on here that we're
actually in the current stage of
repairing and these are not
things that we can just kick.
Down the road. These are things
that we have boilers that we
need to upgrade. We I think we
have We have a dream system at
Carol Elementary. The design of
the system. I'm not sure
exactly. You know, I don't want
to throw anybody under the bus.
I don't know how that thing got
approved, but that thing has a
system that has so many gallons.
Per minute flowing out through a
come from two sides. And so
every time that every time one
of them drains at the same time
as the other actually overflows,
and it goes right into our
hallways, and so we're going to
have to redesign that which is
going to be a costly effort.
That was the way that building
was remodeled, and I'm not sure
exactly how they came up with
that design, but we're finding a
lot of those things.
Early elementary school. Um, the
design of the of the heating
system is on a heat pump system
for that very particular area.
He pump systems shouldn't be in
that school. That's not a good
system for that particular
school, but it was designed for
that. And so now we have to do
an enhancement preventive
maintenance system in order just
to maintain that because that's
to be drained, cleaned.
On a regular basis. So those are
some of the things that we're
having to spend some of our
general obligation dollars on
and any other available dollars
that we have to either improve,
enhance and or repair.
And with that, um, Mr Chair and
members of the Committee. I'm
ready Snapper questions. Thank
you for the presentation.
I think
Did it.
Good, comprehensive job on it.
I'd like to ask if more
President Madrid would like to
add any
Comments to the would I'd like
to thank my name is out today.
One of the most interesting
components for me, is is we've
started moving our media
bandwidth with the heat,
including was an issue on a
daily basis or what they have to
go into the facilities, Master
plan and create Master plan at
that time. Our it was pretty
indicative that without the
So we're caught between a rock
and move forward.
And we still have the to service
our our students.
Martinez. Yossi, our
Thank you. Thank you.
Comments. Questions from
And you do have obviously RBC.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Thank thank you. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you Appreciate the
presentation.
I just want to note um
The list of projects that you
have completed successfully.
And I'm also
And also appreciate all of your
work with the tribal
communities. It's obvious that
this district is very unique.
Your populations that you
support the work that you're
doing.
Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you. I think
that's actually a really good
question. So
Some of those are forced. Um
we've had to bust them. So our
for our current 4th and 5th
grades are all at Burleigh
Elementary School specifically
because we don't have the room
for them.
It at all going, So that's kind
of a simple answer to I believe.
Out 100 kids or so maybe maybe
it's about 75 kids or so the
other kids that are really at
Carol Elementary, or Berlin
Elementary at lower levels. Um
Are and then it's because we
also have sixth grade, so
actually, it's closer to 100
students that already
Because of lack of room at
ongoing is there but the other
issue is because that school has
Consistently had issues. The
parents didn't want to leave the
Berlioz's school district.
They wanted to stay in Berlin
school district, but they didn't
like the facility. They didn't
like. They were just a number of
issues that they decided that
they were opting them out. So
when we've talked to families
because part of our
comprehensive redesign of the
school system and the key six
programs that we're doing
across, has been actually to
talk to families.
And so one of the regrettable
things that we're hearing from
families that are like Carol
Elementary School. That could be
an ongoing is is that they don't
get access to the sample carries
program because that's not an
option for them right now. And
so when expanding that school
and having more room they would
opt in. We've had multiple
family meetings where we talk
about this, So those are some of
the things that we know are in
existence. But people are making
decisions kind of like we all
make decisions. What is
What is the most attractive to
me for right now? Because it's
meeting my most immediate need,
as opposed to if I had something
better closer to home, would I
be able to do that? And I think
that that kind of so Yeah. So
that's that's really good. A.
It's a good question. So we're
redesigning, Um all of our
elementary schools.
Um, this year was the first year
where we went. We brought sixth
grade down to elementary in the
town of early. Oh, and Placentas
Elementary, So we kind of as as
the board.
Um they were willing to kind of
sacrifice on on the numbers. So
it like, Plus, he passed. We
only had a handful of sixth
graders this year next year,
We'll have about 16 6th graders
so it'll it'll be for for a
larger class, but that you know,
anytime you have those kind of
transitions, you sometimes have
to sacrifice that initial year
with numbers And what have you
Um, what were also doing is
right now we have our dual
language program, which is a big
interest for the community of
Borloo itself.
And not just to serve our
immigrant students, but to serve
our heritage. Freaking Spanish
students. So the kids that kind
of got Spanish taken from them.
By generational issues when it
came to language instruction in
schools, and so in a matter of
fact, President Madrid I think
is one of the early adopters of
dual language. All of his kids
have gone to dual language
programs, and they're all fluent
speakers. So when we were kids,
we grew up in our parents spoke
Spanish, so we didn't understand
what they were seeing.
His kids speak Spanish so he
doesn't understand what they're
saying. So we he teases us about
that all the time, but are dual
language program has been
bifurcated by going to multiple
schools. So by being an a K two
setting than going to a 35
setting than going to a 68
setting.
There was never continuity. It
was always broken and so forth,
So we're now moving to go to one
dual language school that will
become a dual language of choice
school for the entire district.
So we see that as probably being
a little bit smaller in the
early years, but after we get
some momentum behind it,
increasing the numbers, both
with bringing people that have
left our school district back as
people as people see that what
we're doing
Um, but what we'll do is right
now we're bursting at the seams
of bes because we have
Uh, suddenly because are going
over their 4th 56 so it will
probably relieve some pressure
so we can actually do some more
program back Programmatic
innovations. We've also started
a CTE program.
Pre k through 12.
And I mean, we've had CT kind of
like in certain areas, but we
started to see SETI program
where we're actually starting
Project lead the way in second
grade. We start the world of
work in the rice sector model in
kindergarten. Um and then in
second grade, we start with the
valuable, um, reading, reading
complement, and all of these
things are aligned to what we're
trying to do in the key through
six, so we'll start seeing those
Things were actually on both
Carol and in Berlin Elementary
School were really without
capacity right now. So, um, all
three of those schools if you
think about
I'll go down is and how it's
impacted. All three of those
schools are really up. We don't
have extra classrooms.
Um, I have one final question. I
think in that's you know, you
made it a point to point to
identify the turnaround for the
bus area for the Busses at that
school.
Uh, what? What are the plans to
take care of that? Are you going
to be figuring the entrance or
because it didn't seem like you
have much room to work with
What?
Well, what is one of the things
that we're doing? Is is
acquiring a piece of property
that's adjacent to it. And so
that helps us with
Moving the addition a little bit
north of the building. Um, and
then actually moving the parking
lot for staff.
And then opening up that area
where the parking lot would
actually and I'm not a designer
nor an architect. So you know, I
I I am just thinking that's
probably how it's gonna work.
But I know we've had a lot of
ideas and as we go through the
process will think through
those, but But acquiring some
extra space will actually
provide us the room to do that
and get and be able to fence
that area off. So there's
We're not having to mess with
the the easement at all. Thank
you. And thank you for the
presentation will between us on
the project.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Uh, I've
got a couple of text. Um people
watching the Webcast are asking
that anyone in the diocese
Um
Point the mic toward them
because it's currently
directional.
And that's it just so they can
hear a little better. Thank you.
Thank you.
Alright, We're moving on them
to, uh, item be on the agenda.
And that is FY. 24 Capital
Outlay Awards overview.
Mr Chair and members. This is an
informational item to update you
on the two systems based awards
that were made in the consent
agenda, which included Espanola
for the demolition.
Of the old head start building
and then a second systems based
award for West Las Vegas for
Luis Armijo Elementary School,
which is a two phase award.
This impacted the state matched
by 291,551.
As you can see on page 142. Here
is the total awards made this
fiscal year.
And broken by program type. So
these two systems based awards
are headed to the bottom of the
Blue section. Um
So that brings the total
He's one state.
Match to just over 30 million
for FY 24, And as I said, we'll
be making many awards the next
two meetings, so this number
will increase.
Thank you.
Any questions. Let's move on
then to the capital Outlay Award
cycle timeline.
Mr Chair and members. This is an
informational item that we
brought to award subcommittee
last week to discuss potential
ideas that we are contemplating
for the White 25 Capital Outlay
awards cycle timeline.
Typically, we've done these
Once a year, but in, uh, 2022 we
released it once in January. I'm
sorry. Prior to 2022. We were we
would release it once a year in
January, and then we'd have
awards in July.
Um I don't know how long this
went on for, but for decades in
fy 22 the PSC OSI approved the
capital L outlay application
cycle to remain open throughout
the year, with awards occurring
on a quarterly basis.
And then in 2023, the
application was open throughout
the year with awards at any
meeting.
And then we close the
application cycle on December
31st 2023.
So I like to go over some of the
advantages and disadvantages
that we've seen, Um, with this
open cycle over the past two
years.
First the advantages, um of the
open cycle and open award cycle
is that districts could apply
for funding at any time, and
we've seen that monthly with the
pre applications received that
some months we received a couple
of summary What months we have
received many applications. And
so this provided those districts
with
Ample time to apply when they
were ready to send in that pre
application letter.
And this also provided the PSC
OC with the opportunity to grant
awards multiple times a year and
not just once a year.
However, we have several
disadvantages to review from the
open cycle and hoping award
cycle.
First of which is that many
districts submitted pre
applications despite the
inability to fund the local
match for being eligible for
local match reduction.
There was no determined deadline
for the African districts to
become financially prepared for
the potential award, and this
resulted in many pre
applications being unable to
proceed to the final application
and potential award for long
periods of time.
So if you you've seen all year
that pre application list,
especially the standards based
section has remained.
Um, large, with many districts
that have stayed on there for
some of them have been over a
year on that list because we've
been waiting for the districts
to go out. The bond passed the
bond and meet the eligibility
requirements for the waivers
that they may need.
Uh Secondly, eligibility is
determined at the time of the
pre application letter per the
final ranking at that time.
However, those applications that
we receive that have taken over
a year's several new rankings
have come out. So, for instance,
the two districts that just
applied when they submitted
their pre application letter,
the rankings were different than
they are today. Because since
that time we've had a new
ranking released
So this creates a little bit of
confusion with which number are
we supposed to use? Because in
the rules, we say that it is at
the time of pre application
Whoever things have moved
Thirdly, PSF has been unable to
sustain the balance between the
pre applications received in the
potential awards made month over
month.
Sometimes we get three.
Applications and I'm able to
make five awards that month. But
then there was one month last
year. We were I received
14 applications from one
district and the few more from
others. So there was, you know.
About 18 applications when I was
only able to make three or five
that month, and so it's become
difficult to keep up, especially
with those districts that remain
on that pre application list for
many months, and those are the
awards that we're trying to push
through in the next two months.
That have just been sitting in
the pre application list for
many, many months.
Fourthly, the open application
cycle resulted in PSV condensing
the necessary workload to make
potential awards that every PS
coc meeting.
When it was once a year we had
approximately six months to do
all of the work. We weren't
coming forward every month with
new awards, and so at the end of
the six month we presented
everything together.
The way it's been going now,
with the open cycle and the open
awards, Um
As soon as the PSC OC meeting
ends. I go into working into the
next awards that we're going to
make next month and it's it's
been difficult to keep up.
And so some of the workload has
been condensed into that six
week cycle.
Awards made at every PS you see
meeting creates constant changes
to financial plan, which makes
it very difficult to reject
future funding availability,
especially with the fluctuations
and cost we're experiencing
affecting the financial plan.
You know, before when it was
once a year, we knew we had this
much money we would see about
the cations estimate those
potential awards and we would be
able to know Is this gonna align
with our availability? Do we
need to limit it a little bit,
or are we gonna be okay? It's
been very difficult to do this
year, especially with our
increases in, uh, cost just
because some of them
Taking so long, so they're
sitting on the financial plan,
saving the money while we get
more and more applications in
So
Is recommending adjusting our
timeline.
Um and I have a graphic on page
146. We would like to suggest
that we align the application
cycle with the fiscal year
rather than the calendar year.
Previously, before this open
cycle, we would release it in
January and make awards in July.
The last two years. We released
in January, and it's been open
season.
Um so I'm gonna review some of
the advantages for that concept.
first of all, releasing the
application cycle in July would
result in the alignment.
Um of the release of the annual
state and local match update.
Therefore, districts will know
the local match at the time of
application, and it will not
change prior to award
Previously the state local match
would change between the
application that the district
would initially send in and the
award. This would often cause a
higher local match, which the
districts did not plan for.
In my time here when we did that
we would update the state local
match.
In July just before we publish
the books so the districts did
not receive
Ample notification that the
local matches may increase
significantly and at what
percentage that they would be
responsible for us. So this is
caused, Um some issues with
districts over the past few
years, so if you release the
application with the eligibility
requirements and everything at
the same time as the state local
match notification, then we're
all on the same page from the
beginning.
They understand what they would
be applying for in terms of
their local match, And then the
award would happen under that
same state local match.
We believe this would resolve
some issues.
Um, secondly, PSF, they can send
one notification to all
districts regarding the release
of the applications for all
capital funding programs. The
updated state local match and
potentially the final ranking.
If we move that to be on the
fiscal year as well, and we'll
need to have a conversation soon
on, if we're going to re release
that ranking for this year.
On. This would also align with
the bond sales for June and
December and would allow the PSV
financial team to close
processes for the fiscal year
end.
In addition to those programs,
which is standard systems, pre k
teacher housing, um
Least assistance and financial
plan assistance have always been
a little different.
We are suggesting that least
assistance stay with the cycle
that we've had this year with
pre application. Um sorry.
Applications open mid July
through mid August, this
alliance with the school year.
This is what we did last year,
and we've had more success with
getting documents in that were
signed. And correct. Um
Rather than in the middle of the
summer or in March, Um prior to
Lisa's being updated
That would result in Lisse
Assistance Awards, tentatively
set in November.
And lastly, F M P awards this
year we've experimented with
having those open all year.
We would like to propose for
this upcoming year that we
opened the applications all year
but have awards only twice a
year rather than at every
meeting.
So, as I said, this is an
informational item. We just
wanted to get
Feedback from all of you before
we make the final determination
so that we can, um make
adjustments as needed, as the
council sees fit. Um, as you can
see on 146. We have this
timeline Graphic. The top band
portion shows the original cycle
prior to FY 22 or 23.
The current cycle, where it's
open season and then the
proposed cycle of moving
everything shifting it to align
with the fiscal year.
Um
We would also be able to have
two rounds of applications and
awards if there's available
funding for that.
Um, So after the December
awards, we could reopen the
applications in January, have
second round awards in June.
With that I'll stand for
questions.
At the subcommittee's reviewed
this
Mr Chair and members. We took it
to awards for initial feedback.
We have not taken it to AMs.
We will next month. Think we
need to? Really
Have a close. Look at this. I
like the idea of having the
rankings.
And the match.
All together at one time. It
seems like that's the reason why
some of these projects are just
sitting there in the pre
application.
Get that information. And so I
like that that part of it.
I do think that we got a lot of
good.
Feedback from districts liking
the application cycle, I
realized that it
Places.
Mr Chair and Miss Ramos. Thank
you for your presentation. Have
you got any feedback from
wondering if that's happened?
And if
Mr Chair members, ms Media. We
have not specifically spoken to
districts about this yet. Um
However, um, we believe it would
it would
Still work as you can see on our
timeline. We suggest having an
open application for three
months, which was longer than
the original.
Um
Prior to 2022. It would be open
very short for one month. It was
a rush to hurry up and get it in
situations. So if we have it
open for three months, we
believe that would kind of be
the compromise.
So that it's provides them with
more time also, um we've been
having more and more dialogue
with districts throughout the
year doesn't matter if
applications are open or not,
we're having preemptive
conversations with districts
long term planning.
So that
We're having, um
We're prepping with the
districts in conjunction with
them so that they are
understanding how the process
works. How the ranking works how
the applications work, so
hopefully more of them will be
ready and understand, So it's
not a hurry up and get this in
and
Not understand.
How many of it works, which we
did see a lot before in the
original cycle. We would we
would we would receive many
applications and then realized
many of them weren't eligible or
if they didn't have the funding,
we would remove them from the
list entirely. Um, so I perceive
that we just continue working
with the districts and if we
have those two phases or two
cycles
That provides the districts with
opportunities to apply twice.
I appreciate the reason for
adjusting things.
But I would encourage you would
would be just to make sure that
We have their their input and
land. You know, Mr Chairman,
Media? Um we wholeheartedly
agree and will do many outreach
cycles through presentations
Roundtable discussions will
continue an open dialogue.
Definitely. I don't see this
shift.
Um, being a huge change in the
way we're operating honestly, as
Miss Ramos stated.
We have such an open dialogue
with the Elia's. Now that, um
We're getting information and
coaching our districts on when
is the best time to approach and
I think this will just help lock
things in financially and allow
the council to have a clear
picture of what is available to
fund Mr Chair and members also
in awards, we did discuss their
possibility of opening, leaving
systems based as
Oops. Open application. Open the
cycle if there may be more need
for districts to come apply
throughout the year for systems
and that we could potentially
adjust for
One of the
The concerns I have as well as
if the current system is
courage, Ng
Districts to come forward.
With when they're when they're
not prepared yet.
Uh, we need to stop that. I
mean, we're opening it up so
that people when they're already
can come forward.
So
Um, while it impacts, actually,
um, make the decision on talking
about support staff in terms of
their processes. I am intrigued,
and I'm excited Actually about
this idea. I think that's really
helpful Act staff needs are and
so being responsive to the staff
is a great thing.
Um and particularly, uh, M s sub
committees direction to support
them with I feel like structure
is good for all of us.
Um
It's good for the districts
helpful for staff planning for
the districts, and it's helpful
for staff that we have in terms
of being able to also helpful
for the staff in terms of their
staff development.
Um and being reflective of their
own processes continuous
improvement.
Um, I feel like I had
recommended similar to Mr Lia.
It recommended the outreach the
district I feel like
Maybe a focus group.
One or two, so it doesn't get
unwieldy. Just pull
Five or six super interesting
superintendents demonstrates the
breadth and with the districts
across the state, you've got
small rule right? That would be
very helpful because you can
take the time to sit down with
them and actually get some
really meaningful Converse
project managers. So good luck.
Thank you.
Mr Chair. Can I Thank you. God.
Sorry. I was not turning that
on. And maybe I shouldn't have.
So I just
Appreciate. Um, uh, retrograde
ornaments. Comments. Um, and
again, I think the data will be
helpful, and I really like the
concept of focus groups and kind
of honing in on who, you know A
nice sample of a diverse set of
districts to provide some
feedback on this, But I agree. I
think structure is very critical
in order to make things operate,
and then
Just kind of dialing or honing
in even further on the financial
plan and aligning the needs with
the bond sales. Um I think that
that's really, really critical.
We should be, um, certifying as
a council, the need and we
should have identified need, and
I do think we have moved a
little bit away from and I think
I will say staff has done
excellent job at really honing
in on looking at need over the
next six months, but I think it
has been a challenge.
When we have that kind of really
open cycle, so I think this will
be a real opportunity for us to
try and get again. Um, align the
certification of need with with
projects that we know indeed are
ready and coming forward, even
if they haven't been voted on
yet. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you.
Any further comments. We did
have similar pretty good.
Think about it.
Good discussion.
So I think you've
Got some
A little bit more work to do,
but I think it's a great
definitely for the next meeting.
Hmm. Mr Chair if I may, just one
small comment. This is only
affecting new awards out of
cycle is
Continuing just as as we've
Been doing in the past. Yes,
sir.
Thank you for that
clarification.
Alright, so let's move on to
item Roman numeral six out of
Cycle awards.
ROTC teacher housing funding
request and there's There is a
Subcommittee motion on this so
Did you want to? Thank you, Mr
Chair? Um
This is not on the consent
agenda because we wanted to
bring it in front of the full
council just so you could see
the ark
Of the, um success of this
award, actually, and we could
study it particularly important
for AMs subcommittee members
since you are in charge of, um,
evaluating this program, so we
really wanted to make sure that
you heard this that you shared
it with you, Um, with that being
said, we do fully recommend this
award subcommittee recommends
for the council.
To prove to amend this current
standards based tools, and it
will include a waiver their
local match totaling
$5,107,197
For revised state match of 5
million
$433,000, 100 and $89.
$5,433,189 100 percent.
And I revised local match up $0
for the construction of 10
Teacher Housing units and
associated site work, so this is
simply amending their current
standard space project,
including the teacher housing
units that they had initially
proposed at a revised match. So
we do recommend that thank you,
Mr Chair. Good. Thank you.
Cheers.
Check in. Sorry.
Um, I just wanted to put point
out a few things here, the
Superintendent, Mr John O'Brien
really worked diligently and
explored every option to get the
cost of where it is, And I want
to point out that this cost is
about 46% less than the original
11.9 million bid.
Um, we didn't include any soft
costs in this project as we are
utilizing the funds that were
awarded
For the full school.
Well, 11, General contractors or
12, general contractors. I'm
sorry. Attend the pre proposal
conference, and only one of them
submitted a bid.
This question came up and
subcommittee. Um so this is kind
of a weird
Hybrid kind of, uh, what we did.
It's uh
Took the bed from the original
teacher housing and broke that
out in the bed locks, and then
we went to home spy and got
manufactured housing pricing. So
that's what we're kind of
utilizing putting together as
one bed you can see on page
151
The home spot contractors for
that actual manufactured housing
is 3.1 million.
And then the site working
infrastructure is 2.3 million.
And that's from Nick Priego and
son.
And with that council I'd like
to introduce Miss John O'Brien.
And super or board President
Gravy Hill if there's any
further questions
Thank you.
Thank you for being with us, and
you were here first this
morning, So thank you for the
patients.
Thank you. Chair again. Members
of COC. We appreciate the
opportunity to be before you
again. Um, we're getting pretty
comfortable in this chair. Um, I
Basically, I'm here to entertain
any questions that you may have
I can share with you a little
bit about the process that we
went through. Of course, this
original, UM award was made was
requested back in July of 2021.
Um, we've continued to follow
through the steps. Since then,
as we've gone through the
process and the housing when we
did the RFP for the full
construction project, the
housing piece was just
astronomical.
And so we re bid it, um, again,
and we had the 12 contractors
that were mentioned and still
only one submitted a proposal
and so we worked with them.
Through a process to try to, you
know, value engineer that down
to where maybe it was something
that would be
A plausible
And still it was about 7.5
million, and that was with
stripping basically everything.
Off that we could imagine.
And so
We kind of
Took a look at them the option
with the modular homes and and I
went and visited the plant.
And I really would encourage if,
uh, if the if the pathway is to
go towards some of these modular
homes, I would encourage you all
to go visit the Carson plant
Right here in Albuquerque. It's
or in Albuquerque. It's um I'm
it's all the same right now. Um,
When you're from mascara, you're
just here.
Um
But it was very informational.
I. It
Leave the lot of concern about
the quality of the housing and
what we were going to get and
what we were going to be able to
do with it and what we're going
to do for sighting and how we
still make it fit into the
culture that we have in mascara
and ultimately we decided that
we could do that. We went to
work right away on all the
pricing, and that is then the
package that we have submitted
to you. But the
The tour of the Carson plant was
very, very well time spent.
Um Dr Pereira tournament. Is
there anything else from that
regard that you know of in in
conversations, or is there any
other questions?
Um, that we might be able to
answer for you guys.
Thank you for inviting us to the
to tour the facility.
Cancelation the first time, I
think
We were unable to make
Any questions or
Coming. So I had one question.
Yeah, you've what was the
original bid on the housing
units and we're down to that
we're down down to it was
Honestly. Yeah, we've got 11 9
23, but
I think with everything
included. It was more than that.
Mr. It was 13. Yeah.
So that's the number I've had in
my head. So 13 is what it came
in the very first time.
Actually, just right at 12 is
what it came in when we rebuild
it The second time we went
through the value Engineering,
We got it down to 7.5. And then
we did it again, and we're at
5.4. So this is one of those
things that actually we sort of
led the charge with and we've
we've worked at.
Really hard and sort of finally
be here with a number that we
feel like we're not embarrassed
of is, um, is
A nice feeling, so hopefully I'm
glad it was favorable in the
Ward Committee Meeting council
had
Relooked at that. We only did
not. But
Change that we were able to come
up with based on input from Mr V
Hill. Anything to add.
Um
Well, some of you know, because
we've been up here before and
also the mayor.
And that the village fully
supported because, like the
school, uh, we gave up part of
the street, so that way the
school could be
Built in a way that would make
it safe and secure and we've
held off street projects to wait
to see if these housing or to be
approved so we can
Not terrible street, but also
get the utilities there and then
also when this is all said and
done the school the housing
You all approved millions of
dollars in awards invite you to
come see what's your work does
especially in these small
communities because it is
absolutely critical to their
survival.
The school is the heart of the
town, especially in a town like
ours.
You know when our kids are
traveling 6070 miles to school.
So when it's over into built
Come out.
See it. Have a meeting there.
We'll take care of you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Mayor.
President.
Maybe Hatch do you have thank
you for your service? I know
you've been
We've known each other for a
long match.
Anything else?
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Superintendent,
Superintendent and staff
strongly commend you team for
all of your D diligence and
working on this, um, looking at
all the different options can,
um, staff really great job
really wonderful.
Superintendent. I think it might
be beneficial for you to talk a
little bit about what you're
planning to do in terms tracks
with this. I did question that
question. Um, and I think it is
important for AMS Subcommittee
meeting the pilot project
because particularly if the
state is funding this 200%
But the district actually
charges read something that we
would have to consider or think
through in the future. And we're
in this instance. Like what?
What are your plans?
Yeah. So
Teacher. Housing is not new and
Mascaro. We have five that have
showed you guys the picture of a
few times that are going to be
torn down that are in remarkable
disrepair so we can give you
some firsthand account of what
the kind of expenses are to
maintain teacher housing and so
rent obviously is going to
reflect what we would
anticipate, Um, maintaining
those facilities and keeping
them
Ah and and good, good condition.
Excellent condition, preferably
So, uh,
We We take a look at the rent.
Um
For new housing obviously
differently than we would
housing that's been recommended
to be torn down.
Ah, And and so with the new
housing What we're looking at is
a little bit of a sliding scale,
because, as we all know, it
takes many different people to
make a school go around, and all
of those people need housing,
and they all have very different
incomes.
And so we would, we would have a
lesser amount of rent around
$450 for a two bedroom, two
bath.
Um, for an individual. That's an
EA making something less than
30,000 a year.
So that they can still continue
to afford that housing. Um
We also have a very rigid
Pet policy if they're going to
have pets, because we all know
those are hard while I While we
all love our pets, they are
definitely also harder on
houses. We probably should
charge extra if they have kids.
Oh, wait. Um, but so we're gonna
charge a little bit more if
they've got pets, So you know
you've got extra filters, extra
maintenance things like that of
that nature.
So that scale will go up to
Ah!
700 for teachers making greater
than
Then $70,000 that are living in
the larger houses. Three
bedroom, two bath houses.
Ah, so that's the sliding scale.
Of course, utilities are on
them. We have in policy already
where they will put all the
utilities into their name
Beginning the date of the That's
a system that has worked well
for us. We've got a few years
practice at that at this point,
and so
Ah, The funding for that is is
literally going into our 12,000
fund, which is the teachers fund
that we used to, uh, pay for any
of the maintenance and upkeep
and, frankly, uh, additional
part time salary, So I don't
think there's any. I'm sorry.
Um, great. There's any funding
for landscaping in this so that
would also
Help to landscape them.
Because we lost our pond That
was
Sure the drawing that everybody
was so happy about. Thank you
Have a motion on the floor. But
I think we have
Yes, Mr Chair. Thank you. I'll
keep this brief. I appreciate
awards, mentioning that and
director prayer, warn Ament
mentioning that I think it might
be good for M s and staff to
look back because this may be
something that we want to
Do have a plan and appreciate
some additional guidance. Um, I
do have a proposal that I
printed out regarding the rental
rates if you would like to have
a copy of it. Yes, Thank you.
Yes, common
I also
Scent of
Hello? How the costs are being
driven.
Thank you all. So, uh, all those
in favor of approving the
Awards subcommittee motion.
Please indicate by saying, I
write supposed Congratulations.
Thank you. Thank you all.
Mr Chair. I know we need to move
forward, but I just wanted to
thank the council for the
guidance on the manufactured
housing and for C I d providing
valuable information. As you can
see, it's it's provided us
another avenue for housing.
Um, and a really good success
story. So thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
We have one major item on the
agenda still
Even though there's some
information
Are we ready to go to the
briefing?
Can we skip to the briefing?
Attorney General's office is
here.
Welcome.
Your chair and members of the
council.
Thank you. All right, great.
My name is Alan Vanegas. I'm an
assistant solicitor general with
the New Mexico Department of
Justice. Um and I represent both
the state and the council in the
Zuni litigation, which, as you
can see in your materials, I
believe it's page 169. There's a
timeline here. This lawsuit was
initiated back in the nineties,
so it's been going on for quite
some time.
The plaintiffs are the Gallup
McKinley School District and
Azumi School District and the
state councilor. The defendants
Um
So most recently. What's been
going on is in December 2020.
The trial court held that the
state's process for capital
outlay funding of public schools
was unconstitutional. Um,
specifically violating the, um
the New Mexico Constitutions
education claws, and you can see
the language here at the top of
the page.
The education clause requires a
uniform system of free public
schools sufficient for the
education of all Children of
school age.
So, um, the state has appealed
that decision. The appeal is
still pending, and it's just
like to provide some information
on the current status of where
we're at with that.
Um
So if you're a few years ago,
the briefing was completed is a
New Mexico Court of appeals
after that was done the
plaintiffs in the lawsuit moved
to certify the case to the New
Mexico Supreme Court and the
Supreme Court did accept
certification. Um, back in the
end of 2023.
So the Supreme Court, um,
certified cases for review when
they involve significant
constitutional issues or other
issues of substantial public
importance that should be
decided by the Supreme Court.
and with that the case has been
transferred to the Supreme Court
and the court ordered new
briefing.
So we're in the middle of that
briefing right now. And, um
Our opening racist file. Just a
few weeks ago, the end of
February. Next, the plaintiffs
will file their answer brief and
then we'll have an opportunity
to file a reply brief.
Um, once that's done, we just
have to wait and see what the
court decides it's going to do
next. Could order order or
argument. It could just decide
everything on the briefs. Um, so
more waiting, sort of where
we're at right now.
Um and I should mention that
although the trial court did
hold that, um, that these
statutes are unconstitutional,
That ruling has been stayed
pending appeal so the council
can proceed under the statutes.
Um, continue with the words.
Nothing has changed for priority
today purposes.
And with that, I'll answer any
questions.
Number one. Thank you for
You know, Representative in our
legal counsel on this, I think
you know this has gone on for
quite some time, and we'd like
to see
Light at the end of the tunnel,
but
Hopefully, um
We'll do that. How do you feel,
Uh, in terms of the filing that
you all provided, and
Response to the
Mr Cherry, referring to the the
recent filing that we just
opening brief. Um, um I'm
feeling good about it. Um, you
know, due to the nature of this
public meeting, I don't want to
provide too much. We are in the
middle of pending litigation.
So, um, but I think you know we
have some some good arguments
there and, um at this point,
it's a little unclear The
Supreme Court could decide to
only address some issues.
And then send it back to
Appeals or the trial court. But
I do think that regardless of
what action the court takes, I
feel that we've covered a lot of
ground in the brief and I think
we're in a good place, and I
know the council. The
Legislature has been working
hard and continuing to amend
statutes and improve the
process.
And that's something that we are
informing the courts of and that
we think is very relevant to
To the lawsuit.
Thank you.
Comments or questions.
Right. Thank you. Mr Chairman
here. Members of the council in
the loop. Yes, I will. Thank
you.
Thank you.
No trouble.
Mr Chair. Is that Mike? You
Well, um you have some important
items, Please, Please proceed.
Briefly about the audit. So if
you go to page 164
I just want to let you know we
have an unmodified audit for
fiscal year. 23. I gave you some
definitions and what that means.
It's a positive audits. We had a
couple of, um I call him
insignificant findings that we
are addressing. And so we're I'm
really proud of the finance team
at PSV, who did such diligent
work to ensure that we are
Daddy in our eyes and crossing
our T s when it comes to being
fiscally responsible with that
all stunt for any questions.
Two.
Yes, Mr Cheryl. Keep it brief. I
just wanted to reiterate, um
The director's comments and
really think the financial staff
for getting us here. I
participated in the exit audit.
The auditor was very calm to get
PSF MPs CSC to this point, um,
no repeat findings. I know we
have a couple to look at. And
you know, I think seeing how you
guys are gonna address that, But
I think, um And I know the audit
addresses that a little bit but
be good to chat about it, but I
just really want to commence a
huge improvement from, I think
the last two on it, maybe more
and again.
Who's come. A long, long, great
CFO to continue was able to sit
in on the exit.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Miss Leach for that for sharing
that
Mr Chair members. Let's go to
page 166, and I'll give you a
brief update on the legislative
session session and some of the
bills that impacted PSF and P S
C O. C.
House Bill two is our General
Appropriation Act where our
operating budget was approved.
Um 204 hundreds were flak. We
did get an increase in our 300.
Which is our, um, contractual
services of 25,000.
Mhm. Other appropriations made
from House Bill two is the
$200,000 to PD for safety
summits.
650,000 to the office of the
broadband access and extension
expansion for personnel costs.
1.5 million to Las Vegas City
school district to innovate
Memorial Middle School, which I
didn't mention that a couple of
these potentially need to be
questioned are will be
problematic and we'll get more
into those details. Um, during
the off offline Senate Bill 275.
30 million was allocated to
higher ed for a literacy
institute. 1.5 million to ped
for their charging stations.
547,500 for PDS school bus
cameras and the tools from
district school Busses of 29.2
million Again for P E. D.
Seven is where
Public school capital outlay
after the minute to make the
least assistance program
mandatory versus discretion. All
so, um, that's the impact of
house Bill 207. Senate Bill 76
is school local share adjustment
waiver.
Bill clarifies the school
district's eligibility for a
waiver of the local match
provisions in accordance to the
act. As a result of this bill, a
school district may be eligible
for a waiver. It's local match
Under the phase two formula is
greater than 50%. And when I
sent for questions all defer to
Miss Ramos and she is our SME on
this bill.
The bill that did not pass the
Senate Bill 45, and this is the
broadband infrastructure build.
This was the request to move
Ah!
Oh, by over to, um
To do it. I believe
It did not pass. But in the
meantime, we've already started.
Uh, resetting and spearheading
on how we're going to move
forward as a team to ensure
timely contractual, um, getting
to contracts timely as well as
um, pain, the vendors what they
need and just streamlining this
partnership in order to better
collaborate.
So that there's no issues or
nothing falling between the
cracks. So with that being said,
I stopped for any questions.
Thank you for the presentation.
I think
Roots. Couple of these were
nice. Nice little adjustments to
Thank you, Mr Chairman. We
talked about this briefly in
AMs Um, the $200,000.
Appropriations and House Bill
two for school safety summits.
Those appear to be operational
and I think we had talked about
Maybe asking Bond Council of
those were appropriate. They
seem operational, so I don't
know that they would be
permissible.
And I just realized that Ah, I
assume these were in Section
five special appropriations
650,000 for personnel cost.
We allow operational
For PSF face, So I'm not sure
that's 650 is also appropriate.
I don't know. Ashleigh, if you
had a chance to look at those Mr
Chair, um, role No, we have not.
but we will be looking at them.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Yes, Mr Chairman members. The
next item is the SEC meeting
processed over viewing.
We already gave this
presentation to eight of you. Um
I don't know. How detailed do
you want me to be Mr Chair?
Just let very important
Okay?
Um, Essentially, this item goes
over the process that the PSF
goes through.
Um, every six weeks for our
Six week cycle. Um
So, as you know, we go to the PS
or the subcommittee's first and
then the council week after
that, Um and so recently the
executive director of PSF has
met with subcommittee chairs and
receive feedback and
recommendations for improving
the books presented material and
House subcommittees and council
meetings could operate better.
Um and we plan to implement
those improvements throughout
2024.
Um, Next, they have the PSC OC
meeting process. Um,
Essentially, we have a six week
cycle weeks one through three.
or the weeks that PCP, um
conducts our work and conducts
are tasked to prepare for the
meetings.
We submit our material that you
see in these books. At the end
of the third week, the fourth
week is for production,
producing the material in the
book for subcommittee. The fifth
week is when we have
subcommittee and prepare for
those meetings. We prepare those
books and then we react to what
happens that subcommittee and
then the sixth week is when we
have the COC meeting and we
complete all of those tasks
based on the council approvals.
The second. The PSC OC meeting
is over. We start the process
over again. So tomorrow we start
day one again.
P s affairs. Internal deadlines
are dictated by the open
meetings Act deadlines at the
amount of time it takes us to
gather information from the
districts and external parties.
the staff analysis and materials
that are developed in the
production timeframe together
and composed the books.
We've heard feedback from
members, which include, um that
you all require more time to
review the Subcommittee in P. C.
O. C E books.
At the new PSC, Jussi awards or
complex and or controversial
items shouldn't be heard by the
full council and should not be
added to the consent agenda.
And out of cycle executive. Some
Berries need to be consistent.
And some feedback that on the PS
COC meeting process from PSV,
Um is that it's challenging to
coordinate the subcommittee and
council meetings to align with
all nine members availability.
Um, last year. This resulted in
rescheduling many meetings,
which causes a great impact on
the deadlines for analysis
districts, the middles
production time production
efficiency and providing timely
information of the council
members and always keep in mind.
the open meetings act
requirements must be adhered to.
The agenda approval. Timing
definitely affects the
efficiency of production if we
have that approval to early
things changed during that last
week of deadlines, and you have
to get it approved multiple
times.
Um last late request and changes
on the agenda or material from
the council members in districts
after the deadlines or
publication definitely slows the
process down and results in the
handouts that you all see
regularly.
Um, handouts are not included in
the books would win published.
So you're not seeing that
information when you get it
ahead of time.
And lastly, there's sometimes an
unclear delineation of what
subcommittee should hear
specific items. Some items are
often presented in both
subcommittees and one has it as
the action item and the other as
informational. Other times like
this item. It was informational
for both. And here we are
presenting information again.
We have some proposed solutions,
which are established,
documented roles for awards and
AMs subcommittees to establish
the separation of powers between
sub communities and make sure
that we all understand those
together.
Approval of a work plan Timeline
at the start of the fiscal year
to better align with the member
schedules to negate the need for
rescheduled meetings.
Um, closer to the beginning of
the fiscal year will be asking
to approve the new work plan
Timeline on that fiscal year,
and by then we're hoping to
receive all of your calendars
for your agencies and meetings
so that we can try to align
better with those, so there's
less need to reschedule meetings
this year.
Um
Member designees should attend
in place of a member if they
cannot attend, instead of
rescheduling meetings, and those
doesn't needs must be approved.
with that designation letter
from your governmental agency.
They will schedule Council
member or in or will provide
council member orientation for
existing in new members.
We could potentially implement
virtual meetings for
subcommittees to allow
flexibility.
We will improve presentation of
information and reevaluate the
executive summary templates. We
will work on enforcing internal
and external deadlines to adhere
to the meeting preparation
process.
And reevaluate meeting processes
and timeframes to provide
council members more time to
review material but retains
sufficient time for pace based,
active conduct and complete
necessary working. Analysis of
items to be presented.
And if I may, um, I think the
most important um
Two diagrams that we've provided
on page 179.
And 180.
On 179. We show this cycle. Um,
that starts the day after the
SCLC meeting. We will go
immediately into debrief either
today or tomorrow will hold a
preliminary agenda review.
Um, now and then, In three
weeks, we'll have another agenda
review meeting. We create
material review. Um we review
all the material that we have
submitted to make sure that
everything is um, as good as we
can make it. We developed that e
book. We go to subcommittees. We
develop another E book in a
shortened amount of time and
then we go to the council and we
start all over again.
And on page 180. We have the six
week cycle calendar showing you
all of the steps that we go
through for every cycle. So
those first three weeks on those
brave boxes. Those are PSP's
timeframe to do our work
analysis, compile information
and develop material.
As you can see that Friday. Um
at the end of that third week.
That's when our deadline is
were defaced, submits everything
that goes into that e book. It's
a week and a half ahead of
subcommittees so sometimes
especially working with
districts, they say, Well, the
meetings in May so I've got time
but really are deadlines three
weeks ahead of that, so it's
It's difficult, you know, for
external entities to understand
that timeframe.
Um, the week of the fourth week,
A lot goes into reviewing the
books would like to commend our
support staff with either
Delgado and our analysts, um,
they put in a lot of effort to
make these books happen. Um,
they receive a lot of documents
that they need to organize and
scrub and clean up and put in.
And organized manner, and it's a
lot of work.
Um, we published the book.
Hopefully, by the end of that
week, and we print it, we prep
for the meeting. Um, this is
assuming Wednesday meetings like
we had last year. We had that
subcommittee and then we have
four days to prepare for the
next subcommittee.
So that's when things get a
little difficult sometimes when
there's a lot of changes and
request made at subcommittee
Um, that compresses the time
that we can get that book done.
We really have the one day after
subcommittee for counselor for
PSF a staff to make those
adjustments and get everything
into the book. If it takes
longer than that, one day it
stalls. So we try to publish
that Friday. So two days after
the subcommittee, um print it
and prepare for that PSC oc
meeting, Um
Usually on Wednesdays. This
time, it's on a Monday and then
the next day we we start over
again.
So we really just wanted to show
you the amount of
Time it takes to get everything.
Into these books.
Um
There's another detailed diagram
on page 180 or 181.
And this is really showing like
week four primarily of
everything that
Staff does, um, to make these
books with multiple reviews.
Multiple submit ALS.
Um, and production of these.
These, uh
Very intense books.
And everything. Um
Is determined by those council
meetings, and we work back from
that date to make sure we have
enough time to do everything.
And so on these discussions when
when we're talking about, um
Improvements. It's just
important for
PSV and the council to
understand, uh
The process that we go through
to the amount of time it makes.
It takes us to get these books
to all of you.
And Mr Chair if I could just add
two comments to Miss Ramos his
presentation we hear the
feedback and as you can see in
the excuse me the out of cycles.
In particular mascara this year.
This
Months.
The format is quite different.
We tried to implement a template
if you will, for the same
information to be consistent
every single time so that when
members open those out of cycles
You're very familiar with that
layout and information.
And I would say
The most important thing to for
staff to glean away from this
was to, um try to adhere to the
schedule as best as possible.
And what that does is
It's not about what's harder or
easier for staff. It's about the
level of information we're able
to get to the council to make
better decisions, and I think
that is where the ripple effect
occurs. Where in subcommittee
more questions coming up?
Because perhaps we didn't put in
enough time on on that effort,
if you will, so I think if we
adhere to schedules, and we
create more clear, succinct
information.
Some of these things are going
to shake themselves out a little
bit as we move forward, Mr
Chair.
On page 182.
Um, there's some dates there for
PS coc meetings and I was under
the impression this when I was
informed that they so
Please don't
Don't look at those dates.
Totally conflicted with my
calendar anyway.
Concerned, but so we will get
some dates down the line. Some
real dates to work with. And
yes, Mr Charity M s is gonna
take a particular. Look at this
with staff. I know to kind of
make sure that we're
incorporating input on getting
some executive summaries to the
full Council in advance, even if
the full book is not ready, but
also ensuring that transparent
can be prepared and know what
they're working with. So we
continue to work on that. In
addition to that, um
Mr Chair. I, um
Connect with you offline, but I
think it would be helpful to
revisit the delegate letters and
thank you.
And one thing that I brought up
two staff. I know that
Uh, all of you look at the
booklets and they have a lot of
information there. Please review
those as subcommittees and make
sure that we absolutely need
that information.
I know it's probably better to
get too too much than not
enough.
But if there's anything in there
that you're not using a
subcommittee to eliminate from
the
The process of printing and
Please. Please. I'd run it by
the council and make sure that
Mr Mr Chairman. Thank you. And
thanks for putting this
together. Just curious. Have you
or are you planning to see how
this
Aligns with the award schedule
you addressed earlier.
And maybe do a side by side
comparison. Just kind of a
30,000 ft over you.
Mr Chair and members.
It really doesn't matter. What
information on how much
information we're putting in the
E books on the cycle, it's still
the same process for the those,
Um
Meetings for the new awards. Um,
the way we used to have them
prior to open cycle. Um, those
books were quite extensive and
large because we were having
many districts come at once. So
that month in particular
Will be more robust than than
others, but it's still the same
process.
Thank you.
Thank you and you're looking at
trying to get us more time
between the subcommittee
meetings and the council
meeting.
Mr Chair. That's one of the
options we're going to explore.
Yes, sir. And even the motion
sheets.
We still just got them today, so
It's not
Thank you so much. Thank you.
I have good news with regards to
preventive maintenance planning
across the state as we end the
2023 year, moving into 2024 71%
of our New Mexico school
districts have current
preventive maintenance plans.
That's one of our highest
numbers since 2006 since the
implementation of preventive
maintenance planning across the
state of New Mexico.
28% do not. We still working on
them, chipping away at them to
encourage them to see the value
of preventive maintenance across
their spectrum of public
schools, films. We've seen a
slight increase in the use of
films across the state of New
Mexico, both preventive
maintenance planning and
reactive maintenance. Um,
management, which is good news
for utility, direct utility
management piece driving energy
management.
It's kind of stagnant, kind of
stale. We're working on some
things as we progress into the
next year to train enhanced
districts use and Rick
recognized the value of energy
management across their public
schools. Another piece of good
news that I want to articulate
is the measure of maintenance
performance across the state of
New Mexico is now at 76%.
We have not seen numbers like
these ever if you recall back in
2015, the state of New Mexico
received a great low grade level
of an F in regards to
maintaining facility conditions,
year over year cycle over cycle.
They're doing something great,
and they're they're maintaining
the investments to a much better
level, and that's really
exciting news.
To be able to talk about and
express. How did they do it?
Well, they're updating their
preventive maintenance plans
more routinely on an annual
basis instead of waiting for the
two year mark or waiting to
apply for funding. They're
seeing value in it from year to
year. Not just with funding.
We're seeing higher performance
level ratings. We're seeing.
Lower
Less of the lower performance
ratings, so they're paying
attention. In many respects the
state charter schools are just
that had been lower but above
the 70 percentile rating.
Nonetheless, they're doing some
good things. Another area that
they're both combining to really
drive. Better maintenance. New
Mexico is they're responding to
what's broken.
They're fixing what we identify
that needs to be fixed through
maintenance budgets, so they're
following
Industry standard protocols to
better the environment for our
kids and teachers. Next on the
list is the minor and major
deficiency. Summary report.
We're still receiving fire
protection systems high on the
list have also noticed that H V
A C and housekeeping systems
Custodial services has kind of
geeked up to number five.
The good news is that we share
this information Quarterly with
the New Mexico Facility Managers
Association and we developed
training programs to help
circumvent and and shore up the
knowledge and skill set of our
facility managers so that we see
reductions in minor major
deficiencies over time.
Meaningful maintenance metrics,
the very powerful report we're
still seeing about 14% 12. I'm
sorry. 12% of our New Mexico
school districts use this report
to report maintenance conditions
up to their board using data
driven methods, and we're hoping
to see more in 2024 as we
progress. And with that, Mr
Chair members, I stand for any
questions.
Questions for Larry.
Thank you for
After 20 plus years of service.
Ah, we also had
AH financial specialist leaving
the agency, um that that
position has been, um
Replaced. We had also an I T
person leaving. We had already
and u I T
Tag and to regional manager that
left the agency that have been
replaced at this point.
Talk more about the departure.
we had the position of CFO is
vacant. Now Irish rumor should
be used to be the CF forces now
Irish rumor should be used to
be. The CF force is now the
director of the Rexel. We are
recruiting for that position. We
have now more resources more
avenues to reclassify the
candidates. We have been only
advertised the position of our
website.
And also indeed for free, which,
you know, provide good
candidates, but not enough for
us to compare, actually, so
that's what that's the process
were involved in. We're going to
be advertising on LinkedIn
indeed paid advertisement, which
provides more cans that we also,
um
At the financial spaces leaving
was hard to regional manager
world where the
Replace and the other
information that is relevant is
in terms of turnover on the
third quarter, so the turnover
is that 1.78.
Which is great beyond this
number is really what I want to
focus beyond his numbers. The
story is that we have been able
to retain much better employees
mainly the new employees that
those employees that are within
the 1st 12 months and that the
reason for that is we
redesigned the onboarding system
of the agency.
And actually, we go full circle.
You know, we onboard the way we
are bringing new employees
different that we used to do on
the up until if if y 20
223, and we also are doing a
much better job in terms of
boarding them. We are gathering
information that we didn't do
before. As a result, what we
pick up from when we are doing
our exit interview is that
There was some lack of
engagement. We're losing a few
employees because you know the
the agents didn't pay a danger
in how we advertise, for
example, the job up and we used
to do just externally while some
employees internally would be
interested in those jobs, we're
doing that now. And so that
helps with retention and
And that also elevated more
engagement. So that's where we
are with that I stand for any
questions. Thank you very much
for that update, and I wanted to
also take this opportunity to
thank you for your assistance.
and when we were looking at the
taking applications and filling
the position filled by Miss
Romero, you are very helpful and
we appreciate your work. Thank
you. Mr not met you so I didn't
realize you were here. All this
time we had we did a lot of work
on them.
Mr Chair members. I just one
audition for myself forgot, so
the decision was made that
temporarily. We're gonna bring a
someone that will do the work of
CFO until we find a permanent
replacement for the position.
Mr. Chair members. Yes, D f
failure. So in addition to that,
that I just wanted to make one
comment regarding
Um, just 25 positions as you
call center. Bill 45 did not
pass. But it is R and D $1000
that was allocated from the fund
for personnel for oh, by we now
have access to those four
positions that we are still pain
paying for out of the PSF a
budget so as a fiscal year 21st
650 K will be used to pay for
Those old by positions to move
over to Dubai.
But they will have to request
that funding year over year
until legislation so the money
Even though you have access to
it.
Mr Chair.
Okay?
Shot is no new money. Okay?
Alright. Got it. Thank you
Questions.
Thank you again so much.
Appreciate it.
We're down to the last item.
I heard that somebody wanted to
add something to the agenda is
the next item is the next date
Next meeting date.
That's to be announced. Mr.
Chair members based on the
approval of the end of the
fiscal year, the next meeting
with
Mr Chairman members remind you
again. That meeting might be
long we might need to do
A meeting over lunch. I haven't
Figured out how many how much
time we need for those district
presentations, but it
Maybe long might want to
consider giving the presenters
Because today's was pretty
lengthy but well.
There was a 15 minute
suggestion.
Yeah, probably next.
Yes.
The
I'm sorry, Mr Chair. That was
gonna be my brief comment
actually about the timeline
process for staff is that I feel
like the full and set us up,
particularly
If the staff does a very good
job, and I think they're getting
better at this proactively
problem attack that we can then
have that agenda.
Actually is aware of what's
actually think they share a lot
of good information with us.
It's not as fully developed as
as it should be. But we know
what this is A pre application.
Uh
We're at the end, and I would
entertain a motion to motion and
a second and before we do that
all those in favor indicate by
saying I host
One. Okay, we're done.
Thank you.
Actually about that.
That half hour delay
