President.
Alpers.
Present.
Memory, Lucero.
Here.
Member John
Prison.
Member changing
Remember Roybal?
Present.
Member of Russell.
President.
Here. Mr. Chairman, do have a
court this morning. Thank you
very much.
Okay with that. I'll call for
motion for approval of the
agenda.
Don't move, Mr. Chair second.
Thank you all in favor.
Alright I alright.
And Mr John the meeting.
Great welcome.
Hmm.
Okay. Next exciting on the
meeting is approval of the
minutes call for emotion for
that.
Some of Mr Chair, Okay? 2nd 2nd.
All in favor high, right?
Okay?
It's a move forward with the
consideration and approval.
Open meetings. Act resolution,
Mr. Opperman, Mr Chairman,
members of the board before he
was this every year. Uh,
Includes the ability
Coordinated by methods. The
resolution.
Publish where the meeting is
going to
stand up, and that has to be
about
Thank you, Mr Opperman. Um
Is there any questions?
And the and the resolution.
Hearing none or call for motion
for approval. So moved
Second
Second
All in favor, say Aye.
I okay?
Thank you, Mr afternoon.
Okay. We'll move on to item
number five. The overview of the
2024 New Mexico State.
Legislative session as it
relates to the water Trust
board.
Um, we had
Essentially for, um
Major bills I guess associated
with water transport business.
Three of them were Health House
bills.
Sponsored. Sponsored, uh
Primarily by
Susan Herrera.
Um, that was House Bill 148.
House build.
201 and House Bill 211.
Mhm House bill went 48 basically
authorized these
2024 projects 55 projects for
the Water Trust board.
Package of work We are doing
this.
This session. Um and also
Um
House Bill 201.
Was originally focused on adding
additional funding to the Water
Projects Fund to cover
The gap between what was applied
for and approved by the Water
Trust board and what was
actually available for funding.
And that bill was 100 and 50
million.
Request of the Legislature.
I went through a couple of
hearings, but ultimately it got
tabled in House Bill or House
finance, because, uh,
I was financed, had already put
Placed 50 million.
Dollars in hospital, too. So
they tabled the bill at that
point.
Um And then we had
Water Trust fund that was
sponsored by Senator ER, Um
worth, um, that also provided
and what was what was ultimately
put in in the Mr chairman of
another dollar amounts discussed
for both of those, so we're
we're recipients between the two
different funding types.
$100 million for water projects,
which is what's great. I think
the request was much higher as I
mentioned earlier.
Because of the need is great. We
know this is
Um, something that's going to
require a lot of attention going
forward from the Legislature,
and we're pleased that they had
addressed it. But they know as
we do that the there's a lot
more need than than we currently
have funding for so
Hopefully, that will continue.
Mr Chairman. I'd note that $50
million that are that's going
into the water Project fund is
an earmarked specifically or
projects on the 2024 cycle and
that the capital out lead back
now had an $18 million
appropriation for cost overruns
for projects prior to 2024,
2020 23 and below, So there are
projects we know that we're
stalled, been able to get going
on the construction and the
Legislature put in an additional
18 million for that.
Small amount of money
project starting
And the more complicated bill
that was
Hmm. That
Executive director Russell and I
worked
Together on and tech team and
several different hearings.
There was a
A lot of, um
Bills being pushed through right
at the 11th hour, and this was
one of those that made it across
the finish line. I think
The day before the end of the
legislative session and part
two Mr Russell's
Work and testimony associated
with that, um
On the floor itself, Um
Yeah, I have two special thanks
to senators. Phonics for
Um, essentially sponsoring that
bill in the on the Senate floor
and our behalf.
And it was a pretty grueling
Debate.
But it finally got approved with
with this Senate vote.
Um uh, for advancing, and I
think there was just a few no
votes in that in the Senate.
Session going forward, so
But what I'd like to do is just
kind of read real quickly. The
the
The contents of the bill. It's
going to require some work on
behalf of the water Trust board
to gear ourselves up for,
including wastewater component.
That's one of the major issues,
but it's basically
Ah, helping to prioritize water
project funds.
Projects that are urgent to
address public health and
safety, blowing the water Trust
board to authorize water
projects for wastewater
conveyance and treatment.
Providing that the new New
Mexico financing 30 set
requirements of financial
Capability of qualifying
entities and determined costs of
originating grants and loans.
No. Let you describe that in a
minute, if you like and then
removing the requirement that
eligible entities conduct an
audit, which was always kind of
a stumbling block for us to, uh,
get projects moving forward
under the older rules.
And removing fiscal agent fees
from items that are eligible for
grants and loans.
To be paid, and there's reasons
for that, Um
That
Executive director Russell can
describe and then reducing the
amount of water project funds
distributed to the status in air
for the next five years and
basically
What That means is that there
was a flat 10% dedicated for
both state engineer
adjudication.
Purposes, Water rights
adjudication purposes because
that's pretty important.
That entities have their water
rights in order to qualify for
projects and, and that was one
of the reasons behind that.
But also there was a small
percentage of that 10% that
would also go to state courts.
To help support their work and
dedication matters and hearings,
etcetera.
Go with that, Um, we we realized
that with the larger funding
blocks that are coming forward.
For the use of the water Trust
board. The state 10% was way
more funding that the state
engineer could ever expand on an
annual basis.
And we determined that about a
$4 million cap on that amount
was appropriate.
For the state engineers needs as
well as uh, authorized 2% for
the courts in order to support
the courts from the total, so
basically it allows for the same
process to move forward on the
adjudication work.
That's important, but it kept
the state engineer funding so
that it wasn't building a big
fund that we would never,
ultimately not, uh, on a on a
routine basis. So
That allowed for more funding to
be available for project
purposes.
So there's that and then, um,
the other piece that's really
important. I believe, uh,
granted the authority to use
water project funds.
For intimate face to hire
contractors to provide technical
assistance to underserved
communities. And those folks
that need that support.
To be come to have more
communities become eligible for
what? Our trust board funding.
Applications.
And then also, it changed the
water. The date of the water
Trust board is that's required
to report to the Legislature to
put it on the same dates of
other reporting requirements
that intimate they has for other
other programs.
Um, you want to add anything
more to that, Mr Chairman, I
would just note on the financial
capability That was sort of an
odd little part because the
finance authorities required
under the the act to make the
grants and loans And so for the
water, the mmf a on how to make
a loan, so that part is now
clean and will allow us to do
our business a little more
efficiently.
The audit section was relative
to the project. Got it, so we
are still required because the
money comes from the state were
still required to look at the
entities audits, but this
provision was a long time
provision that required that we
audit the project records and
because we, um, approve every
draw from the fund.
That was an unnecessary cost, so
we're as as the project is
drawing down. We're already
approving them doing an audit.
The end was simply costly and
duplicative.
Um, the fiscal agent fees
because our primary source of
funding for um the water project
fund comes from the severance
tax bonds, fiscal agency fees
and the way a lot of entities
see fiscal agency fees. It's for
cost associated with getting
their audit done or legal work.
things like that Project
administration fees when you are
paying someone to oversee the
project is still eligible.
Because it's directly related to
the project, but the fees that
an entity might want to charge
in order to help cover the costs
of overhead. That's the fiscal
agency fees that we've been
taken out, so I think it will
have a minor impact, but it will
clarify for a lot of entities
going forward. Whether or not
they can ask for that as part of
the application.
Um and I think those were the
big ones and the technical
assistance. Obviously, that's
something that this water
transport is going to have to
decide. Finance Authority will
hire the contractor, but it will
be a plan developed by the Water
Trust board for how to direct
those dollars and my hope is
that we'll be able to expand the
kinds of assistance that are
available for water systems
across the state.
There are a bunch of little pots
of money that funds some
portions of technical and I'd
love for us to be able to see
how we can do activities that
are adjacent to that. And help.
Um you know, even generate more
regional projects, things that
we think would be in the best of
some work ahead of us relative
to that Water Trust board
Finance authority will be
budgeting for that.
I anticipate we'll use the money
not coming from the severance
tax bonds, but again made
available, um from the fund in
order to cover those costs and
what we won't use for that we'll
put cost overruns, so that's
been my direction to staff is to
not take into consideration for
this year's funding anything
related to the trust fund that
we have the ability to determine
how the how the capacity
development might work best.
We heard from legislators during
the session. They were very
supportive of this idea, but
they wanted to make sure that
Santa Fe
But the technical assistance
would be available in the
communities where people needed
it the most. And so that will
given this eventually more
contractors or larger able to
actually fulfill that direction.
Obviously the number idea
So we have some work to do
Policy Committee will be busy
this summer, not only in
resetting the rules to allow for
wastewater, but then to
determine how we might best
Utilize those. Don't that
decision. Thank you.
And I might add to that that the
the House bill
11 was really kind of a
Stepping stone into a larger
Piece of amendments that we hope
to make to water trust board
capacity and and policy
procedures for a more global
approach.
We all know that we have this.
Monster of Capital Al A.
Issues that go along with
infrastructure projects. I think
water wastewater projects are
those specific.
Special projects in my mind that
require multiple years to plan,
you know, design build.
And implement, um and and we're
pretty weak on the
implementation side and
supporting communities, making
sure that they perform the
appropriate amount of operation
and maintenance and that ties
into the regionalization bill.
That was that was
Well past the previous session.
To help encourage
regionalization of small
community systems. They don't
necessarily have to be netted
together. Uh, physically.
But from an over operate overall
operational perspective to have
the larger rate base to work
with, and also the capacity.
To get into the system. We're
seeing more and more interest in
water Trust board. As as noted
by the number of applicants, we
had this last cycle. We think
that's only going to grow over
time, and we're trying to
encourage the Legislature to
final.
Specific capital outlay funding.
For water and wastewater
projects through
This type of program and it's
got a lot of support from the
Legislature continue to look at
the water trust board for that
purpose, So we're on a growing
mission right now and pleased
that you have, you know, uh
The deputy director like that
you've hired to help. Uh
Your capacity.
Uh, and also, I think our sister
agencies around
This within Imedi officer, state
engineer.
And others really need to
streamline its processes in
reviewing projects as well so
that it's all a consolidated
efforts. So we're all looking at
that.
Uh, we hope through the
remainder of the
This, uh, executive term of our
governor that we can really
solidify that and have it locked
in for years to come so that the
water trust board is very
Functional and serving the needs
of New Mexico. So so I'm really
pleased that we made this first
step that was really grueling
process back and forth with
training and negotiate the
pieces in here.
That that we thought were
important, and I think the most
important one stuck. But there's
others that we would want to
work on on the next session. So
appreciate everybody's support
your staff and others and
helping us get that through
Michael Michael in particular.
Thank you, Michael Bullets for
us, Mr Chairman. I would also
note that the original
legislation had a temporary
suspension of the annual
authorization requirement.
Which got a haircut it a couple
times and ultimately taken out.
Our goal there was to allow for
both the capacity development to
take seed and to see if we could
actually get some smaller
projects in before into the mix.
Um and then also to allow for
our wastewater rules and
policies to be developed.
They decided that wasn't an
option they wanted to consider.
So ultimately, the bill went
through without any suspension
of legislative authorization, so
we will be beginning our
application process as usual at
the beginning of August, which
means that we will not be able
to accept applications or
wastewater until August of 25.
Anticipating that the funding
would first be made available in
roughly June of 26. Wastewater
is coming. It gives us plenty of
time to develop the rules and
policies. That's the good news.
The bad news is, there's a lot
of pent up demand, particularly
in our smaller communities for
wastewater. It is, you know,
because we fund portions of it.
Through the treatment and reuse
process, but not the
collections. And if you're a
small system trying to implement
wastewater, that's a that
collection process is incredibly
expensive. Those projects get
postponed and then we end up
seeing him later in the
treatment of water because by
wastewater and effluent, so I'll
just note that we have two years
to get that together, but we
have a lot of chairman of tribe
which we did try try to trust us
for a few years, and we'll try
that again next session.
Yeah, maybe thank you Any any
questions from the members?
Anything that happened during
the session that we need there.
Amplify or clarify
Okay?
Ah!
Member for it is shaking his
head. No, we don't want to talk
anymore. About last second,
everything signed Mr Very bombs,
Tst. Alright. Well, thank you.
Thank you all. Um we're gonna
under item number six. Let's uh
start looking at our
construction cost overrun.
Update. Um Angela.
Thank you, Mr Chair. So we bring
before you the
Construction cost overrun Award
recall the water trust forces.
Yes, that once we have an entity
They were awarded for the design
engineer believed that they did
have sufficient funds.
In Martian award most of that
project and they were to be in
July 2023 and the installation
of meters by 50%.
So the association requested a
one point look at the table
Park now just starting to 12
months.
Very much so sorry.
So at this time, it is just
sorry. It is just an update. Um,
on what the what are
construction cost over?
Imbalances are and that you did
get awarded the 1.2 for the
2021. And with that, Mr Chair, I
will stand for any questions.
Any questions for Angela.
Thank you, Angela Appreciate the
date.
Alright, Uh, item seven.
consideration of a sculpture
change for the town of Bergoglio
Project number w PF Dash five
665
Thank you, Mr Chair. So we bring
before you the town of Bernie
will request is for a scope
change on their water project.
Ah Water Project Fund 5665
The town secure funding in
December of 2022. It is a water
storage conveyance and delivery
project. They were awarded a
little over 1.9 million the
approved scope of work is for
the design and construction to
replace aged in deteriorated
leaking water lines from the
older section of the town.
They've identified it as the
certain roads.
Um on there, the full balance
remains.
In 2023 the town identifying
that they had well site number
three and Tank three, a
replacement improvements
projects that required
significant improvement
improvements.
Uh, 10 3 A is 120,000 gallon
tank. It is a backup of a larger
tank, three.
A recent tank and structural
inspection concluded that the
tank is no longer safe for water
storage due to foundation damage
and a differential settlement.
They did it died inspection for
this tank, and they identified
that it did need repairs, which
required the reservoir to be
offline through up to about
three months.
Ah, what they're looking at is
the removal and replacement of
Tank three and which will be
required prior to the repairs of
tank three.
At the same location. We had
some site improvements that
they've identified that they
needed to do to control the
water system discharges from
there Well, three, the arsenic
treatment building overflows and
drainage from tank three and
tank three A and the backwash of
the holding tanks so they were
looking at site improvements.
The site area is located outside
of the city of Rio, Rancho
multiple apartment complex that
the city
Ah, recently built was
immediately adjacent to the
location of the talent of the
system for the town of Bernie
Leo. And without making those
sites improvements there was
there may be a risk of flooding
of the complex and a possible
solution that they're looking at
is to construct a piping system
to capture and convey any flows
of the nearby veranda, drainage
control or channel.
So in addition to the talent, In
addition, the town has
identified the most concentrated
area of water piping and service
line breaks in the town's water
distribution system, and this is
in a down Web Alegria
subdivision area. The
subdivision is fairly new. It
was built into the two thousands
and the materials they believe
are relatively new and within
their projected service life.
The town received several
service calls on the area due to
some high operating pressure.
The town has determined that the
installation of a new pressure
reducing valve station in the
Santiago way road will allow the
town to control that pressure
and minimize any future repairs.
Now, with all that being said
You're looking. They're looking
at 1.7 for the tanks a little
over 1.7 and 518,000 for that
pressure valves.
With all that Means said all
what we believe with step
believes is all the proposed
projects taking water trust
board funding go through and
established application and
vetting process in determining
the feasibility of the project,
which includes, including
required planning documents. FAA
staff did reach out to
environment Department
construction. Um
Programs Bureau and we believe
after reviewing these requests,
and that we have determined that
these are different projects
that from the awarded project
and its initial intent.
These proposed changes were not
included in the initial
application, and we're not
vetted through the established
processes with that
determination, And with that
review staff does not recommend
approval of the scope change.
And then in the, um requested,
uh, scope as noted above, Um, we
believe that Project number five
665 can move forward with the
awarded intent of the design and
construction replacement of
their age deteriorate in leaky
waterlines within the area, as
identified within their
application, And with that, Mr
Chair, I stabbed the questions
and I do believe we also have
representatives from the town of
Bruno. Leo. If you
Like to speak. Thank you,
Angela before we move on to any
questions on this project, I
yield the floor to
Members from the town of Borneo
that if you'd like to address
the board
Mr Chairman, members of the
board. My name is Troy Martinez.
I'm the public works director
for the town of Bunol. Leo. And
with me is Clay with Mosen and
Corbyn.
Um, as uh
Quintana right
project. As Miss Quintana
stated, our priorities have
changed slightly. In the last
year. We've updated our water
system Master plan and within
that master plan, these two
priority projects have come
forward, Um, as Miss Quintana
stated.
Apartment complex was put up
right next to our well three
site location, and about four
months ago, we did have a tank
overflow that flooded a good
section of that.
Apartment complex.
Thankfully, we were able to
catch it early enough that it
was, um primarily
Landscaping and
Other damage that didn't affect
the structure of the or the
foundation of the structure. But
our fear is that if that 1.9
million gallons, structure or
Well tank was to overflow or
have a discharge event that we
could structurally damaged that
whole section. So in that, uh
In in our priorities. This
really came to the top of the
second item that we talked about
was the pressure reducing valve
in the
Santiago subdivision, which is
the Del Webb area, and that
section has pressures as high as
100. P s. I, and we continuously
are repairing water lines and
service lines in that area. Um,
and we do believe that that
pressure reducing valve would
Um, prevent that from happening
and and save us from having to
Um with that I am happy to
answer any questions. Um, Mr
Tanya,
Mr. Chairman, members of the
board. Just real quick. Um, I
asked that a very summery
handout. Get passed around, Um,
that overflow event that Mr
Martinez mentioned there's some
photos in there that
I think capture, um, what
transpired in that We're hoping
with the requested scope change,
too. Is this the condition your
project that you want to move
the money to, um is it
considered urgent?
We consider it urgent. Um, so
much so that we've already
initiated design on it, and the
town has committed town funds to
pay for that. It's the
construction side of it that
were not, um, the obviously the
apartment complex owner.
Is very concerned as well and is
really eager for us to get this
resolved because they feared
And if I can just add something
real quick, Um, since the
original application was filed
for, um, the waterline
replacements. We've worked with
the town to, uh complete and
overall update to their water
system. Master plan, um and
evaluating all their needs and
What needs to be done within
their
Supply storage and distribution
system. Um, and the two projects
that are before you today or the
two top priorities that came out
of that mess, Mr Martinez.
You know, these are the areas
that are getting
A lot of their operation and
maintenance time and attention
right now to respond to leaks or
breaks or in this case, the
unfortunate overflow event and
to try and mitigate their risks
and owning and operating this
water system. I think these two
projects have risen to the top
is their most urgent would apply
for the EU secured the funding
for where does that fall on your
priorities under the new master
plan?
Yes, it's I would say about the
middle of our priority list at
this point.
Then do you consider that an
earth? Those waterline
replacements? We don't see as
urgent right now.
I'm sorry, compared like
significant leakage or anything
else that was
That drove your application for
that? No. At the time. It was
because of the age of the
infrastructure and those areas.
Those are some of the older
parts of the town of Bernard
Leo.
And there were, um waterlines
repairs that we're having to be
done, but they're not to the
extent that they're as urgent
Great distance questions from
Remembers.
Mr Chair. I do and
And I do recognize our process.
I guess my these photos are
helpful, right? The town's this
happens again.
The town's liable, so I'm
concerned.
This is a true emergency because
this happens again. The town is
fully liable for any damage that
occurs.
From this happening, so if it's
a structural issue
Right. Italy was one of the
There's no way they could
afford.
They don't speak damages that
would occur from a structural
issue from these apartments. So
I guess I'm in him in a place
where I understand our process,
but the damage to the community
financially.
Infrastructural issue occurring
from this happiness. Why I
understand your process. I'm
willing Mr Chairman just
relative to the process
Question. I support entirely
staff's recommendation, but I
think if this project were to
come before it and get scored,
given its urgency would probably
score higher than the existing
project they have in front of
it. That's my sense based on you
know that it was that you were
taking mitigation efforts to
stop potential league with your
first project. Urgent condition
exists So from that perspective.
We were to go through it. I
think it would get higher
priority.
Policy that we have in place is
to make sure that they don't
apply for an urgent project and
then instead, you know,
ultimately fund a less urgent
need.
Um, that's the safeguard. We
were trying to put in place with
this process where our policies
contemplate for urgent or
emergency situations that weeks
ability with our policies to
address those issues, so I
appreciate the address again.
Staffs doing exactly what their
efforts here, though I think
that it's slightly different
than the original to ensure that
Urgent needs were being
addressed first.
The other.
Questions from the members.
Mr Chair.
Please.
So just a quick question. Can
you tell me based on your
sanitary survey? That's been the
been done by the New Mexico
Environment Department and any
of those sanitary surveys were
any of these criticality ease
mentioned as a deficiency, or,
um, can you speak to that a
little bit?
Mr Chair members of the board in
our most recent sanitary survey,
We did read notification that
our tank inspections needed to
be completed and we did that
prior to the sanitary survey,
And that's where the tank three
a situation did come up as well.
We knew it was an issue, but it
did come up in our sanitary
survey.
Um they saw that there was no
Um
Appropriate drainage for that
Well, three tank three location.
Um, years and years ago, when it
was put together there was
nothing but open land around it,
So it really wasn't
A big concern, I guess to the
town or the city of Rio Rancho
four years that
The apartment complex was
approved. So so just for Claire.
Just for clarification, Mr
Chair. So, Mr Martinez, do you
understand that then this this
last sanitary survey is the only
senators for me that has said
that you you have a deficiency
in the tank based on the tank
inspection, But it doesn't go
prior to that. Is that correct?
That is correct.
Our previous sanitary inspection
didn't and I'm sorry. We can't
see the documents that were
handed out online. So, um, So
what is the age of the tank?
Hmm. So the the tank three a the
one that's subject for needing
replacement due to
Differential settling and it not
being structurally safe.
Mhm constructed in
I think it was 97 or 98.
Okay?
Thank you, Mr Chair That was
very helpful.
Remember to zero I have. I have
a couple of questions.
Have
Uh, is there any method for
early warning to prevent, uh,
overflows that could be
implemented in the interim while
you're
Sorting through you know the
funding getting the contract
going? I mean, all that stuff.
Is there any anything you can do
to kind of prevent the overflow?
We not necessary to prevent it
more to notify us that it's
happening. We do have a skater
system installed on that tank,
and that's how we knew that the
overflow had started.
But once that overflow starts it
takes quite we were notified
that it was happening. We went
out as early as four o'clock in
the morning. I believe to stop
the the so that's why we That's
why there was so much
significant, but we were there
as early as we could to try
building as we could and have it
running. But that was that was
the best of
Um, another technical question,
I guess on operations.
Is there a possibility to put in
a
Refer to to prevent the that
concerned in terms of
operational levels or something
along that line, you know, but
there's requirements. Okay,
Beautiful range bands in your
Refer to to prevent the that
concerned in terms of
operational levels or something
along that line, you know, but
there's requirements. Okay.
Beautiful range bands and floats
apartments
possibility to implement some
kind of operation
until we get dressed
permanently.
Mr Chairman of the board. It's
just a little bit vector, but
our site is not very large and
the overflow basement that we
have next to us is not
sufficient enough to hold that
Uh, West stand department
Property development property to
put a buffer in place there's
closest to the
list on that south end of
property, but
I
Just think part of your question
was the tank itself. That's
correct. So I think there may be
an opportunity to talk with
their operations staff to you,
Um reproduce the You will, um,
to give the town a little bit
more time instrument fails or
continues
to stop signal Whatever.
About? Um and yes to the central
notification of, um there's
probably some flexibility. There
are three big. Yeah. Um, we'll
just have to balance that,
ultimately with the stories
largest community.
And then you have you looked
into other emergency
funny opportunities like no
media as the World Water
And then you have you looked
into other emergency
funny opportunities like no
media as the World War program
and some other opportunities
that encourage you to
look at that as well. Like, you
know,
the defense material
things to do.
The original purpose is, uh, you
might want to reach out to you
congressional delegation
requesting right now
congressional
spending
opportunities Club
Fernandez Fernandez or or maybe
it stands right now. I don't
know Districted something
temporary district.
Um not so I would encourage
Senator they announced,
Please say that, you know,
I think
you know, we can do something
that help you with. This doesn't
seem like potential.
You know, one other
thing
You can figure out a way to get
yourself some operations. You
know security to prevent an
overflow and then also another
funds
like
what do we can also
ones
that makes sense. Another look
into the
You know, one other
thing.
You can figure out a way to get
yourself some operations. You
know security to prevent an
overflow and then also another
funds.
Like
what do we can also
ones
that makes sense and leave it to
the
border.
You know this particular
request, but urgently because
another fun?
Yeah structure staff think will
be reaching the mayor ready to
offer you
barely
We got opportunity that happened
at the river. Ah projects funds
that they have predicted that
we need to consider requests of
more discussion. Planet numbers,
Mr Clarifying point
they're not on the unfortunately
Right now they're
So right now, they haven't spent
the money and there's not really
a position.
Question.
question for you
isn't enough to cover your
project that Yeah, we can play
to fill it up
so we can use to to
right now.
That was basically been able
members of the board. Well, this
makes sense
to extend
what we're saying, or are there
enough time to get this done
with the original time period? I
think with Margarito on this
three times, Yeah. Agreement
that was like,
um, I can't do that.
It has to
come back.
And I asked for my money
Come back to that
extent, dates
possible.
Yeah, mr Chair.
We cannot hear any of what you
are staying at this point, very
mumbled. And so the challenge is
going to have
Online is most women don't
understand the clarity of the
most. So what I want
to continue to have this problem
with the
that
the motion be so that we can
vote on it accordingly, because
right now we can hear any of the
last
and
that so
Results
Can you hear me out? Remember
zero.
we cannot. It's not.
It's point in and out
of
Having enough connection
problem, I guess.
Having enough connection
problem?
Yeah. OK, Still
here. Ah, audio from the
capital.
Yeah,
right
Please
on this promotion's from
from
Yeah.
We're gonna take five minutes to
try this
I think this
I think, just
say
five minutes,
Okay, Thank you.
Just difficulty
happening. So, uh,
I think you're like you, but
Thank you.
Thank you for
the
question.
Thank you.
It was great. The people on the
line,
right
here before
you're ready.
Yeah,
Thank you. Thank you.
may be taking
Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you. So maybe
they can
video
Internet?
Yeah,
Yeah,
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Sorry. Thank you. Yeah, Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay. We have internal
Yeah,
yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Sorry. Thank you. Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
Okay. We have internally in
general
that you used video.
Okay?
Yeah. Yeah
The problem
Okay?
Yeah. Yeah.
The problem.
Is that
your trust in masks?
Yes,
Yeah,
Yeah,
that's the goat starting
something else. Influence
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah,
That's the goat Starting
something else influenced
him
Exactly.
Yeah, it's not. Yeah, Yeah, I
know
what
happened.
You know,
because
it's not really
right. Yeah, that's right.
Can you hear me? OK, off,
Zoom went out
of your
I can't hear you. Very well. You
can hear me,
Okay? Giving the shot is
probably
How did you feel about calling
in that you don't know that was
fixing the issues. It would be
all of them
Each person wouldn't mind
calling and we can see that all
the issues you
face.
Excuse me. There's no question.
Wishes
business right understanding
the Collins. I think that's what
I heard
the topic. But I'm not sure.
Yes, Yes.
Yeah. Thank you. Yeah,
yeah. Most
Okay,
Okay,
My God,
That's
yeah,
you do.
Right?
Yeah,
thanks.
Yeah, Yeah,
yeah,
yeah.
Beginning,
assuming still very topic.
We're on
Remember Garcia
on my phone. It's very happy.
Very public,
Okay,
you
your first
Yeah,
Yeah,
Yeah
decision.
Yeah,
Yeah. Yeah, You do.
Yeah.
Yeah,
Yeah,
yeah,
yeah.
Yeah,
Yeah,
yeah. Yes. Yeah. Oh, my gosh.
Absolutely
Mhm.
Thank you,
don't
you?
The motion of the chapter.
Yeah.
Thank you.
s
Pretty
Such pretty
good
back
Such pretty
there
can
ach
Number,
basket just like
thank you.
Okay,
Better
Better now,
30.
So remember
here,
So remember,
Okay
was gonna check out the
question.
That's the
big to you get there.
We could see the room and now we
can see you.
know,
definitely.
So you
So
can you hear the sun Zoom state
study here. US
can hear us.
Yeah. Okay. Great. Alright, bro
Position. We were in the same
thing.
The, um coaching four
aspects and priorities about
pounds
and we can
move forward with that
discussion together. Questions
in terms of numbers
God
Recording in progress.
Nothing. I was the
recommendation of the board. Uh,
you consider,
just, um,
put it in the right frame
that the was asking the board to
do.
This project for the original
application expended any funds
today so
tired
$0.19 million appropriation or,
um, occasionally for this
project will be
This project for the original
application expended any funds
today so
tired
$0.19 million appropriation or,
um, occasionally for this
project, the
request is completely dedicated
that full amount do this thing
and site drainage control
component.
Of the town's needs so I would
entertain a motion, Mr Emotion.
Second,
Okay,
favor
with
Brazil. We've made emotional Did
you hear the motion?
Okay.
we'll take another word,
either detected in the motion
response that would be
Entire
towns changes go five
seconds, but
Entire
towns. Changes Go five
seconds.
We have John,
So we have to take in the
notion yahoos.
Thank you,
Donna Member John changing
the
notion yahoos.
Thank you,
Donna. Member John changing
for the boat.
They don't vote it. Affirmative,
Mr. Chair, Just okay and already
been approved? Yes, You
remember, right? Understand
yourself,
Close with yes, Your request
approved. Thank you. Appreciate
it. Thank you.
Thank you. Pictures. Yes. Okay,
Moving on to number eight.
Change for the city of Project
number, You get
four to pork.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Beautiful
for you
for project securing this
funding in January, 20.2 on the
front in the
announced a little over 7.7
million
was for the construction to
reach 27.7 B.
Which consisted of the
construction of 16 inch water
line, Anthony Addiction to
connect to the reached 27.63
27.7
condition. Part of those funds
to um
really construction of people
Which consisted of the
construction of 16 inch water
line. Anthony Addiction to
connect to the reached 27.63
27.7
condition, part of those funds
to, um
really construction of water
line. Anthony Addiction to
connect to the reached 27.63
27.7
condition. Part of those funds
to, um
really construction of people
well identified as GDP. 80 slash
1491, and it is existing
regional water system well site.
The city is approximately 80%
completely. It reached 27.7
27 points project is currently
working on the design committee
officers on the 18 fortune
Balance is a little over $3
million at the time of the
application of the street
provided documentation for only
that G p 81. It was intended.
the city include the G 22.
Well, which are close to Pacific
produced water from the
Flint still
Well, which are close to Pacific
produced water from the
formations, the design and
construction of the supplemental
field offset and are to offset
the blame for this one intent is
the same for both water Wells
City is requesting an expansion
of the current between include
the design of the
22,000 and all of the G 22,000
are situated in a different part
of the city. We believe that
they're still in terrible part
of the overall project, which
is, uh, to increase the water
supply for the development
residents and those connected to
the various speeches. And, as I
admit mentioned in the previous
item before the project review
community community
Staff segmentation staff
recommends the approval of
visits with the assistance of
the input of the Construction
Programs Bureau to have reviewed
it and recommended the expansion
of the scope to include the
design of the G 22 Wells for
Project number. 1
Staff segmentation staff
recommends the approval of
visits with the assistance of
the input of the Construction
Programs Bureau to have reviewed
it and recommended the expansion
of the scope to include the
design of the G 22 wells for
Project number. 154 24th
Bicycle Pretty questions, Mr
Chairman, We also have the
representative.
Okay. Thank you.
That was pretty Polly. Would you
like to just
and members of the water? Just
want to thank you so much.
Thank you. So much for the
$10,000
latest Just poured, um,
floating. We got underway right
now. Underway closed. Mr 24 was
Somebody back in 2022.
That we
to put the G 22. We were just
the 80 water wells, 22% of the
windows the same Wales Arctic
conditions, geographical
locations. Um, with that
questions, Are you glad to
answer them?
Thank you questions better for
about
39.
Yeah, recollection from the
court approved
second
by
Just for a little while. You're
get written approval back from
work. Actually, Nd's
second
recommendation.
Remember changing positive
so far,
Garcia focus. Yes,
Yes,
we have the brutal
If? Yes, great. Thank
you. Thank you.
All right. I don't remember nine
consideration condition of 2024
projects.
Requests. Enjoy
Requests.
So this is
one of the people before,
Requests.
So this is
one of the people,
Requests.
So this is
the the the the real.
Mr. Report. You wait for
requests on the 2024
applications.
You recalled between 20
occupation is a Tuesday
step application process, the
first part of the project
application and the second which
we are not going
Reading this application. We
have the project national team
that 17 agencies to the
Legislative finance Committee
that evaluating the application
project occupations with
received 66 applications for the
and probably 66 where, um, put
on the legislative optimizations
second, which is the
legislative optimizations
second
application requires applicants
that are recommended from from
the Legislative office station.
Complete not only the randomness
application and what brings this
application does reviews for
regulatory executive order to
place and putting any method.
Tory's
trust awards.
So in January 25th 61 of those
authorized applicants that has
So in January, 25th 61 of those
authorized applicants that
readiness applications. We had
real grounds. What did this
right
domestic
Blanca and are the ones that did
not submit suffocation.
Policy required that awards
trust border evidence complies
with relevant regulations and
policies private forth from
water transport to have quality
issues were notified, and they
were given the opportunity to
create a correct was issues by
March, 15 discontinued their
application. Correct employment
issues in preparation of the
next cycle request away from the
water.
Actually,
maybe become compliant after the
water transport makes its
rewards on April 23rd wanted and
when we're making those
recommendations, you please keep
that in mind on that 23rd.
If additional funds become
available that will be
recommended 82nd generation in
August for those applicants, not
meet the Caribbean compliance
and aboard kind of lines. We
have the list of applicants
question labors, We did receive
keen wafers. The project
committee has reviewed these
requests and concurs with the
recommendations on 9.1 and
19.16.
9.173 19.19, the contributing
committee, bringing forward
without recommendation and
without Mr
General, if you like. I can go
through all of the projects
recommendations and we can What?
We haven't set it up as it is
the first plunge our product
policy compliance basically
older projects Policy
Continuation project
Continuation on, um, applicants
that did not expand their 2022
older and then the half are
basically regular.
Compliance issues so I can go
through all those questions. Um,
I'll be more than happy to do
that at each one with
Okay. Thank you. Process
question. Um, I think we've done
some bundling of approvals in
the past. Um the wishes of the
border to, um
Look at the
continuation brief. Um I'm just
questioning on them just to
prove them as block. Okay,
There's a couple here. Oh, okay,
Okay. Okay. Let's go forward
and thank you for the first time
we have
a current application for flood
prevention begins. These ones
are policy compliance project
continue.
In this city has to 0.22 awards
zero expensive to date. Don't
need that 95% Department policy,
which is the film tech Project
project, have completed design
question and are currently
moving forward for construction
projects to be completed by
November of this year.
Africanist approval on the city
of Albuquerque flavor
The next one. We have the
right now have applications in
2024 cycle. Two of them are for
conservation. What it is for
water storage has a 2021 and
2022 or both are zero expanded.
The authority has
nation on 2021 project. This is
the
pipeline and they have completed
the
Just sign
Materials have been ordered with
connecting patient's
groundbreaking beginning in May
of this here 2022 project, which
is the artistic treatment
facility has completed the
design have gotten out of bed
and they have awarded contractor
construction will be getting on
this project On March, 2224
staff recommended approval for
the
these stories on there with
flavor.
The next one we have is this You
know domestic Asian. They have
correctly application for the
Water Storage association has a
2020 the war 1400% expended. The
association had three bit twice,
due to the bits coming in higher
and the available plans.
20 Association broke out in the
project in four different places
to be able to award construct
the standard one unusable
project Construction was
reported in September of last
year. But
additions they didn't have to
put it on. Hold on moving
forward. It is, um and that was
in progressively. They started
it again again on March 18th.
The project is anticipated to be
completed.
Like artists of this year. Of
course, it says, weather
permitting, And with that
African approval for this ghetto
regional domestic, so they're
like freaking it out on the
floor that they just hated just
hated
Like artists of this year. Of
course, it says, weather
permitting. And with that
African approval for this ghetto
regional domestic, so they're
like freaking it out on the
floor, Just waiting
for me to
coming back again. Yeah, Angela
cost overrun funding still
complete this because this is a
2020 award.
The water transport does not
have any construction costs over
one set aside.
2020 $18 million available
through the capital of process,
but that
it might and I believe that
their current project that they
have been there make people part
of the completion of their
24.14 right, so they apply like
basically throwing money from
2024 and then the other way that
that
money from the
Completed
the original project
to receive whether
next we have the eastern New
Mexico utility sources have a
water projects in their, um The
project is they have a 2022 40
expanded and this is different
from the other ones because it
required the state sponsored
project to be at 50% expenditure
where everybody else is normally
at 95%.
Yeah. On October approved
extension of this initials
include the raw water 123
because of the additional state
and the federal funds between
used right the identified which
is finished water one between
the availability and delivery
date of supplies materials with
the other third, the authorities
did they implemented what they
called a priest bubble position
Process confirms supply delivery
prior to
Instructions startup and that
didn't delay something. What
project destruction your
technical design will begin on
one and two in March with
instructions on the water three
beginning in April of this year,
recommends approval for eastern
New Mexico.
Thank you. We have is middle
class Conservancy district. They
have water joint Project
District has 2022 to award about
51% expanded the project is
really under construction. But
with the irrigation season and
they have some limitations on
what they can do. The district
anticipated that 89% of
expenditure by actually
March and they're close to death
and the project completion by
the center of this year.
And with that recognized
approval will be autographed
Conservancy.
The next one we have is real.
They watched towards
applications in place. This
association has a 22.1 award is
10% expanded security utility
permits to blame the project
from the construction building
project went to be with the
lowest bit exceeded the
available funds.
The association was awarded an
additional 215 from strategic
over the water, transport,
construction, scheduling and
long week materials from this
project right now, project is
looking forward anticipation
completion of your wife of this
year with that Africanized
approval for realism message.
The next one we have is
substance County, Um, Royal
Control Authority. They have
their flood prevention
application in place.
2022 award is not percent
expensive, so they really close
to that 95% expenditure
Authority, just paste project
completion by the end of this
but
recommends approval for southern
Sudan.
The next one we have is the city
of truth or consequences on
their water storage project.
They have 1820 2020 21 project.
Uh, often projects that are 30%
expended combined amount. Um,
the 2020 project is anticipated
to be completed. Actually, it
has been completed waiting on
the final documents for the
clothes out of the 2020 2021
award. Just fine.
Completed by the Indian made
with construction and completion
of this project. January 27 5
Africans approval for the city
electric consequences.
The next one is regional Water
and Wastewater Association. They
have national project. We have a
couple of confinement issues.
Um, the first one we're gonna go
through is the project
Continuation Association has the
2021 award at 47% expended the
most of the construction is
completed except for two of the
remaining items, which is the
installation of a tribe flex
booster system and right now
The 20 weeks back order time
frame right now to pick up about
five weeks from the time they
submitted this and in the end,
just to be delivered, Actually,
at the end of supposed to be the
end of this month, it looks like
now, probably just, um and
really connections, which is
waiting on the final design
approval of the final permit
from your office, Um, engineer
and dissipate the project.
Of this, despite the ending of
many Africans approval on the
project continuation for
the next one we have is an
officer of the state
regulations, the association
needs to provide a diversion
records for the last three
years, and they were out of
compliance to the African has
the active promised in front of
me to resolve their over
diversion issue. The funding
biggest issues under metering
and version, so
Engineers step recommends
approval for this regulation and
Reto and the final One is the
state room currently is working
with the state auditor on their
2023 audit. Any time of
submission is within 45 days.
Um, we're looking at
The ending of me believe that he
said that it will be completed
step recommended approval on the
state audit rule without any
questions for veto on the Earth.
Three
Christ
when we're waiting for
your requirement to have the
Earth. Three
Christ
when we're waiting for
your requirement to have
condition right now, yes,
basically exciting. We would
give them an additional 45 days
to meet that condition. That's
correct.
And, um member Russell was
correct
So the meat is beyond what they
can or or is is less than what
they can meet it.
They're saying that give them
another 45 days and they will
meet that condition.
So with that being place, Mr
Chairman, but it won't be in
time for the certified that
later this month, right before
the sponsor issue bananas we
believe it will be definitely
should definitely done. Um, if
this border to that
recommendation is moving to the
second operation, and I noticed
that all the other things that
we
were last year potentially
grounds
for
Insufficient on the category of
project continuation for these
essentials, nine projects that
death is recommending approval.
Great emotion, or is there any
questions on anything else from
the members?
None
running through these. You wanna
particular? Okay,
Project continuation.
And then there's other
going forward. So
let's do the project
Continuation. What
do I hear a motion to accept
recommendations on projects?
Mr Chairman.
Okay,
Wait a few minutes protected
member John Yes
Potion made from 9.9 0.9.
Um Mrs
was terrible. Yes,
of course. Be able to say yes
Approval and
okay, we can move forward with
the project next week is
superbly Part Waters
Association, and they can't be
one story which projects in
places
Environment Department
regulations.
Creation has the cemetery
violations with regards to the
inadequate water pressure.
Of the system
recommended two of the waiver.
They believe this proposed
project different and it would
have this system becoming
compliant
the next week. Happy is the city
s personality. They have three
projects are
large storage. They, um they
were requested for the State
party rule. The city recently
completed 2022 audit. It is
currently working up on their FY
2223 audits.
The city, Michigan of their
audit September 15th of this
year recognizes approval.
Mr Chairman,
if we'd be approved this waiver,
um we'll have to set the
conditions as we did last year
for them to disappear. The
second approval date last few
weeks, Um
Um, Remember Mexico. We are
anticipating that we would like
to, um, basically do the same
thing having this. Thank you,
Um, the same process Basically
on July 5th
to that date. That would be the
date by which it sounds like
they're not even that
approving them. Gives it a shot.
Give them a shot. Yes.
Yeah, exactly.
And I can see from what you are
looking at it as well. Is that
the amount of money First of all
we can, and we do have some on
here. That as as you mentioned
will not need the by this kind
of the This is what we're
making. Sleepy. Um
What is served by in April.
That doesn't necessarily mean
that they won't make it by July
5th so it we, You know, stuff.
Look at the numbers this game
and there may be stability. We
hope not. But maybe the
possibility of a possible third
generation, but that's something
that the board will have to
decide. Applications
application correct.
Yeah, we just have to keep its
arrival application of life.
That is correct.
The next one we have is the city
before talents. They have two
applications in place doesn't
have a stake about it. Group
compliance now they didn't have
a high turnover cities. Um,
which
the commission by March 2019
and, um
Mr Chair. We actually have
somebody there on it, so it is
in the second officers. It
hasn't been released by the
state auditor. That's definitely
approval for the city of Dallas
Next one we have is drama Water
Sanitation district. They have
one application for the large
storage. They also do not meet
the state Audit rules District
was informed that they are
required to have a tier six
audit.
The requirements. They have to
do any more in depth kind of
researched, was executed. The
district anticipates completion.
Another audit march was
submission about April 1st the
district past that and so they
also have their audience.
The requirements they have to do
any more in depth kind of
researched, was executed. The
district anticipates completion.
Another audit march was
submission about April 1st the
district past that and so they
also have their interesting
auditor's office. It hasn't been
released yet recommended
approval for the water district.
We have sensitive
conservation district on their
flood prevention.
Application
2013, the district office.
Is required to complete. Some
agreed apart procedures for 18
year for often, and that's to
become compliant. They are
assisting. The auditor is 16
district with the contract for
Services anticipate that the
execution of the contract will
Or the people walking to work
the next we have
faith. They have three
applications to more for water
conservation monies for water
storage. They have their
requests for the state product
as well anticipate finding what
they're 20 to 22 3 audit by May
15th of this year staff
recommends approval for the city
of have
Consumers Association on their
water storage project.
I found agency One review
regulations. The association's
system has the adequate storage
deficiency. They believe that
the proposed project system
training the system into
compliance. Drinking water of
your staff recommends approval
for watching watching domestic
consumers. And with that, Mr
Chair if we want to vote on
1016, and then we'll do the
17th which 1718 19 project
didn't not move forward without
recommendation. Okay, um,
along with with your requests to
think went 10
do nothing. We went and six
of the board.
Yeah, I agree with stuff
Communications,
moving,
Okay. Gotta motion in the second
favor.
From 09.6 number 42nd
Garcia member Garcia, Fruits
member, several produced
member tag proofs in the member
Jonathan
So we agreed before you do, um,
a couple of domestic on the
water shortage occupations they
have Environment department
regulations
monitor for it.
So we agreed before you do, um,
a couple of domestic on the
water shortage occupations they
have Environment Department
regulations
monitor for a
couple of domestic on the water
shortage occupations they have
Environment Department
regulations.
Monitor for
justice system does not contain
a pipe association is currently
exemption from one of your
operator will
fill the current requirements
Association anticipated comply.
Of, um by March. 31st, currently
awaiting the association is
waiting on test results before
the provided to drinking water,
and that was yesterday. We're
still waiting on the results
Drinking one of your old is not
recommended Approval of the
waiver with the PRC eating
drinking water regulations do
not allow for eight kind
extension once of violations are
the issue.
The project committee moving
this request to the court that
recommendation and I stand for
any questions.
they're asking for. There were
no there were there was a
violent and so the drinking
water regular provided the
exemption or they can't
don't understand. And
so the drinking water regular
provided the exemption or they
can't don't understand. But we
also like that drinking water,
So we understand from the drink
of water video, and we don't
have anybody from drinking
water we understand from
drinking water Bureau is once
uh,
Or a notice or whatever it is is
made with drinking is they
cannot grant extension
exemption for consideration just
extended stroke of what we did
Last clarification responded
with
We do not allow for time
extension points. Violations are
issued.
Completed, required testing and
the results correct that would
allow before
you move forward or grant
funding America I'm confused a
little bit.
Yes. So fortunate
that people wanted to
keep it alive, but not
necessary, But until they're
able to demonstrate that they
don't know they're supposed to
do that we would put it in the
African market. It seems like
there's so much confusion and
they struggled them ready, and
I'd love to get some better
clarification without being able
to ask the drinking water zero.
Or
what's going on around this
recommendation will be that we
wrapped the waiver. Um, but
until the funding of the word we
would need to have this
clarified about whether or not
not again give them that The
problem is particularly helping
them become complacent with
drinking water regulations.
Right
22 here but
I? Yeah, except your
recognition Anybody together
Discussion on the matter want to
try and understand graphic
waiver until
System in
System.
April
will be like a lot of time.
System.
April
will be like a lot of times.
Yeah, printed out in front of
the motion. Um, take it from
what time so let's let's do
that second that
favor
By
system can become compliant
priority. April meeting summary
better And I'm sorry. Um, five.
This is our opportunity picking
up
the motion can be typed Chat.
um, almost impossible
Discussion
at least from
And so
Question.
Not catching anything could
catch up a little bit, but not
same,
Hmm.
I guess I don't really
understand what weavers all the
weaver
April motion.
Basically. Yeah, thank you. I
appreciate it.
Basically, Yeah, I think you
appreciate 50
Basically, Yeah, I think you
appreciate 55
member John groups
members approved
anyone else? Um,
never
Alright. Curious
can in the next county. Correct
So they have time regulations
the the right now
the project people's Love had
various violations also needed
to
As certified water problems
later.
The county took over the
previously created
administration. September 2023
has cleared all issues
concerning the water testing and
building and remaining issues
will be completed within the
next six weeks. Four points that
we have on here, they actually
completed the, um
Confidence group The CCR public
notices have already been felt
by Environment Department as
well as the public notices of
the distribution regarding
establishing and testing they
have all been resolved what has
to be resolved is the
inspiration of their sort of
their swords. Possibility, which
we are working with the
Environment Department with the
timeline of the April and is
certified operator. Which county
um actually has the staff who is
getting
The test. They also don't have
prints with the Environment
department and they are looking
at that to be completed in
April.
Um, you want with that said it
would be almost came forward
with the South, um, that they
recommend approval of those
extensions. And so we also have
representatives from a county.
So with that
questions, Mr Similarly, sounds
like they're on their way to do
it and giving them he had a lot
of work through the Colonial.
Definitely.
The task for them to have made a
significant amount of progress
recommend.
Granted the wafer as requested,
and again, they have to meet
with people to revisit it at the
time we make the definitely
okay. How's the 2nd 2nd
favor?
Hmm?
Thank you for mean
Morning afternoon,
general members of the work
Thank you for mean
Morning afternoon,
general members of the
public works director for them,
and, um, I'm
doing all this. Um, this
one loves some 14 violations.
also mainly doing with
administration working
reporting, and
that's what
When I'm doing already has a
certified copy, for example, Um,
I was actually thinking
inspection.
And then my water
as far as the action plan
approved sports and that is
completely operation complete
water permanent. Mm regulations
Nobody read the original
for this
themselves.
So that corrected so
to me taking the test this
morning
contract operator County and
we're done right.
No pressure
So that corrected So to me
taking the test this morning
contract operator County and
we're done.
right.
No pressure
level of testing
one
about 99,000 members.
It's a smoker go up
as well. So we should be good to
go.
Action plans relationship.
It's just a matter of fact.
Yes, Sorry. I cannot hear
anything. The conversation.
It's really hard for me to
China, and I couldn't hear
anything. The conversation.
It's really hard for me to
China, and I couldn't see what
was
going to speak from what I know
for all these years there, farm,
um husband
Um, really not going to for
many, many
Years. They
did.
USDA graph but the challenges in
the killer far from Eritrea and
particular system is the baddest
for the longest time. People
hold it there on the water board
that do not want to be in the
water
going into the overseeing
sticks
Years. They did
USDA graph. But the challenges
in the killer far from Eritrea
and particular system is the
baddest for the longest time.
People hold it there on the
water board that do not want to
be in the water
going into the overseeing
here with a look at this
project.
I think the thing that concerns
me from almost urgency. Your own
water is the fact that this area
is one of the lowest
Um, neighborhoods and and the
most protected under preserved.
Um, and the county. What
concerns me is that they have
the ability to be able to, um
what this project forward and I
got to come in and the county
because of the county has
decided themselves to take the
leadership and get get get get
this, Um
The situation is because they
can't even conduct business. So
I would just I would just ask if
maybe we could have, um,
potentially
Just ask for a little bit more
time, particularly to it. They
need to be. I just think this is
a very much the project for the
people that not location, and I
just think that I would look for
consider just based on what I
know and what top but you know,
there are so many questions that
Okay, I hear you, but I just
want
somebody thoughts around that
and I do have confidence in me
that they have been doing
everything possible way to make
sure that they are compliant
with the requirements and it's
been a little more difficult
because typically don't see that
with the counties right that
much with me
that they have been doing
everything possible way to make
sure that they are compliant
with the requirements. And it's
been a little more difficult
because typically don't see that
with the counties right that
much with power, so and maybe
there's there's agreement. State
partnership with the city.
Point that can happen to make
this move forward. My thoughts
turn over the board.
Thank you. Remember,
I
Thank you Remember
apologized for moving before
that all of the discussion, but
we do have
anything. Um, on the matter, Um,
response from folks that
What one must come that Mr was
the city
location was to upgrade the
water system as it is, you know,
thank taking place in piping
process and then connected
almost two miles south of the
city of was
taken over parts supplier.
But with the entire new Mirror
Council records
change, so we revised letter
request to back away from
breaking itself. So
originally upgrade there is now
little 1000 with the upgrade.
Operator
so
that background check that
sounds like a degree project for
Mexico. Funding, um through the
stream commission to take a look
at that connection to
regionalization.
Perfect opportunity for the, UM,
report sports request to keep
this project
we're getting. So we have, um
member John Frank. Remember
Garcia open the composite heard
from members already.
Yes. Okay. Great emotions. Thank
you. Thank you for coming
And for the
last one, Mr Chair with the
house of Santa Rosa on their
project proved
too much for him in the
communities that have a high
stature over
2023 late.
On April 2nd. So maybe upon
Currently have it has been
released by the auditor pregnant
on the executive
room. We have the environmental
regulations to the city
monitor. First
ER for the 2023
will be received by the city by
March, 25th completed on, um at
20 to 2023 march 30th.
This request. It hasn't been
resolved.
The girl has confirmed that I
think we have many other
regulations. And with that, even
though this is not recommended
recommended, and that was as of
yesterday.
So that's serious. Santa Rosa on
approval for favors issues
result
We have our CIA positive.
I think John can call
I think John King all
saying, Yeah.
So characters that brings up the
question of projects, requests
for waivers and
changes, So I think you start
minutes work putting this
together for us, as always.
Very professionally
and I feel like I need to do to
show up because
of the chair. Thank you. Um, so
let's go to the next meeting. So
we have 1 23rd,
in that
Very professionally
and I feel like I need to do to
show up because
of the chair. Thank you. Um, so
let's go to the next meeting. So
we have 1 23rd
in
order for the next to the
funding
funding, which is very
important,
okay?
Let's just get you get you
Don't have it yet noticed you're
going to need to have
built 200 task force.
um, starting relatively soon and
also policy meeting started
getting
a lot of work to be done
to review committees
Anticipation of the update,
Correct.
August 24th as you mentioned in
the hospital task forces were
going to try to have a
discussion today. Just recently.
Mostly I just want to make sure
we were sitting in a couple of
Elsewhere, 200 meetings, So
let's let's continue to do that
was over. 20 can make it work
for us,
and Cuba getting particular
directly involved in that, given
her proximity to the projects
down there, so we want to make
sure we get hurt completely, Uh,
discussion so I'd like to get
something and,
uh
We're house built 100 passports
as well as early May. So kind
of,
you know that that was gonna be
in town.
Anything else?
During then, um 20 motions for
During then, um 20 emotions.
Just think, even
During then, um 20 motions for
judgment. I just think you
