Check, check, check.
It's OK
Yeah.
It
Good morning. We're just
adjusting technology at the
agenda up for everyone. We'll
start momentarily though.
Yeah.
That's, that's
Thank you.
OK.
I
Oh high children eating control.
Where did you get that? Is that
a
But
Yeah
OK. Thank you.
What is this thing.
Yeah.
OK.
Yeah.
Yes
Oh, I see. Well, that's not
obnoxious.
Not know. As you scroll down,
will it go away? No, it.
Hey, there's a.
Move it.
Don't I've never.
You remember B?
Anthony did it me I assure you
empty is magic,
magical.
Mhm
I'm gonna go see
Mm
Good morning.
I'm calling the meeting in
progress.
First thing the agenda this
morning is the roll call vote.
Good morning, board members. Um,
Madam Chair Keith present.
Member Swaore.
Remember Nickels.
Present
Trujillo.
Member Kaninides.
Members bars in present.
Member raider.
Present
Member Collins. Present.
Remember Lovato.
Is that
Member Shelton. Present.
Member Burke.
President
Mhm.
Madam Chair, we have a quorum.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda is the
approval of the agenda.
Madam Chair, I would recommend
um asking that you, we, um,
change, um, item 11.5 from an
approval item to an information
item of what you have in your
board materials, the memo is
correct, but the supporting
document is not, so I'd like to
walk through the document and
bring it back next month for us
to uh do a final approval on and
that is my recommended change.
Thank you.
Madam Chair would move for
approval of the agenda as
amended.
Motion has been made. Do I have
a second? Second. Motion is made
and seconded to approve the
agenda, any discussion?
All those in favor say aye.
Uh
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Next, the approval of board
members from the July 25th
board.
I trust everyone has had a
chance to review them.
Do I hear a motion to approve?
You do, Madam Chair. Motion is
made. Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair. Motion is
seconded. Is there any
discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Right. Right.
All those opposed, same sign.
Motion carries.
Next onto the report from our
CEO.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the board, um, I
think it's pretty obvious that
at this point we have a
departure from our agency, um,
Cherise Martinez, our board
administration manager left uh a
couple of weeks ago, she was
offered her dream job at the uh
Saint Michael's School in Santa
Fe, where she is both an alma
mater and a former teacher, um,
so she'll be the dean, she is
the dean of academics there. So
we are very close to finding a
replacement for her and by next
month you should be seeing some
new faces. In the meantime,
We've had some, uh, everyone
step up to to a village to get
this board book together and I
really want to give my special
thanks to Chrishana Madrid,
Laura Williams, um, Anthony
Maestas, Joe Maldonaldo, and um
That's those, that's the big
team in Krisha.
Um, and so, again, my great
thanks to that. Um, I also
wanted to mention that we have
a, a positive um
addition to our staff, um,
Nicola Onaa, who's been a
contract scrum master for uh
operations innovation team has
agreed to join us as our new
tech technical operations
manager, so she will be a
critical um uh person to help us
design the new data flows that
come in and out of our agency.
Uh, we were incredibly lucky
that she agreed to join us full
time. Um, she's quite
experienced in what she does, so
she'll continue to help as
books.
Scrum master, but also play this
new critical role for us, and
she begins next week and we'll
report to um our chief
technology officer Paul Romero.
Um, I think it's a good time to
remind ourselves of what we are
doing in terms of projects
outside of the transactions you
see before us, um, you may
recall that we have, uh, you all
approved the selection of FRU as
a contractor to help us with a
risk rating project. It's a
significant initiative for NMFA.
It allows us to put together a
risk rating methodology that
allows us to kind of uh
Assess the risk of individual
portfolios as well as loans, and
I mean more than just what's
our, what's the potential chance
for loss, but where are the
areas where we have risk so that
we can help set our monitoring.
Rick Kerman has been leading
that effort with John Brooks and
the, and the credit team. Um,
that is a year-long project, but
it's a major project for NMFA,
um, and so we expect at the end
of that um a particular project,
you'll be able to see our risk
rating for a project as well as
you'll see it.
In the financial statements
because there will be our, our
loan loss reserves will be keyed
directly to that risk rating as
opposed to just sort of
historical estimates, um, and
for some of our programs, our
historical estimates aren't
really good predictors. So, um,
wanna just mention that.
Uh, the integrated business
application project is the name
for that, uh, the project that's
gonna allow us to consolidate
all of our separate operations
uh our operating systems into
either one big operating system
or two that are interconnected.
We're in the planning stages of
that right now. You'll be
hearing more about that as we um
uh
Progress in our um
Planning process, um, Adam
Johnson, our chief of
innovations, um, he will, he's
leading that, that project, but
it is a massive agency-wide
effort.
And then lastly, the records
retention and data management
project that's been ongoing for
a couple of years. We started
with planning what documents do
we have, what data do we have,
where do they sit? What do we
use that data uh reporting or
planning is now morphed into the
actual implementation, and it is
now intertwined very much with
the integrated business
application system. So those
projects are coming together,
um, quite nicely, by the way,
and we'll then be able to
Sort of tackle both projects
with one major initiative.
Um, and that has led us to the
conclusion that we are going to
be better staffed if the
technology team, our information
technology team and our
operations innovation team,
that's the one led by um Adam
are merged under um a uniform
umbrella. So they will be
working, they are, they have
been working daily, um, making
sure that they are together in
all of these systems that they
are now designing. We want to
make sure that they are
sustainable from, you know, an
perspective, a cyber
perspective, a network
perspective, but also fit the
client needs. So both sides um
are looking at the same issue
from different perspectives and
coming together to make sure
that we integrate um both uh
both parts of that project
before we actually move forward
with it. So right cross
functional, um, they are
technically separate teams. We
still have separate budgets for
each. They're still separately
led in terms of um management,
Adam will continue to
Manage that um operations
innovation team and Paul Romero
or technology team, but they are
going to be morphed together,
merged together for purposes of
day to day operations.
So that's exciting for us. I
expect that next month they will
provide you some overview of
what they're doing on that
planning process for the
business uh integration project.
Um, as you'll note in the other
part of our agenda today, we
have a lot of program
development going on. I think we
warned you about that a couple
of different times this summer
and you saw it certainly last
month, um, but we have before
you today from the PPRF, um, a
final, uh,
Policy for a debt management
policy and what we're hoping to
do is to remove several
standalone policies that have
governed our activities into one
debt management policy, so we
won't have a separate um
arbitrage policy or separate
bond issuance policy. They'll
all come together in a debt
management policy. We've taken
away a lot of things that are no
longer really relevant for us or
we're never relevant for us,
issuing of variable debt, for
instance, um, but now it's in
one compre
Yes
Comprehensive place. So that's
exciting. That came through uh
the debt management committee
which has been recently
reinvigorated for this process
and for other reasons. Um, so
that's before you today. You've
not yet seen that, but I think
um Chip is in a really good
place to walk you through that.
Loan management policies and
rules which we reviewed briefly
last month, um, have, are also
before you today for approval
and um I think you'll
Uh, we'll have a good
conversation about that. The
rules have been approved by our
oversight committee and so
they're in a place after today's
um action to be in a final, um,
final state.
Opportunity Enterprise is the
other area of major um activity
for us. We have before you today
the opportunity enterprise
revolving fund. We'll call that
the commercial Development Fund
that got changed some elements
of that, got some minor changes
to it through the last
legislative session, so the
rules need to reflect that and
the policies are also reflecting
that we're making a couple of
technical corrections as well.
Um, and the housing development.
Revolving fund that's that new
program that the legislature
added, those rules have been
approved by the um
Legislative oversight committee
after we consulted with the
Opportunity Enterprise and
Housing Development Review
Board. Um, and those are the
ones today that unfortunately we
had an error in our, in our uh
uploading and you don't have a
final version. Well they're not
substantively different, there's
enough marked changes with new
um definitions that I think it's
best that we walk through the
document as a high overview and
then bring it back to the final
approval next month. The
policies are in good shape
though, um, those are ones I
expect we'll spend a little bit
of.
Time on those have had the most
conversation, I think, from
public uh members uh ever. So
members of the public keep
contacting poor John Brooks and
he's had to
I think he's got 15 versions on
his on his computer. Um, but the
policies I think are in a really
good place, the um approval of
the rules next month won't stop
us from being able to open our
application. We can't make a
loan until those rules are in
place, but we certainly can
develop the policies, tell the
public about the interest rates
and some of the structuring
issues and so we'll be able to
move forward with those today.
Um, and then lastly, the Water
trust board we've been telling
you for a while that the, the
legislature when it changed, um,
the water project Finance Act to
allow us to use those project
funds for technical assistance
and capacity development. We've,
we give you a little heads up
that that was coming. The Water
trust board has approved that
concept, and so today we have a
request to go out for um an RFP
to start soliciting those
contractors, and they will be
engineers, attorneys,
accountants, project management.
Man, community facilitators.
There will be a broad swath of
um
Contractors that will need to
pull off the two elements, one
for individual project planning
and the other for this uh
facilitation of regionalization.
So we're excited about that. We
the authorization from the Water
Trust board was also for up to
$3.5 million of the project
funds to be used for that
effort. Um, I don't suspect that
we will be close to using that
because it'll be January before
we probably have that open, um,
and any money not needed there
will then flow right to our uh
Overrun um fund. So I think
we're in a good place. Um, but
we'll do a quick walkthrough of
what we're, what we're asking
for this month.
Um, on today's agenda is our
first childcare revolving fund
in, I don't know, almost 15
years, um, we only ever made one
loan from that program for
$50,000 to a home-based
childcare center in um
Las Cruces and right after that
the legislature took the money
back, so we didn't get very far,
um.
But we're excited about this
project. It's uh came to us from
a legislator actually out in the
Tucum Carry area, they have just
one childcare provider there.
This is the same childcare
provider. She'll be opening a
second facility and doubling the
capacity uh for childcare in
that area. So we're excited
about that. Our partnership with
ECECD, the early child.
education and care department is
really quite strong, um, and
they are, they've been very
active in both updating the
rules for this and uh vetting
this project for us. Um, our
current policies, I would just
mention, we had uh $250,000 in
the initial program back in
2004, um, and the law says you
can't do more than 20%, so our
policies from way back when
still limit us to $50,000. Um,
we now have the 1.7.
$5 million special appropriation
that was contained in hospital
2, and we are transferring 1.1
million of excess revenues uh
from admin fees that we earned
on the childcare uh building
supply grant, we earned more in
revenue than we needed to
support our expenses, and that
money is now available to put
into that fund. So we're coming
into this with a $2.85 million
fund, which will allow us to do
with that 20% limitation, the
project that
before you today.
Um, and then one last one that's
new is Lang Grant Merced. I
believe we had a presentation
back in March, um, and that was
from, uh, Arturo Sandoval about
the need for financing for these
land grant Merceds. They have
been as they try to um buy back
land, uh, they have been left
with very high cost.
Funding and um so this is an
opportunity for us to test our
ability to make these loans
well, um, so we'll make a loan,
we'll monitor it.
Very carefully so that as we go
to look at more, we'll know um
what kind of risks we'll have in
the operation of that program. I
think we have a really good
Um, handle on what the, what the
potential revenues will be to
support those loans, but there
are other risks that do you make
a loan and that's the unknown
for us, so we'll be watching
this very carefully and
developing a pilot uh program
for us. This is going to be put
in our junior lean. This is not
one that we will bond reimburse,
um, so it's a, it's a good first
step for us. I would mention
this particular loan had entered
into some bridge financing, and
now we're in a position to do
the permanent financing for
them, so.
We, we're excited to be taking
that first step.
Um, and then lastly, our small
business recovery loan program,
we had a
You all had approved.
The award of a contract to a
group called Lendistry. They're
a national CDFI that uses
technology to fund to make loans
into areas that are typically
underserved and to individuals
that are typically don't have
access to capital. Uh, we have
been negotiating.
Uh, for quite some time, a final
scope of work and I, we have
included that work and we'll be
signing a contract, uh, I think.
This week, so we're really
excited to get that portfolio
into the hands of people that
have the resources needed to
really help these small
businesses. They have uh in the
actual people, as well as the
processes, the systems, and the
um technical assistance. They
have a group uh that's
associated with their
organization, a nonprofit that
offers mentoring one on one
counseling, uh, they offer, they
have a library of technical
assistance tools available to
them.
So this is a group that's really
going to be able to work with
our clients if they're unable to
make their payment, they will be
in there talking to them about
why, um, and really be able to
help them. So I'm excited we
could not replicate what they're
able to do in this program. So
we are moving forward with that.
Um,
Uh, we are in the midst of a
busy interim session today,
Fernando and Ryan are actually
up in Taos, uh, ski valley, to
ski ballot for a presentation to
the invention investment pension
and oversight Committee on our
venture capital program, uh,
Ryan and Chip were
Talking to Piscuda, my favorite
of the acronyms, Public School
Capital Outlay Task Force on
options for public school
financing, including charter
schools. That was a couple of
weeks ago, and then we were all
up in uh Gallup talking about
the public project revolving but
an opportunity for review board
as well as a couple of other
items. Um, so it's been quite
busy. We have one more 2 day
multi-day session in Sequaro at
the 2nd week of September, uh,
where they will hear just a few
things from us and mostly take
care.
of their other business, um, and
then just
proposed legislation after that,
so we are nearly towards the end
of that legislative interim.
And then I regret to say we
don't have before you today um
any proposals for our objectives
of the strategic goals that we
worked on, uh, as you can see
from the agenda, we've been
doing a little bit of other
things. And so, uh, once we have
a better outline of these.
3 major initiatives, the, the,
uh, risk rating system, the data
governance system, and the
integrated business application
will have a better sense of what
we're actually able to achieve
and we'll bring back some
realistic goals uh for you then.
Um, so, Madam Chair, that is my
report and I'm certainly happy
to answer any questions.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
Hearing Nun next on the agenda,
the public lending Committee.
Remember Nichols?
Yes, good morning, Madam Chair.
Thanks. Um, the public lending
committee met um on Wednesday,
August 21st. Um, we did not have
a quorum, however, staff
presented, um, some projects to
myself and remember Garcia, um,
we reviewed two planning grants
for small water systems and um
staff recommends approval of
those items and they're on the
regular agenda today. We also
reviewed 3 PPRF loans um seeking
approval in August 1 request
from the city of Elmo Gordo.
For energy efficiency projects
that required a number of policy
waivers, um, as well as a loan
to a land grant Merced, um, we
discussed how staff would
structure these new loans and
quantify the projected annual
distribution to the land grants.
Staff recommends approval of the
PPRF loans and those are also on
the regular agenda today.
And then finally we reviewed 10
awards totaling about $30
million for water trust board
projects for funding from the
2024 application cycle that
we're not able to meet the
timeline for a war in the
spring, but have since met all
the application requirements.
Um, two of those projects do not
demonstrate capacity to repay
the loans, so that'll be
required to raise their rates as
a condition of closing, and
staff recommends approval of
those awards and those are on
the consent agenda today. Thank
you.
Madam Chair.
Thank you.
So we'll um move on to the water
trust board consent agenda, we
have
11 items this morning on the
consent agenda.
Madam Chair, we'll start with an
overview. It will be nearly
identical to the overview that
Angela gave to us in May. The
application system and process
didn't change at all, um, and as
she told us in May, we weren't
able to fully process all of the
loan applications, so we had
money left and we were able to
then do a 2nd round of funding,
and this is the 2nd year that
we've been in that position.
There's been so much money and
so many projects did not meet
particularly their audit
provisions.
Um, that we ended up doing 2
fundings last year and 2
fundings this year.
Angel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you board members, as Barquita
and member Nichols stated, this
is the 2nd round and hopefully
this is the final that will
close up the 2024 cycle. Um,
again, we bring you 10 projects.
Uh, the board awarded the Water
Trust board awarded these 10
projects because they did meet
the regulatory compliance due to
the timing. So as Marquita
mentioned, uh, this is the
They were given extra time, and
these are the 10 projects that
we bring forward as member
Nichols did mention as well, is
that we do have two projects
that don't currently meet that
coverage and staff will be
continuing working with them in
order for them to secure the
funding they do have to meet
that, or at least um verify that
they can meet that coverage by
the time the loan becomes a
permanent loan. And so with that
we do bring before you the water
trusts board recommends these 10
projects uh for the the last
Iteration of the 2024 cycle for
the awarded amount of a little
over $300 and with the full 2024
projects it should be mentioned
that the water trusts board and
the NMFA board, if this is
approved, we'll have um approved
55 projects for a little over
167 million and with that I will
stand for any question.
Any questions, Madam Chair, I
would just on this particular
spreadsheet and note that the
ones that are highlighted in
that gold color are the ones
that have not shown historic
capacity, all the other loans
meet the required coverage
tests.
Um, and our
Does the same underwriting for
these loans as they do for PPRF
loans and everything else they
do complete due diligence, so.
We will, if they're approved
today as as presented, we'll be
monitoring those two very
closely to see what their
solution is for um meeting that
one time's coverage and that's
One of the things that um Angela
does very closely with those
clients as they work towards the
closing.
It's just like this, this is
that sort of what I call money
page because it sort of sums up
everything uh that follows
those, the 10 projects
thereafter.
Thank you.
So the first one we have is um
Albuquerque Berlio County Water
Utility Authority was awarded
902,000 with a 9010, 90% grant,
10% loan.
The next one is we have Kanye M
your domestic water sewer
association for 3070. If you'll
notice on the last column, they
are required to have a match, so
the canyon not only does not
meet the um uh coverage that
they are taken on an additional
loan in lieu of that required
match, and they were awarded for
a little over 4.8 million. We
have Kale mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association by policy,
they um are are eligible for a
100% grant and they were awarded
$500,000 for their design only
project. The next we have the
village of Logan, uh, for a
60-40 split they were awarded
381,500. After that, we have the
lower Rio Grande Public Water
Work Authority. They were
awarded 9010 for $731,000.
The next is the Santa Fe Poa
soil and Water Conservation
District. They also qualify for
a 100% loan by policy and were
awarded 1.1 million. The next
three are from the city of Santa
Fe.
All of them come with a uh
financial package of 60, 40, 60%
grant, 40% loan. The first one
is awarded for 7.7 million, the
second for 2 million, and the
final one for 5.5 million and
then the last, the 10th project
is Sierra Vista Mutual domestic
Association. They were awarded
uh
6.3 million with their financial
structure of 70/30, and similar
to Paon, they are taking on an
additional loan of the required
match.
And with that, I will stand for
any questions.
Any questions?
If not, this is the.
So I
You do, Madam Chairman to prove
item 6.2.
11 as presented.
Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair.
Motion is made and seconded any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Right. Bye.
Although opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
Next is our regular agenda.
So 5 items on our regular agenda
today for approval.
Um, good morning, madam.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, um, item 7.1 on page 72
is Kon Mutual domestic Water
Consumers and sewage Works
Association. Um, they're located
around the Hemes Pueblo area and
this plan will assist the
association to manage
infrastructure capital assets,
minimize the total cost of
operations, provide excellent
customer service and achieve
sustainable infrastructure.
This plan will furthermore
provide a long-term funding
strategy for the association.
It's for a water asset
management plan for 50,000, I
recommend approval on this
project and I stand for any
question. Any questions?
If not, do I hear motion?
Some of the second.
Motion seconded any discussion?
All those in favor say aye. I.
I. All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Um, item 7.2 is for.
Bitto's mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association, that's on
page 75 for preliminary
engineering report, and they
qualify for 50,000, um, but, um,
Balescitos is between Abiquiu
and Ojo Caliente up north and um
this plan will assist the
association in addressing
deficiencies identified in the
2023 sanitary survey to improve
systems operations and
facilitate collaboration with
neighboring systems, and they
seek to identify potential.
improvements to its current
infrastructure and plan to use
this PER to apply to the
drinking water program as well
as water trust board. I
recommend approval on this
project, and I stand for any
questions.
Any questions for board members
on this project?
Motion to improvement.
OK
Thank you. Motion's been made
and seconded by member Lovato
online.
Any discussion?
All those in favor say aye. A.
Bye. Bye.
Although opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
OK
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
board members, we are looking at
the Merced de Manzano land
grant, the Lamerced to Monzano
has applied to the public
project revolving fund for the
purchase of 764 acres in
Mountain Air, which is located
in Torrance County.
In 2022, the Merced Assistance
Fund was passed in the New
Mexico legislature, and in 2023,
the Monzano de land grant
approached MMFA and had some
discussions in applying for the
PPRF.
Also in 2023, they had a uh
property appraisal, and that was
for 800,000, which is fair
market on that.
Um, the proceeds of the loan
will be used to pay off the
existing real estate purchase
agreement into the Merced, and
that was in January of 2024. The
The project has two loan
components, a taxable loan
component for $566,000.69
dollars 566 694 for a 25 year
term and that interest at 4.89.
This also has a disadvantage uh
component at $62,966.26 year
term as 0% due to the um area's
MHI.
Uh, we are also, um, looking at
the strengths of the project and
they're gonna revitalize land
and have recreational use for
the community. Um, another
strength is potentially used for
solar farms in the near future.
There's some, uh, there is one
weakness is that the fun is um.
Based on the uh
Oh sorry about that.
The the weaknesses, the Merced
fund has volatility based on the
audit, um, each year, so we did
um do, we did utilize two-thirds
of the annual distribution of
revenue for the calculation on
that.
Um, the last audit was completed
in 2023. Uh, the number of
fightings worth 3, and there
were no material weaknesses or
significant deficiencies that
were repeated, uh, staff
recommends approval, and I stand
for questions.
Thank you.
Questions from the board, Madam
Chair, I just wanted to mention
again, this is the new loan that
we're looking at, the land grant
Mercer distribution fund is
eligible to land grants if they
file timely their audits, and so
that's one of the things that
we're going to have to monitor
very carefully is their
completion of those audits. Um,
again, we're not going to bond
fund these, uh, we, um, we end
up with some difficulty, we will
be in a position to um utilize
their debt service reserve fund,
but um
This is, these are the kinds of
risks that we're taking on. If
they do everything they're
supposed to do, the funds that
come in are more than enough to
pay the loan payment, but it's
that other part. How do we make
sure they stay in compliance. So
this is what we'll be looking at
before we try to expand our
program any broader.
Thank you.
Any questions or comments from
board members or do I hear
motion, Madam Chair, I have a
quick question. Marquita, on the
cash flow analysis, there is a
negative amount um for the 25
budget projected.
You guys kind of explain, I
guess what's causing that and if
there's any concerns since the
outflow is greater than the
incoming cash.
It's on page 81 of the
materials.
Is Erin here?
This was your analysis, wasn't
it, Erin?
Yes.
Remember, if we take a look at
the analysis, it's actually done
on a cash flow basis, so we
actually wouldn't consider
The state appropriations on the
top and the bottom. So they
actually had cash flows of
$7000.
But that's how they received the
100%.
Um, rent.
Distribution
Thank you for that, Erin. I
appreciate it.
No further questions.
Any questions from board
members?
There are no more Madam Chair
and move for approval.
Emotions
OK.
Second, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Motions made.
Any discussion?
If not, all those in favor of
the motion, say aye.
I.
Although opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you. Thank you.
Next on the agenda, City of
Alamogordo.
Morning, Madam Chair and board
members. So I'll be presenting
this specific project on behalf
of Carmelo Manzari.
So the city of Almagora is
seeking PRF financing, and it is
for several energy efficiency
projects. So as you look at the
loan details, you'll see that
the city of Almagorro does have
a loan request. It is for $3000.
It is at a 3.99% net interest
cost.
You'll see the pledge revenue is
gross receipt tax, and it is
with a 2.51 coverage ratio.
Looking at the project
description, you'll see that in
December 2022, the city of
Almagora did hire Year out
energy, and it was to conduct an
investment grade audit and it's
on 115 facilities.
Following the New Mexico Energy,
minerals and Natural Resources
Department's guidelines.
The audit has been approved by
the New Mexico Energy, Minerals
and Natural Resources
Department.
So you're energy in the city of
Almogodo have calibrated to
develop a facility improvement
measures that use future utility
and operational savings just to
fund the necessary capital
improvements.
These measures are expected to
save the city of Almagoda over
$3,700,000 over 20 years.
And some of those project
benefits, just to name a few,
and you can see those listed and
I'm gonna be on page 90 in your
board report, so you can see
those listed items. Some of
those benefits are to reduce
energy and water use, lower
utility operational costs,
replace outdated equipment.
Address maintenance and
infrastructure needs and
decrease the city's carbon
footprint.
Some of the improvements from
this particular project to be
listed are replacing over 1450
lighting fixtures and lamps.
Upgrading 19 transformers to
high efficiency models,
enhancing building envelopes and
installing solar panels.
And you'll also see that they're
adding 123 Wi Fi thermostats
just to name a few, and again,
I'm on page 91 there and your
board material.
As mentioned earlier, there's
some um.
Requests with respect to this
particular proposal, so the city
of Algoder is proposing using a
springing reserve, and that's
instead of a traditionally debt
service reserve.
And that's supported by their
strong financial performance,
and then A3 Moody's rating.
They are also requesting an
annual principal and semi-annual
interest payments under PBF
policies.
And with an additional request
for a contingent intercept
agreement in place of an active
intercept agreement for loan
management.
I feel it's important to note
that all of these conditions and
requests that you're hearing
today are consistent with all of
the loans that City of Almagota
has with us at NMFA currently
today.
As you look at the strengths,
you'll see that the strengths
include the projected utility
and operational savings, New
Mexico Energy, minerals and
Natural Resources Department
certification of guaranteeded
energy savings and performance
and guaranteed bonds for the
project.
Now weaknesses do include that
the fiscal year 2020 throughout
it has not been submitted as of
yet.
But looking at the fiscal year
2022 audit, that was unmodified,
it did have 3 findings, but none
of those findings impact this
project or this financing
request.
So let's go ahead and speak on
the delay of that fiscal 2023
audit.
Um, the delay in that fiscal
year 2023 audit stems from an
ongoing administrative
transition.
Specifically, the city of
Almagoda has been in the process
of transferring the management
of housing authority of the city
to the eastern Regional Housing
Authority, also known as ERHA.
The transfer carried out under
management agreement involved
moving all the funds to assets
to ERHA. Now, despite all these
efforts that I'm mentioning, the
Department of Housing and Urban
Development records still list
the housing authority under the
city of Almerorro's Audit, and
that's why this audit's been
late.
Now, um, if you do have any
questions or concerns pertaining
to this particular audit, we do
have a special guest with us
here today. She is the city
finance director for the city of
El Margoro, and her name is
Evelyn Huff, and she is online
via Zoom should you have any
questions pertaining to this
particular situation with the
audit.
Now this is the first time that
this project has appeared before
the NMFA board. Stapp does
recommend approval and myself
and Evelyn are very happy to
stand for any questions you may
have. Evelyn, thanks for joining
us today. Much appreciated.
Any questions on this project?
Madam Chair, this isn't really a
question. I, I know that this is
utilizing some of those direct
pay assets from the from the
inflation Reduction Act we're
really excited about this
provision. If you think about
section 45 of the tax code that
makes certain tax credits
available to individuals. This
is not going to be available to
state and local governments, um,
as a state government, I think
we're really excited about the
idea of
Finding ways to facilitate some
broader adoption, so I, I'm
excited to see this in this
description and I hope to see a
lot more of it in future
projects.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I would just
mention that it's very difficult
to finance these kinds of
activities because you can't,
uh, local government can't
pledge.
Uh savings, operational savings
to debt. So they are pledging
their gross receipts tax, but
they're it's being structured to
match the expected savings. So I
would just note that the uh
contingent intercept is in place
because they expect to be able
to actually make the debt
payments from the reduced
operational costs. Um, we have
capitalized interest in this
loan so that matches the
construction period, um, so
there, there we are trying to
mimic in this loan structure,
what they would get if they
didn't have that um.
The issue of not being able to
pledge budget savings to repay
debt, and so that's why
I think I got it from one of
you.
Uh, that's why it's got so many
waivers and and nuances to this.
It's not a traditional
financing. It is trying to meet
the needs of the underlying
project.
Thank you.
A quick question about the
springing reserve. I just
haven't seen us use that before.
I'm unfamiliar with it. Would
you talk a little bit about that
tool?
Yeah, so, um,
Whenever an entity does require
a Spring and reserve or request
or spring reserve, typically
when we use gross receipt tax or
net citizens revenue, we
typically um would like to embed
a debt service reserve fund into
that particular project, but in
this particular instance they're
asking for a springing reserve,
and to put it into layman's
terms and basic terms, um,
basically, if they are showing a
strong um financial stance in
their um financial status that
current today, then it gives us
the ability to have the ability
to accommodate that request um
for this particular project.
And this project does qualify
with respect to that in that
mind.
So Madam Chair, um, city of
Almaguordo uses this a lot when
we fund a debt service reserve
as part of the loan, they end up
paying interest on monies that
just sit on deposit unless they
don't make a payment. And so
with GRT they don't expect to
fall, have any problems making
that payment. What it requires
is anything as, as Ryan
mentioned, anything below a
fault that coverage falls below
2 times or 200%, then they're
required to build a debt service
reserve, so that it's there. So
we're saying it's a strong
revenue.
stream, it's so strong, we don't
expect that we would need to
have a debt service reserve
fund, but if we see that fund,
the revenues start to fall, will
require them to build that so
that we'll have that in place.
And Gordo uses it, I think, a
lot.
Thank you. Thanks for the
explanation.
Any other questions?
I would second the honorable
member board members motion for
support. Sorry.
We're waiting for a second. Did
you move?
Did you make the motion? I
didn't, but I'd love to.
The floor is yours. I move
adoption. Sure. I'll say. I
think your motion is made and
seconded, uh, to move adoption
on this uh project. Any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye, I.
All those opposed, same sign?
Motion carries. Thank you.
Mm
Gadsden Independent School
District. So good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the board of
directors. I'll be presenting
this on behalf of Todd Norby
today. So what you see before
you today is a project on behalf
of the Gadsden Independent
School District, and they've
applied to the PPRF for a loan
in the amount of 9,500,000 with
a 10-year term for the purposes
of financing projects within the
district.
The district did receive voter
approval in November 2021 in the
amount of $38 million of which
9.5 is part of this transaction
today, but for the items
outlined in the writeup below on
page 104.
They include a well and
wastewater improvements, roof
projects, a security system, a a
a parking lot movement projects.
And ADA restroom upgrades, as
well as the cost of issuance.
But we do have strings on this
loan. Uh, the first one is at
69% of this loan or roughly $69
million 696.9 million will be
paid back in the 1st 2 years.
Major tattoos do equal 14.77% of
the assessed valuation, which is
a low risk to to the tax base,
and we also have our statutory
guarantee should the district
default.
The 2023 audit was unmodified.
It did have one fighting, but no
material weaknesses or
significant deficiencies, and
this is the first time this
project appears before this
board and staff does recommend
approval, and I will stand for
the question.
Thank you.
Any questions from the board on
this project?
Not do I hear a motion to
approve. You do man?
Motion is made. Is there a
second?
N B 2.
So a second from Member Burke,
um.
Online
Is there any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye. I.
Although opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Next on the agenda is our report
from the Economic Development
Committee member Collins.
Good morning, Chairman, members
of the committee.
The Economic Development
Committee met on August 20th,
members instantinidis's Lovato,
Shelton and Rujil were in
attendance.
Uh, the next 3 items that you'll
see today were recommended to
this committee for approval.
Um, alone on the child care
facility and to carry um those
best earlier.
Um, alone for Midtown Sandpa
Productions.
Through the uh opportunity
enterprise fund.
Um,
Um, and then a, a pivot, shall
we call it, on house bakes from
them to another uh loan
opportunity that just happened
to.
That that that uh.
With that situation and finally
staff uh reviewed uh.
Several different loans with us,
which is always important.
That's all.
Thank you.
Any questions for the committee?
If not on the agenda today, we
have 3 projects.
For consideration.
Hello. All right, there we go.
Uh, hello again, Madam Chair and
board members, and thank you,
Madam CEO for giving us a brief
background on the childcare
facility revolving loan fund uh
earlier in the meeting today. I
do want to make the board aware
that we do have Mrs. Chavez
joining us uh via Zoom, and I
will do an introduction here
shortly, um, as mentioned, this
is the childcare facility
revolving loan fund. The borrow
is turquoise,
child development center, also
referred to as TCDC.
Right up.
Project location is at 1300
South 6th Street in Tucum Carry
um in Quy County, the loan is
for $550,000 fixed at 3% for 15
years. That's fully amortized.
Uh, the debt service coverage
ratio is healthy, meeting our
required 1.3 DSCR uh there is a
waiver request for the loan
amount, the state statute does
allow for the borrower to
request 20% of the current
balance of the fund and that
balance right now is at
$2,750,000.
And right now it's my pleasure
to introduce the owner of
Turquoise Child Care Development
Center, Michelle Chavez to seek
on behalf of the center.
Welcome, Ms. Chavez. may be on
mute? We're not hearing it.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
board members.
Uh, my name is Michelle Chavez.
I'm the owner and director of
Turquoise Child Development
Center. I am joined by my
assistant Gabriel Perez. Good
morning.
Thank you for your time and
allowing us to speak on behalf
of our center, turquoise Child
Development Center offers
focused five-star full day
year-round childcare, high
quality childcare for families
with children 6 weeks to 12
years of age, living in Quay
County.
Turcos is more than just
childcare or a learning program.
It is a cornerstone of our
community, a place where values
are instilled, friendships are
formed, and futures are built.
For many of our students,
turquoise is a home away from
home.
Young children often find it
difficult to be away from the
from their parents, but at
turquoise they are loved and
cared for and truly enjoy their
time with teachers and friends.
Our, our students know they walk
through the, when they walk
through the doors, they are safe
and valued. Not only do we
strive to provide high quality
early education, we encourage
and love each one of our
students as individuals, and we
build honest and trusting
relationships with their
children and their parents. Our
goal is to
as many children as possible in
our community and to defeat the
and to defeat the early
education crisis are our
community is currently enduring.
Our community is small, however,
the childcare crisis is severe,
causing loss of jobs, college
withdrawal, and even relocation.
Turquoisey currently serves 40
children. When this project is
completed, we will be able to
serve 90 children, offering
families in our community, the
support and structure
desperately needed, and for our
community to thrive.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for coming today. We
appreciate it and your
presentation.
Thank you, Michelle. I
appreciate that. Uh, the
project, the proceeds will be
used solely for property number
2, which is located at 1300
South 6th Street in Tucum Carry.
The project funds include but
not limited to the refinancing
is existing permanent mortgage
loan, construction costs
including 10% contingencies,
FFNE including fencing,
playground equipment, furniture
and interior items, and also the
general contractor is given a
timeline of 3 to 4 months on
completion.
As, um, as we heard from uh Miss
Chavez. She is the owner and
sole proprietor of this uh care
center. She has a background in
child care and several accolades
and also licensing. This is
she's made this her life's work
and obviously a big need and you
can carry, so I'm sure they're,
we are all happy that she's
there, um, helping the children
of our future and the families
that they serve in that
community as well, as mentioned,
Gabriel Perez is um the
assistant manager and her
Right hand person. She also has
a uh associate's degree in early
childhood education.
As mentioned, the impact is, is
great in this area needing uh
more childcare and expansion of
their services that will help
more families in that area, and
they are siloed right now, so
not a lot of errors um given
right now to a lot of the
family, so as she mentioned,
they have to move, they have to
change their lives, and that's a
shame because they wanna see
that community grow and, and
with the proceeds from this
loan, it's gonna help with the
expansion of those services and
help.
The children in that area, not
only just in the care um area
but also in education. So, uh,
staff does recommend approval
and we do stand. Any questions
from board members on this
project?
I just want to say I'm really
happy to see that we're using
this loan fund, finally, um,
I think a desperate need for
childcare across the state. We
hear it from many communities.
It enables parents to be able to
work knowing that their children
are in a safe place, so an
essential service, I would make
the argument and I'm glad that
we can, we're able to support
it.
There's no other discussion on
the motion do I hear motion or
madam. OK, motion has been made.
Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair. I can
remember to you.
Is there any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye. Bye.
All those opposed
Motion carries.
Thank you. Thank you and thank
you for being with us online
today too.
Congratulations. Thank you.
Next, Midtown Santa Fe
Productions.
OK, Madam Chair and the board
members, um, this project that
I'm presenting now is very
exciting because this is our
very first opportunity
enterprise commercial
development program loan.
Um, it is from an organization
called Midtown Santa Fe
Productions QOF LLC. They are
located here in Santa Fe, New
Mexico.
Um, but before I dive into my
presentation, I'd like to go
ahead and first introduce you to
the principal of Midtown Santa
Fe Productions. His name is
Philip Jessaway, and he'll
introduce himself, speak on the
organization and who they are,
and he'll also talk about the
project description in detail as
well. So with that in mind, I'll
go ahead and hand it over to
Philip.
Morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, board members.
Um, I wanted to start out.
Get
Can you turn
Is that? OK, great.
So good morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning board members. Uh,
my name is Philip Jeaway. I'm a
principal of Midtown Santa Fe
Productions QOF. We are creating
a business here that's going to
be called Aspect Studios or
Aspect Media Village.
Um, I wanted to thank you first
for considering this loan, um,
the state of New Mexico and the
NMFA board, um, it's a
complicated project. We couldn't
get it done um without your
consideration, and I'll tell you
a little bit of the background
and how the project came to be
so you can understand it better
and understand um how important
the proceeds of this loan will
be not only to our business, but
also to the city of Santa Fe and
the state of New Mexico.
Um, we, uh, there's a, uh, area
of the city here, um, that's
been dubbed Midtown. It's.
The old college of Santa Fe or
College of Santa Fe Art and
Design that has been bankrupt
for 8 years and um 2 years ago
my company bought the only
private parcel in that campus,
which was called the
Schellelberger Tennis Center. It
was another bankrupt business is
a part of that, which was
operated as a private tennis
club for many, many years. Um,
our business plan for that
initially was to develop
residential and um as we got in
a little
Deeper and learned about the um
incredible burgeoning
entertainment market in uh New
Mexico.
Um, and in Santa Fe, um, we
decided to convert that building
to sound stages and we basically
over the course of the ensuing
year after our acquisition in
late 22, made the two largest or
two of the largest sound stages
in the state of New Mexico.
What that enabled was a very
large um public production to
come and operate not only in our
facility but also in the rest of
that bankrupt campus, which had
been used informally for
productions for many years. So
it's been abandoned, and those
abandoned buildings have been
used as stage space, in
particular the Garson studios,
the.
Fitness center across the street
from it, and the Benalus um uh
classroom building and an office
building.
Uh, our company, um, did a very
large production called Outer
Range with Amazon, uh, we
combined it with both the city's
property and our property.
And then subsequent to that did
another very large full feature
production with with um Apple
Films. Um, that was also shot
both in her uh studio spaces and
in the city studio spaces. Those
were the two largest productions
to my knowledge, that have
occurred in this area, and they
happened because of the increase
in size because of our sound
stages, but in reality, we could
have never gotten them without
the garson and the city sound
stages. So very shortly after we
acquired
Our property, the city came out
with an RFP to sell all of those
same buildings, and we saw it as
an incredible opportunity to
consolidate these businesses
into one larger business and to
create the largest studio in
northern New Mexico, one of the
largest in the Southwest, and um
something that would capitalize
on a flow of business that wants
to come here but never really
had the uh magnitude of a
soundstage and operating
business to do that.
Um, we're purchasing, um, that
business from the city of Santa
Fe. Uh, we anticipate closing in
the next 60 days, we're going to
be taking all of those employees
and they're gonna be assumed in
our company and so Claudio
Ruben, who's the current
operator, will operate the
larger campus. I've hired 5 new
employees from the area who will
also administer the rest of the
campus and essentially we'll
combine two businesses with no
layoffs and they have more uh
hires after that.
The project um is gonna create a
tremendous amount of economic
activity because it will allow
us to recruit very large
productions to Santa Fe, which
we weren't able to recruit in
the past, and these productions
create over 1000 jobs, thousands
of jobs.
Many of them are short term
temporary jobs, but you have
these productions rolling every
year or so, and so the economic
activity is significant, and the
ability for them to support um a
large business like this, um,
is, is proven. Um, we're
developing this with a model
that we call a media village. We
hired a company called Rios
Architecture, and so our plan is
not to just combine these and
make it an average studio, we
want to do something that is
state of the art and also.
Very um appropriate for New
Mexico and for Santa Fe. So the
concept of a media village is to
basically do what open shopping
centers do to malls, you open up
the studio, you don't put walls
around it, and you integrate it
with residences and retail and
uh other types of commercial
uses, so that's something that's
normally a very big industrial
complex can be integrated into
the community. This is
particularly important here
where Midtown is a brand new
neighborhood.
That the city is trying to
develop to reuse the space, and
it will help integrate our
project into that. Um, and then
one final comment, the, the
diversity of uses that we have
creates creates a large amount
of diversity in the project. So
instead of having one project
with one kind of people coming,
we have apartments, we have
retail, we have a restaurant, we
have bikes that are used to move
around the campus, we have
office space and we have
production space, so there's a
wide variety.
of things happening, a wide
variety of different types of
workers and jobs, and also a
studio environment that the
people who are shooting these
films coming from New York and
LA enjoy and uh make it a place
that they want to come to.
Um, with that, I'll turn that
rest of the speech over to Jeff.
So
So before you move on and Ryan,
you might just touch on it, so
it sets you apart from all the
other sound stages and sound
studios in New Mexico is the
integration part, right? Uh, my
knowledge.
else in the great housing and,
and, and commercial into, into
that. That's correct.
And and we also were located in
the middle of Santa Fe. The
other projects are on the
highway or in an outer location.
These people can walk to
everything that they want to do
at uh adjacent retail, and
they're half a mile from
downtown. Very familiar with
your spot and I think it's an
excellent idea, right right.
So, um, thank you, Madam Chair
and board members, and thank
you, Phil, for everything you
just described. I think you did
an excellent job of describing
the business overview and also
the project description. So I'm
gonna go ahead and just cover
the loan structure detail and
financing information.
So as we look at the loan
details, you'll see that the
loan that we're discussing
today, we're looking at a total
loan amount altogether of
$11,900,000.
This loan is in this loan is
divided into two separate notes.
You'll see an Ano and a B note.
Both of these notes do have the
same interest rate of a 5.1%
interest rate with and they do
share the same terms. They do
have a 10-year term with a 23
year amortization period, and
you'll see that both notes do
have a 36 month of interest only
payments as well.
The overall loan altogether has
a coverage ratio of 1.9 times
altogether, which means it is
financially healthy and we did
account for this for a
conservative estimate of just
35% vacancy rate.
Um, I'd like to dive in a little
bit in detail why do we have two
different notes. First off,
Philip requested us to do this,
but also to add to that the
reason for having these two
notes is due to the project
being developed into two
different phases as he described
earlier, the first phase as he's
described, which began in 2022
involved that cash purchase of
the Schillerberger Tennis
Center.
And also the second phase, which
involves a much bigger piece of
property became clear and firm
here in 2024. The structure
allows us to manage the property
financing more effectively as we
progress through these phases.
So this is why you see two
different notes that are being
presented today, um, on this
project in this manner.
As you look at the next section
is which is collateral, you'll
see that there's two pieces of
collateral to discuss today. The
first piece of collateral
happens to be commercial real
estate property that's located
at 1600 Saint Michael's Drive.
It does have an appraisal that
was performed and given an
evaluation of $12,080,000. I did
apply a 15% discount to that and
gave it a new value of
$10,268,000 and we will take a
first mortgage on that real
estate from a lien perspective.
The second piece of collateral
is commercial real estate, as
well as property located in 1954
Syringa Road, which has a
purchase price agreement of
$6,700,000 and I applied at 15%
discount to that and give it a
new value of $5,695,000 and we
would take a first mortgage um
on that particular piece of
property as well from a lean
position. So the total subject
collateral altogether is
$15,963,000. That's including
all of the discounts applied,
which gives the overall LTV for
this entire request.
74.54%.
So Philip did a great job of
describing the borrow background
and the project description, so
I'm gonna continue to, if you
can scroll down to the right up
and I'm looking at page 124,
during your board material,
which is um I'll be covering the
sources and uses here.
So as you look at that snapshot,
you'll see on the source's side,
you'll see that the entire loan
amount is, uh, the entire
project amounts $13,229,000. It
does include the loan request
that we're talking about today,
which is $11,900,000.
You'll see an equity
contribution that's there for
$1,329,000 and important to note
that equity amount presented is
approximately around 10%, which
is um of the total entire
project amount, which is a
requirement of this particular
program.
But as you look at the uses side
of the chart, you'll see um the
the um you side, you'll see that
there's an acquisition cost for
the property which is a little
over $300.
You'll see hard costs and soft
costs that are embedded in
there. That's to renovate those
buildings to make them ready for
film production, which is around
$8,700,000 combined, and you'll
see financing costs over
$1,479,000 which puts the entire
project again at 13.
$29,000.
And as you look into the
financial summary, you'll see
the underwriting, um, that was
performed has the debt service
coverage ratio at 1.9 times.
This ratio is based on utilizing
35% vacancy factor applied in
rental revenue with a 23 year
amortization period of 5.1%
interest rate, and of course
those interest only term of 3
years.
Looking at the obligation,
you'll see that Midtown Santa Fe
Productions Q O Z B LLC and
aspect Q O Z B L O C, both
wholly owned subsidiaries of
Midtown Santa Fe Productions QOF
LLC, the developers qualified
opportunity final.
Looking at closing conditions,
an appraisal still needs to be
requested on behalf of the
property located at 1594 Seringo
Road, and the outcome of that
appraisal evaluation will be a
condition of closing.
Also in a phase is requiring
that the borrow purchase key
personal life insurance policy,
naming NFA as a beneficiary.
Looking at the management team
bios, the first one's written on
Philip himself.
Um, not only is he the principle
of this particular organization,
but he's the founder and owner
of PE Real Estate Holdings LLC.
He has amassed 30 years of
experience in real estate
development and finance.
His leadership and driven, um,
the development of over 10,000
square feet of urban properties
that are worth over $8 billion.
He does hold advanced degrees in
Columbia University and the
University of Pittsburgh, and
he's very passionate about the
arts.
Looking at Tom Wallace, you'll
see he's a stage manager. He
leverages his Marine Corps
training and over 15 years in
construction and project
management.
He does have, he has renovated a
lot of homes in northern New
Mexico, and he played a crucial
role in renovating that
Shellerberger tennis to um.
A film studio.
Faudo Rubin, which mentioned
earlier, is a CEO of Garson
Studios Santa Fe LLC and read
some Bala films. He has over 20
years in production, including
work on A&E Netflix series
Longmire, and also the time
miniseries Docwest.
Claudio's academic background
includes degrees from Ken
College London and McGill
University, and he also has
experience in commodities
trading.
And then lastly is Jim Tro, a
general contractor with Tuco
Enterprises. He is in Oglala
Lakota, and US Army veteran with
a diverse background in film
industry work and construction.
He now specializes in
entertainment construction, and
he also helped out with the
Shellerberger Tennis Center
being converted into a film
studio.
You also see that I performed in
market analysis on motion
picture, TV, and video
production for your review.
But the summary of all those
reviews for this film industry
is performing well currently
today, but that's especially
after COVID pandemic has passed
and the fact of the writer's
strike is no longer a concern at
the present time.
Looking at strengths and
weaknesses. Strengths included
the project benefits from an
experienced developer who's
deeply invested into its
success.
This developer has a proven
track record at Garson with
recent productions at Amazon
Prime and Apple TV showcasing
their capability. Additionally,
the project promises a
significant improvement to the
south end of Midtown, including
valuable utility connections to
Syringo Road.
And then also finally,
financially the project is in a
strong position with acceptable
loan loan to value and also
acceptable debt service coverage
ratio, even with conservative
vas assumptions.
Looking at the weaknesses,
you'll see that the facilities
are more traditional studios, so
they may face utilization
pressures from the rise of
digital production.
And also Albuquerque does remain
the state's primary film
epicenter, but Santa Fe is
viewed as a secondary market,
and lastly, the revenue
visibility of the film studios
is quite limited because leases
typically range about 3 to 5
months.
Now this does conclude my
presentation and this is the
first time that this project has
appeared before the NFA board.
Staff does recommend approval
and myself and Philip would be
very happy to answer any
questions you may have.
Any questions for board members?
Madam chair, it's not a
question, but I just want to say
that it's a big ass first of
all, but uh, you know, it's got
a tremendous upside, and I think
the fact that uh you're taking
first mortgage on the first
position on both mortgages, I
think is mitigates the risk of
substantially so.
And
I would have no motion for
approval.
Madam, I'm sorry,
I'm sorry.
Go ahead, Andy. I just, I will
have a question, so go ahead.
Um, I'm sorry, I'm a Santa Fe
resident. I live right in that
neighborhood, so you're gonna
get a little um extra scrutiny
that maybe at the.
The applicant for two can carry.
The first, the first thing is
that.
a more serious note, that I'm
encouraged to see that.
Uh, emphasis on reducing
traffic. As you are aware, you
have two very, very large
schools for your direct
neighbors Santa Fe High School
and Molaro Middle School.
Where a tremendous amount of the
Middle schoolers in in Santa Fe.
So you know the times of day
traffic is going to be an issue,
safety is gonna be an issue. I
bring this up um as just that I
urge you to continue to be
proactive as you think about
your traffic management and your
safety measures, we are right
now seeing in Santa Fe a pretty
significant local business owner
who was in real terminal because
of a personal injury, so.
I would really hate
To see um such an integral
neighbor be in a similar
situation.
So that's one.
Uh, no for me on a lighter note,
uh, Garson Studios, when they do
Pyro, it's visible from my deck.
So I'm a very enthusiastic 4
year old who would encourage you
to continue the book uh pyro
activities at Garson Studios
because it's pretty exciting
nights for us that happens.
Thank you. I'm sure.
Thank you. A quick question, um,
Can you talk to, uh, actually
remember Burke was next, sorry.
Uh, thank you, Chair Keith.
Yeah, uh.
Just kind of reviewing this, uh,
you know, recently for the first
time, I just have a couple
questions kind of related to the
format of the presentation, it
seems like the project is well
collateralized and and insured
uh I I'm wondering, um, and, and
I heard that it's
3 years interest only, but I'm,
I'm wondering uh what the
payment schedule would look
like.
For the repayment of the loan.
Mr. Chair, Madam Chair, are you
asking Member Burke what the
what the annual debt service
will be after it gets into the
PNI.
Right, I was trying to find that
and I, I didn't see it in the
presentation.
Madam, Madam Chair, it should be
uh 1.9 times coverage.
Once the uh
Property is fully uh not fully
leased but stabilized 3 years
out.
And I'm talking about the actual
loan payment.
OK
I don't have that handy.
Is there a specific reason why
you're asking but I'm on mute,
so go ahead. OK, all right,
well, I wanted to get right
back, can you mute?
uh, that sounds promising.
Membervato, can you mute? Thank
you.
Well, we see that on the other
loans we approve and, you know,
it rates, it relates to um
You know the ratio you
mentioned, but I'm, I'm
wondering what, what the actual
Payment requirements are for the
loan.
I don't have that at my
fingertips. Yeah, I remember we,
we don't have that uh included
in this information and
fortunately, our analyst doesn't
have that information with him.
OK.
Can we
And we provide that to member
Burke? Yes.
Madam Chair, what we can do is
um get that information and
email it out to the group once
that's been um.
Um,
Established.
That's helpful.
Thank you.
Any other questions, remember
Burke?
Uh, no.
Thank you.
So, um, a quick question on uh
really business structure and
where your business is coming
from. So,
Will you be competing with other
New Mexico studios?
Or are you basically competing
nationwide and internationally
for business.
Uh,
It's probably a little bit of
both, I think, uh, the last two
shows that we had, we didn't
compete with any other studios
for. We were the only place that
they could come to, and that was
because we had a lot of open
stages and a lot of open space,
and it was attractive to them
for that reason. We were
competing against Wyoming and
Arizona and other southwestern
states that have um the
particular scenery. One of the
things that um makes Santa Fe
strong as a filming destination
is the
Outdoor areas that surround us.
There are a lot of western towns
and a lot of really beautiful
vistas that are remote, that are
in outside of Glorieta, and 285
and 84, um, and a lot of the uh
films that come to town shoot
outdoors there, and it's too
difficult for them to have
studios in Albuquerque because
it's too far. So, um, the last
several shows that have happened
on our campus,
um did outdoor shoots there and
Came to us largely because of
our location in this incredible
scenery. It's one of the things
that um mitigates some of the
risk for us, um, because we're
seeing other cities like um.
Um, Atlanta, which have
overbuilt studios just for the
purposes of shooting indoors,
they have a lot of competition
and weakness in their studio
market because there's no real
reason to go to Atlanta other
than the studio.
Northern New Mexico, people come
here to shoot the scenery, and
then the shooting indoors is
kind of a uh.
Support for that. So, I think,
um, I think a lot of our
business is going to come
because of northern New Mexico,
and then I think, you know,
somebody will come here when the
Albuquerque is full.
Thank you for that explanation.
Las Vegas has been a beneficiary
of a lot of that, especially we,
we get a lot.
That's right.
And it's got a tremendous
upside.
Thank you.
I think you were gonna make a
motion. I did make a motion,
Madam Chair, we're waiting on
the second.
Collins, committee there were
two items that were discussed.
One was, um, there was a
question about noise and the
impact on filming.
I'd like you to speak to that.
And the other, um,
was a utility.
Um, that there might be a lack
of infrastructure or some
instability.
Um, if you could speak to that
as well.
Sure. So noise, uh, noise in
terms of impacts on the
surrounding community are are
one of the least problems that
we have. We have truck traffic,
which can be noisy, but the
truck traffic is generally
concentrated into a short period
of the shooting cycle of a film,
so if they're on uh we have a
big film for 6 or 8 months,
tractor trailers roll in from
time to time, but it's not a
constant source of noise.
Um, we're, we're just the
opposite. We have to be very
quiet, so all of our studios are
soundproofed and we don't want
to have noise from the outside.
So all of our noise is really um
Kept indoors, um, unless on
occasion, you have a really huge
outdoor shoot like Apple
recently had, um, but even
apples was not noisy because
most of the activities that you
have in shooting are.
Close in, um, they can have a
lot of background noise and they
don't really make a lot of
ambient noise, so it's, it's
ideal from a noise standpoint,
impact.
To us from the outside, we
mitigate through soundproofing
the studios, which is expensive,
and it's one of the things that
we're gonna be doing with the
proceeds of these funds. We have
gymnasiums which are incredible,
unused spaces from the old
college that we're gonna turn
into um soundstages, and that
requires new flooring and
soundproofing and lighting and
all kinds of stuff like that.
Um, in terms of your second
question about infrastructure,
uh, this campus, uh, the
infrastructure was planned out
probably, um, I don't know, 80
years ago. So there's one
electric feed coming into the
campus and all the buildings are
on the private um electric.
Um, network. It's also um very
remote from main streets, it's a
huge campus 60 acres, so we're
about quarter or half a mile
from Currios and a quarter mile
from Syringo. Um, we are paying
to bring in um PNM um high
tension electric um up the, uh,
it's basically yaka, uh, which
is where Santa Fe High School is
and Yucca continues north, so
we're bringing a high tension
table up that street, and
We're gonna reconnect all of the
um campus buildings that we're
acquiring to that public
network, and we're gonna
increase the amount of
electricity that's available for
the Shelleberger, which was
under.
Uh, planned at the time and
again, these are um additional
sources of capital. That
infrastructure will also be
usable as the city of Santa Fe
expands midtown in the future,
and they put in residences and
other businesses to the north of
our campus. They'll be able to
tap into that network.
Thank you. Any other questions
from board members?
Yes.
Madam Chair, mine is questions.
Much as I'm also really excited
to see this project having lived
in Santa Fe for many years and
um recognizing the connectivity
issues to other things in the
neighborhood and strong arts
programs that we have in high
schools and other colleges that
are supporting films, so pleased
to see this here and Madam
Chair, when you're ready for a
second.
We're ready. All right, second
that motion. Motion's been made
and seconded any discussion.
If not all those in favor say
aye, I.
Hi.
All those opposed, same sign.
Congratulations. Motion carries.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Next on the agenda is
Next on the agenda is the
redeployment of small loan pool
proceeds to Silver City Co op.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board, what you
have before you is a memo
explaining a recapture of funds
in the small loan pool
portfolio.
And a subsequent request to
redeploy these funds.
So on August 12, 2024, and IFA
received a $900,000 full
repayment in the small loan
pool. This event resulted in
what's called the recapture of
funds, and NMTC guidelines
dictate that these funds will
need to be redeployed within 6
months. So staff is requesting
to redeploy these funds into a
new qualified low-income
community investment with the
Silver City Co op.
The Silver City Co op is an
eligible qualified low-income
community business and has 2
loans currently outstanding with
the finance authority.
Both of these loans were made to
finance equipment and
construction of a new store
location in in Silver City, New
Mexico.
We have a $2 million small loan
pool transaction, which is
completely drawn down, and they
also have a $1000 direct loan
from Finance New Mexico.
Which is undrawn at this point.
So we would like to lower the
amount of that loan to $100,000
and replace this with the
recaptured funds.
So construction is set to be
complete in mid-September of
2024 with a grand opening
shortly after. The co op has
operated in its original
location and maintained
profitability, and it's also
expected that upon completion of
construction and the expansion
into the new store that revenues
and profitability will benefit.
So with that staff is
recommending to redeploy the the
$900,000 into a new poliy with
the Silver City Co op, and I
will go ahead and stand for any
questions. Thank you. Any
questions from board members?
If, if I'm correct, we've
already seen and approved the
Silver City Co op project.
Right.
May of 2023, the FNM direct loan
was approved.
Great. Thank you.
Do I hear a motion?
You do have
Motion is made to approve this
project.
Is there a 2nd, 2nd armchair.
Seconded any discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Bye.
All those opposed same sign?
Motion carries.
Next on our agenda, um, an
update from the finance and
disclosure Committee chair
Swaza.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'll
be brief. Uh, we did not have,
uh, a forum, so, uh, as such,
uh, we were, uh, not, uh, we did
not take action. Uh, we were
briefed, however, on the
investment report which is in
your, in your packet uh for you
to peruse. We also uh were
briefed on the authorized and
delegating resolution for the
senior league uh public projects
revolving revenue fund revenue
bond series 2024B kind of.
Slaughtered that, but uh we were
briefed on it. You'll be
hearing, you'll be, we'll be
going over very soon. Uh, we
did, uh, we were briefed on the
fiscal year 2024 budget
performance report as of June
30th, 2024. It will also be
presented today, uh and we
tabled and, and moved to the
full board request for an RFP
for the water trusts for
technical assistance, uh,
contractors, uh, and you'll be
hearing on that in in very short
notice and that's my report,
man.
Thank you. Any questions for the
committee?
If not, we'll move through the 3
items before us from finance and
disclosure. First the
authorizing and delegating
resolution for senior lean
public project revolving loan
bond.
that much better than they did,
Madam.
It'll be a test on this at the
end there will be, madam. Thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
board. The next item is our
2024.
PBRF bonds, the authorizing and
delegating resolution. We have
our disclosure counsel Jerry
Kyle from Oric here today, and
we also have Brad Patterson, our
bond council. Uh, Jerry will
walk through the POS with you
and uh after that bread and
those that are in your board
books, the, the resolution that
Brad will walk you through, I
emailed out to the board members
this morning. You have a hard
copy in front of you, uh, that
was inadvertently left out of
the materials. The reason for
that, I'm going to plead the
fifth.
Uh, so we'll start, I think
chips on board uh with us today.
He can walk through the
underlying, you know, basic
structure of, of the bonds and
then we'll just, we'll we'll
turn it over to Jerry to walk
you through the POS.
OK, thanks again. Uh, madam
chair and board members. This
will be a senior lien issue, uh,
it's entirely a reimbursement.
We've got 26 underlying loans
that will be reimbursed right
now. I just re-ran the latest
numbers based on today's rates
and it's likely to be um about a
$50 million proceeds issue, um,
assuming 5% coupons we're
looking at probably about a 45.
$0.3 million bond issue, um, not
too many bells and whistles on
this one. It's fairly
straightforward, um, we did meet
with the rating agencies
yesterday and so we expect those
ratings to be forthcoming in
about 2 weeks.
And then after that, we will um
have a due diligence call with
the members of the financing
team and then issue the
Uh preliminary official
statement, um.
Early
But yeah, mid mid-September,
about the 16th, 17th, um, so
that's, uh, and then price the
bonds the first week in October.
So that's a quick overview of
this issue and the, the
fundamentals, and I'd be happy
to answer any questions or I
will turn it over to our learned
legal colleagues.
Any questions from the board?
Thank you, Madam Chair. We'll
turn it to Jerry to go through
the preliminary offering
statement.
Thank you, Dan. Good morning,
Madam Chair, uh, board members,
uh, Jerry Kyle with Oric
Harrington and Sutcliffe. Um,
happy to be here before you this
morning and, and, uh, as usual,
I'll kind of run through the
highlights of the uh preliminary
official statement.
The uh the version that's in
your board books is a comparison
to the last senior Lane issue,
which was in October. Um,
And you'll see we've updated the
cover to reflect the uh the
series designation for this
issue, the 2024B bonds, um, and
I'm sorry, I'm on page 134 of
your board books.
Um, so the, the cover, uh, the
marked version carries over to
page 135 of your board book, um,
and at the top of the page
there, you'll see the, the
underwriting syndicate has been
named, um, that will be on the
cover of the document when it's,
when it's printed.
And I think I go to uh
Uh, page 141 of your board
books, the table of contents.
Um,
And then followed by page 142,
uh, this is the first page of
the, the body of the document,
um, where we've got the
introduction and then we've got
uh some brief summaries of the,
the, uh, more detailed
information that appears later
on in the document.
And then we'll see, uh, uh.
Page 146 is the major caption
for the series 2024 B bonds and
uh under this caption, we have
some of the basic information
about the terms of the bonds,
the payment dates, uh,
redemption provisions, and those
kinds of things.
At the bottom of page 147. Um,
we've got the major caption for
security and sources of payment,
uh, under that caption, we, uh,
uh, described the agreement
revenues, which is one of the
primary sources of security for
the bonds, that starts on page
148.
And on page 149, then we've got
the table that shows the uh uh
the uh various types of revenues
that secure the underlying
agreements.
Um, the, uh, uh, shown by, by,
uh, the respective amounts
expected to be received in the
fiscal year 25.
And then on page 150, uh, we've
got the table showing the
largest governmental units, um,
uh.
For for uh
The senior bonds.
And then, um,
On page 152, uh, carrying over
to page 153. We've got the
5-year history of the receipts
from the governmental gross
receipts tax, and then I think I
go on to page uh
162, just wanted to point out
that we've got the uh the new uh
summary description of the
junior obligations program that
was recently authorized.
And then page 163, the plan of
financing, uh, since this is the
preliminary official statement,
bonds have not been priced yet.
The sources and uses are blank.
Those will be filled in in the,
the uh final OS once the bonds
are priced.
And uh pages 164.
Group 168, we've got the pro
forma, uh, kind of estimated
debt service on page 164,
running over to page 165.
And then uh that pro forma debt
service is used to uh populate
the table on page 167 that shows
the uh estimated coverages after
the issuance of these bonds.
And then on page 169, we've got
the major caption for the New
Mexico Finance Authority with
some general information about
the authority and then uh uh
board members are uh named on
page 171.
And then uh at the bottom of
page 171 and carrying over to
page 172. We've got some uh
brief uh uh biographical
information about key staff
members.
Um,
Even I jumped to page 178, uh,
just, uh, to point out at the
bottom of the page the major
caption for uh the continuing
disclosure undertaking. This is
the authority's agreement to
provide information on a a
periodic basis going forward,
um, uh, to investors about uh
the operations and financial
information of the authority and
the, the PPRF.
Um, then on page 180 at the
bottom of the page, the major
caption for the ratings, uh,
once those have been issued by
the rating agencies, we'll,
we'll drop those in. Uh, they're
not expected to change with this
issue.
Page 184 is Appendix A, uh,
where we identify the
governmental units, uh, expected
to benefit from this offering.
Um, and then on page, uh,
189 and 190, we've got the, the
largest uh repayment obligations
by reference to the five largest
uh
uh governmental units.
Uh, Appendix B, uh, starts on
page 192, um, and this is just
the uh extracts of the uh the
indenture, so the, the, the, the
uh legal document that sets up
the framework for the uh um.
The, the, the financing.
And then I go to page 215.
Um, which is Appendix C where we
have certain, uh, economic and
demographic information about
the state of New Mexico.
Um,
And then uh Appendix B is the
form of bond council opinion.
This is the form of the opinion
that will be delivered by uh Mr.
Patterson's firm, Gilmore and
Bell, in connection with the
issuance of the bonds.
Appendix E is the summary of the
book entry only system these
bonds are uh uncertificated.
There, there's no physical bonds
delivered here. And then
finally, Appendix F is the cover
sheet for the uh audited
financial statements that will
appear um in the preliminary
official statement and the final
official statement.
So I went through that pretty
quickly. I'm happy to answer any
questions.
I'm sure I have one question.
Yes, um, I'm just, I'm curious
about it. I see there's been a
change to the underwriters from
the October issuance.
How is that determined? How, how
does
Because those get selected.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, if you all remember the
annually and last month we
actually did a waiver for our
annual.
APRF and DOT bond underwriter
pool, so that's an annual
process which is now likely
going to move to a two-year
process where we uh uh put out
an RFP or an underwriters to
submit proposals to us. There is
a pool of underwriters that are
then selected. It consists of 6.
And then they alternate between
being a lead underwriter and
co-underwriters. There's always
3. And so this is just part of
that process that it's
identified early, I can get you
that list of, of who the current
underwriters are in the pool,
and this is just part of the
normal process in, in rotation,
if you will.
Thank you very much. That's
helpful.
Madam Chair, I'm down in Chip.
Do you guys anticipate any
change or impacts to their
credit, um, from Moody's based
on their methodology change? I
don't think that criteria change
impacted any of the NMFA
portfolio. I'm just making sure
since there were impacts to DOT
and the state.
Um, manager boardrooms, yeah,
good question. They're, um, we
did have a conversation with
Moody's a couple of weeks ago.
Uh, they are reevaluating their
methodology for rating what they
call special tax bonds and those
do include the DOT bonds, and
the state severance tax bonds.
They have not taken any action
at this point, but there is
You know, some likelihood that
there will be uh a review and uh
perhaps a, a rating change, uh,
not to any PPRF that this, you
know, when I can't, can't uh
emphasize that enough. This is
not related to the PPRF program.
It's solely related to DOT and
to the severance tax bonds and
the indication we got was that
they'd be making a decision by
probably the end of September.
Um, but yeah, good question.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
know for the record, um, in the
listing of the board members, we
have caught that there is an
error in that listing. We
understand that acting cabinet
Secretary Mark Roper only is the
acting cabinet secretary for one
department and that uh cabinet
secretary designate.
Melanie Kenderine will be
replaced there, so we apologize
for that error.
A quick question about interest
rates and how we see a possible
change in interest rates
impacting.
So
Uh, man, uh, members of the
board.
The indications are that the Fed
will reduce interest rates uh
either 25 or 50 basis points in
It's September meaning at this
point, the market is
Holy, uh
Anticipated that that 100%
likelihood that there will be a
rate reduction over time, uh,
what that will do is it will
begin to
Hopefully normalize the yield
curve right now, he's still
having an inverted curve where
short term rates are higher than
longer term rates, which creates
this or let's.
Called an inverted curve, um,
As that becomes more normalized
over potentially the next
several months, uh, we should
see both the flattening and then
ultimately a sort of more
traditional upward sloping
curve, those rate changes will
be reflected in the rates that
we uh produce every week for a
borrowers.
As the municipal curve matches
the the taxable curve, we should
start seeing lower rates for
shorter term loans. Um, the
other impact is that
unfortunately it means that the
uh NMFA probably won't be
earning the massive uh interest
earnings that it has been for
the last year and a half or 2
years, um, but I think
ultimately it'll be a good thing
for our borrowing communities
that we'll see lower short term
rates because a number of our
loans are
You know, inside of 5 years, so
as, as rates uh reduce and low
in the short and those, those
folks will benefit the most.
Thank you.
Any other questions from the
board?
Madam Chair, we do have the
authorizing and delegating
resolution that um
Patterson will walk us through.
That was the one that was
emailed to you today and I have
it up here.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of
board, Brad Patterson, uh, with
the law firm of Gilmore and
Bell. We are bond council with
the finance authority. It's a
pleasure to be before you today
and to walk you through this
resolution, uh, as the
resolution, as the title of the
resolution suggests, this is an
authorizing and delegating
resolution and that does a
pretty good description of
describing what the contents of
the overall resolution. First of
all, the resolution authorizes a
series of bonds. These are going
to be series 2024B senior lean
um people.
Eons, um, and, uh, the final
terms of those bonds will be
determined at a later time
because this resolution
delegates to certain designated
offices the ability to set the
final terms of the bonds, um,
and so with that, we will um
jump into uh a discussion of the
contents of this resolution.
As was stated earlier, um,
these, this resolution
authorizes a series of bonds.
Uh, however, the bond principal
amount cannot exceed $600
million. That's the maximum
principal amount and the
designated offices who will
determine what the final terms
of the bonds are have to operate
within that parameter as well as
some other parameters that we'll
talk about shortly. Um,
The bonds can't have a maturity
any greater than uh June 1, 2044
on all this information is set
forth on page 7 of that
resolution.
Um, the true interest cost of
the bonds cannot exceed 4.75%,
and the final interest rate can
exceed 5%. Um.
The um
Maximum original issue discount
at which the bonds can can be
sold and not exceed 2% and the
underwriter's discount cannot
exceed 0.75% of the aggregate
principal amount of the bonds.
Um, this resolution also
authorizes the the execution and
delivery of a couple of
different documents, uh, the
supplemental indenture which
contains the, the terms of
bonds, as well as a bond
purchase agreement, a continuing
disclosure undertaking, a
dissemination agent agreement as
well as the approval of the
preliminary official statement
that Mr. Kyle uh described
previous to my, um, coming up
here, um.
The resolution also designates
to certain uh uh.
Individuals, the ability to set
the the final terms of the
bonds, um, sometimes we've had
the discussion of who will be
those designated officers. I
don't know if we would like to
entertain a discussion of who
those designated offices are
going to be, but it's uh any,
uh, let me just look up and see
who our designated offices are
in the resolution.
So the definition on page 5, any
two of the chair, vice chair, or
secretary of the board or other
members of the board, the chief
executive officer or in the
event the chief executive
officer is unavailable. Another
employee of the finance
authority when designated by a
certificate signed by the chief
executive officer provided,
however, that such other
employee is the chief financial
strategist, chief financial
officer, or chief programs uh or
chief of programs of the finance
authority.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, typically we have the CEO
and a member of the board, we
would
Welcome a volunteer from the
board to take place. I, I think
it's a good time if, if one of
you has, has not participated in
a bond sale, it's a very good
exercise. It, it's a good way to
get familiar with the operations
of the finance authority and the
bond issuance process, uh,
Marcos can tell you he's
intimately familiar. He's done
the last several, uh, so we
will, uh, you know, if you can.
Volunteer today, that would be
great, and if not, we can have
that conversation offline. We
don't have to make that
decision.
I realized that this is not
nearly as exciting as movie
studio discussions, uh, but
nonetheless, I'm happy to
entertain any questions.
Thank you. Any questions on the
resolution or volunteers for the
bond sale.
Madam Chair, what kind of a time
commitment is that?
Um
I think Marcos can tell us for
sure.
Madam Chair, um, Joy, it's, I
would say 4 or 5 meetings. Um,
it doesn't take up too much
time. It's an interesting
process. I've done it several
times and happy to, to do it
again if nobody else wants to
volunteer, but it is eye opening
and, you know, kind of see the
the transaction happen
firsthand. Yeah, Madam Chair
members and it, it, what it does
is it'll give you access to a
series of telephone calls uh
where the, where the
underwriters, the financial
advisors, chip, they'll start
walking through the structure
and you start understanding how
the bond, you know,
transactions.
is gonna take shape and, and,
and things like that. So I
again, I agree with Marcos, it's
not a big time commitment, it's
a couple of meetings over the
course of the next month on the
day of sale, um, you'll get on
the day before and on the day of
sale, you'll get a briefing on
the interest rate environment
and the likely bond structure as
a result, and then one after the
bond sale is complete to hammer
out the last negotiations on
bond uh bond sales. So it's a
Couple of torts on the board day
itself on the day of sale, it's,
you know, 3 meetings probably,
um, that are 15 to 20 minutes
long, but.
If you're interested in the bond
market, it's kind of an
interesting conversation.
And a lot of fun because it's
it's gonna be very boring, but
Not not to undermine Marcus
wants to continue.
I think you'd be fascinating to
do and I, I'd love to do it.
Great, thank you. Thank you for
volunteering.
Any questions on the resolution?
If not, do I hear a motion? You
do, Madam Chair.
Motion to approve the
resolution. Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair.
Motion is seconded, any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye. I. I.
Although opposed same sign?
Motion carries. Thank you.
Next we move to budget.
Right, here we go. Good morning,
Madam Chair, members of the
board, uh, we're happy to
present to you as we do every
quarter.
are uh budget performance
report, we tell you how we ended
the quarter in this case, and we
ended the year. Um, real
quickly, I'll be brief, um,
We had more revenues than
budgeted, significantly more
revenues than budgeted, um,
overall, uh, almost a little bit
more than 60% more revenues than
was budgeted.
Uh, and our expenditures came in
just under what was budgeted uh
overall, 5% less than what was
budgeted overall and that's the,
the big variants here were a
higher appropriations than we
anticipated and also lower um uh
simultaneous closings and uh and
we had budget those account for
uh the biggest changes. 00, as
well as uh we just had more cash
because we had more cash, uh,
and interest rate environment
was so
As a result, our interest
earnings, uh, investment
earnings, uh, were significantly
higher than uh we budgeted.
That's overall, uh, if you look
at the operation, operating
budget, uh, that's the, the, the
more discretionary part of our,
of our budget. It's about a $20
million budget. Um, the same
there, revenues were
significantly higher and
expenditures in this case were
Significantly lowers 13% lower
than uh we budgeted.
Um, beyond that, nothing really,
uh, salient to to bring to your
attention.
Uh, other than the fact that we,
uh, we came in under budget.
Uh, both revenues and
expenditure.
Sa back for any questions you
may have.
Questions from board members.
Motion to approve the budget.
Mr.
The motion has been made to
approve the budget do I hear a
second? Second motion to accept
the budget. Except. Thank you.
Thank you.
Motion is made and seconded.
Is there any discussion or
questions?
If not, all those in favor of
accepting say I I I.
Although the post same sign.
Motion carries. Just stay here.
Thank you, you, you make it easy
when the numbers look that way.
And you really need kudos to for
everything you guys do, it just,
it, it does make it very,
very easy shapeful. Thank you
very much.
Next on the agenda is the
request to issue RFPs for water
transport technical assistance
contractors. Madam Chair, in uh
Fernando's um absence, I will
just mention that typically we
are not required to come to the
board to ask for approval to
issue an RFP. The times in which
we um are
Where we take them is in very
limited circumstances. In this
instance, because the um item
was not yet budgeted, not
included in our 2025 budget
we're required to bring it to
the finance and disclosure
Committee to ask for approval,
which
Which we were unable to get a
quorum, so now it's coming to
the full board. So this is an
unusual circumstance. Our goal
here is to, oh, don't leave
Donnie. They're not, no, I, I
think that Mike's having
problems. Uh, uh, so we will,
um, go out for RFP once we have
a sense of the contractors bring
back a budget amendment
explicitly for this item and um
before we're able to obviously
enter into the contracts
themselves, but this is the
conversation we've been having
the last couple of months.
Donnie will be leading.
an endeavor to um put together
those two.
Um, kinds of technical
assistance, one to facilitate
regionalization.
Um, using the model that the
lower Rio Grande Public
Waterworks.
authority used and the other is
to help the small systems early
on as we saw or uh preliminary
engineering reports and rather
than have them go through a
major procurement effort, they
can do other things, use that 4
time more wisely and have the
water trust board, uh, technical
assistance money hire engineers,
um, Donnie, you want to mention
anything more about who you've
been talking with? Good morning,
Madam Chair, board members, I, I
tell you, where were you,
Marquito, when I was the cabinet
secretary because you do such a
good job of.
Prompting the committee that I'm
not sure I have too much more to
add, but I think the bottom line
is, obviously we're here this
morning to request approval to
move forward with the RFP
process in support of the uh.
Water Trust board, technical
assistance program or we're
referring to as the tap program.
The bottom line is we all
recognize that throughout the
state and the smaller water
service providers, the
challenges capacity.
You know, so there's, here's an
opportunity for us to do a house
bill 211 to directly contract
with contractors on behalf of
these water service providers to
actually accomplish the service.
So rather than putting the
burden on the small water
service providers to all
procurement code be in
compliance with the state audit
Act and Senate Bill 1, the
regionalization statute, we are
going to provide that technical
assistance by directly
overseeing contractors. So this
is gonna
allow us this approval today
will allow us to move forward
with the RFP. I do want to
mention that, you know,
obviously, we aren't operating
in a vacuum and we are
partnering with all the key
stakeholders, the Environment
Department, RAC, uh, Thornberg
Foundation, basically anybody,
and there's several out there
that have been uh supporting
regionalization of the service,
water service providers, as well
as the plenty documents so that
they can actually gravitate into
construction and more
importantly, provide the
benefits.
To New Mexico citizens
throughout the state. So with
that, I will stand for any
questions.
Madam Chair, we just mentioned a
stunning statistic that the um
legislative Finance Committee
staff provided to the LSC
earlier this month, which is
that there are about, I don't
know, between 1000 and 1100
public water systems, 3% of them
serve 75% of the state's
population. So we're talking
about more than 1000 small water
systems that are serving 25% of
New Mexico's population. Those
are the kinds of folks we're
trying to help if we can bring
some real value.
The water project fund, um, and
allow access to this
unprecedented levels of state
and federal dollars earlier for
most of those systems. So we
think it's an important first
step. Uh, this wasn't our idea.
This was um outgoing state
engineer Hammond's idea, and
then he ran out of town, um, but
left us really with, I think, a
very good um way to use these
dollars effectively.
Um,
And so that's, I think all I
wanted to add.
Any questions or comments from
board members. You, uh, if there
are no questions, I'll I'll move
approval. This is member Burke.
Thank you, member Burke. So we
have a motion to approve on the
floor. Is there a second?
Second, yeah.
Ocean in a second. Any
discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
I
I.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you Madam
Chair, and board members, thank
you for your time. Next is a
report from the audit committee
member Burke.
OK.
Uh, the audit committee, uh, uh,
well, Chair Keith, members of
the board, the audit committee
met on Wednesday, July 17th, we
did have a quorum. We heard a
information technology update
and good news about the uh
health of our cybersecurity and
and network, uh, with, uh, you
know,
Better, much better than
standard um risk ratings, uh,
through penetration tests and so
forth of our system. We also uh
heard a report on our financial
statements and financial
performance indicators for the
month of June, uh, these are the
statements that are presented to
our external auditors, um, Moss
Adams, and the committee
reviewed the financials and
recommended um uh to the board
uh for acceptance.
Uh
As presented, um, Moss Adams
gave us a a brief update and
we're on uh Target or our exit
conference uh at the September
board meeting and uh you know,
with that progress is, is being
made.
or external. We also heard um
audit results from uh Finance
New Mexico, a blended component
of our uh financial statements
for fiscal year 2024.
And it was completed
successfully with the findings
and we also heard an update on
the new inmates project,
um,
And uh I think our one lead time
item we were concerned about,
uh, coming and being delivered
with structural steel, and that
has taken place and and the
project is moving along well
with an expected completion data
and of January.
That's my report. That's any
questions.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
If not before we have us, we
have some.
7
the presentation. I know the
financial statements. And we do
have the financial statements
for, for your, for the um
Acceptance of you. Thanks so
much. I'm looking, I've already
moved to item 11.
Kington Understand important,
important approval and
acceptance of financial
statements.
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, we are very happy to
present to you our
Uh fiscal year 2024.
Financial statements. Um,
Uh, we usually close, well, our
target for closing every month
is 30 days. It took us 32 days
to close the year.
Uh, that's a benchmark that
we're also very proud of. Of
course, we, we are not flawless
by any means. I mean, things
could still be
Found by the auditors, but of
course we are very fastidious
group.
Uh, sometimes we test the uh the
patients of our colleagues who
at the end cooperate and uh and
and they support us. And as a
result, uh, we are very
confident that the numbers we
present to you here will not
change by even $1 after the
auditors submitted to their to
their scrutiny. I, I do want to
point a couple of very
significant new milestones that
we have reached with this year.
Uh, we are now a $3.3 billion
total asset operation.
And a $2.2 billion net
receivables operation with a net
position of more than $1 billion
when I started out in our tenure
here, we, we were not even close
to half of that, and so there's
been a great big increase in, in
uh in in our operations and the
impact of the, the organization.
And uh our job, as we see it is,
is to, to guide us through all
these changes, all these grows,
etc. without making any, uh, any
mistakes and, and we're
confident we're there, as I
mentioned to you, it's still
possible that that happens, but
of course, uh we've, we're just
trying the best we can so it.
Uh, what finally goes to the uh
uh to the state auditor's office
is a absolutely pristine.
Of of audit financial
statements, etc. uh really uh
have nothing more to add there
our net position increased even
from last year, even from last
year increased almost $250,000.
And so there's been just big,
big, big changes and the
organization working together.
Uh, has, um, I believe we'll be
able to present to you the
results and those that that
everything happened without.
Significant errors.
They stand back from your
questions and we have, and by
the way, I, I do want to point
out that again that this is,
this is a a big team effort, we
could not be able to achieve
this without that team effort,
uh, with my colleague, uh,
Norman Boylsteig, uh, our
controller or deput controller,
Lucas Elliott, and all the other
staff that that contributed to
these financial statements being
done.
A fast, uh, just so, and
hopefully uh perfect again.
Stand back for any questions you
may have.
Thank you.
Thank you. Questions from the
board, Madam, actually a lot of
questions to comment from from
where we started when I came on
the board to where we're at
today, it's, it's just.
Crazy different and kudos to you
and your staff Oscar. It's, it's
all because of you guys and I
mean 32 days to get the audit
done. It's pretty, that's pretty
good, not, not too bad.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Any other
comments? Montl mentioned that
um we are expecting at the next
board meeting in September to
have an executive session to go
through the audit exit
conference. So rather than have
that held at the audit
committee, we'll bring that to
the full board, so we're
expecting to and it's the last
year of our auditors, so it
might be, I don't know, about a
half an hour of a of audit um
exit conference, so I just
wanted to make you aware of
that.
Thank you.
Any other comments or questions?
Sure Keith, I'll just, you know,
echo, um,
Swazzo's comments on on
financial statement preparation,
but also, you know, note that
the increase in um assets and
loan activity is, is a product
of um how the state is entrusted
in MFA with funds to distribute
in many different ways, so I'll
just make that comment.
Thank you for that.
Is there no other comments or
questions do I hear a motion?
You do
Except the financial statements.
Is there a second?
seconded.
Um, any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
I
I.
All those opposed same sign?
Motion carries.
Thank you.
Now we move to item 11 with our
long list of 7 items with a mini
policies and rules and adoption
here we'll start with the
approval of the amended and
restated public.
Project revolving fund debt
management policy.
Madam Chair,
before Chip takes over, I just
mentioned that um our staff did
a really good job of putting
together cover memos that really
capture the true changes. There
is also a marked version and a
clean version in your board book
as well. That's why the thing is
530 pages. Um, so I just wanted
to mention we'll focus um our
efforts on the cover memos, um,
and moved to the um
The actual changes should you
request that, but I, it gets a
little confusing if we bump
around too much, so.
But right here.
Just you just give us page
numbers as we go through on page
349 currently.
Yeah, and Marquina what uh I I
I'm sure the board members
Marqui was thinking we might do
is, um,
Uh, I'll be looking at the cover
memo, but I thought it might be
useful to be going through the
marked version just to show the
changes while I describe what
the changes are.
What do you think?
I'm, I'm, you know.
Put in your hands, but I was
just trying to think what, what
would be easiest for folks to
follow along what we've
actually uh changed. Madam
Chair, there's so much red on
their chip. I would recommend we
start here cause it's going to
be a lot of scrolling of red.
OK, all right. Um,
Well then, uh, and chair and
board members. Let's walk
through the uh
The loan or the debt management
policies, and I will preface the
discussion for both the debt
management and the loan
management policies to say that
one of the intentions here was
to just consolidate actually 22
parameter goals. One,
consolidate the documents to
make them a little less.
Cumbersome, and secondly, um,
to, uh, make, make the documents
reflect the actual practices uh
at the NMFA.
So that was kind of the
overarching approach that I
think we took to, to both of
these policies. Let's, uh, in
both cases they had become
These documents that kind of get
uh added to like, um, a house
that keeps adding new uh
extensions without sort of a uh
the broad kind of overall
concept, so we're sort of
stripping down to the foundation
here and trying to build a
document in both cases that will
be, you know, more easily
understood by both the staff and
the external um partners, but
also easy.
Here to, to amend as, as we move
forward.
Um, one of the things that
We had seen is that both of
these policies included lots of
sort of sub policies, and so
we've we've consolidated those
into these documents, so we do
not now have, uh, for example,
with the debt management
policies we don't have separate
bond and refunding bond
refunding and refinancing
policies and tax exempt
policies, those are now within
the broader context of the debt
management policies. So that
preamble, um uh the
Section A of the uh policies has
been updated so that the junior
lean now uh the concept of
Junior Lean is included.
And then another big change to
the debt management policies is
we've really stripped out a
bunch of information related to
variable rate debt and swaps and
derivatives, which we just, I, I
don't really see a need for
that. There was a time when we
thought that we would be getting
involved uh in doing swaps. This
was in the sort of the mid 2000s
I can I can recall when we were
looking at um a variety
Those structures and we, we did
not entertain them, but we
considered them, we actually
amended a lot of our policies to
include them now or, you know.
20 years later, saying, yeah,
let's let's just strip that out
cause what they do is, if you,
if you entertain the concept of
variable rate, you introduce a
whole bunch of other
Features related to the
different parties related to
variable rate debt, so I, I
don't see a role for variable
rate debt in the PBR program at
this point, so let's just take
that all out. So that, that, you
see that sort of reflected
throughout the, the uh uh
updated policies. So that's a
section A, section B.
Um,
We, there, there was sort of
this notion of we're gonna put
unusual or special structural
type credits into the
subordinate lien, um, at this
point.
Really, the senior in the
subordinate lean are both rated
AA
one by Moody's and AAA by S&P,
there is no functional
difference between the two
originally, when we did set up
the sport at Lane, that was the
intention. Now, with the junior
lien, that will be the place
that we put uh more, you know,
exotic credits in the senior and
subordinate lane effectively
what we do now is just basically
manage coverage between the two,
the two different lanes, so
there's no
No reason to have that, um.
Section C, uh,
Let's see, one thing that we,
uh, we, we're really making $100
million the hard cap for where
we do simultaneous loans, uh,
previously it was sort of kind
of squishy between 10 and 15
million, um,
I recommend that we go at 10
million. We don't have that many
loans that exceed that level,
and it also reduces our rate
risk to the extent that we make
a loan and then have to issue
bonds if rates have gone up, we
bear that risk. If we make every
loan of greater than $10,000 is
simultaneous loan, we take that
risk off the table. So that is,
that's about uh section D,
again, we eliminate the variable
rate references.
And we update the debt
management committee membership
as Marqui has said, we, we've
really, um, with uh Oscar's
leadership, uh, kind of
reactivated the debt management
committee to be more
Um, engaged in the whole debt
management process and so we're
sort of formalizing that in uh
in these policies in section E,
we um
There there is this element of,
you know, being in touch with
credit enhancement providers,
and again, these are, these,
these policies reflect a time 20
years ago when 70% of the market
of municipal bonds were insured
by companies like MBIA, AA,
Bidjk.
The housing crisis, basically,
you know, scorched earth, but in
uh the enhancement world, so,
um, at this point our ratings
are higher than any credit
enhancement entities, so there's
no need for us to be, um, you
know, constantly in contact with
those folks, and then just uh
specifying that we don't have to
meet the rating agencies.
Personally, more than once, once
a year, um, section G, it's a
new section.
About the method of sale, um,
and does describe the the
process for the selection of our
underwriting pool and also
doesn't preclude us from issuing
competitive bonds, um, even
though we've got an underwriting
pool that will do negotiated
deals for us, but uh just to, to
emphasize the fact that just
because we have an underwriting
pool that does negotiated deals
for us, it doesn't mean we can't
go to the market on a
competitive basis. Um, so
that's, uh.
We haven't done a competitive
deal in a while, but there's no
reason that we can't at some
point in the future.
Um,
Section 8, the bond refunding
and refinancing, uh,
Section, which, as I said, was
previously a standalone policy,
um,
And now it's just got, it goes
into more detail about how we'd
allocate savings with uh
underlying borrowers or when we
wouldn't allocate savings, um,
It kind of depends on whether
they're reimbursement or
simultaneous borrower.
Uh, and again, it
Eliminates uh references to
variable rate debt.
Section I, it's a new section
that presents the factors in
determining whether we uh call
bonds, uh, on the bond
redemption day and
In recent history, we've been
very aggressive about calling
dead as soon as it's, uh, as
soon as it becomes redeemable,
so our traditionally we issue
our debt with a 10 year call
options, so the bonds that
matured or the bonds that were
issued in 2012, we called those
bonds in 2022, the bonds that
were sold in 2013 and we called
in 2023.
This year, um, collectively we
sort of worked on the this
process and looked at, you know,
I had PFM or financial advisor
do some analysis, talked a lot
with Brad about this, that um
Brad Fl that given the earnings
that uh Mark Lovato was getting
uh on our short term
investments, it actually made
more sense to not call those
bonds on their first call date.
We've still got that option. The
bonds, the 2014 bonds are
callable. We just haven't called
them yet because we're earning
more money uh through
investments, then we would be
saving by calling those bonds.
So this new section I is just
intended to kind of memorialize
that those concepts of, you
know, when do we call bonds,
when do we leave the bonds
outstanding? What are our goals
with respect to coverage, etc.
So that's what that is.
Uh, section J, um
There's just a
You know, the I think the, the
Uh, policy had us issuing.
Bonds quarterly. Again, this was
a function of a time when we
would start the fiscal year with
less money than we do now. We
do, we, we start the fiscal year
now with 5060 $70 million
because the GGRT is so healthy
and we've got so many equity
loans, so the amount of the
money coming out of the PPRF,
uh, at the end of the fiscal
year.
Allows us to sort of extend the
period that we need to go to the
market to uh reimburse
ourselves. So anyway, it just,
it, it extends that expectation
of how often we issue debt.
And
Again, we eliminate a bunch of
references to the rate blocks,
derivatives, variable rate
instruments. So those are all
help the out the door. Um,
section K is a specific to
reserve, uh, special reserve
accounts. This is a fairly
significant change. We
Um, you'll recall that we, well,
in, in 2007, we set up something
called the, the contingent
liquidity account. That was the
first time we'd sort of set
money aside. It was not a
pledged debt service reserve. It
was just sort of a um
Uh,
A reserve that was available to
us to meet short term.
Uh, financing needs, what have
you. We ultimately converted
that into a reserve fund called
the Common Debt Service Reserve
Fund, um, uh, I was probably 10
years ago and
Uh, at the time,
There was, was established.
There was a very sort of rigid.
Um, calculation for how much
money would go into the the
contingent or the common debts
are observed fund and it was
based on the underlying pledge
of our borrowers. So for
example, net system revenue fund
borrowers, we would set aside
35% of their debt service in the
CDSRF, uh, general obligation
borrowers, which has become in
recent years, our biggest
borrowers.
20%, even though that's the
strongest credit that we have in
the program, we're still putting
aside 20%. Consequently, those
and and then, OK, so that was
the CDSRF and then the scarf
which was dedicated to the
subordinate lien.
It's, it's sizing was purely a
function of, you know, if X is
the amount in the CDSRF, that's
the amount that goes into the
scarf, so they were equal.
And um, so at this point, both
of those funds have about $39.5
million in them.
We're not, you know, once that
money goes into those two funds,
we can't touch it. Uh, it, the
only way we could ever touch
those funds is if we had a a
loan, an underlying loan failed
to make a payment, we can use it
for that and then that borrower
would have to replenish the
fund, or we can use it to close
out a lien if we ever wanted to
say shut down the senior lien we
could use that $40 million to
call bonds. Other than that,
those are the only ways we can
use that money and the earning
the interest earnings in those
funds stay within the funds. So,
right now they're they will be
$40 million by the end of this
calendar year, I would guess
that they'll be $500 in the, you
know, by the end of this, uh,
decade.
We, we met with the rating
agencies as I mentioned
yesterday, and informed them
that this was our approach that
we were going to put a
moratorium on
Additional funding to those two
reserve funds, um, pending the
results of the uh the risk
rating process that uh Marquita
mentioned earlier, so we're for
right now we're just not gonna
keep pouring money into both of
these funds because we just
don't get that big of a bang for
it. It's a, um, you know, they,
they had done what we had
intended them to do their
significant reserve funds set
aside for the two different
lanes. I don't think we.
need to keep
You know, depositing money,
there's a lot better uses for
that money in the form of, of
making loans to New Mexico
communities rather than just
putting it into a reserve that's
not giving us much marginal
benefit. So that's that that uh
a long winded way of describing
what these special reserve
Account section is about.
Um, section L.
We uh
I've eliminated the the
reference to semiannual
reporting of the board of major
borrowers and borrower
diversity. Uh, we haven't been
doing that.
Formally, however, the document
that you just saw that um uh
Jerry Kyle presented the
preliminary official statement
for the 2024 B bonds includes
all that information. So you're
gonna, the board will be getting
that information just by way of
uh our
Typical bond issuance process.
There's, there, there's no
reason to sort of separately set
it aside. It's just something
that, um, you know, we're likely
to forget, so we're just gonna
keep it as a uh as a uh debt
service there as part of the the
bond issuance process. And then
lastly, this uh section M was a
separate policy. We've just
incorporated it now into the
debt management policy, um, that
describes all the things we have
to do to ensure that the the
bonds remain.
Tax exempt.
So with that, I'd be happy to uh
answer any questions. I know
it's a lot to digest, but uh
that's uh that's, that's where
we're at.
Thank you for the walkthrough
this morning. Much appreciated.
Any questions from board
members?
Madam Sher, I just wanted to
find out that last part in
section M. So what is the
requirement or how are we going
to make sure that the bones that
we are tax exempt really are tax
exempt.
Um, well, we have very learned.
Council, uh, to, to help us
manage that and, and, uh, Madam
Sheridan, um.
Remember, I think that the every
time we issue debt, um,
There's careful analysis by our,
our bond council, Gilmore and
Bell, uh, Brad Patterson to make
sure that we're meeting all of
the requirements of uh of tax
exemption. So we, we, uh, rely
at this point, I think we're
pretty familiar with what what
is tax exempt, what is not tax
exempt, but if there's ever if
we ever get into that gray area,
we um absolutely uh rely on the,
the expertise.
both Dan and our outside
counsel.
Thank you very much. And I think
what confused me is I believe we
have 2 section L's.
Uh one should be section N.
Sorry about that. That was my
misreading, so.
Yeah, no, man, I'm sure that,
uh, remember you are not
misreading it, that, that is um
the uh
Somewhat amateurish effort at uh
uh the nuances of, of word and
um
Having got the, the changes, you
know, from one document to the
next. So you're correct that the
uh there needs to be a, a
section and not to sectionals.
Any other questions or comments
from the board?
And I'm sure it won't comment.
Marquita and
And chip, this is great to see
one consolidated policy that
captures everything and I'm
excited to see that you guys are
removing the variable rate debt
and swaps having to deal with
that in the past and knowing how
complicated that can be. It's
good to see that this policy
moving forward doesn't include
those.
Great work.
Thanks.
Any other questions?
If not, do I hear a motion?
So move for approval, madam. OK.
Motions made and seconded.
To approve the PPRF.
Revolving fund debt management
policy.
Any discussion.
All those in favor say aye, I
I.
All those oppose same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
So on the.
I'm sorry,
approval of the PPRF.
Loan management policy.
It's the man cheered, I will,
uh.
So
Um, no, I mean, I will now do
the same thing for the loan
management policies, um,
And again, the big, I think the
biggest overall change here is
that you'll see in the the
listing there, the bullets
there, all of those were
separate policies that were sort
of incorporated into this
broader notion of the loan
management policy is now we've
stripped out.
as policies. It's just in the
loan management overall policy.
So a lot of these you'll see,
for example, sections A, B, C,
it's just we've deleted it a lot
of the kind of um introductory
verbiage that each of those
policies had. There's just no
reason to, you know, uh encumber
the overall document with that,
so that that's uh the first
section.
And then, um,
Section one,
Same deal we've we had an
applications procedures policy
that's now been incorporated,
and so we've removed the
introduction, the overview, and
the general cons considerations
there.
The uh financial statement
requirements, um,
The there were a bunch of
financial performance factors
that
Applied to some borrowers but
not to others, so it was sort of
confusing that we have this
discussion of this is what these
are the factors that we're gonna
be evaluating when it didn't
really
include all of the types of
loans and, and pledges that we
evaluate. So that's been
stripped out and now what we've
done is put into an appendix.
The primary factors that will be
evaluated for a general
obligation loan, a net system
revenue loan at gross receipts
tax loan and so they've been put
into an appendix, so it's a
quick sort of reference point
for any
Both, both for staff and for our
borrowers.
Um, financial statement
requirements again are deleted
and moved to the appendix,
ignore that updates to
membership of the debt
management committee that was in
loan management. I don't know
why it shows up here. I'm gonna
blame the, the author, oh,
The audited financial reports.
Uh,
Again, we've
Uh, I think there was a
The section was just reworded
and simplified to reflect
current practices. Uh, it was a
fairly extensive section that
we've kind of trimmed down.
The interest rate policies
section 2.
Again, we've we've uh been in
this has been incorporated
overview, general considerations
have been removed.
The setting of interest rates,
um, this is
Sort of linked to the loan
management policies where we,
we, we identified $1000 as the
threshold for the uh
simultaneous loans, uh, as
opposed to the sort of, you
know, flexibility between 10 and
15 million that has been
eliminated.
Uh, the setting PPRF interest
rates.
We put into policy the rate
margin of 75 basis points, um,
And
You know,
allow, I guess, that and the
intention of that is just to
make sure that borrowers can
meet coverage even if interest
rate uh interest rates move up
between the time that the loan
is approved and uh when it's
finalized.
Um,
So the section 3 of the setting
interest rates.
What this does is it it gives
the CEO uh the ability to
increase a loan amount. It used
to be 10%, uh, and we've
increased it to 20%, um, and
this is just in the event that
interest rates decline so that a
a loan that was gonna be is
basically constrained by the
amount of revenue available to
pay that loan, if rates decline
uh sufficient to the point where
they can, instead of
Uh, being able to afford a $1
million loan now they can afford
a $1.2 million loan, it allows
the CEO to make that call
without uh coming back to the
board, that the the requirements
of the coverage, uh, and all
other
Issues of they require a reserve
or whatever, those all remain in
place. It's just about uh the
ability to increase the loan if,
if the interest rate environment
is favorable.
Um,
Section 6, so uh the interest
rates. This is a new section,
um, basically what we're doing
here is saying that uh the loan
of $500,000 or more, um, can be
reimbursed as long as it closes,
no less than 15 days before we
uh close uh a reimbursement bond
issue, and that just sort of
identifies there's always this
sort of uncertainty about who,
which, which loans are we going
to include in a reimburse.
issue, this defines it
specifically that if you've got
a loan that
Uh, say we've got a bond issue
closing on October 15th, and
you've got, we've got a loan
that is gonna close by October
1st, we can include that and it
just helps to sort of
Define exactly the parameters of
who will be a reimbursement
issue.
Or excuse me, included in a
reimbursement issue.
Um, section on, uh,
Yeah, that I talked about
simultaneous issue we just set
the $100 million is the is the
hard cap in any loan of greater
than that that wants to be done
on a reimbursement basis, needs
to get board approval.
Uh, termination of disadvantage
interest rates.
Um, this is, we're just trying
to uh link this more closely to
the PPRF rules. What this allows
uh is an increase from
disadvantage funding from 13% of
GGRT to 15%. What that means,
um,
In today's terms is that uh
we're looking at a disadvantaged
rate cap of around 5.7 million
based on a $38 million GGRT
collections, which is what we
got in, in fiscal 24, um, it
also, we're really trying to
sort of um
Uh,
Formalize
Uh, the, the whole disadvantage
funding process, so this
requires quarterly reporting.
By, um,
The uh uh by Brad, which
basically keeps keeps closest
track on this and um requires
the board to approve the the
disadvantaged funding budget uh
each year. Um, and it also
specifies the disadvantaged
funding isn't available for
refundings or restructurings.
Um,
structuring policy section 3 was
a was formerly its own thing.
Now it's uh included in this
document.
Uh, loan payment and timing, um,
Uh, just allows more
flexibility, allowing a loan
payments on less than the annual
uh less than a monthly basis as
long as the waiver of the
monthly requirement is approved
by the board, um.
Most of our borrowers obviously
do pay on a monthly basis, but
there are times when variety of
reasons they prefer to move to a
semiannual, uh, the debt
serviceser requirements.
Um, we're eliminating the need
for debt service reserves for
loan of 500,000 or less, and
we're reducing the rating
requirement for a springing
reserve, which we talked about
earlier this meeting from low A
ratings to high 3 B ratings, um,
And
Yeah,
I would essentially this is just
an attempt to make, make the
program a little bit more
flexible for smaller loans, um.
It's, yeah, it, you know, we,
the, the smaller loans, we
aren't going to be putting into
a reimbursement issue, so I
think we can afford to be a
little bit more flexible, so
that's the intention here is
just to, to make, maybe uh make
the smaller loans a little, you
know, some of the elements of a
little less burdensome.
Uh, revenue intercepts just uh
rewrote that to make it clear.
And then prepayment uh
revisions.
Again, um,
It's written for more clarity
and
Uh, we're gonna have more
flexible call provisions if if a
borrower up to 500,000 wants a
one year call or a 3 year call
or whatever, uh, we can do that
because we're not gonna be a
reimbursed and reimbursing him
with a bond issue anyway, the
mismatch occurs if we were to
have
Uh, you know, a $50 loan where
we give them a 1 year call but
we issue a reimbursement bonds
with a 10-year call that creates
a mismatch. This
Since we're not going to be
reimbursing these smaller loans,
I think we can be much more
flexible in terms of uh their
call provisions, um, and
eliminate this whole notion of a
super sinker that was in the
policies, we don't, we don't
issue those sorts of bonds so
there's, it's a cumbersome to
have them in there.
Um, that service coverage and
additional bonds test policy.
This has just been
Again, it's an old policy
brought in and streamlined uh a
lot of the language, um.
Uh, and
I think, uh, yeah, a big change
was to, to, there used to be a
lot of words about what the
coverage levels had to be for
various types of credits and so
we've taken all those words and
we've just put them into a table
so that you just go to the table
and you can see, you know, this
is the requirement for net
system revenue. This is a
requirement for a GTR or a GRT
so it's just, yeah, intended to
be a little bit more accessible.
Uh, the portfolio diversity
program. Again, language has
been streamlined.
Um,
This
Historically, we had a
limitation on the amount of geo
debt that the PPRF could issue
which
Kind of
You know, I, I don't know why
because uh I think I mentioned
earlier, we can't get a stronger
credit than a general
obligation, so, um, I don't
think the rating agencies would
mind if 100% of our loans were
for GO credits. That's never
gonna be the case, but if we're,
if we're, there's no reason to
hamstring ourselves, you know,
by imposing a policy that, that
doesn't do anything to improve
our credit so that limitation
has been removed. Um,
And I think and it's also been
put into tabular form so you can
uh easy access.
Um, in the section 6, the loan
refinancing policy.
Um, one thing that we have to, I
mean, we, it, it sort of sets
out the, the terms under which
we can restructure, uh.
restructure alone and
Uh, there's now a specific
statement that if it's if
there's been a refinancing.
Um, we can't subsequently take
that loan and issue bonds
against it because, you know,
likelihood we are already issue
bonds against it. So if we had a
loan, somebody for whatever
reason, it was a 20 year loan
and in year 10 they want to
extend it to, you know, a 15
year loan at that point, we
can't then now treat that as a s
a new loan. We have to recognize
that we've already issued that
against it we can't do it again.
I think it's, you know, it's a
practice that we've always
it, but I don't think it was
specifically uh reference.
The um section 7 tribal
financing policies, again, those
were a separate uh set of
policies as were the charter
school policies, and again,
we've tried to take
The the
Most significant elements of
those policies and put them into
the um
Into the appendix, so you'll see
that there.
And then the uh the appendix,
the application evaluation
criteria by revenue pledge.
This, this, as I mentioned, this
is the intention of this is just
to um
Give a sort of a quick reference
to uh both external uh parties
and
Uh, to staff, what are the, what
are the key credit features that
we will be evaluating, um, for
each credit type.
Uh, I wanna.
Be clear that this is not
intended to be the comprehensive
do all end all list, um, and I
imagine that this, this section
is going to see some fairly
significant uh amendments over
the coming months and, you know,
years as both the risk rating
process, uh, gets, uh, developed
and we start to see some of
these newer types of credits
that we haven't worked with in
the past like charter schools,
um,
Nonprofit, uh, uh, housing
developers, um, and the like,
so.
Uh, it was just basically an
attempt to, to give, give a
fairly quick, um,
Spot for people to uh to
reference what what are uh
credit considerations are uh on
an underlying pledge basis.
So with that, I will be happy
to, uh,
Try to answer any questions.
Any questions from board
members? Me. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So, um, on the appendix
and the special districts.
Kids, kids, muds, etc. I'm
concerned about on the top of
page 415, the sentence or the
bullet that says confirmation
that PPRF loan is for
reimbursement only. We talked
about that a little bit last
month that the intention was to
make sure that these were not
going to private developers, um,
and my concern on that bullet is
that to the extent there are
municipalities, small entities,
schools, higher education
institutions that are wanting to
borrow these funds.
To make an investment in for
towards economic development.
Will they be required to come up
with their own funds and then
request reimbursement because
that may be an obstacle to the
use of the PPRF for those
entities.
Madam Chair, if I could, um, uh,
what we had last time under this
section, which is the carryover
from the prior policy was that
the project had to be completed
before we would reimburse it.
What we have done here is to
reflect really what we do with
most EPRF loans there, I think
there's one borrower that we let
hold their uh loan funds.
Everyone else has to submit a
reimbursement to us.
Um, before we'll disperse the
funds, so they'll send a draw
request in that shows that
either the cost has been
incurred or that they've made
the payment before we'll uh
And funds over to them. Um, so
this will likely in those
instances in which they don't
have the cash on hand to make
the payment to the contractor
directly, they'll requisition us
to send the payment from the
loan uh loan account over to
their uh contractor directly. So
we'll make the payment directly
in that instance. Um, the reason
we weren't, we kept this in here
to a certain extent though, is
that we really have to
understand the underlying
development agreement.
Because the development
agreement will drive when low
when proceeds can be dispersed
to them. So we, we need to be a
little flexible here. It may
differ substantially between a
tid and a pig, so we, we do need
to keep this uh generally broad,
but we understand the concerns
that were raised and think that
we have captured it here. So if
I could just clarify,
reimbursement, the word
reimbursement means can mean you
have expended the money somebody
has a contractor is built to
build.
put a roof on.
And needs to be paid. It doesn't
mean that that state entity had
to have paid them already.
That's correct. Thank you.
Any further questions from board
members?
If not doing her emotion on the
amended PPRF loan management
policies. You do.
Motion's been made. Is there a
second?
Second, man. Motion made and
seconded to accept.
in the policies, all those in
favor say aye.
OK.
All those opposed, same sign?
Motion carries.
In the interest of time, um,
which I'm keeping a close eye
on, um,
I'm going to ask that as we run
through these sections that you
really just highlight those that
there are major changes in that
you want to draw our attention
to, and then we'll let the board
um ask.
Questions as they see fit on
other portions. Madam Chair, I
am happy to be brief.
With that, I will turn to the
PPRF rules. These rules were
presented to you at your last
board meeting. They were
subsequently presented to the
finance authority oversight
committee. There were no changes
from the last version that you
received on this set of rules,
uh, remember Costantinides, I
know you asked a question on the
definition of public project.
that you had emailed last night,
so I thought I'd address that
now. The definition actually was
stripped out to conform and be
an exact duplicate of the
statute. So it does, you had a
question about does it include
broadband and various things
like that. You'll see that it's
not completely inclusive, for
instance, we do fire trucks and
police cars and things like
that, assets of a long term
capital nature. So as long as it
fits that definition, we can
have it here, but the rules are
now just a mirror image of the
statute to avoid any confusion.
With that
The other changes that you see
are very conforming high-level
technical changes, acronyms,
things of that nature, changes
that conform to the way that
finance authority operates
current practices, uh,
You will see, uh,
Evaluation minor changes
pertaining to evaluations, we've
captured the appropriate appeal
process that now runs through
the CEO first. So,
Again, these rules have not
changed from the last time you
have seen them. They were
approved by the oversight
committee. I'm happy to go into
more detail with you on anything
that you would like today.
Any questions from the board?
On the amended rules.
There are no madam Jo you cool.
Motion is made for approval. Is
there a second.
Motion made and seconded any
discussion.
Not all those in favor say aye.
I.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Next we move on to the approval
of the housing development
revolving loan fund management
policies.
Madam Chair, before John begins,
I wanted to mention one thing is
the next item is the, the rules
that I've asked an information
item, frankly, they are
unchanged from the last time
substantively, but there were,
in fact, not a lot of
definitions, we can even skip
that review this month if you'd
like, we'll get the, the, uh,
rules out to you in both the
Correct clean version and word
uh.
Red lined version, um, but I
wanted to mention that this is a
really important elements of
this uh right now are things
like the interest rates, the
terms of the loan, the loan to
value, things that will uh be
looking at as we go to structure
alone. The new parts about these
policies, um, deal with how we
deal with developers, which is a
new area since we've only
largely been dealing with public
bodies up until this time. Um,
there's been a lot of
conversation about that.
I suspect after we adopt these
policies, there will continue to
be a lot of conversations about
that. Um, there was a lot of
standards, for instance, in
state or how we structure.
Um, affordable housing projects,
but since there's no
Workforce housing program, it's
difficult to mirror workforce
housing, uh, best practices
within the state. So that's one
area where I do expect there may
be a secondary shot at this as
we go to understand that more.
We've been, John's been getting
a lot of input from uh the the
housing development Committee of
the Opportunity Enterprise
Board, um, and we've been
working very closely with the
folks at the now housing
authority.
New Mexico housing, I can't
remember what they call
themselves MFA um.
finances, well, they, they, they
have a new name and I can't
housing New Mexico, I think it
is, I was in New Mexico. So now
I'll confuse it forever, um, so
anyway, we, that's one section I
just, I want John to go through
these, but I did want to mention
that that part is still an area
where I suspect there are gonna
be continued um requests for
Changes. So this may be a living
document for the next several
months.
No.
Yes, um,
Madam chair and board members as
Marquita indicated that these
are the loan structuring
policies for the housing
program.
And this allows us to um staff
to put together the structure
for potential loans that we will
be receiving or seeing in the
next few months. Uh, we do have
the, the round opening in
September 4th, and so I think
around November December time
frame, we will see our first
loans from uh the efforts on
marketing this particular
program.
As indicated that these policies
just real high level indicate,
number one,
the
The the nexus of the of the
program and what we're going to
do to in order to understand the
project that through your market
study through Housing New
Mexico and their standards that
they have put together in their
program, so we're adopting that.
Also, the maximum loan amount in
this program is $150 and so it's
um it it is intended not to fund
a whole development, but
hopefully be um a a funding gap
in terms of the capital stack
that we see with housing
development projects.
Also, uh, the use of proceeds is
outlined in these policies, so
for affordable housing
infrastructure projects, and
also workforce development,
housing, uh, projects in the uh
infrastructure and also vertical
needs.
Some of the things that are also
highlighted are deep
restrictions, and we outlined in
the policies the type of deed
restrictions that we would uh
look and, and, and place on
these particular loans and then
as Marquita indicated the
limitation of developers, um,
um, fees that are paid to the
developers, we um segregated in
two different categories. One
for um infrastructure,
construction, and those type of
projects.
Versus which has a maximum of
12%, and then a maximum for 5%
for acquisition um projects. So
there's a delineation between
the two types of uh developer
fees that we would pay.
And
On
4 page 479, we outlined the loan
terms, so the terms that we
would see in this particular
program, and the, you know,
This is where it gets sort of uh
unique, um because we haven't
really done these particular uh
loans, and what we have done is,
um, figured that for a project
that does not have um federal
funds, our maximum loan terms
would be up to 30 years with a
3-year construction period.
If there are federal um um uh
funds involved in the project
that we would match the federal
terms up to 40 years. And so
hopefully that will attract
federal dollars for the uh these
particular projects. In addition
to that, um,
We looked at the interest rates
in, in this particular program,
we mirrored the same thing that
we did with the commercial
program where it's based off the
Wall Street Journal prime rate,
uh, up and up to 60% of the Wall
Street Journal crime rate with a
floor of 3%. And so that is for
regular um projects that do not
have federal funds. If there are
federal funds involved in it,
then uh we will look at the
federal fund rate and match that
rate um in
Or, um, uh, to attract
affordable housing projects
only. So that, that's how we're
gonna uh work with federal funds
to make sure we matching the
interest rates and the, the
The conversation that we've had
on that particular project, if
we use the Wall Street Journal
prime rate, and
It will make these funds
unattractive because we will be
a lot higher than federal rates.
So this, this was the compromise
on that particular uh uh issue.
And then lastly, loans or loan
value is up to 80% and there is
a 10% equity requirement,
personal guarantees, credit
history. So everything else that
we normally see in the, in our
uh structuring policies
throughout other programs that
we have at the finance
authority.
So with that, um, men of chairs
stand for questions and
recommend recommend approval of
the policies.
Thank you. Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
On these policies to a manager.
Motion for approval. Is there a
second? 2nd, ma'am.
is made and approved any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye, I.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
So on the next item of the
rules, I know CEO has made the
um
A recommendation that we maybe
take these off the agenda today
and consider them at next
month's meeting. A question on
that just want to ensure that we
can go ahead and
for proposals on September 1st.
And not get off our schedule if
we were to move this to the
September board meeting. Madam
Chair, for purposes of marketing
this program to prospective
applicants, the most important
parts are the things that we
just went over. Is there going
to be an equity requirement?
What's the loan to value? What
are the terms? What's the
interest rate? So that the
action you just took is the most
important part. The loans, as
you, as you know, our loan rules
are very much parameter
documents and they get to how
you
Apply for a loan and how you,
you know, seek a
reconsideration, so it is a
technical document that we can
still adopt next month without
hurting the application at all.
The application period is open
for 6 weeks starting on um
September 4th. So I think we'll
be fine. We have no, I think we
have no problems whatsoever just
postponing that. We'll get them
out to you in advance and again
they are marked, there are a lot
of new additions, but they're
not substantive, they're mostly
definitional. We think they're
helpful, but I
I think it's better for us to
just take them offline and do
them next month.
Thank you for that
clarification.
So if there are no objections
from board members, we will, um,
Move that item to next month.
Thank you. So we'll proceed next
to the
Approval of amended opportunity
enterprise revolving loan fund
management policy.
Yes, um, Madam Chair and board
members, which you see before
you is a proposed revision to
the opportunity enterprise loan
management policies,
specifically for the commercial
uh development um or commercial
loan um program.
Um, the policies and the changes
that were made were um consisted
to some of the changes that were
made to, uh, to the rules and
also to clean up some of the
areas that we made from the
prioritization policies and now
carrying carry them over into
this particular umpolicies. And
so the things that we cleaned up
were in on the definitions, um,
make sure that the definite the
definitions aligning in terms of
enterprise.
Development opportunities, rule,
um, projects, urban projects,
unrelated opportunity enterprise
and unrelated a percentage of
occupancy. So we wanted to make
sure that the percentage of
occupancy matched up with the,
the rules and the law um
pertaining to a 30% mark and on
occupancy for an eligible
project. We also cleaned up the
definition of uh economic
development project and added a
definition
for the occupancy as I just
mentioned.
In addition, we cleaned up the,
the evaluation or prioritization
portion of this policy and
carried it over in um carried it
over from the prioritization
policies, so it is now uh
reading um and incongruent.
Also, the Opportunity Fund
concentration limits, we removed
that, uh, in the past, there was
a, a defined uh limit um based
on the Nasix code, uh, as of
right now with these uh changes
that limits eliminates the
concentration limits.
And then finally on those
structure and policies we
removed the minimum of 15 years.
This is an important um uh
change because it allows us to
do as, as the previous project
that you heard, um, under the um
Santa Fe Midtown project, we
could do a, a
A 23 year loan with a 10-year
amortization and now that's an
eligible um uh uh financing
structure.
Also we cal uh cleaned up the
calculation for debt service
coverage requirement, um, and
then also the loan value
percentage. So these policies
were all clean up um policies
that allow for, um, hopefully,
um, more, um.
more
Structuring um um guidelines for
the um the lending and credits
and also allow us to work with
some of the, the potential
projects that we could not move
forward now that these policies
will allow us to move forward.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
These policies
Hearing no, do I hear a motion?
There's a motion to approve. Is
there a second? There is man.
Motion has been made and
seconded any discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Oh, all those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
And the final item on our agenda
today is the approval of the
Opportunity enterprise revolving
loan fund rules.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
thought of doing this one
blindfolded. This is the 5th
time I've presented these rules.
They started with you. They went
to the oversight committee, they
went to the housing committee,
and went to the housing board or
the opportunity house uh
Enterprise Board.
There are no significant changes
again from the last time that
you received uh reviewed these
last month. I would note exactly
as John said primarily the
biggest changes in Section 5
which removes the 15-year
minimum duration of the loans,
that is the biggest change
you'll see everything else is
conforming and technical, yeah,
happy to stand for any
questions.
Thank you. You're welcome. Any
questions?
Moro.
I have a motion to approve. Is
there a second?
2nd manager. Motion is seconded.
Uh, any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda, um, the next
board meeting is September 26,
2024 at 9:00 a.m. in the state
capital, room 322 and available
online through Zoom.
Uh,
