And we don't need to recording
in progress.
Um, meeting of the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
Board meeting to order
And we have a roll call.
Good morning, madam Chair and
board members. Thank you for
being with us today, Madam Chair
Keith present.
Member Suazo.
Recording and
Remember Trujillo.
Members to here that it may not
hold on one second. I'm sorry,
madam Chair. We're probably
gonna have to start that over
again. Good morning, everybody.
I will conduct roll call now,
Madam Cherokee.
President.
Member Suazo.
Remember Trujillo.
Present members spars.
Member Burke.
Right?
Member Nichols.
Collins.
Present.
You did see him on.
Um, member cost Antons.
Member Weller.
Present.
Member kill.
Member Lovato.
You go back to Collins? Yes.
And a member of Collins.
Um, here. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you now. Thank
you.
Thank you and Madam chair. We do
have a
First on the agenda this morning
is the approval of the board
minutes from the May 30th
meeting.
I hope everybody's had a chance
to review
Those minutes. If so, do I hear
a motion to approve some of
Madam chair
So, um
We're gonna go ahead and approve
the minutes. Uh which was the
motion? Do I hear a second?
Motion is made and seconded to
approve the minutes. Any
discussion.
All those in favor say I
All those opposed.
Motion carries.
So if you notice I skipped the
approval of the agenda went
straight to the minutes, So
we're gonna go back to the
approval of the agenda for
today.
Do I hear emotion to approve the
agenda for this meeting? Don't
move, Madam chair. Thank you. Is
there a second?
One second
Motion is seconded by member
Collins. Is there any all those
in favor say Aye.
I
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
We have governance items this
morning. Um
A report from the nominating
committee. Thank you, Madam
chair. So at the May 30th board
meeting, uh, chair Keith
appointed myself member Trujillo
and member Collins to serve on
the nominating committee for the
officer, positions of vice chair
and secretary for NM FA. The
committee met and the
recommendations are as follows
for vice chair member Suazo is
recommended for Re-election and
for secretary member Forte has
recommended for re election with
the understanding that the
nomination includes his
designee Alison Nichols. That's
Report, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
The nominating committee has
nominated two individuals.
Um, I will now take a motion to
open the floor for any
additional nominations. In
addition to the slate, presented
by
Are there any other nominees
from the board who would like to
advance their name or anyone
else's or the positions of
Hearing. None. Do I hear emotion
to elect the slate as presented
by the nominating moved
Motion has been made. Is there a
2nd 2nd madam chair?
Motion made and seconded any
discussion.
If none all those in favor of
the slate of nominees say, III I
all those opposed same sign.
Andrea,
OK.
Madam chair. I would just note
that joined us. Um, and so he
was present for that vote.
Thank you.
Motion. Congratulations to our
Uh, our new officers who are
also are former vice chair and
secretary and thank you for
their service and their
continuing service to the board
So next on the agenda report
from CEO. Akita. Russell. Thank
you, Madam chair. Thank you.
More board members. I appreciate
you all being here today. Um, a
couple of staff updates. I wanna
note as we did in, um, at our
May Special board meeting that
June marks the 30th anniversary
of, uh So Dora cac employment at
NM FA.
She currently serves as our
chief administrative officer,
but came on as employee number
two to support Tom Pollard, then
the executive director, so she
has moved up through the ranks
for many, many years. She was
our sole human resources
representative, um, starting in
a number of different positions,
Um, and she's had a hand in
virtually every, uh, employee
that you see here. Um, so she's
currently working, um, very hard
to get a building in place. Uh,
for us, And so she represents,
as I
To say both our past and our
future.
Um so we really appreciate
everything she does to us and I,
you know, personally, having now
worked with her for 24 years,
couldn't ask for a better
colleague.
Um So thank you, Dora. Um
30. June also represents the
goodbye to one of our credit
analysts. Um Austin Anaya. I
know. He said goodbye at both of
our, uh, the public lending
committee and our
Uh, Economic development
Committee. He was a part of our
original, um, credit team. Um,
about two years ago, and he's
moving on to, uh, get his
advanced degree at the Barcelona
School of Economics, and we
really wish him well and I hope
he comes back and decides to
work for us again. Um, but we'll
see.
Uh, strategic plan Update we met
in? Um, uh, may as you know, to
have our, uh uh, visioning
session. Uh, we have continued
to work at the senior staff
level with LEH Consulting who
facilitated that, um, work and
we expect to have to both the
Executive committee and the
board in July, a final set of
themes or goals. Strategic goals
for you to ratify and approve
and then we'll come back to you,
Um, in a month or two after
that, with
Plan that includes the
objectives as well. So we are on
track to have that done by the
end of the summer, and we're
excited. Um it's been really
invigorating work.
Um, a couple of program updates.
um are opportunity Enterprise
and Housing Development Review
Board has kept us very busy at
the Finance Authority. Um, House
Bill 195, which passed this last
session had not only some
changes to what we're now
calling the commercial
development.
Uh, program the Opportunity
Enterprise revolving fund. It
also added the housing
development. Uh
Project fund, and so we've been
both making changes to the
commercial development fund and
putting in place the framework
for us to accept applications
under the housing fund. Uh, we
had a public hearing last week
that Dan chaired for us, or, um,
as served as hearing officer on
the 20th and 21st. We got a
couple of comments from that
We've been posting for a very
abbreviated public comment
period. Uh, comments on policies
that we presented to the, um OE
board back.
A couple of weeks ago, so the
goal here is to have them meet
on July 11th and finalize the
rules and finalize some policies
so that we can stay on track to
get an application open,
Hopefully, by the end of August,
beginning of September, Um
there's been a lot of focus on
this, uh, program, particularly
the housing program, so we are
eager to get that on track.
Adam's team is working very
diligently to get both, uh, a
new application created for the
commercial development fund.
And ultimately, the housing. So,
uh, I don't think there's a
person at our agency right now.
That isn't touching the OE, Uh,
fund in one way or the other,
and I appreciate all the work
that they've done to get us
here.
Um and I have attached the
housing policies. Those are the
ones that we posted for public
review and comment. They will
start to change by the next time
we meet. They'll be in a
different form. Um, but I wanted
you to see certainly what the
board has what the staff has
presented to the board. Uh, the
OE board and what they PO posted
for public review and comment,
Um, because I think a lot of
folks may be asking you those
questions.
Couple of other things are going
on, Um House Bill 211. This past
session also made some major
modifications to the Water
Project Finance Act. That's the
Water Trust board bill. In
addition to adding, uh,
wastewater. It, uh, provided the
opportunity for us to use the
water project fund to fund
capacity development and
technical assistance. Um, it's
very explicit that we can use
the funds to hire contractors.
Um, and this is not intended to
increase the aim of a staff to
become, you know, a capital
Outlay Bureau. Um or
Direct technical assistance
group, but we can hire. Um,
these firms to help in any way
the water trust board sees
appropriate and so the the, UH,
policy Committee has been
working. We have a couple of
proposals in front of them that
they have blessed to move
forward, One of which is for us
to, um, help facilitate. Uh, the
Faster implementation of
preliminary engineering reports
right now, the preliminary
engineering reports happen
primarily through the local
government planning fund that
takes a lot of work from the
local communities. Um, it takes
a lot of work from the NM FA
staff, and they generally take a
long time. There is no fast P ER
to be done. Um, just because of
the nature of the way the
program works, um, and that that
we're primarily with small
systems, so our goal here is to
kind of take it out of their
hands. Do the procurement hire.
Contractor and get these
preliminary engineering reports
done faster under a contractor
that we would hire. If that
comes back. It'll come back
obviously to the board because
we will have to procure for it.
Um under the guidance of the
water Trust board or
consultation with the Water
Trust board and then ultimately
budget for it.
Um, the second is to help with
some regional facilitation.
There are many communities
across the state, particularly
small volunteer water systems
that are next to each other.
They don't They're not
interconnected. They're not.
There's no collaboration
whatsoever. There's no regional
Cooper operation. Our goal is to
find some of those communities
that are
You know, uh, geographically
close to one another and to see
if there's a way that we could
facilitate that regionalization.
There was a great bill passed
two years ago. Senate Bill one,
which put in place a framework
for regionalization, because
prior to that, you literally had
to come to the Legislature and
have them warm you as an
authority. So now there's some
governance or systems to go
through it, but it still takes a
significant amount of work. It
takes facilitators. It takes a
lot of attorneys. It takes the
kinds of things that no Grant
fund will pay.
You can come and get a
preliminary engineering report,
But you cannot get the
assistance you need to really,
truly get a regional system
together.
And so the concept is, we'll
look to see if there's a way
that the water trust board can
facilitate some of that.
Ultimately, we'll end up with
stronger water systems. Uh, that
will be less reliant overall on,
UM capital outlet because they
will have the efficiencies of a
larger rate base rate paying
base and so that they'll be able
to operate more sustainably and
potentially with two different
sources of water, So there's
some redundancy and some
resiliency built into this
concept. Um, we'll see if we can
make that work. That's the
concept that we're working
through with.
Trust board now, and we're
hoping that that, um is
something you'll see in the
fall.
Fingers crossed. Um The other
thing with the water trust board
is, uh, three years ago, Uh, the
Legislature passed a bill to
have the water trust board serve
as the vetting group or projects
to be funded from the interstate
stream commissions. Uh, New
Mexico Unit fund. Um, it's been
we've been back and forth with
the Interstate Stream Commission
on how they want to make that
work. They've ultimately really,
um, put some momentum to that
They've hired somebody last year
who put together a policy.
And we'll be launching a pilot
program for that collaboration
that will focus on, um,
planning.
So we can, you know, sort of
experience and get some get some
experience on working together.
Um, because this is very new to
them. Um and they are, I think a
snake bit from their original,
Um, efforts in the New Mexico
unit fund. Um, so our hope is
that we'll have that done, and
then we'll come back, probably
next year with full applications
to vet through it. That won't
actually impact this board at
all, and, unfortunately or,
fortunately impact staff, so
we'll be working to support that
effort. Though you won't see
it'll be behind the
From your perspective, but it
will be a way in which we're
helping to facilitate the
completion of a lot of water
projects.
Um, on the agenda today,
switching from water over to
economic development. Um it's
interesting that we are 20 years
later, taking advantage of some
of the powers that were granted
to us under the statewide
Economic Development Finance Act
When that bill was passed in
2003, the primary focus was
really having a statewide issue
or conduit, tax exempt bonds.
Um, that typically happens at
the local government level and a
lot of local governments in New
Mexico simply don't have kind of
staff to support these and
monitor these the way
They need to be monitored. Um,
and every state has a conduit
issuer of these kinds of
economic development bonds,
except, you know, maybe a couple
in New Mexico was prominent
amongst them. Um, so we put
together that bill it's a
massive bill, and most of it is
dedicated to the issuance of
bonds. But 22 years later, um,
we're being asked to, uh, look
at and inducement resolution or
the Enchantment Water Project,
which is down in, uh Hobbs. Uh,
Lee and Ed
Um, So you will see that today.
Um, there's a couple of
interesting things about this
sweat for provided additional,
um
Let me start with this. The tax
code limits the the numbers of
Private projects that can use
tax exempt financing after about
1986 up Until then, virtually
everyone could be funded with
tax exempt proceeds. They've
been peeling that back, and
since about in the late
nineties, for sure, Um, they've
limited the amount of volume cap
that can go to these projects so
each state is limited to the
amount of these tax exempt
proceeds, and they've limited
the the continues to narrow in
on the kinds of projects it can
support.
Sweat fur further limited it by
putting a cap in of 15% of the
state's, um total allocation.
New Mexico Typically, all that
money goes to the, um
To the mortgage finance
authority. They do most of the
they they use most of this what
we call volume cap.
Um, So the project before you is
much larger than that, 15%
allocates. Um it's anticipated.
This will be a multi phase
project so you will see probably
if we end up issuing the bonds.
Um, we'll be in a position to
probably look at this a couple
of times over the next several
years. Um, it's very engaging
Project and, um, I'm I'm eager
for you all to hear the
presentation. Um, but wanted to
mention to you that there are
some nuances even for tax exempt
bonds. There are some nuances to
this one because of the firm,
The further limitations of
But, uh
So, um
That's really all I really
wanted to say there is that
you'll see this project today.
It's the first for us, certainly
not the first of its kind in New
Mexico or nationally, um, and
that it will be different than
many that you would otherwise
see, which is that, you know,
we'll see it probably a number
of times over several years. Um,
And then, lastly, uh, you'll be
hearing today from Michael van
Der Hyde on, uh, men rules for
the local government Planning
fund. Senate Bill 216 added to
the local government planning
fund the ability to fund
affordable housing.
Plans, um, archaeological
clearances and flood inundation
maps, and so we needed to update
those policies. There's also
been a, um, a request from a lot
of communities that are $50,000
limit is, uh, too limiting. They
can't get the projects done with
that amount of money. So the key
among these, uh, changes will
also be to change the maximum
amount per project to $100,000.
Uh, but not changing the two
year limit of $100,000. So there
may instead of doing a maybe a
water wastewater separately, you
might be able to do one a
preliminary engineering report
that's combined that includes
both of those and would go up to
that. 100,000. I think that's
the concept. Our goal here,
though, is to have policies that
accompany these rules. And those
policies will, uh, probably
limit further. The amount you
can get so we don't do L every
preliminary engineering report
to now cost 100,000.
Dollars because that's what
we'll pay. So we wanna make sure
we're right. Sizing the amount
of grant funds to the actual,
uh, cost of a project and
sometimes when you put in these
limitations that then drives the
market for everything costs that
they all cost $25,000 until we
went to 50. Then they all cost
$50,000 in our concern is as we
double that we obviously don't
want to see that trend continue.
So, um, our we're getting them
to you today without the
policies because we'd like to
get these heard by the oversight
committee next week. Um, and so
they are They relatively
straightforward. Um, we think
that they are don't require that
much conversation on the
policies really will guide most
of that. So that's before you
today.
And Madam chair. Um that is my
Thank you any questions from
board members?
Hearing. No, we go.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the board.
Marquita did a wonderful job
explaining what I'm about to
present to you, but, uh, as she
mentioned, we're bringing before
you amended and restated rules
for the local government
planning fund. Um, it really is,
uh, as a result of Senate Bill
216 being passed in the 2024
regular legislative session, it
expanded the use of the fund to
include those planning documents
that Marquita mentioned
affordable housing plans. Flood
inundation, maps, archaeological
clearances, Um
And so we, uh
We'll include that. Um, the
expanded uses of the fund and
also in increasing the maximum
great 1000, as Marquis had
mentioned, that will be a Max.
We'll come back with policies to
try to further work through that
to flesh that out a little bit
more. That may be more limiting.
Um
But by way of background, the
local government planning fund
was created in the NM FA Act.
That's really where, um, the
changes occurred in Senate Bill
216 for the act. The
Ingram program, um, makes grants
to qualified entities.
And we also pay the
administrative costs of the L GB
F program pay staff, so we're
making grants, but we're also
paying for administrative costs
with this program. It's not a
cash cow. It receives
appropriations usually B
annually from the P PR F. Uh,
right now we've got about 1.9
million in active grants. 40
grants, uh, for the program. Um,
we're at about 1.7 million of
unlisted funds. But we have 2
million coming in in July in
fiscal year 2025.
Which we think will help
supplement some of these new
plans as well. Um, but just to
give you a little idea of what
the scope of the of the, uh,
program is
Um, as mentioned before we're
including those new planning
documents in the amended rules.
Um
Again. We're increasing 50,000
to 100,000 per planning
document, But we are going to
retain this. Marquis had
mentioned the $100,000 limit per
24 month period. Uh, of course,
either of those provisions can
be waived by the board. Uh, if
there's you know, availability
of additional funds or other
urgent needs, that would, uh,
meet that criteria to go above
100,000. It certainly can be
done. Um, we've also
Uh,
Increased. Well not increased,
but, uh, we're we're retaining,
Um
A sort of waiver or that
$100,000 limit, uh, per 24 month
Period or Metropolitan
Redevelopment Act plans as well
as affordable housing plans. Um,
those are plans that require
ordinances to be passed by local
governments. They require a lot
of work with all the other
planning going on that local
governments are doing, uh we
feel it's appropriate to at
least have some waiver for those
particular plans where you could
go above the 100. Additional
100,000 would be available.
Um, um, We've included red
lines, uh, a red line copy of
the amended rules. I think
you'll see that a lot of the
base criteria hasn't really
changed. We're still looking at
MH I We're still looking at
water rates. We're still looking
at other, uh, determining
factors related to economic
development. Um, we feel those
are all useful. Um, it's not
only useful information for us
at the at the Finance Authority,
but they act as qualifiers for
additional grant funding, so I
didn't necessarily want to take
away.
Hearing the rules. Uh, but add
the additional dollars. What
we're also gonna do is add some
additional local match waivers.
That's how the program works.
Right now. We've got urgent
needs and economic development.
Um, type plans can include that
local match waiver. What we'd
like to do and what we're
proposing is that, um
Documents that planning
documents that would address
regulatory compliance and or
affordable housing needs. But
also so really, what we're
trying to do is, you know E
expanded uses of the fund were
not necessarily expanding the
operations of the fund, but we
want to make additional grant
dollars available, uh to local
governments that would qualify
under the program.
Um We've also included new
definitions in the program and
clarifications on really how the
program operates. It's been
since 2014 since these rules
were last amended and restated,
so we had a little catch up to
do just with terminology. What
are our business practices kind
of how we administer the
program?
Um
And so what we really want to do
is just make sure that this
program is continued viable. Uh,
option for local governments,
Uh, for planning grant funds,
Mar PETA mentioned what the
Water trust board is looking at
with those policies and smaller
entities mutual domestic looking
for P ER S. We understand not
every landing document is
created equal and affordable
housing plan for a large
municipality versus a AP ER for
a system with 32 connections,
you know, so we're gonna work
through that with the policies
and try to come up with some
Um, limits in there that that
are, uh, that work for local
governments. Um, we always
require a cost estimate with our
applications that needs to be
signed by an engineer or
consultant so that we get some
idea of sort of an official.
Look at what the, uh what The
planning document would cost
Um, but we'll work through other
limits through the policies. Um,
also, as stated by Marquita,
we'd like to bring these rules
to the oversight committee. We
are required to bring them to
the oversight committee for
their approval. Um
Next week. And so, uh, we would,
We would look for for your
approval today. Um, I'm happy to
answer any questions. Uh, staff
does recommend approval of the
amended and restated local
government planning fund rules.
Um, and again happy to enter.
Answer any questions? Thank you
for your presentation.
Any questions from board members
hearing? None. Do I hear a
motion on the resolution as
presented
So moved Madam chair for
approval.
Motion is second Madam Chair.
Motion.
All those, and is there any
discussion?
Ever say I
I. I
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda is a report
from the Public lending
committee.
Um
Madam chair in, uh, member
Nichols Absence. I'll report the
committee met, they went
through, Um, the three planning
grant projects that are before
you today. Uh, a water trust
board cost overrun Project And,
um, uh, three P PR F, uh, loans.
Um, They also reviewed, uh, took
a lot of time to review the
colonies, infrastructure
projects that are before you
today very similar to the water
Trust board and the way in which
the board makes recommend
Over to the finance Authority in
our job is to ensure that we've
got them structured according to
their policies. Um so those
applications, um, are going for
before you today. I'd also note
that, um there's at least seven
applications that will be
considered most likely in
September. So like the water
trust board, we will see we'll
have two shots at this this
year, largely due to the amount
of money we have, and the number
of entities that don't that
aren't currently compliant with
the executive order, uh, for
audit comp.
And so with that, madam chair.
uh, that was what the committee
discussed.
Thank you.
If not, we'll move to some of
the consent agenda. This
And it's
Um, for 50,000 Did I need to
That
That better?
Hello.
Can you keep going? Ok, Um, item
there, item 8.2. Is me me. They
applied to our program for a
plan as well.
And the final item.
Uh, we make
Re
Any questions?
Motion is made is there a motion
is made and seconded.
If not all those in favor. Say,
II. I
All those opposed same sign.
We have four items on the
regular A switch over to the one
that we both work.
Thank you, Madam Chair Bring
before you a construction cost
to overrun from the water Trust
board. This project was awarded
in 2020. This board approved the
financial structure of this as a
15% loan 85% Grant.
Um and
For the construction cost
overruns is basically that these
communities go out to bed and
find out and in this instance
that the bids came in the lowest
bid came in almost double of
what they had available.
So the additional funds that we
are proposing is would allow the
contract to finish the remaining
water lines and meters and
provide the adequate service for
the West Settle service area.
In 2022. The water Trust board
did set aside. Uh, funds in for
the 2021 and 2022 projects, but
because this was a 2020 at the
time, we didn't have any
construction cost overruns.
funds to fund this project.
In this current cycle.
The center or the legislative
session. Senate Bill 275 did set
aside 18 million to address
construction cost overruns for
projects not only approved by
the water trust board but
authorized by the legislature.
Through 2023, so that's 2023 and
older projects will have access
to these 18 millions.
Based on the current water
trust, board policies and the
Finance Authority Analysis. The
association qualifies for 100%
grant of the additional funds in
combination with their current
funding package.
The association is requesting
1.2 million of additional funds,
and that is to complete the
initial scope and awarded
project.
Staff at this time recommends
the additional 1.2 million for
the settle regional mutual
domestic and it will come in as
100% grant. And with that, I
Any question. If not, do I hear
a motion to approve.
Madam Chair. So question is
made. Is there a second a
second?
Motion is made and seconded. Um
are there Is there any
discussion?
If not all those in favor say I
I
All those opposed same sign.
Good morning, madam chair and
board members. Sorry about that,
Uh, what you see here presented
in front of you, and it's on
page 61 there in your material.
This is for the Hondo Valley
Public School district in their
home of the Eagles, which is
located in Honda, New Mexico,
and there are about 40 minutes
east of Prio so and this is APR
F 2024 general obligation Bond
loan request.
So in November of 2023, this
district did receive voter
approval and it was for
$1,400,000, and that approval is
valid for a period of four years
and the Honda Valley public
School District does have a loan
request today, and it's for
$540,000. You'll see that it's
for a 20 year term.
And then net interest cost is
3.4%.
As you look into the project
description, you'll see the loan
proceeds for this request will
be used for but are not limited
to the information that's
provided in your material again.
That's on page 61. And it's for
the design, engineering and
utilities work necessary for the
complete replacement of the
Honda Valley Public School
Districts Educational complex.
This project is to replace the
educational complex. It is
important to the students and
staff of the Hondo Valley Public
School district.
Looking at the strengths you'll
see strengths to include major
taxpayers to equal 19.15% of the
total valuation, which is
considered a low concentration
risk of the tax base.
And as you look at the
weaknesses, you'll see that
there's the district did have
one repeated significant
deficiency that was identified
in the fiscal year 2023 audit.
The repeated significant
deficiency has been addressed by
the district as stated in their
action plan received by staff.
So the fiscal year 2023 audit
was unmodified had a total of
eight findings.
The repeated significant
deficiency was specifically for
improper cash controls.
So on page 62 of your board
material, you'll see the details
of that repeated finding and
the, um action that they plan on
taking to re to, um, address
that finding
Important to note. Um, the
business manager. Her name is
Mary Prudencio.
From the district. She is
available here, um via Zoom if
you choose to have any questions
with respect to the audit, and
their, um, action plan
This is the first time that this
project has appeared before the
board staff does recommend
approval, and we are both happy
to stand for any questions you
may have.
Thank you. Um and thank you for
our, uh and being able to answer
questions this morning. We
appreciate
You're doing that.
Are there any questions for
Do our visitors from the
district. We do not
Um, a quick question about, um
Remediation plan for the
significant deficiencies so
One of the issues is, um
Regarding an M FA bond accounts
and the, um not reporting of the
correctly on those. Will you
talk to us a little bit about
Your correction plan for that. I
think it's especially important
to this board. Um
To know that those proceedings
are being handled.
By the district will, too, as we
look at issuing
Uh, yes. My name is Mary
Prudencio. Thank you for
allowing me to answer any
questions. Um, when I returned
back to the district, the
The bond accounts were not being
kept very well. And of course
when I came in mid year, I did
not understand them until I
spoke to my auditor, and he
showed me how to track those how
to, um, track the revenue and
the expenses.
And we have three different
bonds at that time. So I called
Leslie Medina from NM FA because
I had met her in my in my
previous, uh, tenure at the
school and her and I went over
in detail each account and of
course it was rather simple. Uh,
but I am tracking everything,
According according to the way I
should be
So do you expect that that
finding will not be reoccurring.
No, thank you for that.
Appreciate you being here and,
um, answering questions.
Yes, ma'am.
Any other questions.
If not do I hear a motion.
So move, Mr Madam Chair.
Uh, we have a motion from member
Lobato. Thank you. Is there a
second?
I second. This is this member
Burke.
Second from member Burke.
Is there any discussion?
All those in favor. Say II. I
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Next on the agenda Mountaineer
Public School district
OK, so, Madam chair and board
members which you see here in
front of you on page 75 of your
material is for the Mountaineer
Public School district.
This is a series 2024 general
obligation bond Education
technology note.
And they do have a loan request
today for $570,000, you'll see
that it's for a three year term
and with a 2.46% net interest
cost.
Now important to note. Um we
were notified by loan cancel
this week that there will be a
taxable component which will be
reflected in the final debt
service schedule.
So, looking at the project
description, you'll see that,
um, the Mountaineer Public
school district has applied to
the people of to finance
purchase of education technology
equipment.
And the mountain there Public
school district is located in
Torrance County, which is about
43 miles southeast of Berlin,
and the district includes two
school buildings. The first
school building is in
combination of middle school and
high school and the second
building is an elementary school
building.
The proceeds will be useful but
are not limited to network
equipment, servers, security
systems and cameras.
communication systems, staff,
computers and laptops and
software services.
This project is vital to the
district's education mission and
providing a good quality
education for the students that
they serve. Looking at the
strengths you'll see the
strengths. Um, include that the
education technology notes are
short term financing with the
final maturity not to exceed for
five years. As you can see, with
this particular project, it is
for a three year term as an
example and also another string
is the upgraded technology does
benefit the students.
Now, when it comes to
weaknesses, you'll see that they
did have three repeated material
weaknesses and one repeated
significant deficiency, and they
did provide us a a plan that
addresses these repeated
findings. The fiscal year 2023
audit was unmodified. It had a
total of eight findings on the
board summary report on page 76
of your board material, You'll
notice the summary of the detail
of each of those findings and
their UM, action plan to address
those findings.
Important to note the business
manager Peter Nieto from the
district is available today via
Zoom Should you have any
questions about the project or
the audit results?
This is the first time that this
project has appeared before the
board staff does recommend
approval, and we are happy to
answer any questions you may
have.
For the presentation this
morning. Any questions from the
board?
Not Mr Nieto. Thank you for
joining us that
Do you have anything you'd like?
I just wanna thank you for your
time today and taking this
project into consideration. Uh,
when it comes to our audit,
we're doing everything we can to
correct the findings. I'd like
to say that we do have a new
superintendent coming in next
week on July 1 and I've already
spoken to him and he's a fully
on board with implementing the
necessary changes to come into
compliance. We will work
together as a team to move
forward. I've been the business
manager for mountain public
schools since 2019 and plan to
continue being here to ensure we
correct all audit findings with
that being
Said Ryan and myself will stand
for questions.
Any questions from the board
member as Spz.
Madam chair. I'd just like to
ask Ryan what the name of the
team is because he can cover
that for once.
The mascot is the Mustangs, but
Madam chair, remember Esper.
Do I hear emotion?
We would be approved as
presented.
I have a, um, motion from member
Collins. Do I have a second from
member as span second? Yes,
ma'am motion has been made and
seconded any discussion.
All those in favor. Say II. I
All those pose. Same sign.
Motion. Thank you. Sure you can
tell that we, uh we test our our
staff at Credit Committee on how
well they know their
communities. Next is the Pake
Valley Public School.
Good morning, madam chair and
board members. Today I'll be
presenting a
General obligation bond loan for
the Paki Valley Public School
district.
In November of 2021. They
received voter approval, various
district wide projects and they
will issue general obligation
bonds in the amount of $2
million
To complete various projects,
and the proceeds will be used.
To include, but not limited to
building a new middle school.
Safety and security upgrades for
the high school, Intermediate
school and elementary schools,
which includes vestibules, cules
entries, security cameras and
door locks.
Alone is for a 10 year term. It
has net interest cost of 4.04%.
The strengths of the loan
include that the new school
improvements will provide
students with a comfortable
learning environment and provide
them with improved
infrastructure to keep them
healthy and secure.
Uh, we also have the, uh the F
AD FA statutory guarantee. Uh,
we do have a weakness to note
which is, uh, related to their
audit.
Uh, the district had two
repeated.
Material weaknesses. They did
provide us with a plan that
addresses those findings and are
listed in the board book.
Additionally, NM FA staff was
able to speak to the CEO and
provided
Uh, who provide details and on
their process and protocols and
indicated they do not expect any
repeated findings in the future.
The last complete audit was in
2023. It was unmodified. There
were six findings.
Which includes those two
repeated material weaknesses. I
just mentioned
This is the first time this
appeared before the board and
staff does recommend approval. I
do now stand for an
Are there any questions from
board?
I'll make that motion Madam
chair.
I'll second it.
Motion made by member Lovato
motion seconded.
If not all those in favor say I
I. I
All those opposed motion
carries.
Thank you. Thank you.
Next on the agenda. We have a
significant number of projects.
um, from the colonies on colon,
so 31 of them.
Um, from the colonial
Infrastructure board.
If there's no objections from
committee members, I would like
to hold the vote on these
projects. Thank you, Madam
Chair, so I bring before you
actually 30 projects that the
Colonials board
Awarded in the 2024 cycle on May
16th the board the Colony board
awarded these projects and to
recommend to this board for
funding in the 2024 cycle.
Statue. This the the Finance
Authority makes the grants and
loans to projects recommended by
the colonial Board. The
Colonials board similar to the
Water Trust board, uses an
annual application process to
recommend prioritized qualified
projects for financial
assistance.
On March 8th we did receive
about 77.7 million in request.
Um, there is a criteria. These
applications were rated in
ranked by a technical team that
comprised of not only the
Environment Department office of
the state engineer, the DOT and
the Finance Authority. There is,
you know, we have her policy.
what those criteria are
For the funding of the Colonials
fund. We receive 4.5% earmark of
severance C severance tax bonds.
In addition for this cycle, the
Colonials, Uh, board approved a
council 2022 project to re award
in this current cycle. So our
funding for this for the 2024
cycle is a little over 63.1
million.
The T board. Uh, in March did or
Excuse me in, uh, may did
recommend 31 projects. We are
only bringing before you 30 of
those projects. We will bring
the 31st 1 or the 31st 1 In
July. There was, um some issues
with that entity and getting
their correct pledge. So before
you would bring you 30 projects,
these, um projects as Marquis
had mentioned there's a
comprehensive list of, um,
review.
That considers not only policy
compliance but regulatory
compliance. It also looks at
project readiness and timing and
these projects are awarded for
complete funding.
The water trust or the Colonies
board. Sorry, Wrong. Cat board
postponed funding as Marquita
mansion. So, um, on seven of
these or seven applications,
which we will be bringing in
September, um additional funding
for this cycle.
The policies required that the
funding package contained a loan
component equal to 10%.
Of the awarded amount, with the
remainder coming in as a grant.
The policies also require these
applicants to have a match
component.
You'll see that some of these
projects are requesting an
additional loan in lieu of that
required match.
All of these loans will be
structured as construction loans
and that allows up to 24 months
for the projects to be completed
prior to the first loan payment
coming in
You'll see that we also require
what we call readiness to
proceed. And those are items
that, um, once they receive the
award letter that they will have
to meet some of those readiness
to receive requirements in order
to, uh, start the process of
securing the fund. We do have
five projects in this year's,
uh, recommended list that don't
have the historic capacity to
undertake that debt, which is
the one times coverage.
As part of the Finance Authority
readiness to proceed. Those
entities will have to verify
that they do have that capacity.
um and whether it's to be
increased of the rate rate rate
increase, or perhaps a different
loan or loan pledge on that
before it can be converted into
that construction loan.
So at this time, Madam chair and
the board. The Cloys board
recommends the approval of 30
projects listed below it or
listed that spreadsheet, the
grant and loan components again
consist of 90% Grant 10% loan.
We have the exception of We do
have eight applicants, which are
10 projects that will take on an
additional loan in lieu of that
required match, which is
typically an 80% Grant 20% loan,
and all of this is based
On colonial policies. And with
that, madam
Thank you, Madam Chair if I
could just make a couple of more
comments, um one is that, uh,
the coverage requirement for the
for the by policy of the
Colonial board is that the loans
have one times coverage and they
sit in what we call the super
subordinate position. So any
debt that they already have gets
paid first? Um, and we require,
as Angela mentioned we do a
complete analysis as we would
any other project. A P PR F
project doesn't matter. We do
that analysis. We see what their
capacity
And we identify as you see,
starting on page 102 those that
don't meet that coverage. Um
there's just a couple of them.
Um, but we are working with each
of them to ensure that they can
actually get that pledge in
place that will make that 10%
loan. Uh uh. Work. Um
And I would note that there is
an annual, um
If they run into issues. We
obviously work with them. The
loan component here serves as
basically you know, skin in the
game. We wanna make sure that
they're bringing something to
the table that they've, uh 100%
grants just get overseen
differently than any project
that has even a minor portion of
loan. Um and I note that the
loan component also pays our
bills on this program, so it
serves two important functions.
Um, but, you know, we we aren't
here to make sure that the
community goes out of business.
We wanna make sure that the loan
and get cover
And some of that means that we
have to talk to them about
increasing their rates. Um most
of these guys are gonna be
larger communities or counties
and so they have tax bases that
they usually pledge, so these
are actually typically more
straightforward than the water
trust board where we see a lot
of small water systems. These
tend to be bigger entities. So
in 102, the colored the color
coding system. Those, um, sort
of peach colored uh, tan
colored. Uh, line items are
those where we did not show
capacity.
Um And as I as Angela mentioned,
there'll be a commitment before
we close and allow them to start
drawing the funds for
construction and before we
convert to a permanent will
ensure that they follow through
with what they said they were
gonna do.
Um And so with that, madam
chair, the Colonia sport has
looked at this. Our credit team
has done a complete analysis.
Uh, we spent time with the, uh
public lending committee looking
at this. And, uh, staff
certainly recommends that you
approve them. We're happy to go
through them. Um, individually,
Um, but I would note that, um
They all have, uh
The I would say that they're all
in a position to be approved in
as a consent item should you
want Thank you.
Any question that colonial
infrastructure
Member of span. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I was able to attend
these hearings and, um great
community support. It really
shows how significant these
needs are, and I think we spent
a day and a half.
Going through these different
proposals. It was really great
to see it at that level as they
work through it, and this really
address some of our most needed
communities, so
Any other questions.
If not, I would consider a
motion to approve.
All the projects as presented
Madam chair with that, I would
certainly make that motion.
Thank you. Is there a second?
Madam member Burke, I'll second
Motion seconded.
Um
Either one.
If not all those in favor say,
Aye.
I. I
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
To approve. Uh, all of the 30
colonial infrastructure board
projects as presented. Thank
Next is a report from our
economic development Committee
member Collins
Madam chair members of the
board. Um
The Economic Development
Committee met on June 18th.
Um, members Trujillo, Weller and
Lovato were in a in attendance.
Um, the lone staff went over the
lone monitoring report, uh,
which is always
An interesting, uh,
presentation.
Um, We also discussed the
private activity bonds and
recommended for approval. The
ones which Marquita teased
earlier and are next on the
agenda.
And finally, um, we, um, talked
about new markets tax credit,
uh, transactions and ranking.
Um
And that's all I've got. Thank
you.
Thank you. Any questions for
member Collins?
If not next on our agenda is the
considering the inducement
resolution.
On the exempt facility Revenue
bond.
Um
Madam chair and, uh, board of
members. Uh, thank you for your
time this morning to talk about
a champ Land LLC, um, who is a
wholly owned subsidiary of INF
Infinity Water Solutions, LLC,
and before I go too further in
in this presentation
Turn over to Marquita, then
invite Madam chair as I
mentioned earlier. This is an
inducement resolution. It starts
the clock for purposes of the
IRS. So once we take this
action, and the action is, you
know to declare an intent to
issue those bonds they can
reimburse themselves from tax
exempt proceeds for any eligible
costs. Going back 60 days from
today's inducement resolution,
So after this point, they will,
um be able to put the financing
together, which will be
complicated.
It will come back to us once
they've secured the volume cap
necessary to issue any series of
these bonds. Um there's a
potential for them to be a
combination of taxable and tax
exempt. There's some different
structuring options that may
occur. We'll find out about that
in the fall.
Um, but this is really just a
technical, um
A a technical step to ensure
that the they have the ability
to reimburse themselves from
cost because this is a fast
moving project, and I don't know
if you want to bring up the
clients and they can describe
the project.
Um
Bear with me. It's hot in here
or is it just over there?
We're comfortable. No sweat it
here.
Maybe you're in the hot seat.
I guess So, um, from from
infinity or enchantment, Land
LLC. We have Ashley Uh Keeley
Whitehead. Um, she is the chief,
uh, communication Officer. Uh,
Michael Dyson, The CEO and Chris
Cardwell. Uh, the CFO. And if
you guys wanna come up
And then also there, uh,
financial Advisor or the the
I normally don't get this much
attention. But today
So, um, Madam Chair and board
members all turn it over to, uh,
Mr Dyson to talk about the
project.
Madam chair members of the need
to present to you today. Uh, if
I could before we get started, I
would just like to give a very
strong, uh, commendation, uh to,
uh Marquita, Miss Russell and
her staff. They've been
absolutely wonderful, uh, to
work with and help us
understand? Uh, the process.
Thank you.
Very much for that.
Um
I'm a co founder and CEO at
Infinity Water. Um as mentioned
enchantment, Water is a wholly
owned subsidiary, uh, of
infinity. We've been doing
business in New Mexico since
2019.
Uh, we have our operations
located in Leonetti County.
Um, almost exclusively. Um
We are a water technology,
sustainability and management
company.
We actually started. Our company
founded our company.
Um, as a direct result of
legislation that was passed, uh,
here in New Mexico, specifically
the produced Water Act.
What we
Endeavor to do is to bring in a
barrel of produced water from
the oilfield wastewater or
historically considered
wastewater. Uh, treat that
barrel of water.
Uh and then send it back into
the oil field as a resource.
In so doing what we're able to
offer.
Is a reduction in freshwater
usage.
Downward pressure on a scarce
resource, uh by the oil and gas
industry.
But we also are offering an
opportunity for, um
Reduced reduced economic or
environmental issues are
associated with, uh, potential
for seismicity and seismic
seismic risk.
Um
What we believe Water offers for
the state of New Mexico is
Something not too dissimilar to,
uh the, um, the opportunity that
advanced energy ecosystem
provides to the state as well.
Uh, we honestly believe water as
a
From a waste source to a
resource conversation. And what
does this mean for the state?
Uh, this is an opportunity for
an economic
Diversification. This is job
creation.
Uh, this is the ability to
really introduce concepts
around, uh, meaningfully
concepts around sustainability.
Um, that I think
The industry and most
stakeholders if not all
stakeholders across the state
would agree on the best interest
of the state.
Um with that, what? We are here
today to discuss is a, uh,
capital expenditure program that
didn't
Uh, envisions a closed loop
network and what we mean by that
is an infrastructure built
through Leonetti County.
It's going to span. Uh,
approximately 100 and 30 miles
worth of of pipeline. Uh, what
we'll be able to do is store
treated water as inventory and
then we're able to deliver that
inventory to oil and gas
operations as they need it.
Uh, we are backed by, um well,
we do business with some of the
biggest, uh oil and gas
companies, but also, uh, some
local uh uh, companies and
anchored in, uh, Roswell and,
uh, Oria.
Uh, so there is a level of of
even just diversification.
Um, what we have done is put
together this project. Uh, in
such a way, uh, that, um
It is.
It is intended to drive an
opportunity again for economic
diversification for the state.
Um we like to talk in terms of a
blue economy and an opportunity
for a blue economy.
We consider ourselves part of
the advanced energy ecosystem.
The same kind of ecosystem that
Really anchors. Uh, most of, uh,
New Mexico's, uh, revenue.
Uh, we believe that under the
right circumstances, water can
be introduced.
As a former wastewater.
What was considered formally as
wastewater allows for fresh
water to stay in place. Uh, for
Tyson best use.
A as well as as serving as that
economic driver.
With that I would absolutely
open up for any thought, uh,
additional detail.
I have a question, so I'm the
the board member from the
energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department, So I'm
sure you have talked to our oil
conservation division. More than
once. Um, and my question is
about the construction of your
pipeline network.
Um And I mean
You don't have to get super
technical, but I am curious as
to how you are negotiating the
construction of this network,
along with the correlative
rights for Mineral explorer
working in
You bet. Um, Madam Chair. Uh,
Doctor Weller. Thank you very
much for the question. Uh, what?
We, uh with our all surface use?
Uh, it is a combination of
working through a private
acreage. Private ownership, Uh,
state owned lands as well as
federal owned lands, so the
process is slightly different.
Uh, depending on um who, uh, the
Um
Who the owner effectively is,
uh, in each and every case we
are going to endeavor to, uh
Parallel.
Uh, existing pipeline. There's
honestly
It makes it makes it's good
business sense. Uh, in that, uh,
there there tends to be greater
levels of infrastructure to
support um additional
infrastructure going into place.
Uh, but almost as importantly,
the idea of of
Preserving a level of natural
uh, when when I when given the
opportunity makes a tremendous
amount of sense for us.
So just as one. Follow up, Um
I think I understand your
business model. It makes a lot
of sense to me. Um
You are not planning on running
your own injection disposal
Wells.
You are only planning on selling
treated produced water back to
the oil.
Or
Again. Thank you very much for
the question. Um, What would you
have endeavored to do is what we
refer to as a zero liquid
discharge.
So in every instance a barrel of
water that comes in
We would like to treat that and
rehome that
So we do not, uh, we do not
operate any disposal Wells.
Um, we have had this discussion.
Um well,
And that the need them. I'm sure
you're very familiar with the
traditional way in which the oil
and gas industry manages its
wastewater. Um, traditionally
that is through disposal. Uh,
there are, uh
Potential complications when
with STDs, saltwater injection
wells, salt water disposal
wells, Um
One of the opportunities that
that we see and we believe we
are unique in the space. Um, is
Is to satisfy, uh, this this
concept of a of a closed loop.
Bring the water in. Allow that
water to come in as a as a waste
product and then rather than
that traditional linear
relationship between an oil and
gas company and water, um, let's
figure out how to tighten Mother
Nature's natural water cycling.
Loop that waste product.
The idea of reuse treatment and
and reuse in the industry is not
in itself Novel.
However, a a network system that
allows for a stability in the
market and known quantity is
Um, we like to think of this in
terms of, um, almost like
terminally system or a a
marketplace can even call it.
Um, a a supermarket if you will.
There has to be a a known way
for a functional and, uh,
market.
Uh, to to really
Exist.
Uh, you have to be able to there
has to be reliability and
inventory on the shelves that
marketplace and that's what we
believe our Hydro harbor project
will do just to be.
Clear as well. We have been
operating. We do operate two
facilities, uh, to date, uh,
every barrel of water is has
been rehomed with Thank you very
much.
Cherokee. This is member beg I.
I, um
You know, I haven't haven't been
significantly exposed to this.
Uh
Particular.
Bond of resolution at this point
or or the project. I'm
certainly, uh, supportive of of
what we're working to accomplish
here. I do have a question. Um
These are gonna be revenue bonds
as I understand it, um and I. I
just, uh have a question about
the anticipated source of
revenue to repay the bond.
Thank you. Thank you for the
question. Um, we are contracted
through, Um
Uh,
Mega major as well as, uh, a few
of the major oil and gas
companies as well as some
independent, uh smaller
operators. Um
The contracts. Oh,
unfortunately, I can't go into
too much detail on the on the
specifics of the contract save
to save is one of the largest
water management contracts, and
there's ever been a, uh, awarded
in the state of New Mexico.
Uh, it has guaranteed, uh,
minimum revenues associated. Uh,
with that contract, which should
allow for a level of guaranteed,
uh, of revenues, uh, to allow us
to service. Uh, the bonds we're
discussing.
And Madam chair If I could just
add these are revenue bonds.
They're conduit through the
finance authority. So the
Finance authority assumes no
liability to make payments
Should that project not be able
to make payments? The bonds will
be placed with institutional
investors, they will make their
decision as to whether or not to
buy those bonds or not, And they
assume all that risk. So there
is risk. The risk will be borne
by the bondholders, and it will
be a direct conduit through
finance authority. So we have
reputational risk so that
Want to go sideways. We have you
know, operational, um, burden
that comes with that. Should
there be a default on those
bonds, but there's no financial
liability on behalf of the
Finance Authority, and I
probably should have started our
my comments with that. Um, thank
you very much. It was an
excellent question, Um member
Burke.
Thank thank you, Uh,
Marquita and and members.
Any other. Yeah, that answer
that answers my question. Thank
you And Madam chair. We do have
our bond council. Um uh, Brad,
there we are in the back, um,
from Gilmore and Bell. Should
you have questions on the
inducement resolution? I would
like him to walk that walk you
through that, um, at the point
at which you were ready, so I
wanted to make sure you knew
that we had a piece specifically
related to the actual inducement
resolution, um, dedicated to the
presentation. So, thank you. Do
you do that? One more question
for the company. Can you talk
with
Little bit in what you think
that looks like
Oh, that. Yes, ma'am. Uh, and
thank you very much for the
question. Um
We think honestly that this is
one of the biggest opportunities
should New Mexico want to
embrace it? New Mexican economy
has has really seen, Uh since
developing, uh, it its energy
industry.
Um
What does that really mean?
And this idea around. Uh uh, A
blue economy if you will this
ecosystem
Uh, we're we imagine, uh and
using, uh uh, US labor, uh,
board statistics. Uh, even just
this project alone, uh, would
employ thousands across across
its timeline.
With as many as 300 permanent
employees on the other side of
it.
Um
The revenues generated by that
for the state, uh, would be
associated with
There are opportunities for, uh
economic diversification.
Unlike uh, some aspects of the
energy sector, which kind of ebb
and flow uh one thing that
Doesn't quite, um, change
course. Maybe that pendulum
swing quite as much, uh is is
water.
Uh, one of the aspects that we
can all be assured of, Uh, water
touches and concerns.
Absolutely.
As a matter of fact, uh, the two
historically most correlated,
uh, aspects to human success are
access to reliable energy, which
new methods
Uh, but also
More number One historically is
access to water.
And that is as you all very well
know, here in New Mexico, uh,
always been a challenge.
And so the the idea that we can
take what was normally or
historically considered that or
that waste source and turn it
into a resource even just in one
sector.
Alleviating that pressure. Uh,
that downward pressure.
On scarce resource. You would
anticipate we would anticipate
certainly, uh, any number of of
birthday what we would all
generally encourage, um is for
the state to adopt a concept.
Um, around, uh, encouraging
innovation.
Responsible innovation.
Thoughtful innovation but
innovation.
Um, we think
Maybe a couple of generations.
Uh, could, uh through water.
Um have a a level of economic
impact, not dissimilar.
Uh, to to your for the answer
Any other questions? Madam
Chair? This is member tree. You
have a couple quick questions
related to the the bond
structure If you don't mind.
Yes.
Madam Chair, Marquis and John.
Um, can you guys kind of just
walk me through? What? The plan
of finances. I know you guys are
still working through it. Since
this is, you know the initial
approval that needs to happen,
but based on the limitations
with SW EF, and how much
allocation um, can go towards
this project in each given
calendar year, Um, are the bonds
gonna be issued like in two
tranches to fund one phase or or
have you guys worked through the
details of what? That timeline
Looks like Madam Chair? I. I
think, um uh, rich Weise.
Richard Weiss from
Wells Fargo would be the
appropriate um, answer that
question.
Members of the board. Richard
Weiss, Uh, Wells Fargo.
Um, the the plan is to do an
initial, uh
Issuance of assuming violence is
allocated 56.7 million, which
align with, um equity, uh, about
a two thirds one third of, uh,
debt to equity re rare
Issuance of assuming violence is
allocated. 56.7 million, which
align with, um, equity. Uh,
about a two thirds one third of,
uh, debt to equity. Ra Ra, uh,
relationship.
Will fund um um significant part
portion of phase one of the
project.
Plan is to do additional, um,
tranches of debt over the next
couple of years.
To enable the company to build
out the project.
Um, we will. We will market the
bonds under the, uh, indicating
that the the plan, uh, with the
overall plan is for this
project. Um, the initial phase
but also the anticipation.
To build out the project and we
will show to investors.
Um, an engineering feasibility
report a market information
about the contracts and other
Uh, for investors, um, regarding
the feasibility of the project,
and this these bonds will be
sold.
Qualified institutional buyers
who are sophisticated social
investors.
Funds will be non rated, um
And we give given
me
Sustainability perspective.
We think there should be, uh,
the demand for the project.
Thank you for that detail. Um I
really appreciate it. Um, one
follow up question. Is there a
timeline for the, um,
infrastructure Build out are an
estimated timeline on how long
the construction is going to
take.
Yes, sir. Um, we have actually
already begun. Uh which is why
we're we're here today. Uh uh,
requesting
Uh, the, um the NM FA served as
a conduit issuer. Uh, we began,
uh, incurring costs in
furtherance of this project in
April of this year.
Um
A meaningful costs, I guess in
furtherance of the project
Um
From start to finish. Uh, I
think it would be safe to
suggest that this is probably an
18 month timeline.
With the bulk of the project and
the resources. Uh, coming
actually within the next
Madam chair. Thank you for that.
No further questions.
If there are no further
questions for
Madam Chair members. Members of
the board. Uh, Brad Patterson.
I'm with law firm Bell. We're
Bond Council to the New Mexico
Finance Authority. Uh, on page
272 of the board book. There is
the beginning of a resolution
that Marquita referenced
earlier. This is an inducement
resolution. It is, uh, an
indication by the finance
authorities has been explained.
This is the starts the clock
rolling and reimbursement
expenditures for purposes of the
Inter. This enables the company
to go back and reimburse itself
for in itself for additional
expenditures.
That will occur in the future
prior to the issuance of the
bonds.
Um, the the
Resolution, uh, does not
obligate the finance authority
to issue bonds is just merely an
expression of intent to issue
the bonds. Um, I believe that
there is going to be additional
work that will once that the
terms of
As Marquita mentioned. This does
not obligate the finance
Authority, uh, financially
themselves need to provide that
there's authority that they are
payable from a specific source
of revenues for some of its, uh
um customers.
Um And so with that, I'll be
happy to entertain some
resolution.
Madam chair, I think would just
note that the inducement
resolution is for an amount up
to $250 million, which is
greater than this first phase
that's been described in the
materials. Um the inducement
resolution obviously is good for
many years, so if they further
expand, this provides some
protection for purposes of being
able to reimburse themselves so
it is not the intent to bring
back a $250 Million project.
when we've described these much
smaller increments, but it is
intended to be sort of a
complete
Project. Um Multiphase project
financing inducements. Thank
you.
Any questions from
If not do I hear emotion on the
inducement resolution.
And I'm sure I make that motion.
Motion has been made by member
Second
Madam chair. If I if I may real
quick, I apologize for the
interruption. I just want to
know that I gonna abstain from
this vote. Um, since this
project will be going to the
board of Finance for the volume
cap allocation, And since I do
staff that board and we'll be
reviewing this project in depth,
I just want to remove my myself
from this approval, so I
apologize for the interruption.
Thank you for letting us know
that
Uh, all those, uh, the motion
has been made and seconded all
those in favor Say I
I
All those opposed.
And one of
Motion carries good luck on this
project.
Next is the approval of new
market tax credits around 32.
Good morning, madam chair and
members of the board.
Before he was an approval
request for the ranking for
around 32 of the market.
The competitive application
cycle was open from March 2nd.
Through April 22nd.
Eight applications were
received, and all were deemed
eligible in the new market tax
credit census track
The applications were reviewed
and scored by a team of 41
member from the Economic
Development Department, a member
from Baker, Tilly and two
To be placed on the priority
list. An applicant must receive
a score of at least 60 points
and have a moderate readiness.
Or of the applications received
a score of at least 60 points
with a moderate or high
readiness to proceed.
Hm?
And allows them to move forward
with the process.
The prioritization has been
presented and the projects that
met the 60 points.
60 point threshold were
approved.
The advisory board.
Requested that the ranking
committee meet to complete an
additional review of United
World College and Independent
Nation.
If either of these projects
meets the 60 point threshold
after the additional review, the
projects will be brought back to
the Finance New Mexico Advisory
Board and the NM FA board.
Upon her approval of this
request, staff will complete the
due diligence in the priority
order established to determine
if the
If the project meets the
criteria, A preliminary approval
will be brought back to finance
New Mexico and the projects
receiving preliminary approval
are given 90 days to execute a
financing term sheet and an
additional 60 days to document
and close the
Transaction.
Steps.
Yeah. Four projects be
prioritized as part of the
application around 32.
And we stand for any questions.
Questions from board members on
that came in. I know that only
two of our projects did we have
any more rural projects come in
to funding.
Um
Madam chair and board members.
We only received the two rural
projects, uh, that you saw in
this particular round for, um,
United World College and fresh.
Um
Farms based in, UM in down in
Luna County.
And what we're thinking of
doing, um, because we do have a
a requirement for allocation
agreement to do a rule. Um, a
rural allocation of at least $5
million is to do a rule only
round.
So what we with staff will be
bringing back for is a roll
around only, uh, price.
Any other questions from board
members.
Madam chair, one comment on the
project on Independent Nation.
It's down in Sunland Park, but
because of its proximity to I
think Dona County
It count as urban
But it should have kind of
fueled rural to me. Not that
that changes the designation,
but just just kind of thank you
for that point of clarification.
any other questions or comments?
If not do, I
Some of Madame Chair.
Motion has also and all second
OK motion has been made and
seconded to approve the new
markets.
Is there any discussion?
If not all those in favor say,
Aye.
Hi. Hi.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Next. We have the Finance and
disclosure Committee.
Is not here today, Madam Che,
I'll be happy to present. Uh,
the report on behalf of vice
chair Suazo, so the finance and
disclosure met it had a quorum.
They, uh, considered a couple of
items. Uh, one of which or two
of which are before you Today.
One is the presentation of the
investment report. That was an
information item. Um, it is a
monthly report that is given by
our treasurer. Uh, the bond
issuance We had, uh, we have a
monthly report. Uh, that's given
by our
Financial planning director on
the high level outlook and
demand for the PR F program. Um
and then Chip Pierce provided,
um, a report on the 2024, a
state transportation rep. Uh,
refunding revenue bonds. That's
an information item that will be
before you today And then
lastly, um, the, uh, Financing
Disclosure Committee met and
reviewed a request to amend the
capital budget. Uh, which is
also the headquarter budget. Um,
one in the
In this instance uh, for $1.24
million to finalize the, uh,
budget. There were cost overruns
due to the inclusion of the, um
EV charging stations to increase
the furniture budget to cover
the cost of increase of staff
and larger, uh, board sizes and
the required modifications to
unanticipated existing
conditions. That presentation
will be before you today by
Fernando and is a, uh
The Finance and Disclosure
Committee recommended approval
of that item, and I think first
is chip.
Feel free to sit. But Chip is
chip is next.
All right. Great. Thanks,
Marquita.
Um, Madam, Chair, the board. We,
uh did sell the New Mexico state
transportation or revenue
refunding bonds on June 11th.
Uh, the total par was about 100
and 17.5 million. We refunded
three prior issues of, uh, the
state Transportation department.
Two of those were subordinate,
and one of them was a senior
lien. For the purposes of this
issue. It was simpler to refund
them all into a senior leaning
issue. So that's what we did, Um
JP. Morgan was the lead manager
and Wells Fargo and Morgan
Stanley served as co managers.
Uh, Marcus T Trujillo was the
board designee, and the issue
will close on July 2nd.
Uh, when kind of interesting
thing about the the refunding is
is some of you may be aware of,
but, uh
US Treasury no longer allows.
uh municipal issuers to do,
advancer fundings that is
Sell the refunding bonds, months
if not years, before, uh, before
the bonds would actually be
called.
In this case, uh, we do. We can,
uh, invest funds for up to 90
days.
And because the yield curve is
so inverted that is high rates
early, and then they sort of
decline. We're actually able to
invest the proceeds, uh, into an
ASC grow for 87 days, thereby
saving the department, uh in
additional $151,000 on a prison
value basis. Uh, overall, the
gross savings of the refunding
were were about 8.7 million. Uh,
PV savings of
Under, uh 7 million
And in the in in addition to
saving, uh, the fund the money,
the department actually
shortened its outstanding debt
profile by a year or so, um, the
debt that we're refunding went
out to 2032. We actually
shortened it to 2031. They still
achieve savings in each year.
But then, obviously the bulk of
the savings occur in that last,
uh, that last maturity.
We had, um, initially intended
to sell the bonds.
Last week. Um
But the market rallied quite
significantly. Uh, that first
week of June and so, uh, the
decision was made to let's
potentially pivot to the week
of, uh, June 11th June 10th
through the 13th, which we
ultimately did, Uh, we we took
advantage of
That market rally for a couple
of reasons. One. It's good to to
price into a a rallying market
and to
On the 12th. We were gonna get
the FO MC meeting results and
the the May CP I Consumer Price
index, which
Are both potentially fairly
significant market movers, so we
kind of took a bird in the hand
approach and went ahead and
accelerated the sale into, uh,
June 11th, which I think turned
out to be a a wise choice.
We, um
Basically the during the order
period on the 11th. We
So a very solid subscription
levels. The the issue is
structured kind of,
interestingly, because
Of the 117 million, uh, that we
issued about, Uh, 70.2 million
of it occurred in the 2012 27
maturities. So you maturity So
you had
You know 88 million ish, uh,
principal amounts 2526 and then
28 through 31. But then this
huge maturity and that was just
a function of how the how the
original bonds were structured.
So, um, after the horror period,
we had full subscriptions for
all of the smaller maturities
and very solid subscriptions for
the 2027 maturity. Uh, about
80%.
Or so was, uh, was had orders
for that, so we were able to
reduce yields by
2 to 4 basis points on the 28 to
30 maturities. And, um, I think
the underwriting team did.
Underwrite that $8 million
balance, which I think was
subsequently uh uh they were
able to sell later that day
after we'd given them the verbal
award.
Um
You know, the ratings on the DOT
bonds are very solid. They were
affirmed.
Through the course of this
issue, and, uh
You know, the yield curve does
continue to be oddly shaped, as
you can see on the the graph on
the third page there that
Um, that's you know, we've been
sort of stuck with this for
quite a while. And it is it is.
It used to be very unusual. It's
becoming apparently not so
unusual. It used to be a sort of
a a harbinger of of, uh,
recession, But, um, you know,
until the Fed starts reducing
the short the overnight rate
we're gonna see this inverted
yield curve. And the odd thing
is that the, uh, municipal rates
right now. The one year rate is
the
Until you get out to 2041, and
that just is not
How the world is supposed to
operate, but you know it is what
it is, Um
We had, uh, orders that got the
list of the the main the top 10
entities that that submitted
orders for this transaction and
you can see we had total orders
among those top 10 of about 100
and 63 million, um, and then
smattering it other orders.
Interestingly, of those top five
US trust, Nuveen, et cetera.
They are in the top 20 of, uh,
investors. Uh,
Place orders with the P PR F
program, So we do see some some
overlap of of, uh, interest both
in the P PR F program and the
DOT program. Um, that is all
I've got. I have included
For those who are so inclined
to, you know, summary of the
structure and the the terms of
the the deal following the the
memo here, But
Otherwise, I am happy to answer
any questions and, um,
appreciate the time.
Thank you.
Uh, with the
Good morning, madam Chair and
board members. Thank you for
your time today and the
opportunity to present on the
new NM FA, Uh, building
headquarters. Wanna start with,
uh
Introduction of three key
Project team members that are
here today. First here to help
answer questions if there are
any a second we have our
facilities manager Mark Dalton,
uh, in the back here who's also
joining us? And finally, we have
Simon with FSTR.
Owners representative here
answer questions if there are
any
Um, I want to just really thank
the three of them for the work.
They've done the work they
continue to do to keep this
project on schedule and make
sure we have a quality building.
At the end of it. The done a
trend. We've spent the last
several weeks on a comprehensive
review of this project.
The three of us, uh four of us,
actually, um
Well, three of us working on
with with the Brighton or
contractors and with Loyd and
associates are architects. We've
done multiple site visits. We've
had multiple in person line item
by line item on completed
construction activities on
future construction activities
as well as um going line item by
line item on the budget. Um,
what's been spent what's
expected to be spent? We've
looked at change orders. We've
done all these things. We've
done. Evaluations of
Post demolition.
Uh and, uh, excavation at the
side and water testing and the
start of construction activities
And based on all these
activities we've identified as
CEO. Russell mentioned three new
developments that were not in
the approved budget to start
based on that. We're we're
recommending an increase of 1.24
million to get this project
completed.
And
Move in ready by January.
Um, So the whole idea behind
these reviews is really to
ensure that we have structural
integrity of the bill. Those
were really the main things
we're looking at. So we we first
wanted to determine. Can we
complete this building on
schedule?
The second thing are we gonna be
able to complete the building?
Under the existing budget.
And the third thing is, Are we
gonna identify any critical path
items that would delay the
project or, um, result in cost
overruns? Um, so after all that
we we came to these three areas
that that we need to cover these
new developments. The first one
was really a change in Project
scope, which was with the
electric vehicle charging
station.
Um this is a big chunk of the
increase that we're requesting,
Uh, we did attempt to obtain a
federal grant for this.
Project. We were unsuccessful in
that effort. Um, but we still
feel it's very necessary to put
these EB charging stations and
more disruptions and higher
cost. Um as everyone on this
board knows we are moving
towards zero carbon electricity
and electrification of fleets.
And this we are seeking
$430,000 to cover this cost that
does include a $50,000 in
contingency.
Um, the second development was
really with regards to
furniture.
And when we first, uh, got the
estimates for the furniture with
the, uh, offices, non fixed
offices were configured at the
time there were two small to
meet state mandates. In fact,
they're half the size and then
also they weren't designed for
ergonomics and sound and other
things that
We could ensure, um, staff could
work without disruptions and be
productive. Um, so we are
seeking a $550,000 increase
there to cover the increase in
staff and the new sound in her,
Uh, ergonomic. Uh,
Requirements that we're trying
to meet as well. And then
Lastly, um and I think this has
been reported to the board
before we did have based on the
demolition activities and the
excavation and water testing has
started construction activities.
There were some unanticipated
unexpected things that did come
up during that water intrusions.
Um, we found some structural
issues that that needed to be
addressed. Uh, for instance, we,
um
And the boardroom. We wanna make
sure that doesn't collapse so
that required like new, uh,
anchoring in there with helical
piers and and the foundation and
new structural.
Uh, structures, more concrete
things like that that we found
that we needed to do, um, things
that we had to level up with
with, you know.
Window seals and things like
that, with window breaks and
when and all the window for
outs, all that sort of items to
deal with water intrusions that
we found.
Um, but we also looked at other
items that we identified that we
much rather one is repaving of
the parking lot.
The current budget allows for
Patching and seal coat of that,
But we feel now that the
buildings unoccupied this is an
opportune time to deal with
that.
And so we're recommending that
that we do that The other thing
is, um
When we did the excavation, we
found a very unusual drainage
system.
And we don't feel that's
adequate to protect the new
building, especially the
footings from erosion and and
Potential off site impacts from
poor drainage. So we like to
redesign and and redo the the
drainage system to ensure
Safety of the building as as
well as prevent off site
impacts. Uh, so those are two
other big ticket items.
Um So in short, um, based on all
these activities that we've done
to come to these conclusions, we
are recommending a $1.24 million
increase.
To our capital budget to
complete this building on
schedule and also to ensure that
we have structural integrity and
Thank you. I don't know if you
have any Madam chair members of
the board. No, I think we have
an old building and anytime we
dig, and we
Find excavate. We find
Any questions from board and
Burson
Thank you, Madam Chair I notice
in part of the recommendations
above the table. It talks about
requesting a minimum increase of
1.2. Do you anticipate that this
will really meet the needs? Do
you expect any additional hires?
That would mean additional
reconfiguration? Should that be
1.5?
Um, Madam Chair, a member as
bars and we do believe that this
is the amount we did spend a
significant amount of contact.
Um, we did determine on the cost
projection that we were going to
exceed the existing budget by
$600,000. We had $500,000 in
contingency that we're gonna
blow through. And as most
members on this board know, a 3%
contingency is pretty low, um,
standard industry practice is
789 10% of contingency, so this
would bring us more on par.
With that, But we do think that,
uh, we're not in for any big
surprises. I think the the only
item that could be a critical
path item is the final delivery
of our of the second order of
steel structures so long as
those come in, uh, with on time
in the in the middle of July,
and with the right, uh,
dimensions and elevations and
everything, Um, the building
will be able to be enclosed at
which point there won't be any
surprises. Um, Bryon is a
Ready to proceed with six days a
week on construction at this
point, that's on them. Um so
there won't be any additional
cost. So those are the main
things. Um, right now we've
We're pretty much done with the
helical piers for the
foundation. The concrete work
will be done by the middle of
Of July and then we can start on
this once we have that fully
enclosed building as I and Madam
chair, the other just kind of
wild card out there is the EV
charging stations and P and M.
Um, so they did require a new
site survey which was completed
in early June, and the
expectation is that we've
provided the right cost
estimates. And so that's
430,000 plus an additional
50,000 that's built into that
contingency. So the 300,000 that
we're asking for contingency
50,000 is earmarked
specifically.
For, um, the EV charging
stations, so they're kind of a
wild card out there. Um, but all
the known costs have been
shifted from contingency up to
that budget amount. And so we
have 250,000 as contingency
outside of the EV charging
stations, So I think you know
again, Fingers crossed with P
and M, but because they don't
have a lot of experience in the
new permitting that they're
doing for this, Uh, but we do
think that with all the best
brains at the table that the one
point that, uh 1.24
We'll cover all the costs, OK?
Thank you Any other questions
from?
Just very quickly on EV charters
in the unfortunate event that
you have not managed to sort out
all the permitting the building
will still be perfectly
operational while you have a
nonfunctional EV outside.
Um, so it's worth doing now.
Do I hear emotion?
Keith. I'll make that motion,
says member Burke.
We reviewed it pretty
extensively at the audit
committee and feel comfortable
moving forward.
Is there a second?
I'll second it.
Motion is made and seconded on
the Ame.
Is there any discussion? Not all
those in favor say I
I. I
All those opposed same sign.
Hm?
Thank you. Chair Keith. Members
of the board. The audit
Committee met on June 20th. We
did have a quorum, uh, present,
uh, we reviewed, Uh, several
agenda items first being, uh,
the financial statements and
financial performance
indicators as we do each month
for April. Um we also, uh, heard
heard a brief, uh, presentation
from our external auditor. Uh,
Moss Adams and Aaron Hamilton.
Uh, you know, indicated to us
that we're we're making good.
Progress on our audit and and on
target to complete things, Uh,
on time. At this point, we also
heard a presentation on our
operational excellence and
internal audit update. I think
we call it our assurance program
as well. Um, uh, staff asks us
to approve this plan, uh, for
BDO to do internal audit work
and evaluations. Uh, during this
coming fiscal year, some of the
areas uh, that they'll
Touching or plan to touch or
sales force. Uh, implementation
plan. Uh, HR payroll IT
financial related, Um, audits
and then a collateralization,
um, kind of loan review.
Uh, audit as well. Uh, we did,
uh, approve the plan, as
presented for FY 25.
We also heard and we've already
talked about the NM FA
headquarters project.
And I believe, um our next aena
item will be, uh, resolution
related to the disposal of
obsolete and surplus. Uh,
furniture. Uh, that's uh, in our
existing facilities that we we
rent in Santa Fe, so
With that? That's my, uh,
presentation. I'm open for any
questions and
Thank the committee for for all
their work.
Thank you.
Worry, Madam chair members.
Um, real quickly. Uh, we have a
lot of obsolete furniture. And,
uh, you heard that we're gonna
buy a lot of new furniture.
The question is, what are we
gonna do with that surplus
furniture?
Uh, it's completely uh,
depreciated so it it
It. There's no no value in it.
Certainly that we carry on our
books.
So the question is just, uh,
just how do we dispose of it?
Uh, cause even disposing of it
will cost money.
One of the options that we, uh
we're pursuing at this point is
to leave it in place, and, uh,
with that, allow us to more
quickly get out, and, uh and and
not have to do all of the
repairs that we would normally
have to do.
For the landlord. It we we
haven't concluded those
negotiations We're thinking of
doing, uh, we're we're bringing
this resolution to you as a
measure. Uh, extra measure of
transparency. We're not
required, uh, to to have the
state auditor's office approve
such a disposal. Uh, but we
wanna do that, anyway, just as a
matter of, um, of transparency
and and also keep it in spirit
with that with the audit, we
recommend approve Madam Chair. I
would note that the this
authorizes us to dispose of the
furniture it requires.
I come back and tell you of the
final method of disposal, so
there will be a report back at
the point at which we know how
and what was disposed of, so
we'll have a report on the items
that we disposed of, and the
method in which we disposed of
them, Um, because you don't
otherwise see our inventory list
any other place.
Thank you Any questions from? If
not do I hear a motion?
Seconded.
Motion is all those in favor say
Aye.
I
I think that was the last item
of business on our agenda this
morning. I want to take just a
few minutes. Um, who is served
with us and today with us?
Which I'm very sad about. This
has been, um, absolutely lovely.
I'm leaving state government for
other employment. So actually,
um, I Since you put me on the
spot, I'll put my replacement on
the spot and the audience we
have
Um Mr Ben Shelton, who is the
general counsel for the energy,
Minerals, Natural Resources
Department, and you will be my
replacement.
Um And I hope that, uh, you all
will appreciate as much as I do.
The insight that he brings us at
M nerd, and I'm going to miss
being on this board. I haven't
gotten to be with you very long.
I think it's been about seven
months. Um, but it has really
expanded my awareness of how the
state works how the finances of
the state operated
Um, and it's been an honor going
that far
Our next board meeting will be
July 25th 19 With that the
meeting stands adjourned.
Thank you. Thank you. Bye.
Y'all. Thank you. Bye. You back?
