You'll see the changes there to
the SB 9.
And, uh, least famous is
inwards?
came in.
Um, now moving down the page,
uh, to item, uh, line 27 through
30. This is a reflection of the
new awards.
Uh, 28 through 30 will be
reflected in the actual award
schedule, which I'll take you to
momentarily. Uh, item 27 is just
the potential outyear uh
waivers, which have not tracked
in the award schedule, um.
Moving on, Mr. Chair, uh,
members to the summary of
changes, uh, page 11 in your
e-book.
The very top just denotes the
two action items from the last
council meeting in November 1st
for Zuni, and then moving to the
middle of the page, PSCOC Fun
Project Award schedule detail
modifications. This is just a
detail of all the out of cycle
and new awards coming to this
meeting, um, with color coding
to match uh based on the program
being or green being standards,
blue bean.
Finally, uh, on page 11, very
bottom financial plan
assumptions in summary, uh, you
can see the uncommitted balance
changes from the previous
meeting in November to this
meeting, uh, right now.
Mr. Chair, members if you'll now
turn your attention to page 12
with the award schedule. Um,
you'll denote or you'll see on
the far left column items
highlighted. These are the items
that are being affected this
meeting that are changed. Um, if
you move, uh, your finger or
scroll all the way to the right
with the red border. That is
where we currently are at in
time. Uh, we are in quarter 4
for 2024. Um, so next meeting in
January, you'll see that column
move to 2025 quarter1 once we're
in the next quarter.
Um, there's a few things to note
here, and I, uh, you'll see a
lot of uh blue arrows. So we
have met with Field and
discussed the projects that were
originally estimated in these
quarters and so we adjusted them
based on if they weren't going
to be coming for award this
meeting and then looking at the
next two quarters if they're
going to be coming for awards
for those meetings, um, so we,
we met and looked at each
project individually and move
them accordingly based on when
we think they're actually going
to come to that construction
funding or uh the whatever
funding type it's gonna be.
If you'll turn your attention to
page 14.
The very bottom, Mr. Chair,
members, uh, this is the FY 25
awards. You'll see a big block
of the highlighted text. These
are all of the projects that
have been, are coming for a new
award this meeting?
Um, so they don't have project
numbers yet, they will be
assigned once awarded. I'd also
like to note in the 4th column
from the left that we've added
the uh SSTB.
Um, so once we go over the
recertifications, this is all of
the bonds that these projects
are being associated with as
they're not going to be included
in the December bond sale and
we'll talk about.
And then finally, Mr. Chair
members, last page 15. Uh, this
is a square foot variant. This
is where we track um just the
cost per square foot. We, this
is, um, going to be sunsetted
eventually, but we are still
adding the projects and also
wanted to just denote and call
him P on the very right or 2nd
from the right, you'll see the
two potential outear uh waivers
for uh Silver and Bloomfield
that we wanted to make sure to
include in the financial plan,
as it will affect the committed,
uncommitted balance eventually.
And with that, uh, Mr. Chairman,
was I stand for any questions.
Thank you for the questions from
council members, Ashley.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Matthew. Thank you for the
summary, and I really appreciate
the cleanup work on this
financial plan. Um, I checked
it. It looks good. I just have
one question. I'm hoping you can
clarify. So, um, on page 13,
Matthew, um, towards the bottom
under the FY 23 awards, um,
Or I'm sorry. Apologies. Page 12
under the FY 20 awards.
Um, uh, I saw that Newcom moved
out to the 4th quarter of the
fiscal year, um, and it's
captured, uh, you know, was
captured in the June
certification. So that's already
been accounted for. Can you tell
me, uh, Roswell Mountain View
also appears to be in that 4th
quarter, but it's not captured
in the newer certification. Uh,
can you explain that, or should
it be pushed out further?
So, uh, Roswell Mountain View.
Yeah. And it's the 3rd, uh,
project, uh, under the FY20
awards.
It looks like it was just pushed
out a quarter, um, just
wondering if we should be
capturing that or where we're
capturing that,
uh Mr. uh Ms. Leach members,
yes, that project will be
included in the December.
OK, sale, so it will be coming
up for awards just so we can
cover it.
Oh, it is there. Thank you. I
was just fine. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. That's
all.
Thank you.
additional questions?
We'll move on to the consent
agenda.
A pretty
consent agenda.
Uh, approval of our minute last
meeting, November 12th.
That is based in system-based
award uh additional conditions.
And um
recert.
Mr. Chair, just brief we talk
about the PSCOC minutes also as
it pertains to the additional
conditions. This is in addition
to award language, the fiscal
year 25 awards are further
subject to additional conditions
and are incorporated that is
what came to.
a
OK, and these are.
Uh, affecting.
All of the all of the uh project
agreements.
So, uh
And our consent, we'll handle
this in one motion, so all those
in favor of approving the
consent agenda, please indicate
by saying I.
OK
All those opposed
The agenda is this consent
agenda is approved, we'll move
on to the.
5 award cycle.
We discussed this and you're
going to provide a short
description on each.
Yes, Mr. Chair and members, good
morning, um.
I would like to turn your
attention to page 54.
Uh, this is an informational
item of summarizing the overview
of all of the awards, potential
awards you are about to make.
Um, there are 4 standards-based
awards.
14 systems-based awards, one
pre-K award, and 2, teacher
housing pilot awards for a total
of 21.
Awards with a phase one state
match of 17.9 million in
potential state match out year
of 99 million.
If I could turn your attention
to page 56. Um, this is the
spreadsheet showing all
potential awards that you are
about to make.
Again, um, these are organized
by the program showing the
standards-based systems-based
pre-K and teacher housing,
showing a total potential state
match for both phase one and
outear at 116.9 million.
Mr. Chair, any questions on that
before I proceed with.
Mr. Chair and members on page
57, we have the executive
summary for the FY 25 Capital
Outlay standards-based awards.
Again, there are 4 potential
standards-based awards first to
silver for Cliff Combined
Schools, ranked number 11,
Bloomfield, which is combining
three schools ranked 37, 58, and
71. Rear Rancho for Lincoln
Middle School ranked 88 and Rear
Rancho High School ranked 99.
If I may turn your attention to
page 59, we have the spreadsheet
of the 4 potential projects.
Showing um information regarding
the schools with their ranked
WNMCI score and FCI scores as
well as the project description
and the total estimated project
cost divided into phase one out
your end um local metroductions
for both the local and the
state.
If I could quickly go through
each of these 4 projects, um,
Starting with silver.
Cliff on page 60. Again, as you
remember, the district presented
last month. The district is
requesting a full school
replacement or cliff combined
schools, the facility uh
currently consists of 9
buildings ranging in age from
1950 to 1993, the buildings
themselves, as well as the
systems and infrastructure have
surpassed their functional
lifespan, and all of the
buildings have multiple
condition issues. It is cost
prohibitive to continue
upgrading and improving.
individual systems and buildings
as a whole, he opened and spread
out composition of the school
creates safety issues and it
cannot be secured. Uh, the
school is facing declining
enrollment and therefore has
excess square footage, and
therefore the district does
request a replacement to provide
a safe, modern, effective
learning environment. Again,
this school is ranked number 11
and does meet all requirements
for a standards-based projects.
On the next page, on page 61, we
have our PSA staff
recommendation, PSFA agrees with
the request and application due
to the age of the facilities and
the uh condition throughout um
the facility as well as the
excess gross square footage.
Resulting in unnecessary
maintenance and operations cost.
The scope of work would include
a full replacement of the
facility for 167 students with a
maximum allowable gross square
footage of 50,000.
This would be a typical
two-phase project with phase one
being planning and design to
determine the scope of work
planning, uh, programming,
design and construction
documents with the district
returning for phase 2 funding
for out of cycle when they're
prepared for construction.
We have estimated a Mac cost of
$800 a square foot, which would
result in a potential estimated
total project cost of 54
million.
As you can see, uh, down at the
bottom of that page, we do have
that 54 million separated into
the state and local match both
at the 63 and 37% of state and
local match.
But the district will require a
local match reduction for phase
2, and we have those numbers,
um, shown there at the bottom of
the page of what we'd expect
that um to look like.
On the next page, on page 62, we
do have the district financial
information. Again, the district
can afford phase one of their
local match, but the district
will request and require a local
match reduction for phase 2. The
district did pass a geo bond in
August of 2024, uh, for $25
million which, um, they are
participating in phase one and
we'll.
Um
To dedicate a portion of that
$25 million to this phase two.
the district, uh, with passing
that bond, there may be will
exceed the 10 mil levy mark, and
therefore they do meet
eligibility for the local match
reduction.
On page 63, um, you'll see the
facility description for each of
the buildings, as you can see
the FCI score for all of the
buildings exceeds 60%,
indicating that the
Buildings are ready to be
replaced, and you can see on
page 64, the aerial photograph
of the school showing all of the
facilities. Again, the school is
very spread out, causing
security issues, um, the
district will likely build the
new school in that central
courtyard, um, and it will
likely be phased so that the
district can continue um
operation throughout the
project.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members, um,
I can leave it up for questions
or if you would like to hear
from Mr. Valdez on the
enrollment in demographics, we
can also do.
I think we should just move on.
Sure.
Mr. Charing members next up we
have Bloomfield School District.
They have applied for a
standards-based project to do a
full school replacement and
consolidation. Oops, I'm sorry.
72.
Um, the district is
consolidating central Primary
School, Naba Ai Elementary
School in Mesa Alta Junior High
School.
This strategy to consolidate
would improve effectiveness,
effectiveness and efficiency in
addressing the district needs
while reducing the overall
footprint required to replace
the 3 buildings currently in
use. This would also allow for
the sharing of services across
campuses.
And um in addition, the three
schools have many systems beyond
life cycle and um the buildings
are nearing replacement age. As
you can see, the ranks for the 3
schools are 37, 58, and 71, and
all three schools meet
requirements for
Uh, replacements.
On page 73, we have the PSA
staff recommendation.
Uh, PSA does agree with the
district's request.
for the 3 schools that are
highly ranked, uh, we do agree
with the efficient,
effectiveness of combining these
schools into one, as well as
improving the, uh, systems and
the overall condition of the the
school, the scope of work could
be a full school replacement or
a 5-year enrollment projection
of 1100 students with a maximum
allowable growth square footage
of 120,000587.
This would be another typical uh
phase uh project with phase one
being planning design, and the
district will return for phase 2
for out of cycle construction.
We are estimating a maximum
allowable construction cost of
$700 a square foot, which would
result in an estimated total
project cost of $119.5 million.
As you can see at the bottom of
that page, we do have the local
and state match divided um
between um the uh phase one and
phase 2 without a local match
and with a local match
reduction.
On the next page, we have the
district financial information.
The district did pass a geo bond
in August of 2024, with a bond
sale of $24 million which keeps
their mill levy at 12.02.
Uh, the district will be able to
fund fully fund local match for
phase one, but can partially
fund phase 2 or construction.
Therefore, the district will be
requesting a local match
reduction for phase 2.
With the Mill levy exceeding 12,
the district is eligible for
that local match reduction.
And lastly, on page 75, you'll
see the uh facility descriptions
for all three schools. Several
of these schools have many
different additions and assets.
However, every single one
exceeds an FCI score over 60%,
indicating the schools are ready
to be replaced.
And the aerials um of each
school are on the preceding
pages.
And with that, Mr. Chair
remembers, I stand for
questions, um, and then I can
move on to Rear Rancho.
Mr. Chair and members, next up
we have Rear Rancho Public
Schools. They have requested a
standards-based project for
Lincoln Middle School. This is
uh different and unique. This is
to complete the renovation of
the existing facilities as well
as a systems upgrade, the
district would like to renovate
the interior spaces of the
existing building to include the
renovation of the old gym spaces
to create usable education
spaces, renovation of restrooms,
as well as interior finish
upgrades.
Essentially, the school built a
new, brand new gym. Therefore,
their old gym, um, is available
to be used as other additional
um educational space. The school
has several portables um to the
side of the building that they
would like to move into the
interior of the school.
The school also requires systems
upgrades to include partial roof
replacement, plumbing upgrades,
and fire alarm replacement.
The school is currently ranked
number 88 and does meet all
requirements for a
standards-based project.
Uh, the district can fully fund
the local match of this project.
They also went out for bond in
November of 2023 for $80
million.
And, um, can therefore fund the
projects that they have applied
for.
On the next page, we have the
PSA recommendation, PSA does
agree with this project.
Um
Due to the old main gym
auxiliary gym and associated
spaces are no longer needed due
to the construction of the new
gym, uh, the large spaces
available to renovate and create
additional spaces, um, the three
portables can be moved into this
space. The scope of work would
be a poten or a partial
renovation for 836 students with
a maximum allowable gross square
footage of 101,190.
Uh, the phasing is, um, slightly
unique. We are recommending a
phase one to include a planning
study to determine the classroom
use analysis and preliminary
program of spaces to help
determine what spaces would be
renovated and be um put into
that renovated gym.
We will also do the systems
design and construction in phase
one.
Phase 2 would be design of the
renovation and phase 3 would be
construction out here for the
renovation of that space.
The estimated cost would be a
planning study of $75,000 these
systems upgrades would be 3
million.
And then the renovation would be
3.9 million, totaling 7, just
over 7 million for the total
project cost.
Um, as you can see at the bottom
of that page, we do have the
state and local match divided
into those, um, three phases,
and then on the next page, we
have the facility description
showing um the additions that
have taken place over time, the
FCIs are reaching into the 60s,
that is because this, the
building does require systems
upgrades, the building's FCI
scores will lower once the
system's upgrades are um
completed. The building is, is
not ready for a replacement, and
then you, you can see the
aerial.
below with the red roof being
the new gym and um the portions
of the building inside would be
renovated. He remembers any
questions on Lincoln?
OK. Please proceed.
Lastly, Mr. Chair and members,
we have Rear Rancho Public
Schools is applying for a
standards-based award for an
addition in systems upgrade at
Rear Rancho High School.
The district has requested
construction of an addition to
negate the need for the
remaining portables on campus,
the majority of the portables
are used for special education
classrooms and support spaces.
The school has um many
significant original.
building systems in place that
they need to be replaced at this
time, including partial roof
replacement, HVAC upgrade, LED
lighting upgrade, fire alarm
replacement, and drainage.
The school is currently ranked
number 99 and meets all
requirements for a
standards-based project.
Again, the district can't afford
their local match for this
project.
Uh, I'm following page on 97, we
have the staff recommendation.
We do agree with this request.
However, PSFA does recommend a
planning study to determine the
exist if the existing facility
could support the special
education spaces, or if an
addition is needed.
Uh, for this planning study, we
are recommending to complete a
comprehensive district-wide high
school analysis to include
demographics, enrollment
projections, capacity and
utilization.
Classroom inventory attendance
boundaries, impact of the new
CTE Center School, which is
opening next year and potential
recommendations for how to
handle um the enrollment at the
3 schools, and most importantly,
determine if this addition is
necessary.
We also recommend the systems
upgrades to include roof HBC,
lighting, and fire alarm.
This would be a potential
two-phase with planning and
design. I'm sorry, this would be
a three-phase with the, the
first phase being that planning
study and design of the um
systems-based projects and then
phase two would be uh design of
the addition and then phase 3
would be construction.
Um
We do estimate the planning
study to be 150,000 systems
upgrade 28.8 million and the
addition potentially at 15.7 for
an estimated total project cost
of $44.7 million.
And with that, Mr. Chair and
members, I will turn it over for
question on the standards base.
Thank you.
for that uh summary of each of
these projects, these are
Major project unders based.
And we do have a.
Motion from the award
subcommittee.
Mr. Suli, if you could just
there and then we will open it
up. Mr. Chairman, I move.
The council adopt the awards for
Silver's Lincoln Middle School.
The full, uh, state.
Thank you.
Uh, are there any questions?
Again, anything in particular
that the award subcommittee
Mr. Chair, if I may, I just
wanted to make a comment. I
think the uh documents and how
everything was laid out, uh, for
these awards and those that we
still have yet to act on, uh,
was excellent and made it very
easy for AMS to work through
these, um, these projects,
appreciate the efforts on that,
um, for those of us who aren't
on the ward subcommittee to be
able to get through the
information. Thank you. There
are no further questions then or
comments.
All those in favor of proving
the award subcommittee
recommendation on these 4
projects, please indicate by
saying I.
Ocean passes.
And I, I believe we have some.
Uh, local representatives from
some of these projects here and
They would like to come up, and
this would be an opportunity to
to address the council.
I have to go before Will.
Good idea. Good morning, uh, Mr.
Cherokee and members of the
committee, um, on behalf of
myself and the uh entire school
board uh of Bloomfield Schools.
I just wanted to offer my, my
heartfelt gratitude.
Uh, for this award. It's not
only an investment in community
of Bloomfield, but it's an
investment in education. And we,
we appreciate your continued
support, uh, very much.
Thank you very much for being
here.
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
But in all seriousness, um, on
behalf of Cliff schools over um,
this is a long time coming for
the community of Cliff.
So along with you all done
including Ali Romo.
Thank you again, thank you for
being.
Let's move on then.
To the systems projects and I
know there's several here, so
you might want to be.
Brief
more brief.
Mr. Chair and members, um, next
up we have the FY 25 Capital
Outlay Systems-based Awards on
page 105.
Um, I would like to, um, just
quickly, um, go over the um
staff recommendation, that is to
approve the 14 standards-based
awards totaling $17.1 million.
Uh, I would like to just draw
your attention quickly to PSFA
does recommend full
participation in the total gross
square footage of the potential
systems based to make these
projects whole and allow the
districts to complete, um, have
a comprehensive upgrade and
improvement of the entire
facility to prevent continued
degradation.
of um and extend the lifespan of
the overall facility.
We also recommend on the
demolition projects that the
council fully fund the systems
based demolition awards based on
the district satisfying the
criteria specified in Section
22244, um, the district's, uh,
facilities are all abandoned.
They are, um, they would save on
insurance funding and there is
no practical use for those
facilities.
If I may draw your attention to
page 109, we have the um full
spreadsheet of the 14 potential
standards-based awards.
Um, if I may, uh, I can just
quickly go over this spreadsheet
with all of you, um, and if you
have questions I can answer
those after. Uh, first, we have
grants applying for grants High
School for exterior walls, HVAC
and lighting for a total
estimated project cost of 15.1
million. This project is a
relatively complicated and
therefore PSFA and the district
have determined that a two-phase
approach would be best for this
project, so they will be
returning for that your funding.
After design of these systems is
complete.
A Magordo is applying for
Almogordo High School for the
roofing of the entire facility
for a total estimated project
cost of 14.3 million. Again,
this one also is uh fairly
complex and therefore PSP and
the district both feel that a
two-phase approach would be best
for this. So at this time we are
awarding 7.2 million for phase
one and the district will return
for out of sight, oops, I'm
sorry.
That's total state funding, uh,
729,973, phase one, the district
will return for out your
funding, um, at a later time
once design is complete.
Hatch has uh applied for Hatch
Valley Middle School to include
a roof safety systems, exterior
walls, doors, and drainage or a
total estimated project cost of
585,000.
Eunice has applied for Eunice
High School, uh, plumbing to
include, um, sewer and plumbing
system replacement.
Uh, Logan has applied for roof
and drainage issues are
surrounding the pre-K edition.
Only
Silver has applied for Harrison
Schmidt Elementary School to
include Roof HVAC and Alarm.
We are also um going to include
on this uh project, a
districtwide planning study to
include capacity and utilization
analysis.
For all of the town of Silver
Area Schools, demographic
analysis and recommendations
based on the study findings for
efficient use of school
facilities, the district is
contemplating right-sizing
facility and so we are
supporting um that need with uh
A planning study to determine
the feasibility of that.
So that um total estimated
project cost is just over 3
million, a single-phase project.
Silver has also applied for La
Fata Middle School for the fire
alarm.
Clayton has applied for Clayton
Junior High School slash Kaiser
Elementary School for a fire
alarm.
And uh Riodoso has applied for
Riodoso High School to include
exterior walls, HVAC, lighting,
and plumbing.
Uh, with the focus need on the
educational spaces. This one as
well is um quite complex in the
systems and the scope of work
needed, therefore, PSA and the
district have agreed a two-page
approach is best for this
project as well.
And then at the bottom of the
page, the last 5 districts have
applied for demolition of
abandoned facilities, those
include Cimarron, to demolish
the old bus barn, Corona to
demolish and abandoned teacher
housing unit.
Grants to demolish uh the
Old district office and old
professional learning center.
Lovington to uh demolish a
district-owned facility. It's an
old house and church.
And to carry to demolish the old
abandoned mountain View
Elementary School.
In total, we have a potential
state match of 30.4 million with
phase one at 7.9 million and a
potential outyear of 22.4
million in state funding.
And with that, Mr. Chair and
members, I stand for questions
and I can go over any of these
in detail if you would like.
Uh, let's go to the motion we
have did uh
Let, let's go to. Is the
microphone OK?
OK.
Um, I just have a question about
um these ones that are going to
two phases and if they're
Gonna cause um delays in, in
equipment and stuff like that.
Is there
Provisions so that the, during
the design phase, they can
pre-order materials or anything
like that.
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Ingham, I, I
think there's always an option
for um early purchase, although,
um, that's typically slated for
construction manager at risk
projects.
Um
I don't think that this will
hold up the ordering of material
more so than we're just making
sure that the scope is buttoned
up correctly before.
Before we award the full amount,
if you will.
Any other questions?
I have a question, uh.
Is there just the one projects
that
that's a two faces there were 3
projects that would have 2 phase
grants, Elmogordo and Riodoso.
And, um, because I, I know that,
you know, we're
We're wanting to expedite these
projects as much as possible,
and the systems projects uh seem
to lend themselves to that more.
So again,
I'm pleased that we're able to
fund the rest of them.
Uh, in one phase so that we can
get those uh completed. Mr.
Chair and members, the, the
two-phase approach is really to
benefit uh both the district and
and the council so we don't have
to return.
Um, once we do the design and
real hammered out at this time.
Yeah.
Um, I, I did look at the demo
costs, they seem to be really,
uh, these are.
These aren't quotes. These are
just estimates by square foot.
Uh, Mr. Chair and members, a
couple of the districts did have
some quotes that we could work
with, um, we've been doing the
demolition projects for a few
years now or a few cycles, and
so we were starting to gather
data and, and, um,
Have more realistic estimates on
the demolition. um like.
Demo one Tetridge.
Uh, that's an easy one to just
take a.
We are including um site work on
several of these and several of
these sites are pretty
complicated and, and um
potentially problematic and
we're also dealing with asbestos
and abatement issues. And so in
some cases we've added more
contingency than others to
ensure that we have sufficient
funding.
Uh, so we don't have to come
back to the council.
OK, so if there, if there is no
um
asbestos.
and Mr. Chan members, I would
just say that that one in
particular is in Corona, New
Mexico, which if you've been to
Corona, it's, there's not a lot
around it. It takes a while to
Get that material to a landfill,
if you will. So there, those are
some of the reasons why they,
they come in a little. Alright.
Any other questions?
not, we're ready for the motion
from the award subcommittee, Mr.
City.
Uh, Mr. Chair, I would, uh, move
that the council approved the
systems-based capital outlay
awards detailed in exhibit A.
Um, for a total estate funding
of 7.
Thank you.
There be no further questions or
comment, all those in favor of
approving the systems-based
projects, awards, please
indicate by saying I.
Ocean passes or any
Persons in the audience on on.
These projects
would want. Good morning, Mr.
Thank you.
Very much. Right.
Moving quickly here, so let's
move on to the next oops.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the council. My name is
Gordon King, representing Maria
Deo Municipal School District on
behalf of my superintendent, uh
renovation of our high school
Warriors.
Next then is the uh
the pre-K.
Mr. Cha members, uh, next we
have the FY 25 Capital Outlay
pre-kindergarten awards, uh,
today we have one potential
award for rear Rancho Shining
Stars preschool.
Uh, this would include a
planning study as well and as an
addition. Um, we do have on page
187, the spreadsheet showing the
project description as well as
the estimated cost for phase 1
and phase 2 at the local and
state level.
Uh, but if I could turn your
attention to page 188, um, on
the recommendation report. This
is
Um, a little bit of a
complicated project, um, the
district initially applied for 2
separate pre-kindergarten
awards, the first, uh, is to
create a second pre-kindergarten
facility within the district.
The district was requesting to
convert Questa del Sol
Elementary School into a
pre-kindergarten facility hub on
the southern end of the
district.
Um, this would be in preparation
of the district um moving
towards full day
pre-kindergarten. This would
allow the district to serve the
current enrollment numbers that
are at Shining Stars by moving
half of those students to the uh
southern school.
Secondly, the district applied
for the design and construction
of a kitchen and cafeteria at
Shining Stars Preschool, this
existing school does not have a
kitchen and cafeteria, but they
will need one once the district
moves to full day
pre-kindergarten so that the
school can serve lunch to the
students.
Um, so all of this is in
preparation um of the transition
that the district is gearing up
for, um, for a full day. Again,
uh, the district can't afford
the local match, uh, they did a
uh past an $80 million bond in
last November.
Um, although for the
pre-kindergarten due to SB 131,
the local match would be reduced
by 1/2 of the regular local
share, not 1/3.
Um, on page 189, you'll see the
PS based staff recommendation.
We do agree with the district's,
um, strategy to move towards
full day.
Um, however, we do recommend um
the design and construction of
the kitchen and cafeteria at the
existing Shining Stars
Preschool.
Which um was their initial
application, and then secondly,
uh we have um discussed with the
district and have determined
that we would like to start with
a planning study, and that is
what we would recommend to the
council, uh, to do a
district-wide analysis of
enrollment projections,
educational programs, capacity
and utilization, space needs,
potential boundaries, etc. in
order to help the district
create this transition plan.
Um, this study would be tied to
the shining stars, uh, project,
because this is where the
students are currently served,
um, this study may help the
district determine if Westa
delul is the um best option for
transitioning into full day or
if there are other options the
district would like to pursue
and therefore that study may
spawn a secondary project at a
later time in order to help, uh,
the district meet those needs.
Um, so therefore, the, the,
there's a
a two-phase currently.
The first phase would be the
that planning study as well as
the design of the kitchen
cafeteria and then phase two,
the district can return for
construction funding for the
kitchen cafeteria edition, as
well as a potential spawned
project for the secondary
project.
Right now we are estimating a
potential total project cost of
3.9 million, that includes
100,000 for the addition, as
well as a $3.8 million for the
um, and as you can see on page
181, we do have or I'm sorry,
190, we have the aerial of the
existing um shining stars
preschool, which was constructed
in 2020.
And with that, Mr. Chair and
members, I will turn it over for
questions.
Questions on the
Mr. Chair, at least, I just want
to, um,
Reference our conversation in
awards regarding the, the
timeline for the study itself
and I'm concerned um that I had
just that it wouldn't um delay
things too long and so just want
to say for counsel that staff
that that the study could be
done.
Uh, very quickly, so they can.
Make a decision and proceed.
That's it. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Tay, I just had a, a
comment and it one first half.
Um, Ms. Ramos and your team are
collaborating with their early
childhood education and care
department and making those
awards, that's much uh to make
sure um we're making the right
decisions for the community and
that is, you know, been game
changing, I think for us. I also
just wanted to make the comment
in support of the land grant. I
think we heard at the December
meeting due to a lot of
different issues in Rio Rancho
transportation, um, we all know
Rio Rancho is growing uh rapidly
compared to other.
that I think
We're looking forward to
collaborating with the school
district and with PSFA on the,
on the planning grant to make
sure it really meets the needs
of their district, including um
that continuation of allowing
for half day, uh, pre-K and then
in pre-K because of facilities,
it closed by saying on that
planning and just for members of
the, the council that aren't
aware Rio Rancho compared to
other, you know, jurisdictions
of its size or school districts
of its sizes as a very uh kind
of low saturation.
of pre-K, um, and that's because
it's grown and the
infrastructure has not kept up,
and so I think this is a really
great opportunity to show how we
can better serve both children
inclusive.
Any other questions or comments?
Mr. Chair, I would move council
approval.
Of the pre-kindergarten, uh,
capital Ola award detailed in
your book under exhibit A.
Um
Thank you.
All those in favor of approving
the project, please indicate by
saying I
host.
Or passes.
We'll move on to our
Uh
Future housing awards.
Mr. Chair and members, we have
the FY 25 Capital Olay pilot
Teacher Housing Awards, this
today we have two potential
awards. The first is for Corona,
for
To teacher housing duplexes for
a total of 4 units.
Um
With a state match of 394,320,
and then we have hatch for 5
teacher housing units for the
state match of 629,200.
Uh, as you can see on page 199,
uh, we have the, uh, two
projects listed there, um, with
the
Potential project description
and uh potential project costs
with the state and local match.
um,
Again, the corona is applying
for the two duplexes, which
would be modular units, the
district does meet requirements
for this program. This would be
a single phase project.
With a total project cost of
744,000.
Um, and then hatch again 5
teacher housing units, uh.
which would be for 4 brand new
units as well as a replacement
unit. The district does meet
requirements for this potential
project.
And it would be a single-phase
project to install the 5
manufactured housing units for
total project cost of 700 and
with that, Mr. Chair and
members, I turned.
Yes. Um, Mr. Chair, I just want
to, um, thank both uh Corona and
Hatch, uh, school districts.
Um, the cost of housing is is
much, much lower than anything
that we've seen, and I'm really
pleased that they're able to to
construct the much needed
teacher housing uh for these
costs, so thank you for that
effort.
So one of the things that I want
to highlight is that uh
Through these presentations, uh,
hatch, uh, when the
superintendent, you know,
presented, you know, one of the
things having housing within
that school district, you know,
uh, you know, maybe a teacher
has kids or something, uh, they
partake in, you know, that
school district, so.
I really liked that community. I
think is key in all of this is.
You know, providing this housing
is, you know, providing it
within.
There are no further comments or
questions in all those in favor
of approving these projects,
please indicate by saying I.
It was a
3 months on the uh
From Rancho or Corona, I think I
see Superintendent.
Mr. Chair, uh, Kurt Cloff,
Superintendent of Corona.
Uh, the board on behalf of the
board, our community and our
staff, we were really excited
about this project, Secretary
Beer, I'm glad you looked at the
hard work we tried to do to keep
housing costs down.
Um, this is an exciting time for
our district, and I want to
assure Mr. Ingram, we're aware
of the costs of everything that
goes on in Corona and everything
else, and this is part of a long
term building phase for our
district, as I mentioned in our
application, we're using this as
the swing phase I'm looking at a
building and long-term teacher
housing projects for the future.
This is step one of getting
corona new facilities and
everything else and we greatly
appreciate and thank the support
from PSCOC PSFA, and we're
willing to work to stay within
the cost. I got a commend.
Mr. Ficklin. I've worked with
him now with 2 districts with
his background. He gave me some
ideas that
I would have probably not
thought of, and PSFA Ryan, Elise
have been great to work with and
their staff has been incredible
for us and looking forward to
working with you in the future
on other building projects, good
morning, Mr. Chair, members. My
name's Kayley Weimerskirch with
RBC Capital Markets, uh, the
municipal advisor for Hatch
Valley Public School District
who fortunately couldn't make it
this morning, but asked that I
extend my thanks, my gratitude
on behalf of the district for
both your support of the middle
school project and also for the
uh the district's teachers
project too, you know, your
support behind these projects
benefits not only
the district, but also the local
community there and uh we're,
we're very thankful. Thank you.
Thank you.
Good work. I'd like to
compliment, although we still
have some.
Um
Out of cycle awards to go
through, uh.
I know that the.
Applicants, staff.
And our
Committees worked very hard in
reviewing these applications.
First of all, and putting them
together, reviewing them, and
now.
Implementing them, so thank you
for all your hard work at the
local level and stable.
This week
Far too improving the
educational facilities.
Uh, so let's move on then to the
Auto Cycle awards.
And the first is um Maxwell
combined. Are we gonna take
these individually again?
Director Cilli, would you, Mr.
Chair Director S Lee, would you
like us to walk through them,
um, before your motion call, OK.
Yeah, let's let's take a look.
Mr. Chair remembers before I get
started here, I wanted to um
take a minute to introduce the
newest member to the PSFA Field
group.
Miss Candice Thompson. Hello.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Good
morning, members of the
committee. Um, I look forward to
this new adventure and, uh,
doing great things for our
students and districts and.
Thanks for
Coming to the
Other side of it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I'm glad
you see it that way as well.
We're excited to have her.
Mr. Chair members, um, I'll go
through, uh, briefly each one of
these projects, um, starting on
page 208 for Maxwell combined.
Maxwell combined or Maxwell
municipal schools is requesting
an additional 8000 gross square
foot to the original original
45,000 originally awarded gross
Square foot.
PSFA staff recommends.
Awarding an additional 6,171
gross square foot for a total of
5 51,171 gross square foot.
The current schematic design,
um, phase that they're in, the
area is designed at 53,046 gross
square foot.
The district's request is for
approximately 15% of the
original award.
And staff recommendation is for
approximately 12% of the
original award, which is 6100.
6,171 gross square foot.
Some spaces that are ineligible
for PSCOC funding are athletic
spaces totaling 1,80075 gross
square foot.
The spaces that PSFA does
recommend.
for a larger cafeteria, larger
admin space, specialized
classroom for art, construction,
wood, and welding shop plus
storage and some tear.
Members, Mr. Chair, if you turn
to page 209, the uh the
potential fiscal impact is about
4.4 million.
When the district comes for the
additional construction phase
funding.
They will be sinking, they may
be seeking approval of a full or
a partial local match reduction.
With that members I'll stand for
any questions.
confused.
Um
It it looks like
Local mass reduction for this,
this phase of the project.
And then on page 211, it says
that the uh
School has, uh, does have
adequate funds.
Not quite understanding why.
Mr. Chair, um, this request is
not for the additional funding
request, page 209 basically
shows the fiscal impact of, of
adding the additional gross
square footage and the district
did have their share for the
first phase of this project for
phase one, they will be
returning for phase 2 or
potential um waiver reduction.
OK.
to leave for the motion, uh,
move adoption of the in favor of
approving the subcommittee
recommendation, please indicate
by saying no. Those opposed.
O
Who
High school project.
And Mr. Chair, before we move
on, just something to point out
about Maxwell very quickly is
that is um another K-12 or
pre-K12 combination school.
Um, that was originally awarded
at 45,000 square feet. We have
now seen 4 to 5 of these that
have come in more in line with
this 50 to 55,000 square foot
mark, and so we have a better
idea of what these combination
schools are gonna need moving
forward.
And um the project in cliff that
was just approved and awarded
was for 50,000 square feet, so
we've, we've increased the
baseline to that 50,000 mark.
Um, and I just wanted to point
that out to the
To this council.
Before we moved on. Thank you.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, we have a,
um, we have a potential motion.
Um, excuse me, let me get
working.
219. Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Um, so we have a, a council
approval to amend the current um
standards-based award for Gallup
McKinley schools for through
high school to, um, part one is
not participate in additional
athletic space.
Um, square footage that was
requested by the district and
part two, of the motion is to
reduce the awarded design
capacity from the current 477
students to 390 students.
Uh
Or uh maximum gross square
footage to be reduced from
84,350 to 71,998.
Uh, the district did submit a
letter requesting participation
in additional 12,786 square feet
of athletic space.
Um, staff cannot recommend
participation in that requested
additional athletics place, um.
For the addict, uh, the APG.
Um, just a few key points to
quickly go over, um, design
professional through schematic
design programmed uh the
building at 71,986,000 gross
square feet for 390 students.
Um, this is 12,364 square feet
below the awarded maximum
allowable GSF of 84,000,350.
Um, however, as we've, we've
mentioned, um, and Mr. Valdez is
here to talk about the
projections, um.
The, the, the design has been to
the 390 version of it, which is
more closely related to the
projection that we're seeing in
Uh, projected student
enrollment.
Um
As mentioned, the district did
request additional 12,786 square
feet for athletic spaces, um,
that are considered above
allowable.
Uh, 5400 square feet of bleacher
space, an additional 2000 square
feet for a larger gym.
Um, and then a wrestling room
and some other items associated
more with athletics like a
concession space.
Um, and
Uh, I'll let Mr. Valdez speak
just very quickly to the
projection just to paint the
whole picture. And members of as
of this this 2023, 24 school
year through high school had an
enrollment of 383, and the
enrollment projections is
relatively flat to that 390, so
we still support that 390.
During COVID, they had a bump in
enrollment due to, um, kids
moving back or people parents
moving back to uh the area to be
near family during COVID. Also,
Gallup actually gained students
from other alternative education
models in the area who
transferred into the Gallup
School District, and also they
also district also enrolled
online students as well. So you
saw a bump, but it's coming back
down. So we're confident with.
And Mr. Chair, that, that's
illustrated on page 222 of the
projections.
And with that, um, I will stand
for questions. I will mention
that the district is here, Mr.
Chair. Um.
And not sure if we have if, if
they want comment or if they
have comment or not.
Sure, we'd like to hear from the
district. Can we hear them?
We've we've heard the motion,
but just maybe confirmed that
the.
the
Uh
Someone here from Gel?
My name is Katherine Chrysler.
I'm the lead director here
representing our district
leadership and.
And I appreciate you giving me
the moment.
to share the reasoning for this
request.
And I did want to make one quick
correction. There is no weight
room. We, we did have our to
that and so there is no weight
room space in the
Additional space that we're
asking for.
One of the things that we wish
to comment on is that in many
places in the adequacy
guideline, it mentions best
practability to come to the
council and to the PSFA to
request um exceptions to those
adequacy guidelines. We have
found that the guidelines were
not written to consider the
needs of our rural communities
and also.
We are looking for the future.
This is a facility that we hope
to last 50 years, and we do not
wish to, one of the reasons that
we are asking for this
additional space, we wish to
make it very clear, is not for
community use, it is for our
students. It is not only for
athletics, but it is also for
academics. It will be a
multi-purpose space. We are not
asking for an auditorium, for
example, this space is the only
cent in their students, and we
Sincerely request.
Your consideration is a.
Has uh undergone.
Very
Difficult time. It is one of our
communities with the highest
rates of student suicidal
ideation.
And in fact, in the past, the
Navajo Nation actually declared
a state of emergency because
suicide rates. So our request
genuinely is for our students
and for their ability to be able
to academic and athletic
activities, we believe that in
the past it was not fully
understood how much athletics
also plays a part in the total
education of our students. And
so this is the reason why we
also, you know, through high
school is at the heart of a
community where
The culture is for full and
entire family participation. And
one of the issues that we have
noticed is when we have these
smaller built facilities, we
cannot accommodate community and
family participation in these
events, we have to limit
ticketing to graduation events,
to cultural as well as academic
extracurricular activities. So
as I said, we, we genuinely are
not asking for this larger
facility or just some frivolous
use. It
is for our students.
Thank you.
Um, full committees.
Um
The subcommittee really looked
at this project for a level of
participation in.
Athletics and other uh is very
real, uh, in this part and
frankly is part of the local.
I think it's important that as
we are moving into the
New adequacy standards, the
councils.
Fully understanding of what,
what, how athletics fits a
better understanding for myself,
what we're really talking about
in terms of usage, the
Practicality of, you know, how
ask, um, I know you're reviewing
your um.
How that would, um, how it would
affect this decision, um, I
think I mean the fact that we
are
In the process of, of reflecting
on those.
Uh, this specific project and
Um, the other question is, is
the district going to have the
funds to do this?
Without our um participation, or
is this gonna
Really restrict the actual
building of that that facility,
Mr. Chair, Mr. Ingham, I'll let
the district answer the second
question with regards to the
first question, we have our um
adequacy standards public
hearing meeting this week.
After that, uh, we will be
publishing the new adequacy
standards, um, eminently.
I will say that again, to remind
the council that the standards,
the adequacy standards are the
bare minimum.
That is what we use as our
measuring stick to go assess
buildings.
The adequacy planning guide
would be, if you will, the
maximum. And so I would say
things like,
Uh, athletics would be better
addressed in the adequacy
planning guide work.
Uh, which is going to take 6 to
12 months to revise after we get
this adequacy standard
published.
Uh, my next main charge is
revising those, the, the
planning guide itself.
Um, at which time I will be
bringing things to this council
for um
Your direction
On, on which way we want these
uh planning guide.
Uh, movements to go, if you
will.
So right now it doesn't affect
the athletics, to answer your
question, uh, Mr. Chair and Mr.
Ingham, the adequacy planning
guide may affect
This
But without having several
meetings and um bringing things
to this council for approval. I
can't speak to what and or or
would or will not be in that.
Revised planning guide.
Waiting to see it, respond about
whether or not you're going to.
On this project.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, the answer to that
question, we are at our maximum
bonding, raising the tax rate
for our
rural and low income communities
but maybe it's not necessary,
uh, that is, uh, by taking
action today, subcommittee.
Would that prohibit
Yeah.
No, Mr. Chair, that wouldn't
prohibit the district from
utilizing their own, their own
funding for this additional
athletic space, um, as we like
to tell districts.
We're not here to tell you what
you can and can't build. We're
here to tell you what the
council can and cannot fund.
Based on statute and and policy,
and this, this uh
Policy or statute or uh
Has been uh
re p li ed consistently.
In the past.
Yes, Mr. Chair, when it comes to
these athletic spaces, uh, we,
we try very hard to stay
consistent. I, I may, um, I
wanted to correct. I may have
misspoke and said weight room
earlier, I meant wrestling room.
Um,
But yes, Mr. Chair, to answer
your question,
We, we stay as consistent as we
can, uh, from project to
project, especially when it
comes to things that are not.
Um, that cannot be supported
with uh an educational delivery.
Uh, or an FTE or a program at
this time.
I may, um, you know, kind of
pushing the priority.
And you'll hear.
Your needs are based on
What's the, the
Mr. Chair, um,
Members, uh, we do not have that
number right now, I believe, Mr.
Parks is looking for it, um, but
we will get that to you.
As soon as possible.
Further comment or question.
We have motion
At the subcommittee, so all
those in favor of approving the
subcommittee motion, please
indicate by saying I
anyone opposed.
Motion passes and we hope that
uh
can prioritize that amongst your
18 projects currently.
To send some money to.
So again, thank you and uh the
motion passes and we'll move on
to.
The next project is
Dan Elementary Mr. Chair,
members like to turn your
attention to page 234.
This is a request for Astancia
Elementary School.
Estanza municipal schools is
requesting an increasing to the
awarded maximum of the gross of
the maximum allowable gross
square footage of 45,64569 gross
square foot and PSFA does
recommend the additional square
footage of 4569.
Um
The PSCOC originally awarded
49,956 gross square foot, and
currently the schematic design
phase is 54,525.
The request for increased area
of 4500 gross square foot is
approximately 8% of the original
award.
And majority of this room is
doing uh is due to the, this is
an existing facility.
The majority of these classrooms
are existing, so in order to fit
the mold, we had to add a little
bit to each classroom, which
pushed us over the
allowablegross square footage,
Mr. Chair members, I'd like to
turn your attention to page 235,
um, this is, uh, the potential
fiscal impact of the increased
gross square footage of 1.1
million.
With that, Mr. Chair members
don't stand for any questions.
The ready for yes.
Move adoption of the stance here
a subcommittee motion.
Uh, to approve the.
Request
Are there any questions or
comments?
Not then all those in favor,
please indicate by saying I
a post.
And there.
not
Any comments?
Uh, this projectiterate that
we're not trying to really
downsizing, moving from 3
buildings into 1, and very much
appreciate that when I came and
met with my board with you a
year. We were at the very
beginning of a dream.
Let's move on to Dennis Chavis
Elementary School in Berlin.
Right, Mr. Chair, members, um,
this one starts on page 243, and
this is for P19018 Dennis Chavez
Elementary School in Berlin, New
Mexico.
La Consolidated schools is
requesting construction phase
funding for the replacement
renovation of Dennis Chavez
Elementary School. Included in
this
Construction phase funding is
replacement of the school's
existing water well, due to
insufficient flow from existing
domestic water wells. Some of
the work involved in that is,
um,
Drilling of the well, the
associated equipment, the
electrical work, domestic and
fire tank storage.
This request is for 53,112 gross
square foot, which is 46,680 of
that gross square foot, this new
construction, 6,432 is
renovation to the existing gym.
And this also includes an
additional 1300 gross square
foot for an additional pre-K
classroom that was added in the
design due um based on the
requirement for the New Mexico
pre-K and full day.
The bad amounts came in at $437
a square foot and the total
project cost of 544, a square
foot.
There was 4 bidders on this job,
Jane's Court, Bradbury Stam,
wheel constructors, and
enterprise builders.
With that
I will stand for. Questions or
comments?
Um, so does the, it's, it's a
that it was a tank.
So the question is, was this
required to um
Keep your virus suppression
system adequate and so.
Is that part of the flow
restrictions? Yes, that's what I
wanted to. And Mr. Chair,
members, yes, that is correct.
There was a insufficient flow.
If not, then all those in favor
of approving the project, please
indicate by saying I.
It was a post.
Good afternoon.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
committee. Thank you so much for
your continued support of our
project. This will have a great
impact on our Los Traves uh
community where this uh school
will be going into and we we
appreciate the continued
support. Thank you. Thank you.
The Duranus pre-K.
Project in Albuquerque.
Mr. Chair, members, I'd like to
turn your attention to page 256.
This is a construction funding
request for K-24002.
Uranus early childhood center.
this award, uh, the original
award included a maximum of
50,000879 gross square foot.
And currently, the design is for
47,313 gross square foot.
Out of that total gross square
footage, 37,262 gross square
foot is new construction, about
10,000 gross square foot is
renovation work. There were two
general contractors, Bradbury
Stam and Enterprise Builders
that bid on this project, and it
did come in at $550 a square
foot.
For the bed amount and 659 for
total project cost.
then, uh, all those in favor of
approving the request, please
indicate by saying I
a post.
And we're gonna hear academy
first, is that correct? I, I
believe the district APS is
here. I'm not sure if they want
to come up.
OK, we had that uh
Switch in the two projects,
we'll be hearing G and then F.
Is that correct?
Good morning. Thank you very
much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you and thank you for all
the work you do.
OK, Mr. Chair, I believe we, we
switched items F and G, so we're
talking um item G823001,
preschool Academy East for
Farmington, uh, school district.
This is a construction funding
request.
Page 288.
My apologies, Mr. Chair. Page
288.
Um
Mr. Chair, we, we have a
potential motion in, in front of
us that was um
Uh, recommended by subcommittee.
Um, however, Mr. Chair, Director
Sali, do you want me to discuss?
kind of what's been going on.
OK.
Or
Part of the issues they had
multiple projects that they um
waiver of local match.
And we asked
Prioritize
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair
and Director. So, um, as you
just heard, the um items F and G
kind of collide a little bit.
It's the same district. They did
request a local match reduction
on both projects.
Um, and we have heard from this.
Um, we have heard from this
council about the importance of
prioritizing projects, getting,
getting the construction funding
out sooner. Um,
And we have relayed that down to
the districts as well when it
comes to um not only coming
forward for a local match
reduction, but also new projects
in particular.
Um, kind of get, get what's done
first before you come forward
for more projects.
Um, and so,
We, uh, staff had a, a good
conversation with the district
and um the district responded
with um
Uh, uh, a follow-up response
which included they, they plan
on
Uh, rescinding the um
There's 2 standards-based awards
that the district currently has
in place, and they plan on
rescinding those two awards.
And um making the pre-K their uh
priority for the local match
reduction.
As well as um the district is
here to talk today. I believe
that they will move forward with
the Piedra Vista High School
project.
Um, if they are in fact
Uh, approved for this local
match reduction on the pre-K
facility.
Um
And so I just wanted to point
out that uh Farmington has done
the hard work and made hard
decisions.
Uh, to, to come um to this
agreement that we're at right
now, and I think staff is now
more comfortable making the
recommendation for the local
match reduction on the pre-K
facility.
Um, and
Mr. Chair, with that, I'll, I'll
turn it back over to director
Sali.
Absolutely, um, Mr. Chair, so
Um, the revised
Motion would be, um, council
approval to amend the current
2022, 2023 pre-K-based award to
Farmington Municipal Schools for
preschool Academy East.
To include construction phase
funding for a replacement
facility to the maximum
allowable gross square footage
of 51,929 gross square feet.
Totaling 39 million to 39 511.
Including a waiver of the local
match totaling 24,72892.
For a revised state match of 39
to 39, 5:11 at 100%.
Thank you.
Questions?
The, the, it's been clear they
they tried to reach the um
Level of I don't understand the
yield and and why they
When they did did when they go
for the
uh,
and that's why they came out
just below. Mr. Chairman
Stringham, I can, I can explain
that. Um, so that is one of the
pieces that AMS reviewed was
yield controlled mail rate
versus non-yield controlled and
yield control is something that
the, the district does not have
control over, that is, um,
Statutory. It's, it's public
education department and and
other um agencies that create
that yield control. And so our
recommendation was to use the.
The raw data, if you will,
instead of the yield controlled
data and so they are, they are
above the 10 mil if we don't use
the yield controlled version.
They, they do meet the criteria
based on AMSs and full councils,
um, approval of
Um, the, the way we intend to do
this moving forward, I did go
through that.
In the EMS meeting. It's just
Foreign to me and I did not
thank you.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Ingham, I did not
think I would know this much
about bonding.
It's gonna be.
OK, and get ready for more
during the uh.
There are no further questions,
then.
All those in favor of the.
Revised recommendation, please
indicate by saying I.
Fassus.
And we'll move on to the next.
Mr. Chair and members, um,
Item F, which is on page.
351.
I'm sorry, 270.
51 would mean we were done.
Um
This is, uh, uh,
Council approval to amend.
Um, the systems-based award for
Farmington municipal schools for
Piedra Vista High School.
Uh
This is construction phase
funding, totaling 10.8 million
with a state match of 4.7
million and a local match of um
6 million.
For the replacement of the
heating and ventilation system,
um,
To a maximum level growth square
footage of 176, 979.
Uh, as we just discussed, Mr.
Chair, this one, was a request
for a local match reduction as
well.
Um, that option was not approved
or recommended by subcommittee,
um, and therefore, we're
recommending the, the regular
splits.
Um, on this project.
And with that, I'll stand for
questions.
Questions, comments?
And all those in favor.
Of approving this project,
please indicate by saying I.
Yes.
I just uh
Make sure everybody the motion
that it was just adopted.
All right. Does anyone here from
Farmington?
Yes, Mr. Chair.
the
Mr. Jar council members, uh, I
just wanted to tell you, thank
you for your continued support
of Farmington schools and also
thank you to the PSFA for
helping us get started on this
new project and um.
As always, Thank you.
My name is Taisha. I'm the
principal at Farmington
Preschool Academy East, I
forgive me now, I'm preschool
and so thank you so much for our
award, um, it's, it's been a
long time coming. I, I
appreciate your support and not
only um early childhood, but
you've also um supported early
intervention for our youngest
learners within our state, so
that we can also close those
educational gaps for special
education students and provide a
building that they can be placed
in their.
least restrictive environment
and have access to typically
developing peers. So above and
beyond just a new building, you
have just helped the children of
the state and so many great ways
and I greatly, greatly
appreciate it. So thank you, and
I'm probably the most emotional
person here, but I'm preschool
and I already apologize. So
thank you again.
Thank you for your emotion
on priority to the paper and
Right.
We'll move on to other business
then?
December bond sale.
EMS on this or is this some
more?
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members, as it pertains to the
December bond sale. I'm gonna
start. I'm gonna hand it over to
Mr. Shimmel, but I want to start
by saying, um, there was no
recommendation at the AMS at
this point. Uh, there was some
conversation that was had that
Miss Leach brought up some
excellent points based on
comparing this December bond
sale, comparing it to the
financial plan, um, validating
that uncommitted balance on the
financial plan, but also
Taking a look at, taking a look
at the award schedule as to
looking at the future projects
and why aren't they on the bond
sale, and if they're not, where,
where do they reside?
Um, so with that, I'm going to
refer to Mr. Shimmel, but then
I'll take it back with a little
further clarifications on how,
uh, we can.
Mr. Chair, members, uh, so
turning your attention to page
325, we'll talk about the
December bond sale, go through
the executive summary. So the
estimated SST SSTB proceeds for
the um let's say December,
excuse me.
December 2024 bond sale have
been estimated at 144
million199,205 dollars and 0
cents. Uh, the 5, there are 5
projects that would be certified
on this bond sale as detailed
below. Uh, I'll go through the
districts including Roswell,
Estancia, Albuquerque Public
Schools, Gallup Thoreau, and
Maxwell.
Uh, the, the projects you see
there are included in the 1st 2
quarters of the upcoming uh
fiscal year.
Or starting basically from
quarter 1 and quarter 2, so
January to March, which will
have one meeting, as you know,
session will begin, so we'll
just have the meeting in January
and then picking back up
potentially in April, so April,
May and June. Um, so if you look
at the financial plan, all of
these projects are included on
quarters 1 and 2, the projects
that are not included. There's
42 of them were included on a
previous bond sale and then the
other two can be covered with
carry over their small systems
projects, so we're not concerned
with the, the cost going in.
Uh, and with that, uh, I will
pass it back to Director Romero
for final comments.
Chair, members, if you also look
at page 329 is a
Spreadsheet that was used to
determine what the bond sale
was, but also I want to bring uh
to point that we've gotten a lot
better on identifying what
projects are coming forward and
uh assigning those to these bond
sales. Um, we've come a long way
as in the past, there was
buckets of money, there were
just, we're taking the top 100
off of the fad list, the ranking
list, and so we've done a lot of
scrubbing and, and hardworking.
At uh projects coming forward.
Um, I do want to transition into
uh a comment and conversation we
had at AMS where
director Lee director Lee asked,
Couldn't some of these just be
paid out of carryover?
As you know, we're doing some
work on the bond
reconciliational bond
consultant, as well as
finalizing the project closeouts
as well as determining what
needs to be reverted.
At the time I told Miss Leach
that I was not comfortable with
using any carryover as that
number is not validated, how do
you know?
And I said, I have an internal
documents that I used to track
bond balances, as well as
assigned bonds too.
So with that being said, she
asked if that I show the, the
council what this looks like.
So what you're seeing and I want
to preference with the fact that
it is not scrubbed to the point
where it is formatted correctly,
um, some a codes are missing.
It's, it's, I work in progress,
but it's been a very helpful in
determining where we can assign.
Uh, projects too.
Keep in mind where this spreads.
This is a huge spreadsheet with
multiple tabs, every tab.
has is a Bond series.
Also keep in mind that we sell
bonds every uh twice a year.
So we have what's in front of
you is since 2013.
Um, where this spreadsheet
started was when I came on board
as a consultant and had to look
for every single closing memo
from the board of finance of
what the original bond sale was.
And then, uh, search for every
single recertification that was
attached to that bond. And so we
Uh, went as far back as we
could, um, with the information
we could locate.
So you will see on this, um.
From 2013, there's some
uncommitted balances or um
balances within that bond.
We do know that we want to
eventually swipe those dollars
so that we don't want to keep
rehashing this old bond and keep
we're not there yet, only
because that takes into account
the project closeouts.
Do we owe the district money? Do
they owe us money? And we need
to ensure that we have an open
bond for that transaction to
take place, um, based on that
work, we also have to do
reversions. So we um need to
revert some dollars per project.
That's going to increase that,
um, bond balance.
The other piece to that is we
have our third party consultant
who did the bond reconciliation
that now adjustments need to be
researched and um made in order
to fix what needs to be fixed
based on that work. So, with
that being said, we need dollars
in these bonds right now.
Um, before we can do any
swiping.
If you look at the first page.
Of your
Huge handout. These are what are
we consider the uncommitted
balance or the balances left in
each of those bonds.
This matches in your bond rec uh
recertification packets, you'll
see a worksheet.
The bottom of that worksheet
shows the balance of that bond.
That would tie to the
spreadsheets and this master
spreadsheet.
So to answer the question, um,
Miss Leach had as it pertains
to, well, how do you know? This
is how I know right now it's
unaudited, um, not complete.
So, as it looks right now.
It looks like we have $113
million of uncommitted. Um, also
keep in mind, uh, another
Suggestion from director Leach
was, why not take the new awards
that Mr. Ramos presented to you
today. The phase one of those
awards and use carryover. So we
did that. We did not include it
in the December bond sale. So
it's Mr. Shimel referenced the
financial plan to you on the
award summary, you noted.
Those awards are on these
particular fonts.
Um, so we feel very confident
right now that this bond sale
will
get these 5 projects moving.
Um, the reallocation to old
bonds for the new, uh, phase one
projects are covered.
And um as we go into another
topic on the informational,
you'll see where we are on that
bond reconciliation work, and to
get closer to validating that
uncommitted balance on the
financial plan.
And with that, um, Mr. Chair,
members, I stepped.
Thank you.
Uh, I, I think.
I understand.
Uh, but, uh, again, work a lot
of tracking. I'd like to hear
from.
Mr. Chair, thank you. Um,
really.
The
The reason that AMS didn't have
a reconciliation or
reconciliation or recommendation
or um
Uh, for this was simply because
this work needed to be flushed
out, um, more from when AMS
looked at the financial plan.
Um, and this has been work
that's been occurring over the
last couple of months. Um, I
think about 6 months ago, um,
uh, Director Romero and I met,
and we talked about how we need
to do a look back when we're
looking forward.
Uh, we need to be looking at
what was previously certified
and what's moved and what's not,
you know, as, as Iris mentioned
when she came on board, um, it
was quite a mess as to the
certifications, uh, there wasn't
really any knowledge
incorporated into that. Uh, we
were just certifying sort of the
total amounts and there was some
information coming forward, but
it really lacked a lot of
transparency and accuracy. Um,
this has been a long process,
uh, to, to really being
to look at
Ensuring that we're tying what
is truly needed with what we
have.
Um, and I think that was this
process. And so, um.
I think Iris, you started out
with about 404 million in a
certified amount that dropped to
206 when um both AMS myself and
the awards chair took an early
look at the certification and
said, OK, well, have you looked
at these various things with the
projects that you expect coming
up in the next 6 months. That
work dropped the number down
back to 144 and then again at
AMS there were some issues with
the financial plan that weren't
reflecting the uncommitted
balance accurately. So we didn't
want to take action on that.
So we had accurate numbers and
Director Romero is correct, I,
you know, if there's other
documentation, we, you know, I
did not intend for everyone to
get a huge book today, but it
is, you know, and I understand
that there's a lot of work
behind this. I think there's
more work to do, as I think
Director Romero would agree on
getting these numbers audited if
she's, this is her spreadsheet
that and I know she's fantastic
at it, but we need to make sure
that we can truly reconcile, so
that when the council's making
decisions on whether we should
sell for
new money. We know how much
money, so I think this is a step
in the right direction, um, on
this, and I appreciate the work
in making the corrections to the
financial plan from AMS
subcommittee from, you know,
showing the spreadsheets, I
think again, there's still some
more work to do and we're
working offline, uh, with the
awards, uh, uh, committee chair
as well as myself to be a little
bit more hands-on with Iris and
her staff to kind of keep moving
uh forward on the necessary
reconciliations, but going back
um, you know, long story long
the, the, the reason we didn't
have the recommendation is that
we just didn't have uh fully
accurate numbers at the time of
the AMS committee meeting that
we felt to be able to take
action, um, I have again
reviewed the financial plan
compared to this revised
certification, and it does seem
to tie out, so.
With that, Mr. Chair, um, I
mean, see, given what I've seen
now, I, I don't have the
concerns that we had. OK.
Thank you for, for
Uh, your comments, uh, and for
all your work.
And trying to get us to that
point, it's incumbent upon us
that we
We'd be uh transparent and
overre at all times, but we're
responsible for.
Anything that we can do that
would hinder.
Our ability
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Director
Romero wondering what, uh, I
mean, assuming that numbers are
accurate on uncommitted
balances. Are there limitations
on the use of those funds for
future projects.
Sorry, Mr. Chair, I'm just to
follow up to that to, um,
director, so some of the work
that we're gonna be engaging at
that kind of micro hands on
level with uh Director Romero
and her staff is, um, revising
the certification process a
little bit, um, to including the
recertification process. Uh,
that's a pretty cumbersome
process, um, largely driven by
this sort of less than um vetted
uh past uh certifications of new
money, um, but we're moving
towards a, a potentially a
different process where we can
sweep up all the our own money
and kind of put it in one
bucket, which will make it a lot
easier to track and reconcile. I
think this large uh spreadsheet
document could potentially be
reduced significantly. Um,
hopefully making it easier for
Iris and her staff to um be able
to, to utilize that funding.
You know, that's going to,
again, that's kind of the
continued work in progress and
we'll be working with them on
that. So there's a lot of, I
think, um, procedural
improvements that we're engaging
as well on on
on the on the board of finance.
Sold 3 billion in bonds.
We've booked 2.9 billion in
change against not attached to
any specific and I also want to
uh work on this.
Uh, so then do you have other
columns, uh, to the right of
this showing like bond sale has
been encumbered, how much has
been expended steps.
Mr. Chair Director, that is a
good question, and we actually
have it in another in-house
spreadsheet that again is being
vetted and worked through that
includes all of that. It
includes this includes what's
been budgeted, what's been, um,
Again, a bunch of moving parts,
that is the next step.
But it also the other piece to
that is, and you'll see in the
um update of that work that
we're gonna be engaging in a
third party vendor to even see
if we can get rid of all of
that, like a database, more
automated. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, sorry again.
Um, and I think just for the and
I, I'm in these numbers, not
nearly as much as Iris and her
staff, but, you know, one of the
things, you know, the next steps
to your point, director Soli is,
if you look at this first page
and it's showing the 113 million
uncommitted, but we've got a
different number on the
financial plan. So that's,
that's what gets really sticky
and tricky. And that's what we
really need to start honing in
on, I think this next year is
making sure we can get.
To a point where we can take
this this spreadsheet which
hopefully turns into a database,
um, and then actually have it so
that we're reconciling every
month on that uncommitted
balance, and we know exactly. So
we do have a recommendation.
And
Miss Leach, you feel comfortable
with that?
to make the motion. Yes, Mr.
Chair, so I would um move uh
Trying to find it here. I would
move the council approval to
adopt the December 2024
certification and resolution to
sell supplemental severance tax
bonds in the amount of
144,199,205.
Uh, we would work cars and
motion in 2nd. Any further
again, thank you all for working
on this. This is a vitally
important and
I would also, you know, having
been here for a few years. We've
seen
Procedure
changes as well from various
department with various uh of
our directors, it's uh it's,
it's moving all the time, but
again, uh, I hate you.
So, all those in favor of the
motion please indicate by saying
I.
All those opposed.
pass
OK, we have some informational
items and
Uh, we have other business after
that so we could keep those uh
to a minimum, but, uh, anything
that
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members, I have a project called
the update.
For you, um, I'll be reading
from the executive summary.
Duty CFO and financial staff
turnover for the past 4 years,
the project closeout process has
not been maintained.
As as directed by
Director Ashley Lee of Board of
Finance and chairwoman of the
AMS Subcommittee has made it a
priority to focus on closing out
projects, documenting processes,
and creating uh, reading from
the summary of projects closed
for FY 22, there was 157
projects on the audit list. I
have reduced that, uh, amount to
151 due to phases that were
being included from projects,
um.
Essentially they were just all
one project but phased out and I
reduced it to 151 projects.
Um, the FY 22 list is a
compilation of projects left
over from the previous those out
endeavor in FY 16 through 18.
And projects that have been
closed out in subsequent years
of um out of the 157 projects.
22, 132 projects are closed, 7
projects are reconciled and
ready to be closed.
All projects are in audit, one
of those projects cannot be
closed due to advance repayment
and for projects.
Will potentially be
uncollectable payable.
Uh, for the FYA 23 and FYA 24
projects, all of those projects
are closed.
And the exhibit A is a reversion
by Bond.
Um, these reversions.
staff.
the
staff.
Um, Sims system.
Thank you, thank you both and
the entire staff.
And uh almost as important as
getting these projects.
Built is closing them out.
Mr. Chair, uh, let's move on to
the
Mr. Chair remembers that she's
passing this out. This is in
reference to the work that uh
Director Leach mentioned that as
well as um LFC and so this is
kind of just a heads up of where
we are in.
I'm just gonna read off the key
points currently there's um
keeping in mind that's not
accurate as um, significantly
less than that.
Um, this balance does not
reflect all newly awarded
projects or future construction
funding requests.
Um, the work group that is LFC,
LESC and Board of Finance were
striving to validate that on the
financial plan.
This uncommitted balance takes
into account large close out.
versions based on the work of
the project closed out. The bond
reconciliation that the third
done.
Um, as well, uh, the future
initiative is to streamline this
process in order to create more
transparency, hopefully automate
this process and provide
real-time financial data.
There is timeline, an estimated
timeline on completing this
work.
By January at the next meeting,
all of the items, um,
From Melissa's
Um, research and facilitate the
adjustments for uh the third
vendor consultant reconciliation
Melissa has worked with and has
met with the consultant to um
take a look at his bond
reconciliation, navigate through
the 60 60,000 lines of data in
order to figure out
Um, and we're gonna provide an
intern working group with
official bond balances by
February 14th base and I met
with a third party consultant,
Deloitte.
Um
In order to engage in automating
the system.
Uh, I met with them on Friday.
Sounds like it's gonna be a
great partnership I'm gonna meet
with them again on Wednesday,
and there was in that um session
is coming on board, and we
Um, and then to provide a plan
to the interim working group,
and the result of the 3rd. So
that's kind of where we're at on
this work. Um, I'll have more
information based on the on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, um, not a
question, more a few, well,
actually one question, a couple
comments. So Iris on the
Deloitte, um, will you need to
go out to RFP for that? Is it
gonna be over 60K?
OK, OK.
Um
Yeah, I think, uh, April's
probably really aggressive. I
mean, we're, we've been redoing
our bond tracking system and
it's taken a bit longer, but if
they can get it done, that's
fantastic.
Um, and then a couple of
comments I think I was on this,
um, a couple things I would add
that maybe we can build into
this, um, is, you know, I think
both uh subcommittees should
receive reports on the progress
of this, um, you know, ad hoc
group, um, and all of the work
that's being done, it's gonna be
a very heavy lift, so I think if
we can get um reports back, um,
and all of the subcommittee
meetings, that'll be really
helpful. And then, um, one thing
that I think is really, really
critical to add to this process,
um, we're all into the time.
line is the policies and
procedures. Um, it's fine to do
a recon, but as uh Ting
mentioned, um, you know,
Things change over time. It's
kind of a moving target, but we
wanna make sure that whether
it's staff turnout or changes
into the, you know, from the
council on how we want to do
things that we have very, um,
solid policies and procedures in
place and trainings and cross
trainings uh with staff, uh, to
make sure that these processes
are documented not just for
internal PSFA operations, but
for external, um, stakeholders
that are also a part of this
process. They touch it at
different points of it, but.
Um, it's really important, I
think, to have that transparency
and and let uh the districts
know what the process is, how it
moves the timeline. I know a few
years ago we did this for
awards, but I think we really
need to kind of look at the
processes and procedures, um, on
this uh uh uh financial uh
reconciliation work
certification project close out
as well. I know, um,
To the last item, Mr. Chair
members, uh, uh, I know that
staff have started some work on
a, uh, a closeout policy, uh,
and procedures that we'll be
looking at in the future, but I
think um that's something that
we should kind of keep on this
radar and add to this list as
part of the overall, as part of
the overall project.
Let's move on then to
that sword.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members, um, presenting item C
of the informational on page
338.
Uh, this past year, we did, we
held the 18th annual Ben Luhan
Maintenance Achievement Awards
in collaboration with CS's
Thirty-eighth annual.
facility manager's training.
Um, that was held on October
14th of this year.
Um, executive director Irish
Romero and Deputy Director Larry
Tilson presented these awards.
We had
3 different categories of
awards, um, team and individual.
District awards and a plant
manager of the Year award.
6 awards, 24 individuals and the
plant manager of the Year award
were role.
Submitted this year or were all
given out to those participants.
Um, exhibit A as a list of all
those awards a lot of good
comments from the.
folks had attended the award
ceremony in the.
Mr. Cherry does grow every year,
surprisingly for all of us that
it just keeps getting more and
more.
packed into one little area.
OK.
Thank you. Appreciate the, the
work you all do to putting,
putting that event on.
The maintenance program status
report.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, if I
can.
Give your attention to page 340,
that is the quarterly
maintenance program status
report. I'm just gonna read off
a few key points here.
Um, we have a Plan currency rate
of 67.03.
Um, for FIM's usage, we did see
an improvement in all three
modules, maintenance preventive
maintenance strict, and utility
direct.
Um, we are now at a current
average of or a current state
usage of 65.94%, which is up
from our 64.28.
Moving on down to the
Facility maintenance assessment
report.
We are sitting currently at a
76.42% state average.
With 243 schools out of the 784.
Um
Charter school average right now
is at a 78.05%, slightly higher.
And then I would like to direct
your attention to page 342. I'm
gonna cover the.
Maintenance and verification.
Just a few highlights from that.
Um, we have implemented the
measurement and verification
program into 5 districts, that
being Bernalio, Farmington,
Gallup, Hobbs, and Los Lunas.
Um, PSFA and the districts
currently meet with.
Mountain vector that
The vendor on a biweekly basis
for updates and system usage.
with that. Thank you for the
report. Thank you.
I'm gonna step
this
I'm gonna step
step real quickly here or skip
real quickly to item, uh, 11
just to.
Let everybody know that our next
meeting is January.
And then we'll go back up.
To
Go back up to um.
To item 9.
Uh, consideration for approval
to adjourn it so this is gonna
require emotion in a second.
And a uh voice, I mean a roll
call vote.
You
Ready,
Let's do a motion the.
would like to make the motion.
Yes. I'll move that we uh enter
into executive session, uh, or
adjourned to executive session
pursuant to the Open Meetings
Act, Section 10-15-1H2 NMSA 1978
for the purpose of conduction of
the PSFA director evaluation.
a
Oh,
OK.
Charles Sully.
Shawna Casebeer, yes.
Ashley Lee.
Sarah Mickelson.
Mariana Padilla.
My apologies. Amanda Luparde.
Stewart Ingham. Yes. John Senna.
Martin Romero, uh, yes.
So.
The motion passes.
