Institute.
For Berlio County, this is a $20
million appropriation. Next PED
statewide alternatively fuel
vehicle stations construction
$1.5 million.
Um, Santa Fe schools is getting
uh Paolo Soleri amphitheater
construction of $3 million
appropriation.
Navajo Prep school and drainage
and Farmington, San Juan County
is getting a $3 million
appropriation.
And then the final bullet point
on page 10, section 52,
statewide school distribution
Security CTE maintenance and
repair. This is a $50 million
appropriation as a reminder,
we've been, I think we've done
this the past 2 or 3 years, uh,
first with SB 212 and then last
year with House Bill 505. So
this will work in a similar
capacity that will be just
appropriating the money to the
districts.
Now, now moving to page 11, the,
the top bullet point line 31. Uh
this is just
For us to offset the funds, so
we've added the $60 million in
our uses for the community
benefit because we did not want
it to get mixed up with our
uncommitted balance to be used
for projects. So at this point
until the program is set and we
start um
Receiving applications and, and
awarding the funding, we just
wanted to make sure that it was
offset at this time.
Also, before moving on to the
actual financial plan, I wanted
to make a couple more notes. Um,
first, we received some input
from our AMS chair last meeting,
uh, which was really beneficial.
The first was on the executive
summary just to add additional
info, um, things like maybe the
original award year for projects
that are coming and just some
additional details to help
understand the full picture of
the request.
Um, also just looking at the
financial plan, especially with
the one presented, it was a uh
the executive summary was a
little busy, so I'll be looking
at ways of cleaning up the
layout so it's less worthy and
just more kind of clear to
understand.
Um, I also wanted to know, we
are working currently on our
June 2025 bond sale. Um, so
we'll be meeting with the field
department and, and updating the
financial plan as far as the
award schedule goes and the
timing. Uh, we've also received
input at the next meeting that
that uh the AMS chair would like
to hear the status of the
December bond sale items. There
were 5 projects included on that
and where they're at and we
anticipate they'll come for.
Uh, July 1.
So with that, I will move on to
page 12 going into the actual
financial plan now.
Uh, again, starting with the
sources and uses detail, you'll
see a lot of highlights.
Um, a piece that's not
highlighted that I'd like to
note is online to the SSTB notes
currently is set at 606.8
million based on discussions in
uh AMS this amount is going to
decrease, uh, so we'll wait with
Board of Finance to get the
final number and then I'll
update it.
On the financial plan.
Again, line 4 HB 2. This is the
money that we will be receiving,
so the $60 million appropriation
going into our sources, um, but
it is offset with line 31. So
again, it's just kind of a net
zero at this point, but we
wanted to make sure it was
accounted for.
Uh, lines 9 through
it looks like 15. I'll have
additional updates. These are
all related to pieces in the
executive summary of amounts
we've increased, so the final
amount is included here, but if
you'd like to see what the
original amount is, you can
refer back to the executive
summary.
The next line 26 through 30.
These are all the new
appropriations that are coming
out of the PSCOF, um, you can
see them all listed there by the
section number and then the
amounts highlighted in uh column
FY 26 estimates.
Now moving on to page 13. In
your e-book, this is the summary
of changes.
The very top section, Hobbs
Middle School. This was an early
work package of $4.3 million
that was awarded in January.
Uh, the following section after
that for potential council
actions are the four items that
are coming for award this
meeting, you'll know on the
executive summary, I noted the
GSF increases. Those are not
requiring funding at this time.
So these are the only items that
are actually requiring council
action for funding approval at
this meeting.
And then finally, the bottom
piece with the assumptions and
summary is just the net changes
that we presented from the
uncommitted balance from January
to April.
Moving on to uh the, the larger
pages. This is the award, uh,
scheduled detail, uh, starting
on page 14.
I'll run through this quickly,
but I just wanted to know at the
very top, if you look at the 4th
column from left, we have the
SSTBs included here. We heard in
EMS, um, and this is something
we wanted to add, um, but it
kind of staggered for a minute.
So at the next meeting, we will
have a substantial update of
these items of which bonds that
the projects are currently on,
um.
Previously or if that we have
them certified on a future
project, so I'll be adding to
this significantly for as you
walk through this piece, if you
look at the red border in FY 25,
it's the gray column, uh, the
red column indicates where we're
currently at in time, so we're
in calendar year 2025, quarter
2, again, that's April through
June. Uh, we're in fiscal year
2025 approaching fiscal year
2026.
So as we move through time that
uh red highlighted piece will
move, but that's where we're at
currently.
If you scroll to the middle of
the page, you'll see P19017
Tularosa. This again, all of the
highlighted pieces are noted in
the executive summary with the
changes with this piece,
although it's not requesting
funny, you can see that the, the
blue arrow indicates that it has
moved forward in time, so we're
anticipating it to come this
quarter opposed to last quarter.
Moving through the pages now on
page 15, uh, Mr. Chair, members,
again, a few other highlighted
items you'll know Hobbs
highlighted in yellow in that
red border indicating that they
are coming for funding at this
time. As a reminder, these are
only the state match we track
the waiver on a separate tab
which I'll talk about
momentarily. Uh, the reason we
account for here versus putting
the waiver all in one piece is
we want to allow council
discussion and once the final
waiver or local match is
approved then we include it here
and I'll highlight it at the
next meeting with the final.
out
Uh, moving to the final page of
the awards scheduled detail.
This is page 16. Again, you'll
note the highlights in FY 24 for
various reasons, including the
GSF changes with the outyear
updates, the updated movement in
time and the requested funding
in yellow and then finally
Bloomfield and Santa Rosa added
to the bottom just to indicate
the movement and also the new
request for Santa Rosa pending a
new uh.
project number.
This members final piece, the
square foot variance. This is
page 17. Again, you'll know
quite a few highlights. I
apologize for the busyness, um,
on the left indicating the
projects that were affected and
then going into columns O P and
Q, the amounts that have either
changed or have moved up or
down, uh, again, noted in the
executive summary.
And with that
I stamp any questions that you
have.
Could you repeat the last?
on the square foot changes, I, I
didn't quite get that.
So, uh, Mr. Chair, members
absolutely. So on page 17 for
the square foot variance changes
in columns O P and Q. um, the,
the only items that have changed
here are the waivers, uh, so the
amounts either have been
included or adjusted based on
current actions being presented
at this meeting.
Thank you.
Quite a bit of information.
Thank you, but it was easy to
get through, so, uh, questions
from the councilor? Yes sir, um.
I just wanna ask, I'm, I'm kind
of surprised and I'm, I probably
don't have a correct
understanding, but when we're
looking at the Anton Chico
project where they're in, says
it's a current.
2017, 2018 emergency wards. So
we don't track emergency wards
on in this, is that correct?
Because there's nothing, there's
a 12.
I don't see that one here.
is an emergency award, not
something that gets tracked in
here.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Yon members, that
is a great question. So the
awards are tracked. It's just in
a hidden piece, although with
the award link hidden in the
sense that it's since it's moved
out because it was 2018. It's
not reflected here.
So it is included, but it's
since it was awarded in 2018.
It's not shown in this window of
time.
So we've moved it down because
it will be receiving potentially
a new project award to remove it
as an emergency part of the
projects from 12.
And 15 and 18, you know, that
was inclusive of all other
questions?
sleep.
Thank you 12.
Of the overall exhibit a
financial plan, the broadband.
So I think there was legislation
still.
Basically giving broadband uh
$10 million a year, but
bypassing the need for council
approval. Is that correct?
So then
Isn't that still coming out of
Our pot of money.
And how do we
You know,
Or to find are we, we need to
account for it somewhere.
Even if we're not approving the
transfer.
It's
Your EFA or our
That that
We'll just need to figure out
like
How to account for it.
So that's, that's all I had Mr.
Chairman.
Would it be tracked the same way
as some of the other.
Special appropriations out of
the fund.
That's what I would
You know, recommend if we're
doing a, a big bond sale and
then some things are gonna just
go on and keep everything in
line with what is being sold.
With the sponge bonds and then
what's going out, I think we
need to have both sides.
Um, yes, uh, Mr. Chair, uh,
agree, so I think, excuse me,
anything that's hitting the fund
we should account for, but it
may then just be transferred
out.
Which would be similar, and
we've done that for PED in the
past and other things, so I have
a couple of questions, Mr.
Chair, but whenever you're
ready.
Are you, are you too yes, go
ahead.
Um, so just really quickly, um,
uh, Matthew, and you may have
mentioned this and I may have
missed it, um, but on, uh, page
12 line 36, uh, for fiscal year
25, so the awards, excuse me,
here to date. Um, I know AMS I
asked whether how much of that
has actually been awarded of the
517.6. Do you have an update on
that?
I don't at this time, but I can
get one for you, yeah, if you
wouldn't mind because I think
that's gonna inform the, the,
um,
certification that's coming up
is how much we anticipated, uh,
awarding an FY 25 versus where
we're at right now. We've got
just a few months left, um, to
have those awards come forward
and they very may well, um, but
it, it's helpful. One of the
things that I brought up, um,
that Matthew didn't mention is,
is kind of keeping a little bit
closer track on awards that
were, uh, or certifications that
were recently made and whether
we're actually awarding.
pi.
Um, in addition to looking
further back on that, but I
think it's helpful for the
council to keep fresh in their
mind what we anticipated coming
forward in the next 6 months and
whether it does. And in
addition, one of the other
things that I really um
Uh, I think will be very helpful
and I know staff has stated
they're working on this is
bringing back the project status
report.
So that we can be looking at the
awards and the status of those
projects, whether they're
moving, whether they're
stalling, and we can start
targeting uh key projects that
may be needing additional
assistance or maybe we need to
be uh rethinking.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Any other questions or comments?
So, uh
On the cost per square foot, you
know, are we still monitoring
that because with all the
terrors and everything that
we're hearing about in the news
is kind of like a moving target
and, you know, costs are, are
going up. That's what I'm
hearing from industry. So, uh,
and then looking at the chart,
uh, pretty much the majority of
everything for cost per square
foot, you know, is higher than,
you know, the initial cost, so
how are we gonna monitor with
these tariffs.
Yeah, how this is gonna impact,
you know, projects as far as
costing that how we're gonna be
looking at that.
reports
Thank you
Any other questions?
No
Thank you for the report.
agenda.
You could give us a brief
rundown of what these are quite
a few.
Items here
And these have all been heard by
the.
So
Appropriate um
Subcommittee
And are recommended for
approval.
And you
summary.
Mr. Chair, members, yes, you're
correct. There's quite a few on
here as um.
Item A is the January 8th, uh,
PSCOC meeting minutes.
Item B is the 2nd round of uh
FMP awards that includes 5
districts or charter schools
with a total of $402. You wish I
can go and let you know which
schools those are if needed.
Uh, also item C is for Indian
Hills Elementary School. This
was a systems, this was an
addition, this is an additional
construction funding request.
The project was to renovate and
replace roof exterior walls,
fire alarms, and sight drainage.
Due to the cost of the roof, uh,
renovation, the districts who
questioning requesting
additional funds to complete the
rest of the project to include
exterior walls by, um, so that
totaled, uh, request was 1.8
million.
Um, the state portion of that
was 1.5 million.
I'm going to go ahead and skip
item D and E as those you have
come off consent, and we can
discuss that at the end of.
Consent agenda.
So let's move to uh Roselawn.
Uh, our teacher.
This is to increase the square
footage to align with the new
calculator from 47,611 square
feet that was originally awarded
58,461. The district can support
their local match.
Item G was to update the lease
assistance awards for
Albuquerque Charter Academy.
This was an increase of $87,167.
This was, um, to include 2 new
parcels of land that they
incorporated into, into their
LPA.
Um, items H is BDCP category 1
for the fiber optic upgrades,
uh, for 3 entities totaling an
estimate of $4,507.
Item I
Is BDCP category 2, which is
network and equipment.
Totaling 358,960.
Uh, this included, uh, APS
Clovis Demming digital arts
Technology Academy, Las Vegas
City and Sandoval Academy of
Violin. Item J is the research
of SSTB.
Um, some of these include Indian
hills, Anton Chico, uh, Hobbs as
um is a recommendation. It also
includes some technical
corrections such as um FB9 were
also um requesting to certify
$50 million for espionage.
Uh, we will be bringing updates
on the latest bond sale as um
Mr. Shimmel had indicated as it
relates to the stat status of
certified projects in May.
Item K is the approval to start
the disposition of a PSCOC owned
portable in Los Alamos.
And finally on consent, uh, Mr.
Chair, is the approval of the
PSFA budget adjustment request.
Uh, as of March 24th,
Yes if they had a vacancy
savings of $476,531.
His is requesting 58,000 for
contractual services to include
the automating of our bond
tracking system as well as, uh,
website redesign.
Also, we're requesting
approximately 142,000 for IT
equipment and all of those, um,
were put on consent or you
Thank you for that uh.
Review
You have love, you indicated on
the.
facilities master plan, FMP
awards.
That it included several.
Districts.
And uh
Charter schools. I, I need to
understand again.
For charter schools since many
of these are in private.
Facilities
Mhm
How do we
Help with the facilities master
plan.
private
Mr. Chair, members, good
morning, John Valdez facility's
master planner.
What we do is we do allow
charter schools to apply for
facility master plan funds and
It's basically a facility master
plan slash educational
specification for those schools
that are not in their permanent
facility and still need to look
for a facility. The educational
specifications component will
identify the spaces they need to
deliver their educational
program. For example, if they
are a dance oriented or or
visual arts, fine arts oriented
charter school, they may not
need a gym, but they may need
dance studios, um, to deliver
their physical education
component and their dance and
fine arts.
Uh, visual arts education, um,
for those schools that already
in their permanent facility and
our
In a facility that is owned by
their foundation or that they
own outright, they they will
start needing to see um some
some, some improvements needed
in their buildings, um, you
know, they have system needs to,
they have structural needs, so
it will identify that those um
elements. So those two different
categories, those that uh.
Are in their own buildings.
And have lease.
Move forward with those
facilities, but those that are
in privately owned facilities.
It's a matter of identifying.
The needs and then seeking.
Uh, assistance from their lands,
that is correct.
Thank you for that
clarification. Any other
questions?
Uh, since this is a consent
agenda, uh, we will.
Handle these with one motion I
would entertain a motion to
approve.
All of the items except D and E,
which will be set aside for
discussion.
Uh, so again, I would entertain
emotion.
To approve the consent agenda.
Chairman.
Also
We have a motion in a second to
approve all items.
With the exception of D and E on
the consent agenda.
All in favor, please indicate by
saying I
was a post.
Ocean passes and we'll go to
item D.
The first, uh.
With questions, OK.
Um
Well, my first
My first question was about the
fact that this was
2017 emergency award.
And going through the history
first off, I need to apologize.
This is partially my uh need to
understand.
This project because it
It, to be honest with you,
offends me that we built a
school in 2014.
And we now are.
Having to replace it.
So these are some questions in
regards to that.
Um, the fact that it was an
emergency ward in 2017, reading
through the history.
It
Um
I can't tell what actually got
done.
Um, did, when you did the
emergency ward, the, the, was
the district was um.
Give him funds to do the civil
instruction to investigate. Was
there a final um investigation
completed.
And
What were the recommendations.
Then we had another one in 2018.
To begin making repairs were any
of those repairs made?
Um
The design, funding repairs in
2021.
Again, was anything.
Done with that money expended
and was, you know, was it
effective?
And then um
The
I was clarify something for me
before that there was what the
litigation was actually what the
amount was on the litigation.
That seems trivial in my mind.
Um, but the
Um
That information wasn't here.
And so that was one of my
reasonings for doing that
because I wanted to make sure
that.
What was the
What was the value of the
litigation and what was the
intent of that money you spent.
So, if you
Start from that, the history of
what's been accomplished.
And what the effect of it was, I
would be really.
would help me. Thank you for
being here, Mr. Madrid,
Superintendent of Madrid.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ingeman,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you for having me this
morning and I appreciate um you
taking this item off the consent
agenda because I think uh it
does need to be heard and I
think the story does need to be
told.
Um, I can start in 2017 when
you, if you want or I can go
back to 2014, which I prefer,
but that's what your, your
permission, um.
Mr Chairman, uh, so for those of
you who do not know me, I'm
Martin Madrid. I'm the
superintendent Santa Rosa
consolidated schools. I'm in my
6th year and unfortunately, this
is a project that I inherited
from my predecessor, Mr. Perea,
and his predecessor, Mr. Hearn,
uh, we're both superintendents
at Santa Rosa. Mr. Hearn was the
superintendent at the time of
this build.
Um, so, dating back to 2014,
that's when the building was
opened roughly around that time,
um, immediately following the
opening of the building, uh, the
floor started cracking, uh,
walls, sheetrock started
cracking on the walls, um, this
was told to quote from what I
understand, uh, to the previous
superintendent, uh,
superintendent that this was
natural settlement and that it
would stop and
And so they the contractor came
back in, uh, patched up some,
did some patch up work.
Um, but that was not to stop.
They did not stop. They
continued, it continued and the
cracks started getting uh more
severe.
Flo started continue to buckle
and so.
It's, it's just been an ongoing
process, eventually litigation
took hold, and I think that's
when lawyers get involved, it
started wrapping this whole
project up and I think this was
the major delays in this project
was because of the litigation
itself. Now, the litigation did
take place when I was a
superintendent. And the reason
we did have to go to litigation
is because the the statute of
limitations for litigation was
coming up to an end, and we
either had to let it go or we
had to file litigation and
that's why we filed the
litigation on.
this, uh, it was against um the
design company and the
contractor at the time.
Um
So we've studied numerous
studies have been done and, and,
and basically we're all studies
have concluded and you and you
have access to all these studies
is that.
There was insufficient feel on a
clay base under the building and
so.
When you get a rainy season that
clay gets moist underneath and
expands.
Push the floor up.
And then when it dries out,
which it normally does, it
contracts.
Drops. So, uh, throughout the
years, the rainy seasons, dry
seasons are buckling this
building and then it's really
severe if you have not seen the
pictures, I can show you them.
Um, my concern is that it's been
a 10-year ongoing process, uh,
litigation was, was hard, um.
Some of the things with
litigation and, and, and, and to
your point, Mr. Ingham, there is
the, the amount, you know, I
can't disclose it in public, but
yeah, I think you know what the
amount is and it is a trivial
amount.
We were settled with um.
One of the things uh.
Both companies were severely
underinsured, but it seems like
to me or what the lawyers
informed me of.
And then also um.
One of the findings, um.
And I don't want to cast blame
anywhere, but um one of the
findings is that there was a
lack of testing done during the
construction process, lack of
testing and the contractor came
in and said we
Tested as much as PSFE.
told us to test.
And in reviewing that the
lawyers.
Kind of agreed that
There was, it was under testing
done or and, and my thought
process behind that is that if
this, for those who don't know
Anto Chicos, it's between Santa
Rosa and Las Vegas.
On Highway 84, about 56 miles.
Uh
uh, West.
On another small little road,
beautiful building, um,
But it's out of sight.
Out of mind and it's quite a
ways to get there.
So, um, but
You know that
Is, is
Why we had to settle for that
trivial amount because I think
if the contractor had continued
on with it, I think we would
have got 0.
In the arbitration, um.
So it has been a frustrating
process and, and just so you
know, this
Building
Serves the most impoverished
children in our district.
I would like to take you off for
a ride out there to some of
those communities out there and
it's a very impoverished area,
you know, this school, um, like
I told Ms. Romero here, it
should be a beacon of hope for
some of these kids.
You know, instead, they have to
walk in and see cracked walls
and, and the filling building
is, is falling apart, basically.
I think there needs to be some
urgency behind this. And I also
um don't understand why we have
to go through an a specs when if
we're going to rebuild it, it's
going to be done anyway.
I think that just delays the
process, um.
But I'll stand for questions at
this time. That's a kind of a
short rundown, but it's, I do
have a binder this stick.
I have one comment.
Whoever said that PSFA
determined.
How much testing should be done.
That's baloney.
I'm sorry
Mhm
This is not the design
consultant.
They have a design consultant
that determines the testing
requirements. Those should have
been kept and if the design firm
didn't require those and didn't
monitor them.
I mean, this is a travesty. It's
just I, I can't, I can't hardly
stand it.
OK.
Second thing is the question I
had was these costs that we've
already incurred.
Was anything done?
This 1.6 million.
Did they do repairs?
The
It was just completely
unsuccessful, wasted money. It
was, um, so part of it was the,
was a study that was done and it
came up with the same results as
all the other studies and then
these, these um repairs or
emergency repairs for safety
hazards, uh, doors weren't
opening. They were jamming
because of building shifting.
There was concrete um slabs that
were up trip hazards, and all
the like, right, because there's
moving all over the whole area.
Um, so those were, were
Or trimmed down, um.
Doors trimmed down, things like
that, you know, um.
Various patched, but within, you
know, 6 months, it was right
back to where it was again.
Question, I'm incensed.
I'm sorry.
This is complete frustration to
me.
The fact that the litigation was
based on
I mean, to me, what you just
said, that litigation was.
The district was left to, to
challenge these design firms.
Without any
I don't, I don't know, I don't
understand that, and for, for
me, it was gross negligence in
the design firm and the
construction company.
And
They dodged
Completely and, and it's not
just, I mean, if you're just
looking at the, what about the
geotech company that approved
this. What about the, you know,
the whole thing down the road.
It should
Me
That's a travesty and the
state's gonna pay for it.
And I just grossed out. I'm
sorry.
So
That was my comment for this.
That's why I bought it. I wanted
to bring it up too. I just um.
I'm frustrated with this project
and, and, and if I may make one
more comment, Mr. Chairman, um.
You know, and this is, uh, Ms.
Romero's predecessor who was on
PSFA, you know, we initially
when I 1st 1st took over and in
this kind of blew me away is we
went to mediation, uh, initially
to when the litigation first
came up and um
You know, we were going back and
forth and and her predecessor
was on the call.
For the mediation and not a
single word what was spoken by
PSFA or or or or any advice
given for anything out to and
what we were told is, oh, well,
once we gave you guys the keys
and construction was complete,
you're, you're the building
owner and, and then that's been
kind of the, the
Until, until recently, that's
been kind of the, the
How we've been treated by PSFA
is that uh we were the building
owners and, you know, so we were
out on an island.
You know, and it was
It was frustrating and I, like I
said, I inherited this.
This project, I wasn't there
since the beginning, but I know
my predecessor was frustrated.
I'm frustrated, my board's
frustrated, and the community is
frustrated and um it's, it is a
travesty.
That's it.
Mm
Thank you, number one,
We're bringing this forward and
for your recapping my, my
question is, where do we go from
here?
What support can we provide?
To the council and of course
through the staff.
Um
To get us uh to the next point
and, and what is that? What is
the goal at this point?
you
Uh uh.
is
OK
Mr. Chair members, one of the
first
Uh, phases of this award.
If, if you do decide to.
Transfer to the standards base
to do educational
specifications.
mentioned educational
specifications earlier and what
aspects do is they define the
educational program of the
school. This is a combined
elementary and middle school.
Um, and under the new gross
square foot calculator, they
would be entitled to 55,000
gross square feet.
Their existing gross square feet
is 23,112 square feet and they
have an enrollment projection of
95.
Um, we felt that that specs
would be appropriate in this
case uh to help define what
spaces they need um for this
elementary school, middle school
combination. Um, it doesn't have
a high school component like
some of the other combination
schools that we will be talking
about later.
Um, but that's not to say they
may not need CTE um components
of the school or um other types
of spaces for electives, and
that's what the educational
specifications.
Sounds like it's twice as big as
what they currently have.
But is, is the plan then to
To, uh
Build a new school.
On the same site.
No, not on the same site. We
have a.
commitment from the land grant
and they're willing to donate
any land in kind to us wherever
we see fit and we'll do plenty
of, of testing that land is, is
built upon, um, and if I may,
uh, Mr. Chairman, um, as far as
the aspects and and the and the
square footage of the of the
current school, it's 23,000
square feet. She's correct, um,
but.
The school took 100% part of pay
for we had to build their own
computer lab on that school,
which we built that with the
district's money and then we
brought in a portable um for a
library for this school does not
have a cafeteria, it does not
have a library, does not have a
computer lab, does not have
special education space, does
not have ancillary space so that
tells you right there.
Um, what, how it's severely
undersized.
Um, um, you know, it doesn't
have room for electives. It has
the, the, the, the core
classrooms, and that's it.
You know, kids are supposed to
uh eat in sals for classrooms or
classes going on.
It's, it's
It's a beautiful building, but
when you get in there, it just
it's not.
Conducive to education.
Well, uh, again, let's.
Let's be supportive of one
another as we go through this
and let's try and get this done.
As quickly as possible, but with
a sound.
Mhm
Um, Superintendent Madrid, thank
you so much for being here and,
and thank you for giving us the
history of this project and
Um, I also just wanna express my
concern about this happened and
that um that PSFA and PSCOC were
not, you know, engaged in this
process. The school was publicly
funded, even though it was built
and we
Turn over the keys.
It's built with public money and
we have a responsibility to make
sure that students are in safe
and appropriate facilities.
Um, the fact that we had an open
Uh, emergency award, and we
weren't aware of what is was
happening since 2017, I do not
think.
Is acceptable either.
Um, this pertains to
Ashley's comments about a
project status report. We really
need to know what projects are
lingering, what projects are in
trouble.
So that we can um
Move those things forward, in
general, I am concerned about
how long it takes for projects
to be completed.
Um, from the beginning of the
application process through
awards and through the
construction process. We should
be doing everything.
In our uh power to support.
Um, the LEA is to make sure that
they're able to uh build their
facilities in a timely manner.
And so that requires quite a bit
of support from PSFA staff. You
need to be fully staffed. You
need to be engaged.
And then you also need to bring.
Um, issues to the councils, um.
Um, levels so that we can weigh
in as well. And so I'm, I'm
apologize, Superintendent Madrid
that.
That you and your students went
through this, and as you
mentioned, ultimately it's the
students.
That are suffering and so.
Um, I would encourage PSFA.
And the council to do everything
we can to move uh the neck can
and in general, as we approach
these projects.
Timing is important.
And we need to be able to uh do
our process as quickly as we
can, um,
And uh, you know, with all of
the information that we need to
make the decisions quickly and
not really, that's it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Mr.
so
Comment I have is that
For me, this is kind of
troublesome as well also, and
the reason for it is that
You know, there's a process as
well within CID as far as filing
a complaint, you know, against
the contractor, you know, to be
investigated, to be looked at. I
wasn't aware of any issues in
this project at all whatsoever.
Uh, you know, this is something
that would have been brought to
the CIC, the construction
Industries commission, you know,
to look at better, uh, it would.
There have to be a hearing,
there would be a hearing that
would, you know, gone through
the AG's office, so, you know,
there is a process for some of
this stuff, so it is kind of
troublesome fact and this kind
of happens often.
And just to kind of echo what
the Secretary Padilla said.
I think is that we do need to
hear about, you know, the status
of projects of which is to me is
kind of
You know, troublesome and give
you an example, uh.
I was at the Las Cruces on
Monday, uh, went to visit
Colombia on Tuesday, such as,
you know, the school's gonna be
on occupancy because they're not
going to be done and you know,
when I was out there, we know
there was some significant
problems on that school as well
also and that school had to be,
you know, thrown down, but, you
know, my thing is, you know,
what did they do differently?
You know, so that, you know,
this doesn't happen again, so I
went out there, did a site visit
to ensure that, you know, these
issues aren't going to happen
again. So uh even uh Las Vegas,
there was issues as far as
delays and all of that kind of
troublesome, so I think uh I
echo with Secretary Padilla has
said, I think we need to get
some type of update where we're
at with these projects, do what
we've got to do to move these
projects forward because, you
know, there's a saying in
construction time is the essence
that time is money. So these
projects have got to, you know,
got to
keep them moving forward,
especially with the way costs
are escalating now with tariffs
and all that, you know, we need
to be on top of it to try to
keep that those are my thoughts.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you all for
your comments.
a version of the PSA.
Thank you. And if I may, Mr,
just one final comment with
regards to Mr. Romero's uh.
Questions or comments, um, you
know, we were never informed
anything about, you know, filing
a complaint with, with CID or
anything like that, so we didn't
know and like I said, it was
pretty hands off from PSFE at
the time, and we did feel like
we were on an island at that
point. And finally, Mr. Chair, I
just want to thank you for uh
for allowing me to come up here
and give you a little bit of
history. I think it's very
important that you all
understand, you know, the
brevity of this building and the
timeline.
needed for rectification of this
building, um, you know, and it
expects is great, but if it's
gonna delay it 9 to 12 months, I
think that's putting this
project really uh in danger here
of, of, of something happening
and, and the last thing I'd want
to do is for anyone to get
injured in that building, uh,
and then why wasn't it done a
lot sooner, right? Why did it
take 10 years, 11 years, 12
years for it to get rectified.
Thank you Mr. Chair. Thank you
and I think we agree with you
and everything we can do to
expedite the process.
We will be there and please keep
us informed.
Um, Mr. Chair, just really
quickly, and, and you may have
gone over this, but on the
specs, I mean, is that something
that absolutely needs to be done
if it's gonna delay this
project, which I think
Uh, you know, hearing the
comments, it sounds like this
needs to move much more quickly.
I know we have that 55,000
minimum. Do we have other
schools that have been of
similar, um, uh, enrollment
levels that have been designed
like how can we expedite that
cause I am concerned and is that
spec necessary? Is that like set
in stone that that's gonna
happen, or can we skip it can be
expedited and done.
Together with the plants and
speck so.
Tell me if I'm, I'm wrong.
Mm
Miss Charley remembers um.
The inspects uh typically can
take anywhere from to.
3 to 4 months.
Um
They're they're, oh yeah, I said
they basically identify the
program, but if
It can be done in design as
well.
Um
We just
When we analyze this project, we
thought that
Um, going from that square
footage to the 55,000 as a
minimum would help us to define
the spaces that this school
needs, but it's
Something we can do in design as
well, so they, they don't,
they're not completely necessary
but they're they're a tool to
try to identify the gross square
footage that the school needs
that then when it comes back to
in subsequent project phases.
Then we could
evaluate that, you know, the
program of statement and then OD
uh the subsequent ODR programs
to that aspects to make sure
that
We're building the school that
we need to build, you know, I
believe we've done that in the
past when there is a need to
expedite.
We've combined the
It's important that
building be designed to the
program.
So
To make sure that you know
you're.
Your floor plan, no.
Appropriate for your programs.
Anyway.
Oh
Can we expedite that?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Uh, can you remind the committee
who the
Design firm was in the
construction company.
Mr. Sali, um, I'm bound by the
settlement agreement and at this
time I'd prefer not to.
So you entered into a settlement
agreement that doesn't allow you
to identify these companies or
the settlement amount.
The settlement amount well.
Um, not necessarily to identify
them, I guess. It's just a
settlement amount and then um
you know.
I wouldn't want to say anything
bad about them.
Mm
Why we need to know who they are
if they
Inappropriately designed and
constructed a facility so that
they're on our radar for
Uh, quality control for other
awarded projects.
So she's concerned about that
and we can follow up.
Um
The next thing is,
So you, this is a 10 year
problem.
This isn't the first time the
council has heard about this
problem.
We made an award to respond to
it.
Um
When did you file the lawsuit?
about 20016, 2015, 2016.
And you've
been over as superintendent, so
no, that would have been.
Maybe
1819.
I would agree with other council
members that this has been a
project problem that's carried
on for too long, but
It's also a project that, you
know, I'm.
Prior to my appointment as
director was not
I was not really wired into
PSCOC and I knew all about it.
Um, so I just.
I want to point that out for the
public's perspective that this
has been a problem. So that the
ed specs.
Uh, what's your alternative?
You have like, and you pick up
another already designed school
and plop it down and expedite
this. Are you willing to do that
during the process, it can be
combined. Why, why design a new
school if somebody else in the
regions already designed one.
To meet this minimum, you just
get started.
I would encourage the council to
If you
want schools to get moving.
And there's like already square
footage that meets.
You know, 93 student school, why
are we going through a whole?
Design phase for local control
of
This or that.
We want to expedite things or do
we wanna
You know, delay them because a
school district wants to
redesign it at 55,000 their way.
There's trade-offs for both of
them.
So I appreciate you coming today
and I appreciate.
You reminding the council of the
Potential pitfalls of some of
these failed projects and we've
got them out there.
Um, and how we can.
Uh, help ensure they don't
happen again.
Appreciate that real quick.
Don't mind me mentioning the
names.
problem
all of the
safe enough.
I believe
Intense programming.
But it may take us maybe.
the
Thank
Appreciate the
Overview as well.
I know this has taken.
Quite a bit of discussion, but I
think it's I'll be watching
closely so.
Uh, I'd like to go ahead and.
Entertain a motion then to
approve the project.
Yeah
Mhm
Move it forward. Hi, yeah, uh.
to improve the project.
So
All those in favor, please
indicate by saying I.
Motion passes.
I look forward to working with
you on the team.
Next item is the item number.
E. Hagerman.
I don't think anyone is here
from Hagri yeah there she is.
How are you doingtendent? to see
you.
12 post school, um, it's the
increase in 32.
89
And the subcommittee
recommended.
I wanted to know if during the
subcommittee.
Hearing. Anything was spoken up
about, um.
Your maintenance record.
Um,
I
I feel strongly.
That a district.
As the obligation to maintain
the facilities that we are
On
And yours?
That or you
And
Get more report is
And you're
You know, yes, the other options
are.
The p.m. completion rate.
I'm gonna say that. I'm gonna
say when we're going to fund a.
A project
We need some assurance that
that's not going to continue.
And I just wanted to know.
If during the
Awards committee, if anybody
brought this up, and if, if not,
I would love to hear what your
response is to that.
This, um
This report
The, the
For me
So
If we ignore it and we don't say
anything about it.
And we we're, we're.
What I'm gonna say is this is
we're doing design funding.
To make some improvements.
And I would really love to see
before we come to construction
funding.
That there's been and I guess I
just like to have you work on
that.
When we come to that point of
construction funding.
That
The
There's been some these issues
have been addressed because
otherwise,
We're pounding sand down a rat
hole. We fund a district that
doesn't take care of them.
we're bounding up.
That's my comment.
Mr. Chair, members, uh, Mr.
Ingham.
On behalf of the school
district, they are in compliance
with their
requirements, state statute
requirements for preventive
maintenance planning and we've
worked with the superintendent
over time to update that
document.
Uh, we do recognize that uh they
also are moving forward with
better and improved use for the
first time in a long time of the
state provided facility
information management system.
a very uh good quality level and
they're making improvements. I
think I agree one of the aspects
that they need to improve upon.
It really tells the story that
they'll take care of the new
investments moving forward is
your improvements in the FMR.
And our team can help. We've
reached out to the district many
times and I think because of
some short staffing, we just
haven't gotten there yet and we
are committed to helping them
pursue uh greatness as they.
Mr. Chairman.
Many days a year, do your
students go to school?
Fine.
We're a full week.
You
full calendar, like, what's the
total number? 180.
OK. Thank you. Mhm.
Any
additional questions?
If not, then all those in need
emotion.
To prove the project as
recommended by the subcommittee.
All in favor, please indicate by
saying I.
Host?
See
Well, thank you very much, uh
Mr. Guille and members of the
board, uh, you know, our
students deserve this and, you
know, we will work
collaboratively together so that
we can, you know, make sure that
we maintain our
Our properties, so thank you
very much. I really appreciate
it.
Right
We're going to Roman numeral.
out of cycle awards.
First one is the new hubs Middle
School.
of
We have
Superintendent here uh.
Mr. Chair, members, I'm not sure
if uh.
somebody who wants me to go.
Mr. Sali wants to start off the
conversation.
We need an overview of the short
overview of the project and then
We can hear from
Mr. Silly in a recommendation. I
would, um.
Suggest that we get the overview
of
Both middle school projects
because
This is a good example of a
School district that's got.
Multiple projects in the queue
there.
supposed to be moving
In tandem.
Looking at them individually,
it's hard to discern, like the
finances of at least it has been
for
For me through this awards
process, uh, and now we're
presented with
dramatic change in the financial
request.
That uh warrants further
discussion when we get to that
point about.
Uh, project status and what we
know about things, so.
And with that I just turn it
over to Iris and the
superintendent to kind of go
over both projects high level.
Mm
These 2 projects, items A and B.
Mr. Chair, members, we have 2
projects, uh, 2 middle schools,
New Hobbs Middle Middle School
and higher Middle Middle School.
I'm gonna go over New Hobbs
Middle School first where uh
they are requesting an increase
in the maximum allowable gross
square footage from 96,0789 to
104,376.
This is for grades 6 to 8.
So they're also requesting their
construction phase funding for
uh this facility.
Uh, totaling 65,257.
Uh, 65,257,0824 with the state
match at 49% and the local match
at 51%.
Keeping in mind both of these
schools are very similar,
they're prototype what you would
could consider prototype
schools, they're both um
designed at 1,260,400 square
feet.
The um new calculator allows for
104,376, and that's what the
Uh, what PSFA is recommending,
it's just to align with the
calculator.
Um, in addition to uh that
request, the district is seeking
uh reduction in the local match
by 5%.
For their outstanding FA scores
and um they do qualify at this
time.
Uh, I, I believe the question
here is, again, stating that
both of these schools are
similar in size.
That the allowable is 104,000
square feet. The district is,
uh,
able to uh fund their above
allowable, yet they are seeking
a waiver request for the Heiser
Middle School.
So both of these are similar in
scope, um, similar in the, in
the request.
Um, except for higher Middski.
Uh, now partial waiver.
initially it was full waiver,
now it's partial waiver.
And with that, I will turn it
to, uh, Director Soli.
The superintendent had any
comments? Yeah.
Absolutely, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sali, Iris, thank you for
those comments.
Um, pardon me.
A bit of a history on these
projects in the comments today,
I think we will be
representative of that, uh, and,
and, um.
Since subcommittee, uh, Ms.
Romero and I have had numerous
conversations to begin working
together.
Um
With with the transition at PSFA
occurring, uh, we as hob schools
have maintained a healthy
relationship with PSA for the
better part of two decades.
Um, and have performed.
In that partnership with PSCOC
very well in terms of a number
of projects.
Unlike other schools and other
districts, hobs for the better
part of 20 years has been a
growth district.
And we continue to maintain and
grow in that area. So we have
not been in the business of just
replacing schools.
We've been in the business of
adding new schools in one of
these projects new is response
to that growth.
Heiser is a replacement with an
increase in square footage at
Heiser because of that
enrollment and anticipated
enrollment in the future.
We started this conversation
back in 2019.
Believe it or not, uh, we were
in front of the council
requesting a planning award for
the new middle school at that
time, Heiser qualified.
Or replacement
And between PSFA staff and
honestly, two directors ago, um,
we had conversation that the
PSFA and and director uh
Chamblin believed that Heiser
needed to be replaced.
As a school district from a
facility maintenance. We did not
believe that Heiser was our
biggest issue.
Heiser's FA at that time was
satisfactory, and we were
maintaining that building.
Interesting enough, it is not
our oldest middle school in our
inventory.
other two middle schools are
older than Heiser.
What our request was, was to
study what we needed to do,
because we believed as a
district that we needed
additional square footage.
To account for what we knew was
coming.
So we agreed that the council
agreed to plan that, just to
study that. We studied that, we
looked at enrollment.
Fast forward
After that study, uh, PSFA staff
agreed that we did need
additional.
Square footage on a new middle
school altogether.
As well as maintaining a
replacement for Heiser.
So we move forward with that
with that mindset that
It was time to address Heiser,
even if it wasn't our worst. It
was time to address it because
it was necessary.
A bit of a factor is including
the new facilities that we have
in home schools over the last 20
years, the average age of our
buildings and, and I've said
this before, qualifies for
Medicaid, if they were people.
They're in their 60s, they're
actually 67 is the average age
of our facilities in hobbs.
across all of our square
footage.
That's with the addition of new
square footage.
In the last 20 years.
Moving into these two projects.
Um, very early on after it
communicated that we need new
square footage.
We conducted the ads back.
Yeah
Communicated
That the design
Space of that facility needed to
be 126,000 square feet.
At the Espack our program
communicated that.
Um
At that point, we hired a design
professional.
Um, we had some history where we
didn't need the same design
professional doing our ESE as a
design professional designing
the building.
So we separated that process.
We hired a design professional
that specialized in planning.
it's back.
Then we hired a design
professional that could carry us
through construction, to design
the building.
All along our community has been
engaged in this process the
entire time.
We have what's called fact to
us, FACT facility assessment
community team.
And they're a group of members
across our entire community.
That we've maintained membership
and for the better part of 20
years.
Every single time we have a
facility master plan.
This team comes together.
They look at our facility master
plan, they help prioritize
what's important in our
community.
They are very responsible, and
I, and I will share with you an
experience I had.
We had an elementary school that
we were building 2 elementary
schools that we were building 13
years ago.
And the design discussion was
We need to
dishwasher in a teacher's
lounge.
In fact, the committee said
Absolutely not. We do not need a
dishwasher in the teacher's
lounge.
We have a sink, we can, we can
wash dishes for lunch.
That was the community's
response in terms of a
conservative approach.
To what was necessary in our
facilities.
Then, as a fact committee became
part of and continued to be a
part of.
Every one of our projects from a
design perspective.
We want to continue to be
responsive to our community's
needs.
Moving forward into into these
two projects, um, as, as Ms.
Romero's communicated.
They are
A carbon copy of each other.
Um
126,000 square feet. The
difference in cost is associated
with one, the demolition of
Heiser.
As well as the
Road work that needs to happen
for the new middle school.
The new middle school, we were
able to secure land, 19 acres in
a high growth area in our
community. If you've ever tried
to buy land in Hobbs.
Um
It's expensive, given how things
are happening in Southeast New
Mexico.
A land developer donated to
Hobbs Schools 19 acres.
Just under $3 million in total
cost.
Uh, in terms of those 19 acres
and so we're extremely grateful
to that, to the developer.
To contribute to us.
As a district in the development
of that school because that
would.
communicated an additional cost
to the project.
Continuing to move forward into
design.
Having those design committee
meetings, uh, we went on tours.
We wanted to see what was what's
been built. We haven't built a
middle school in Hobbs in 50+
years.
And actually
72 was when we opened our newest
middle school.
And so that's a bit more than 50
years.
Um
We went and saw schools.
Um
In recent in New Mexico, middle
schools from ground up.
There are no recent examples.
There are examples older than a
decade, even and even older than
15 years.
And so
We did our best.
We went to see those schools as
well to try and inform what
needed to happen.
One thing that stuck out to us
throughout this entire entire
design process as an educator.
In my twenty-seventh year as as
uh
Really contributing to future
generations.
Middle schools unique.
Often said middle schools are
weird years.
Uh, for kids.
What we see in our data, not
only in Hobbs, but also
nationwide.
And and Senator Munoz mentioned
this just last week at Spring
Budget Workshop.
We have to find ways to
re-engage our middle school
students.
Because they're leaving when
they go to middle school and
they're coming back when they're
in high school and they have the
opportunities that are engaging
to them.
Our numbers communicate that
even with a growth factor.
Our numbers communicate that
students leave us after 5th
grade and show back up as 9th
graders.
When you ask them
Quite simply they say.
There's not enough electives for
me in middle school for me to
stay engaged. I can go
homeschool, I can do what I
wanna do.
In our community, that's, that's
their answer.
That's disheartening.
Because in in our community, the
homeschool students that come
back to us.
Academically, they struggle.
And so
Our our our programming, our
core academic program, you know,
these two middle schools.
Resembles that
I don't think there's any secret
anymore, you know, we're not
hiding.
CTE in Homs underneath a bushel
anymore.
Everyone knows, and if you don't
know, ask, we will share that
story freely.
Uh, we are not ashamed of that.
In fact, as a state,
CTE and Hobbs is something we
should be very proud in that
vein.
We recognize that our middle
school students are disengaged.
Our programming communicates
that.
It communicates the opportunity
for students when they're in the
5th grade and they dream, I want
to be an engineer.
But we tell them you have to
wait until you're a junior in
high school to engage in that.
Middle schools allow us through
CTE spaces.
To move them and continue moving
them forward.
special in space.
Currently within the allowable
square footage were allowed 1900
square feet of special ed space.
Program design communicates
upwards of 9000.
That's where a significant
portion of our above allowable
is being represented.
Physical education space, middle
school of 770 kids.
Every 6th graders going to take
PE as a as a requirement.
State requirement.
As well as 7th and 8th graders
taking PE as an elective.
We're talking about putting 120
6th, 7th, and 8th graders in one
space for physical education.
I would urge just to say that
that's not safe.
Middle school being the weird
years anyway that many students
in a single space is not a safe
manner in which to educate
children on a daily basis.
What what you've seen here and
what you do have in front of you
is absolutely the communication
of a program to 126,000 square
feet.
You see the commitment from hop
schools and our community to say
we will continue to support.
Um
2023, we, we had a bond election
for $50 million.
It passed with 70% favorable
rating, 70+% favorable rating.
That $50 million was sold to our
voters.
The only these two projects on
there.
We do not engage in selling
bonds or going to bond election
for a capital program.
We go to our voters with the
projects.
That will be funded by that
money.
Our community expects that that
$50 be spent on.
Those two middle schools.
We've always offered that.
As the design has progressed, we
recognize that that $50 million
as well as a state award of
match was not going to be
sufficient.
So we asho schools, we
contributed and with the board's
support an additional $8
million.
To the projects to bring them to
completion because we were
anticipating.
Construction costs.
Being north of $700 a square
foot. We've heard those horror
stories. We, we've experienced
what's called the hops factor
before.
Uh, in our construction
experience.
So we were trying to plan for
that.
Um
Again
Building being designed to the
program.
We continue to move forward.
Got into
schematic design review.
Design development review,
instruction document review,
stay at 126,126,000 square feet
all the way through.
Even at that time.
We recognized, hey, that $8
million may not be enough.
We want to express to the
council that as a local school
district.
We've put even additional skin
in the game. So not only do we
have the $50 million originally
committed to the projects.
We contributed an additional $1.
Excuse me, additional dollars
towards the projects.
An additional $3 million is what
we originally offered.
And made available.
So from a school district's
perspective, uh, to back to
director Solis.
Comments of we're really looking
at this as one project because
of the total cost.
They will be two buildings with
their own climate, with their
own culture.
Even though there will be one
simple design through the
Documenting or not the
documenting phase or the bid
phase of the projects.
We actually
And, and counsel benefits from
this as well.
We did not realize those those
accelerated costs that we'd
anticipated.
We, we absolutely expect it to
be $700 a square foot.
Construction costs.
We came in at 561.
$140 139 dollars different than
what we anticipated seeing.
That happened
Quite literally, because some
individuals that are back there
with us.
I, I do need to apologize. I, I
do have uh Mr. Doug Young with
us.
And
Assistant Superintendent of
operations.
Our project team is here.
Uh, recognizing the
collaborative effort that we've
continued to engage in in these
projects.
For the better part of 6 years.
Um, you have RJ Lopez, which is
the uh principal designer from
Park Hill.
You have, um,
Nicholas Cain, which is our
member of our Stiefel financial
team.
You have
Lucas Adam of Bradbury's
construction construction and
Philip Ericson of Redbury stem
Construction, their chief
estimator.
On these projects. I say all of
that to say.
Of schools has from the edges
back.
Communicated 126,000 square
feet.
It was not until we got to
subcommittee.
that design square footage was
above allowable.
iSFA staff, former PSFA staff.
Communicated
All the way through that up
until their departure of late.
that space, that square footage
had been communicated multiple
times in programming.
And at the building was designed
to programming.
But it was not designed above
allowable.
Um, so to get to subcommittee
and and I appreciate that the,
the, the scrutiny and the level
of detail that was that was
provided.
Because again,
If we can't justify it,
can't defend it.
We can't fill it?
And no, we're not gonna build
it.
And that's been our our exercise
forever.
Uh, when we build facilities, we
strive for them to get 85%
capacity.
On day one opening.
And that's how we've designed
these facilities to continue
that progress forward.
So
I know you asked for initial
comments.
Wanted to take a moment to
provide an overview for the
council. Maybe I answered some
questions that you had.
Absolutely answer additional
questions.
Thank you.
I think we'll have a good handle
on.
Where you've been and where
you're at.
So
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So this project.
At its earliest stage was 2019.
In terms of like, it's infancy
of thinking we need to do
something.
When can you remind the the
council when the planning awards
were first.
This
Mr. Chair, Mr. Soli.
I'm gonna take a stab and say
22.
We had a little thing called
COVID in there, yeah, um, but.
John probably can can quote me
on a date or even.
American.
And plan the funding to complete
phase one and boundary study.
Updated the 5-year middle
enrollmention students and
location geo code.
We got the COVID dip.
They're in the middle of
planning, which creates
significant challenges for
everybody, including
People having to build a new
School or a school replacement,
so I, I get that.
Uh, but even so during that
particular phase, and it was
communicated that you felt the
schools needed the 126.
000 square feet.
Which was above what the old
calculator.
Um
would allow
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sali, um.
Yes, in short.
And
When were the
Contracts for the CAR.
Um
Initiated her
To start getting sort of like,
what, what your cost estimates
would be.
For that design.
So Mr. Chair and members.
I'll address that in terms of
the benefits to us of Seymour.
Um, and then Mr. Young can
provide the specific dates of
those you would, you would be,
you would have been doing
Seymour kind of during the
planning phase, right?
That that's, that's been our
benefit to projects overall is
to get the CAR on board as early
as we can in design, uh, to my
knowledge, we had Bradbury
stamps secured as a Seymar
before.
We had finished the schematic
design phase. So you go out for
voter approval of 50 million.
Already planning to put
District operational cash.
As part of that at the time of
bond or after the bond that you
decided you were short after the
bond, yes, sir, at that time we
believed really two things.
Um
We believed the
We knew the offsets were going
away.
Uh, we, we've never really
secured offsets as a school
district. Uh, we've allowed.
Uh, those funds to be spilled
elsewhere, I say aloud, we,
we've just not pursued those.
Mm
But at the time, we also
believed that the local match
reduction bill sponsored by
Senator Stewart. We were
informed by PSFA staff at that
time, that that would
take whatever our current match
was.
And increase it by at least 1/3.
That's not how it's been applied
to these projects.
Um, it's been applied.
To where we are and and we'll
have no greater than 1/3.
And, and so PSFA staff, and
again,
Prior to Mr. Romero isFA staff
has said it that doesn't benefit
you any at all.
Because these projects were
awarded.
At 46 54%.
flipped that.
So basically that match
reduction.
Didn't apply to these projects.
Is that correct, Mr. Rome?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Soli, I would
have to.
I guess I'm trying to
Figure out in my mind, there's
been a lot of transition.
Uh, both on the council.
At the agency.
During this project. I'm trying
to figure out when did we
Identify that the district was
short in its ability to to pay.
Because I've been operating
since I've got on that.
That's not been an issue until
we got to awards, so that was a
surprise for me and.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Soli, I, I can
share with you that even in
2019, when we made the original
presentation.
Um
Our comment at that time was, we
will continue to monitor our
financials.
Um, and will further inform the
council if a local match waiver
will be needed.
Prior years, many prior years,
many prior projects, the school
district has qualified for a
local match waiver.
Um, because of our tax rate,
because of our growth rate.
Um, currently our, our citizens
are paying 11.4 million.
Um
To continue to keep up with our
growth.
However, our valuation.
Believe it or not.
Has not stayed.
Yeah, is not tracked equally
with the cost of construction
and the cost of doing business
as it relates to school
construction.
So that's continued to shorten
and I think you all have
experienced that as a council
across the entire state.
Um, microdistricts to large
districts.
That ceiling available because
of the 6% bonding capacity.
is no longer sufficient.
To meet that need.
Um, so
After the initial planning
award.
I believe you'll find it in our
materials that
At that time, we indicated from
the initial planning award, we
indicated that
We believe we will need to
pursue a local match waiver.
And in every stage since then.
So that's something I think.
It's important
You know
Be flagging system.
Um
Earlier on
And I think that this is a
challenge for the council, what
we've been experiencing for the
last
1.5, maybe 2 years, is we've got
a good two-stage.
Planning, construction process,
uh, yes, sometimes that can drag
things out and
Make it last too long. We've
moved to like
Have a rolling
Speed things up and not, I just
feel like for the last year,
we've been sort of surprised
with, well, we're ready to break
ground, but we don't have enough
money to actually.
Do the construction.
And then we're kind of up
against.
Versus waving.
Things for, frankly, some of
these have been
But some people would consider
property rich districts.
Uh, where they're designing.
Uh, for their own local
community needs, what ends up
being above allowable.
And so that's kind of what we've
got here. Uh.
The community engagement.
I want to compliment Hobbs on
your uh maintenance and
preventive maintenance programs.
You know, I think that that's,
that's built into the enhanced
match, uh, that you see before
you on this table.
is that, you know, recommending.
Um
Increasing the state match by 5%
to reward a district that's.
Maintaining a very old
buildings. And so I think that's
important.
Uh, but at the same time, we've
also
stuck to
Um, the allowable.
square footage
Uh
On other projects, uh, including
Zuni and Gallup.
When they wanted to design
bigger and have the state
funded.
And so I'm, I'm hard pressed.
Um, where I sit today to.
Go for a waiver uh for this
particular school district.
Or
Um, above allowable.
That's it.
The construction cost kind of
increases that we've been
Seeing that are unanticipated.
Uh, combined with, you know,
the, the financial parameters.
Are such that that is something
that maybe we take a look at so
that you can see those.
Sort of what we worked with PSFA
staff, they calculated a sort of
district shortfall under the
allowable.
At 8.3 million and 7.3 million
for the two different.
is
Uh, but they still have an
overall project.
A shortfall for that above
allowable.
for the gym
In usage, if we were to just
waive the.
Sort of the, the construction.
portion of it.
They are at 11 mills, they still
do.
Have bonding capacity from what
I understand.
be a challenge.
Um, we have
Offered uh advances, you know,
basically alone.
To move projects forward.
I'm not sure if that would be uh
an option that
The district would want to take,
but I would suggest, Mr.
Chairman, that we offer that as
a.
As a council
Um
And I kind of like to hear from
the district.
You're short
You may not
Uh, qualify under the parameters
that we've got in place today
for the full waiver of the one
project that would essentially
supplement.
Your ability to build both.
What would your plan be on a go
forward basis if you could get.
Help on the
Allowable, that's about 15
million, but not the full amount
that is being requested today.
How would you move forward?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Sali, a great
question and I think a
responsible question.
Well, one thing that I would say
in terms of what, what a, what a
plan moving forward would be.
Building is designed based on
our program and, and.
That was informed by the Ed
spec.
That says this is
Again, a, a council requirement.
That the building be designed to
the program within NSE.
That numbers never shifted for
the district.
It's always been the expect
number and and I'll share.
again,
Two different firms, a planning
firm did the ES back.
In a different design firm
built.
The design.
Uh, so there's not a, an
inflation there associated with
a designer building bigger.
The the offer in terms of what
what the district is, is capable
of doing, um, and you mentioned
in advance.
I think a number of reasons that
are concerning for that one as a
superintendent, I don't have the
authority to indebt my school
board.
The future that.
Mm
As a school board, they don't
have the authority to indebt.
Their community.
a future debt.
So so we don't have the bond
authority to say yes.
An advance it makes sense for
us.
The volatility in our
Valuations.
is a concern.
When we went to the voters with
$50 million.
That allowed us some ceiling in
the event of valuation dipping.
So we, we had, if you take the
$50 million off the top because
that's what voters approved. We
still had $60 million available
of bonding capacity up to that
6% number.
And we had a 22% drop in
valuation.
That's 60 million evaporates.
And so now we're riding hot
checks in terms of what we have
available.
So currently, and I think the
numbers you have in front of you
that shows we have 100+ million
available in bonding capacity.
That's not deducting our current
bonds that are committed to this
project.
So right now, if we were to go
to the voters in November.
Which would be an out of cycle
for our, for our financing
package.
Um
A day, if today were November,
uh, we would be asking.
Uh
Somewhere in the neighborhood of
of of about $70 million is what
we have in capacity. So we've
only increased 10 million from
that ceiling, it still creates a
buffer for us.
Our bond cycles are scheduled
every 4 years. They, they
coincide and they tie they're
tied to our facility master plan
so that we can continue to
maintain.
A
An active capital outlay project
cycle.
Yeah
That that SNP that you you all
took action to approve that and
we appreciate that on the
consent agenda for our new FNP.
I think it's been
Be part of 20 years that we've
had a current and active FMP,
um.
As as a response to the
council's request and, and
that's, that's good behavior.
That's, that's responsible
behavior on behalf of the school
district and and the voter.
Even if the building is
designed.
Um
A request for a for a partial
local match.
would be would be an option, we
would, we would love to consider
and, and have the council
consider as an option.
What we would like to do is
If the council's unwilling to
look at any of that square
footage to be allowable.
And ignoring staff, PSFA staff
prior.
Commitment that
Based on programming and heads
back.
That square footage is
allowable.
What what we're proposing.
Um
And it will make the project
much more difficult, and these
are today's numbers.
That we would take the 21,000
square feet.
Leave the structural components
of the building, the exterior
components of the building so
that that is dried in and
secured.
And we would shell out about
21,000 square feet.
So roofline stays the same, roof
structure stays the same, we
don't install HVAC, we don't
install electrical, we don't
install finishes.
And
We, we keep the project on
schedule.
So that we can get farther down
the road. Those finishes.
Those components are something
that will not happen to the
project, either of the projects
immediately, that will allow us
as a school district an
opportunity.
To come to our legislators and
request legislative
appropriation.
And essentially the next two
legislative cycles.
It also would allow us the
opportunity to shift some of our
capital projects in our mill
levy.
In fiscal year 27.
To account for that.
Uh, to, to make those projects
work.
Um
As a superintendent, that makes
me nervous.
Uh, we've got some estimates in
terms of
What that savings to the project
would be if we shelled out
21,000.
communicate a new number of the
local match waiver.
So again, that's
I hope that that's seen as a
commitment from the school
district to say,
We're asking the council to fund
to allowable.
Um, and allow us to shell out
that 21,000 square feet.
For us to pursue that down the
road.
Um.
Again, what would it be
detrimental to the project? It's
not a deal breaker on the
projects.
However, it does cause us.
Quite a bit more sensitivity in
terms of monitoring that.
Um
You know, to a to a future bond
sale.
We anticipate our facility
master plan communicating what
our community is already asking
for.
Is, is they're asking for.
How are we going to address the
existing inventory and it's 67
years of age.
In a growth community.
I sit here day as your
superintendent.
My hair was a different color.
When I started in operations.
And
And I, I have not had the
privilege of had Mr. Senna's
haircut yet, but I'm working
there way that way quickly.
Um
But, but I, I anticipate our
facility master plan
communicating.
and Mr. Valdez maybe can confirm
this, our elementary schools are
reaching capacity again.
And we're roughly 30,000 square
feet short on elementary space.
That we desire to create.
A early childhood care center.
From near birth through pre-K,
so that we have staff to provide
that to our community as a
whole.
Yeah
I'm not pontificating that
that's what our FMP will
communicate.
But I anticipate that being part
of our project as well as
continuing to deal with our
existing inventory.
I hope I answered your question.
If not, please point on the one
that I, I skipped over.
Thank you both for
Try to work through this.
So that we have a
A path forward
Was there anything else that the
subcommittee discussed?
Shed some light on.
Yeah, Mr. Chair.
And I've spoken to the
superintendent as well and I, I
think the hard part here is um
We talked about this in the
subcommittee too with the
superintendent, it's clear how
intentional they're being about
educational programming and
trying to meet the needs of
their local community.
Um
The, the ass that we that we
were presented with, uh, was
actually already an increase
from allowable to, to
accommodate for the new.
Um, adequacy standards and so.
This is still above that amount
where you'll see some, you know,
we're already seeing requests
for language change to match
that new allowable square
footage because of the new
adequacy standards.
Thank you. On page 149.
Um
And so this is still above that.
And so we talked a lot about
obviously the intention behind
this building, and this is not a
haphazard. We're just gonna
build bigger because we can.
Um, but, but
Obviously, as a subcommittee and
as a full council.
We've had, we've struggled with
this. We've struggled with, with
school districts that are coming
with these requests.
And we have obviously granted
waivers for school districts who
are unable to pay for a lo.
We have not granted waivers. I
don't think.
districts who are asking above
allowable.
And that's kind of especially
when you think about Doctor
Calli's comments about this is
essentially one project.
Uh, although it's two different
schools where we're sort of
seeing it as one.
It's, it's a, a tough balance.
This is probably gonna, this is
a little bit ahead of some
comments I might make later.
I'm a little concerned about
How some of these projects are
communicated.
to the districts.
From PSFA staff.
Because clearly we're in a tough
position now because school
districts have been told up to
this point, this is not the
first time it's happened.
Come to the to the council or
the subcommittee with a
particular request.
And we're, we're put in a very
tough posi position.
Where I feel like some of these
projects should never have
gotten to us in the in the.
For that they're in.
I
Um, and I'm not sure exactly why
that, why that's happening.
Um
I'm, I'm just concerned about
that because, and then I did
have a question, I guess, going
back, this is not about, we
didn't talk about this in the
subcommittee because it didn't
come up.
The conflict between the eds
spec.
Considering the last
conversation about Santa Rosa
and Ed Speck and and design.
The conflict in this particular
case that Ed Speck came back
with a much larger square
footage.
That we would ever fund given
especially.
at the time.
The allowable square square
footage, and I wonder if anybody
from PSFA can talk to us about.
The Ed spec on these particular
projects.
Um, and the square footage
there.
Or or the conflict there
potentially.
Mr. Senate members.
Um, the district of this aspect,
what we did is we, it did
identify the spaces that were
over at that time, though, we
didn't really assign that the
district was to be asking for
Us to pay for the the amount
over the square foot. So what we
had done is we said, right, this
is what mounts at the PSFA or PS
we will ask PSCOC to pay for,
and that was at the time based
on the old calculator amount.
And then at that time we believe
that the district would pay for
their share over.
There has been a narrative to
Design and build in, you know,
diving into it and it not really
being as counsels.
put in place.
Yes.
seemed that we were no longer
using that measuring stick.
Whether or not
We liked it.
Whether we were hearing uh
different from the districts.
Um, yet I don't believe a lot of
this in this as far as the
recommendation.
Now if you do want wheat or and
you could just buy them more.
And the design needs to stop.
We come to council, you give
your rationale as to why you
need the more.
And because PSA is not, we're
not the decision makers. We're
the data collectors.
And it seems for a little bit
there's been some um narrative
going out that.
The council will support.
Build bigger.
And PSFA has put the council in
a very awkward position. And
there's gonna be a few more like
this coming forward.
Um, but we're putting, we're
going back to basics and we are
utilizing.
Uh, the adequacy standards, the
new calculator, and we're gonna
start
In order to give uh the district
even uh a bigger voice is as you
know, the APG is not.
complete and updated.
We're going to um have those
round tables. We're going to
engage with our partners. We're
going to hear the why do we
need, why do you need additional
square footage for the special
programs such as a special
special education or CTE. Some
of these combo schools you're
gonna be see coming up that they
need admin space and it's not
allowed in the APG. So those are
the conversations we now have an
opportunity to have as we modify
the APT.
But back to what you were
indicating. Yes, there was a
narrative that put you in a um
Making strides to go back to
basics.
And if I may, I'll probably add
some additional context to that.
I think there's some some
conflicting language.
From my experience.
Adequacy planning guide is.
The minimum
It's not adequate.
Uh, based on programming, based
on that spec.
communicates adequate.
And so from a language vision
and Ilo PFA staff for continuing
to look at that.
Um, I think that's some bad
language because as a counsel,
you what the minimum is.
And, and that's necessarily not
adequate for these two schools
specifically. I'll I'll share.
You know, again
There is no recent history of
middle care to as to what is
adequate. The calculator, the
calculator was adopted with
direct evidence.
Of what that should look like as
well and so again, do, do I
believe the calculator is, is a
good measuring stick. I do.
Do I believe it's an appropriate
measuring stick.
I think it's a starting point.
And, and when you have
programming that communicates.
Mm
A model that that we're pursuing
in New Mexico and not just in
Hobbs, but a model that we're
pursuing in New Mexico.
Is to get out of this.
Rot
Uh, which is my passions on both
sides.
As as we as a as a state pursue.
Excellence in our education
system.
We began to look at those areas
where we're pursuing that
effort.
And I think Anton Chico is an
example of.
Where we, where we did the
minimum.
And, and now years later, so as
a council uh back.
To Mr. Romero's point, I think
that that.
We, we all own the air and I
won't speak ill of my former.
Uh, Superintendent, um, many of
you know and I, and I respect
and I but I I do welcome the
revision of the APG.
Uh, and we will absolutely
participate in any way we can,
we've done that.
As a school district.
Again, we're, we're not hiding
anything under a, under a
bushel.
We're we are at the table.
Willingly offering solutions to
what we believe is adequate.
Um, for, for a core academic
program.
Um, if you were to look at these
buildings on a
You will not find fluff space.
It is fully programmed already.
We've got master schedules that
communicate that, and I think
Mr. Valdez has already seen.
Schedules that say this is how
126,000 square feet will be
utilized.
You know
The COVID death
What it did for us is it allowed
our middle schools.
To shed for lack of a better
term.
To shed
About 100, 120 kids per campus
that were way over capacity. We
were seeing 135, 140.
So we're hitting that capacity
again, we're we're we're right
up.
Two of them are already above
it. Heiser is at 97% capacity.
Yeah, just last two things, uh,
Mr. Chair, if it's OK. Uh, one
is clearly
There's still a conversation to
be had about the adequacy
standards and, and what kind
that's not enough.
And, you know, I'm
I've asked my staff um.
You know, maybe we need to take
a couple of tours. I'm just not,
not this particular school, but
schools about whether or not
they have the space that they
need to provide the kinds of
things that we know are
important.
That's, that's the first piece.
As as regard to today.
Um
We've said no to a lot of
people.
For these reasons.
Because they do not meet
adequacy in terms of waivers, at
least, not because.
We, we might be setting a
precedent.
In terms of funding a project
like this in this, I think those
are the those are the two big
things for me, what we're
funding on a regular basis is
actually serving school
community needs.
And then
Thank you
Madam Secretary
You're the,
yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair and
Um, I, um,
And so, I think
that.
You know, we, as accountant in
what we're doing and.
You know, we reflected, you
know, the district did process.
Um
I am concerned.
Moves
Um, in terms of what they follow
the requirements that we give
them, including ES.
And they're working towards
that.
We have to be consistent with
what, and when they have done
that, we have to be able to say.
because ultimately we need to
build over capacity when
they're.
We need to do something. And so
I.
I lean towards and to to further
delay.
Um, I think, uh, an option. I
appreciate that the district
thought about this, how can we
Um
I think that looking at what
we're doing for middle middle
school is really important, and
we all, I told that we need it.
We need um
You know, many high
schoolsficient in that.
In that middle school students
is something that we need to.
Uh, um, and the legislature to
address the needs of second
subcommittee
and, uh,
on page 150.
Um
By the calculator gym weight
room.
And correct.
Mr. Romero members, that is
correct. What Hobbs did, they
sent us a basically a class um
and we saw the number of CE and
not only PE popular at all three
of their existing middle
schools.
Um
They also have the CT spaces.
I can, I
can pull these up for family
uh
can pull these up for family
basically the home rooms, the
tech centers, keyboarding, um,
they have, you know, their their
science labs, so they do have
these spaces that uh that they
utilize for the regularly and
then also um.
On page
148 of your
But there's a utilization table.
Um, and for higher Highland in
Houston, if you look at that
last column utilization rates.
Those are in the 90s, um, and
typically those are utilization
rates we see at the elementary
school levels because
il ization rates of the
elementary school levels are
always their classrooms, uh,
they will, they'll they'll go
to, they'll go to recess, but
that they don't.
Um, what happens in middle
school and high schools is the
students, you know, they switch
classes, there's prep period, so
the, the utilization rates at in
middle schools and high schools
are always a little bit lower.
They're usually between 70 to
85% is a good utilized middle
school. Those utilization rates
that at the 3 Hobbs middle
schools that you see they are
very high. That means they don't
have a lot of flex, don't have a
lot of flexibility to add new
students. The the square footage
minus the marijuana members,
that is correct.
Um, one of the things that
auxiliary gems have typically
not, we, there's a provision
within the adequacy planning
guide that says auxiliary gems
are typically not um or are not
eligible with the exception of
unless they can prove
utilization. Um, so that's the
reason why they've included the
auxiliary gym in this program,
because they are highly
utilized.
I think
And I agree, we can make it
worse a level playing field for
everybody.
But in this situation, I think
that with the school district,
you know,
You know,
Sometimes I think we need all
the school districts what they
need.
I think the school district
should be telling us what they
need, you know, as far as, you
know, being able to move some of
the.
Yes, go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a
real quick clarifying question.
I'm looking at 149, John, the,
the.
Program statement and the ODR,
the square footage by space.
Um, and you said, I think you
just said that the auxiliary
gym, Mr. Romero is already
included.
Mr. uh, Mr. Senate members, uh.
Yeah gym, we have included that
in in eligible.
Just because eligible or
ineligible.
Eligible eligible. So can I ask
the where it says physical
education and there's.
What is that?
Also uh members of I'm
understanding your question, you
want to know what what
constitutes that 9000. That's
right. Well, what they did is
when they first.
worked on both the aspects and
then program statement they had
both eligible and in over
eligible for footage.
Um, that they are now requesting
to be eligible so that there was
um a a there was basically a
PEGym of 6200 square feet, which
is allowable for high for a
middle school, well, it's a
little bit over for middle
school, so.
For middle school like uh middle
school gym is 5200, so that was
a little bit that was over
there.
And then they also had, there
were 2.
spaces that we flagged because
they were specifically athletic
locker rooms. They have PE
locker rooms for both boys and
girls.
4 of those each, but we flagged
those spaces as being over
eligible, and those were 12,030
square feet each.
So I'm sorry to ask, keep asking
the question. So is, is that
9000 square feet include those
spaces that you flagged? Is that
what you're saying the locker
rooms are included in that
physical above eligible spaces
that does that includes um the,
the two locker rooms.
OK.
I think we're getting there.
Mr. Chair, Director Sale.
Because of the, I think it was
Senate Bill 131, which is a
number of years ago, um,
actually the bill before that
matches.
Taking us to 20 which is where
we are at now is 80/20.
I don't remember what it was in
that year in 202. Uh, we may
have been at 26 at that point.
But we would all agree that the
The local match rate.
Over the course of this
preventative maintenance.
Mr. Chair, Doctor Sali, the
match at that time was.
So I think the the table that's
important, Mr. Chairman is on.
149 because it's really relates
to either.
Either school
And the kind of space, so it, it
sounds to me like the auxiliary
gym space.
It's kind of in the base, but
there's still an excess of 9.
Core academic, which would
include CTE.
You're right about there on core
academic, the other.
Big outliers, special ed class
streaming space and.
You know, admin.
space and then
He
You know, that's always
So I
From my perspective, I
You know,
I don't know what emotion Mr.
Chairman.
But I'm OK with funding the cost
above, I think this project came
in.
You know, funding the allowable.
Um, that's working and
appreciate the coming up here
and the.
What I wanted to do was just
summarize a little bit, and I
think then I, I think the
discussion has been good on all
our parts. I think we're
learning.
Types of questions that are
gonna come before us.
Uh, face the increasing costs
which
One problem you don't have,
which is great, and it's gonna
give us some flexibility here, I
think.
But
I think we're we're all on board
on this project except for the
overage.
And the overage includes.
Uh, special ed
The gym
Uh, CTE and I think those are
issues that we can really.
Oh
Look at justification for
including them in the.
Especially the special ed.
Mhm
And the CTE
Uh, so
I think that if we
Include a portion of those or
even all of those.
And if it is, then
Uh, the, the motion would, would
be to include
Mr. Chairman, I would propose a
motion that would
Apply to both projects, uh, the
first.
The second would be to increase
the
New middle school.
Uh, funding amount by 8.3
million in the Heiser Middle
School funding.
To fund
The shortfall for allowable
square footage.
reconsidered.
Yes, and that was my, my
understanding.
Some of the money that
we were adding to the project.
Well with Mr. Chairman, it would
fund the construction.
Uh, space that's above
allowable.
Yeah, we're back to his.
OK
Did I need anything else besides
increasing the square footage
and increasing.
The state
Just, just to clarify, Mister
Chair, Doctor Slee. So I'm
looking at this.
And I just want to make sure I
understand the motion. So I'm
looking at the, those last few,
uh, district shortfall.
And it sounds like the motion
would be to fund.
That district shortfall for the
allowable pieces.
And other
14 and 13. So to fund this
entire project, they would need
an additional 27 million.
not really clear.
about based on this I was gonna
go back
to.
as well, but if you have a
question at this point.
Yes, thank you for helping.
So I, yes, I was funding.
Not being tied to past.
Decisions, but really thinking
about the future and building
schools um in the way they need
to be built in the EDAs, EAs,
noted facts, it's back.
Um, came at this above. I didn't
know how much they came up, you
know, um, and to your point that
we see rising costs, so why
would we delay?
Building is to, to build the
full.
What the community based it on
with a lot of good data.
And so, and I know there's a
way, the waiver to the match.
Those are my, I'm a little.
Need a little more clarification
elig.
Mr. Chair, I, I saw that and I
think that's what I was saying
is, are we voting against what
I'm.
I think that's what the answers
are for.
The above.
That's Roginsky, um.
And, and I appreciate Secretary
Padilla.
And Senator Mr. Sinner, Director
Sen waiting through that.
Um
But yeah, there are a number of
pieces to that, and so the the
motion from Director Sale.
Would take the building would
fund 104,000 Sygian's question.
Is what is the council willing
to consider.
Based upon the E spec and the
programming of that 21 in that
additional local match.
And, and I think to that point
in terms of clarity, the, the
motion as presented.
would not fund any of the any of
that space that we've talked
about in terms of CTE or special
ed.
Above what's allowable.
cul ator so there would be
21,000.
At that point, in terms of a
funding mechanism, uh, it would
require a what what the district
is considering is for the
council to approve.
126,000 square feet to be the
award.
In the program
And then allow us to consider
what that shell that cost would
be um our both our.
Design professional and general
contractor's estimates and
working with Mr. Gherkin.
About validating those costs.
Of what the savings to the
project would be given a 120
set.
And my thoughts on that, which I
thought were included in.
I don't see an amount for CTE
in.
You know you, uh, you're wanting
us special use classrooms as
You know, if, if again, if, if
we're, if we're gonna set a
precedent, I think if we do it
not as a whole but as
Particular items here that we
feel are agree on if we
can.
And you don't want to break
that.
Mr. Chair, sorry, just, I think
we're all still a little bit
confused about some of the
descriptions that we're getting
to your point about picking
things out, if that was
something that council even
wanted to do.
Can someone tell me on this
table, we're looking at, and I'm
not sure if I'm supposed to be
looking at the.
like green or the blue, but.
Um
Where it says special use
classrooms.
There's above eligible square
footage.
One or the other, what, what
does that mean?
Some of the members, especially
classrooms or classrooms that
are sort of electives that have
special equipment in them, um,
or there are large, larger size
because of the the the
enrollment. So those are your
science labs.
Your um family community
community science labs, um.
Your tech center, your, your
keyboarding lab, your art,
choir, music, drama, and band
rooms.
Um, what they did when they did
the program statement and when
they did the ODR program, they,
they allocated some square
footage to eligible space, and
then some square footage over
eligible space even though we
would always pay for a science
lab. We will always pay for
band room and drama lab. They
just did that to show, uh, and
the show the amount of square
footage that what constituted
the mount over the 1,104,000. So
Mr. Chair and, and I thank you,
John, for that. I appreciate it.
Um.
So in other words,
These are essentially the square
extra square footage here is
bigger rooms than we would have
paid for.
So members, that is correct, um.
For example, they are asking for
A well, the science was a
science lab 1200 square feet or
a science classroom, 1200 square
feet and
According to the Odyssey
planning guide, where the
minimum classroom size for that
is 650.
OK
So, I guess, Mr. Chair, my
question would be then, if, if
we chose to come back in, this
isn't adding or taking away
particular rooms. This is square
footage within multiple rooms.
And it would require redesigning
the spaces that we're talking
about.
OK.
like
So, so, Mr. Chair, Mr. Senna, I
think to that point in terms of
those special use classrooms,
some of that space you're seeing
is science lab as an example, an
expensive room to build compared
to a science classroom.
Those are combo labs.
There's two science classrooms
nearing that.
So we, we are leveraging
efficiency of those being in.
Near to each other.
In terms of overall overall
design.
And, and Mr. Chair, I'm, I'm not
questioning the use of the
classrooms. I'm just trying to
figure out is there a way to get
at some of these uses while
still trying to scale back, but
it doesn't sound like that's the
case in these particular cause
we're not, we're not talking
about
You have one science lab, and
you don't need another science
lab, and we could just do away
with one, we're talking about
you have to redesign so much of
your space in order to get to
that.
And, and I think to to that to
that question, um.
How it's calculated in that
table on 149.
Your point, I think there's some
confusion about what spaces or
what.
from
There there's there's spaces
that that are not calculated in
that if you use um.
My question is, um, is it?
Feasible
Um, I know that we've had many
projects come back with funding.
Is it feasible to do your
methodology of
Chilling out.
portion of it in the.
To get the project moving.
And then allow them to come back
cause this clearly has been
Rushed. I'm just gonna say,
yeah, at least what for us on
your end, on our end.
Um
To come back to us at a later
date.
During construction,
To
rehash these.
Issues so we can have a better
understanding of.
Adequacy versus um.
In any case, um, for, for me.
I, I feel like I've seen a very
professional approach.
To this project and.
that and an efficient and
conservative approach.
And so my tendency is just from
gut feelings. Is it, I, I feel
like you guys have done a, a, a
very
Um, good and the fact that you
have a committee.
Oh
Community members watching over
this whole process.
Really impresses me.
Um, so for me at this point,
I think we need to get the
project moving.
I, I think that.
Some of the stuff, OK, yeah, is
it, is it appropriate to buy an
HEAC system as quickly as
possible, yes.
But also if we can get the
project moving.
give the council some time.
To reevaluate some of those
adequacy standards in this
regard or or how we're going to
address this as far as, you
know.
Give us some time to work on
that.
And then come back to us again
at a later date with um.
Uh, additional funding request.
I don't know if that's
appropriate or, but that's what
I.
Comes to me as a
Uh, at least an approach to take
today.
But
Poster
Go to your motion again.
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
I think it's important for the
committee.
I don't think it's abundantly
clear exactly what.
If
The committee were to adopt the.
District request for the above
allowable.
Square footage.
What exactly
And it sounds like it would be
buying larger space.
That's already
Harder than everything from
Extra
Uh, locker room space for
athletics versus used athletics
using the same space as the gym.
Maybe larger
Like you still have an auxiliary
gym.
Under the
Um, allowable.
So it's not like we're requiring
them to forego to gym.
It's just a question of.
Do we want to set precedent, you
know, but in this case, 21,000
square feet.
For school.
For this particular district
when
We've set standards and live by
those standards with.
That, uh, Mr. Chairman, I'll.
Restate the motion to increase
the
Maximum I will uh grows square
footage to the new uh eligible
amounts.
A little over 104,000.
And to help pay for the
additional.
Instruction inflation cost.
Or square footage within the
allowable.
To reduce the state match for.
Um
Or to increase the state match
for.
The new middle school.
of
8. those amounts that you see on
the sheet that was handed out
8.3 million for the new middle
Do you have to redesign
anything?
and appreciate their question.
So the motion as it sits right
now would be a motion for 100
recognizing that there would not
be any.
Consideration
Program square footage.
We would not be able to go
because.
There's not funding for that.
On our end or
The motion for 126,000 square
feet, it's 775 students.
I would
And we hold
A.
Mr. Chair and Secretary Padilla,
we do have cost that's been
validated at the request of PSFA
staff.
As to what that 21,000 square
feet.
would be.
Uh, it's, it's roughly
33 $3.4 million.
In terms of shelling out that
21,000 square feet is what.
If we're not considering
allowable in terms of funding
the allowable because of the
design, because of the timing of
the project.
know
Proceeding with 126,000.
Not funding the above allowable.
finished cost.
Similar to what what Mr. Ingham
is talking about.
Um
But funding
The structural costs associated
with that. The roof structure.
We clearly believe it's clearly
been communicated from our
community.
That this is our core academic
program at these two middle
schools.
Is 126,000 square feet.
So I redesign would put not only
the new project.
Out another year.
Because of the, so the cycle, we
would not open that school until
August of 28.
Because of the redesign of
attendance boundaries.
I understood the, the cost
you're saying.
make this project
forward is 3 million.
Additional 3 million
You wanna move
I understand it correctly, uh,
Mr. Sali's motion will not get
us to the point of moving
forward.
We need to
Table this and try and work.
And understanding at least of
what we're able to provide and
what we're not able to provide.
Or is there any?
Bottom line, request that the.
This trip would like to
Make at this Mr. Chairman and
council, I, I want to.
Express my grat investing in the
timing, hearing where in in.
Mr. Ramiro, Ms. Romero, not
Ramiro.
Romero um has fully stepped
into.
In the conversations we've had
offline has fully stepped into.
Those conversations that you've
shared even today.
In terms of where PSFA is and
the desire of where you it's a
head.
In the future.
Um
We look forward to being a part
of that partnership.
Um, the, the bottom line ask.
would be
Allowable square footage of
126,000 square feet.
funding
The construction of that minus.
The shall cost.
Which is about $3.5 million.
What we did is, is we took.
Comments from subcommittee and
we said.
Why is all your money on one
project and and.
Some of our conversations with
PSFA staff have been all your
money needs to be on one project
and let the council decide what
they're going to match on the
next project.
That's occurred.
So we, we, we took a step back
and, and so the numbers you see
in front of you now are
reflective conversation with
PSFA staff on Thursday.
We, let's look at the numbers
from what?
The original ask is of put your
money on one project.
And, and look at what the
matches, the waiver on the other
project.
So that's what we've prepared.
Uh, which is that shell.
So overall, I mean the numbers
we've got and we can fine tune
these numbers, um, but overall,
Um
The new middle school.
Because there's been an early
work package already awarded.
Uh, we show a total project cost
of 69, 175 and some change.
We have district bonds available
of 41 million.
Because we've already expensed 4
million on early work package
that takes us to 45 of our
original 50 available.
The state match of 49%.
Of the allowable square footage
of 104,000.
would be 28 million.
That would fully fund the new
middle school.
Heiser
Again, keeping in line with what
was originally presented to
subcommittee.
That total project cost is 74
million.
If you pull out the shell cost
of that 21,000 square feet in
Heiser.
Which is about 3.3 million.
We now have an allowable project
cost of 71 million.
We have $5 million of our
original bond available to the
project.
Our local match portion.
The state matches the state
match of 49% would be 31
million.
For an unmet need of 34 million.
Honoring what we said before,
the school district is putting
additional money into the game,
additional skin into the game to
show our continued to.
Participation
Of $7 million.
Which would leave and I
realized, I think the numbers
changed this morning, um, and so
I I appreciate PSFA staff's
diligence in getting that
together, uh, in terms of what
that number is, but the number I
have here it shows an unmet need
for a partial waiver.
Which would not have those that
those that space I finished, it
would be shelled out.
Um
And we, we would bear the
responsibility of that.
But it would, it would have a
partial waiver contribution
request of 27.5 million.
That would fund Heiser
minus the shells
state share.
not assured.
It it it would be the state
share that that would be the
waiver request and then the
state share as well of 49%,
which is 31.
And so if we, if we split it
like it is on this page,
Across two projects
At 27 million.
Is is roughly
13.5. Um, so unless uh.
There's a motion to that effect.
And we would go with Charles
motion or.
table the matter and.
Not fully understanding that if
we're just designing.
Space, slight adequacy allow.
Versus we're going to shell out
an extra, I think we need to
know what you were I don't.
Since opposition of funding the
additional.
Consider
Mr. Chairman or not.
But I absolutely I think uh
there seems to be agreement with
that approach.
We, and we don't want this to.
Mr. Chair and Mr. Lee, I
appreciate the comments, um.
I would
Continue to welcome
The work and effort that we've
put into these projects for 6
years. It will not get cheaper
the longer we wait.
That shelling out cost is on
today's costs.
That we're stepping up and
saying that's an unknown for us,
that's a bogey for us.
Recognizing that we have an
established process of 126,000
square feet communicated through
an edges back.
Communicates the projects
necessary size.
communicates, this is the
designed program spaces.
Delaying the project even a
week.
This is my board meeting
tomorrow night. It potentially,
I mean granted, we, we do have
some time.
For
Guaranteed maximum price
contracts with our CMA and our
subcontractors to hold those
prices.
But every day we wait, we're,
we're losing time.
And that $140 a square foot that
we saw in savings.
May evaporate
In addition to to further
communicate our efforts.
Uh, back to to Mr. Ingham's
comments.
And back to Mr. Romero's
comments from earlier today.
We've been diligent in building
in a tariff contingency into
these projects.
Recognizing that that may be,
so.
We looked at the total program
again.
After November of 2324 and said,
We gotta do something,
anticipating something.
So we trimmed there.
I do appreciate the
consideration of 104,000 square
feet, but I think it would be.
Improper on my point, if I
didn't point out.
We already have an agreement, we
have an award.
To award that.
That's the minimum is 104,000
square feet.
That's not adequate.
That's the minimum.
It's 104,000 square feet.
So for for the district's ask of
126,000 square feet.
Yes
It's that important that we
continue to work through this in
terms of the timing.
hypercritical of how close we
are.
Having this conversation, Mr.
Chairman.
We've been in front of PSFA.
For well over a year.
In active design.
Of 126,000 square feet.
And we're here as a district.
Asking for permission from the
council to build what's been
designed.
And, and asking for
participation.
In that design that the process
clearly communicates is the
program.
So the the minimum standards are
so that districts don't go to
cheap.
And so I, I appreciate the
opportunity to, to provide the
some follow-up comment.
Uh, in terms of where we are.
We're willing
To look at what that is.
Yes, the shelling out of space
is a contribution on the state's
behalf.
Of building that exterior
structure of building those
structural walls.
The finished space is not.
The district's willing to take
that.
And work that into the overall
project long term.
Recognizing that
It will cost us more than what
you see here.
So the district, specifically
this one.
It's not a wealthy district.
You've heard it said before,
we're one of the least funded
school districts in the state of
New Mexico as it relates to our
SCG that pales in comparison.
I recognize other school
districts.
And they're their their ability
to meet their need as it relates
in the history of hop schools.
We have never
Asked for a local match waiver.
Even though we've qualified.
And maybe that was an error on
our part and in the 13 years
that I've been in operations,
maybe that's an error on my
part.
And I think it's important that
this council consider the local
match waiver.
The spaces in
So
that we get.
again.
is not at this point. Thank you.
Thank you for being here.
Uh, we've had a good
relationship over the years
we've.
I think the council man I I've
been in the facilities.
And we hope to
Be in these facilities.
Mm
It's so unclear.
Thank you.
Thank you. Appreciate you.
12 o'clock
OK
We've still got some items on
the agenda, so thank you in the
audience for
Your patience with us.
And uh the next item is.
Item number C combined school in
Maxwell.
And there's an award uh language
change request.
Mr. Chair members, um.
Let me if I'm wrong
is these were left off.
sense because they're two combo
schools.
level
Of um
superintendent and then um.
can chime in with.
Mr. Chair, members of the
Mr. Chair, members, uh, that
memo starts on page.
179 of your books.
What we did in response to some
questions that the, the award
subcommittee is we wanted to
look at
Previously funded combination
schools.
Or ones that we are currently
working on right now, and that
includes San Juan.
Maxwell, Springer.
Des Moines, Mascaro, and
Carazozo.
What we did is we looked at the
program statements.
Totals per area for these
schools and, and when I say per
area that includes core
academics, which are their
general classrooms for grades
pre-K through 5th middle school
and high school core classrooms
and certain electives.
Especialty classrooms, again,
we, those are the classrooms
that contain special equipment.
There are larger sizes.
Um, their rotational spaces, you
know, art, music, career
technical education, labs and
computers.
Special education, those used by
full and full inclusion special
special ad.
full inclusion and
pullouts.
Physical education, gym, locker
rooms, media arts, library.
Student dining and which
cafeteria and supporting spaces
and of course at district
administration.
So table one on page 180 shows
each of those districts I
mentioned.
And what they programmed in
their program statement.
Um, when they were designing
their, their, their school. I
have a designer enrollment in
the green boxes.
And then those those areas, so
you can see uh a comparison by
the different space areas within
each school.
You can see the net square
footage, then the tear and the
growth.
And for that project.
I have the administration space
called out specifically because
those are some questions.
Um, from the award subcommittee
and the reason we were looking
at administrative spaces because
Um, district administrative
space is usually not as
typically not eligible for.
Uh, PSCOC funding and that's
typically because we're dealing
with districts that have
actually their own
administration building.
Most of these districts do not.
Um, I think the only one that
does right now or or if they do,
they're, they're they're
planning to
Um, not to, to not care that
they're planning to incorporate
the administrative space within
their pro their new program.
Curazozo is a school that has
administrative space, they're
going to retain. So you see um
the space by space comparison by
area for each school and then on
page.
182
You see, we call out the
administrative space
specifically.
And have the different spaces or
subspaces that constitute those
administratives. You can see it
ranges from uh
in Sanho as administrative
square footage.
2580.
Maxwell, 2973.
Springer, 2820.
2620, I'm sorry.
2055.
Mascaro
continue to be discussions that
we want to have.
what
I just a unique
Chair, members of the council,
thank you for your time this
morning as a former elementary
teacher, I feel like I should
offer you a snack because I'm
sure your blood sugar is
dropping, and that's never good
for anybody.
I'll try and be brief.
When I first sat before you in
the late summer of 2023, I came
to you and asked for an award to
combine our 5 current buildings
into one combined campus to
allow us to make a a safe um
campus. We were one of the ones
who had a major street that ran
right in between our buildings
and our, and we couldn't
securely when required.
And we actually did, um,
We an award of 45,000 square
feet according to the old
calculator.
And art. So we said about the
ESE in programming phase trying
to cut down to right side to fit
within that 45,000.
What we found is that we
couldn't fit within the 45,000.
But we did fit within the 55,000
that is the new calculator, and
I think that is evidence in
smaller districts.
As a microdistrict, we do have
the foods all of my custodial
staff. I have 2.
Um
We did include our counselor's
office and the, and I'm
suspecting that other school
districts must have put it only
listed under us and uh Springer.
So I think our overall admin
space square footage is a little
larger, uh, um, we have had a
declining run down.
Um, we did have a family of 5
moved to Colorado.
We had a family with 3 kids
moved down to TRC. They were
able to buy a farm.
We did have a family with 4 kids
moved to Oklahoma.
And so um, so it's just that we
have very large families and
when there's small number.
We do have a family of 4.
However, whether I have 117 or
whether I hate or still allows
for the same square footage,
because I still have to have
Um, in terms of this spaces that
are over are allowable or over
larger than like our, our, um,
But we put a lot of space into
our special ed area.
We actually, you know, as a K-12
school, having a, maybe a 3 or 4
year old in the same classroom
with a senior, and we did
actually have a situation with
severe autism was safe in that
special ed square footage. We do
have because we don't have some
of the resources and services
that large urban districts have
to be and teach them those
skills in the community.
We don't have a grocery store in
town.
So we do have a
In our CTA, we do have an area
for a woods lab, a metals lab,
which does support our ag focus
from our regency with um PED but
we do have some high school
students where A is not their
desired pathway.
And much like, you know,
We have a very high graduation
rate, but this we lost because
they didn't see the relevant and
how it impacted their lives.
So we are expanding our and
including a commercial culinary
kitchen, so that our we also do
have one classroom and, and it
may sound like.
one general electives for 3D
printing and computer science,
which along with our health
drivers right now, the chicks
are hatching as we speak in my
office because that's where
there's space.
Um,
but those are some of the areas
that we have put additional
square footage into and we did
forego having two separate gyms
as a combined school, we would
be awarded, you know, one full
size gym and then kind of an
auxiliary gym. We combined those
two spaces, but we are putting a
dividing curtain down the middle
of that, so that when we have
another 33 inch snowstorm, we
can have indoor school PE on the
other side and not.
Uh, our cafeteria space will
serve as a multi-purpose area
and has a stage built in in
front for any questions, and we
do have our project manager and
our design professional
Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman, uh, I
would move to the council
approved to.
Increase the
Footage from 51,024.
It's a subcommittee motion, so.
Well, it's not we're so.
too
There
Anything else you'd like to add
before we?
And
we'll still have a little bit of
that left over to put towards
construction, but we will be in
phase 2. Alright, so we have a
motion and a few seconds.
All in favor, uh.
Uh, please indicate by saying I.
I was supposed
Mhm
Thank you, thank you, thank you
for traveling.
OK OK, next we have
They've been waiting patiently,
sent home to school.
from those
What 200 books we uh printed. Go
ahead. Yes, my name is um Alan.
I'm host superintendent Sanhome.
Um, thank you, Chairman and
distinguished, um.
Committee, I thank you for
hearing us today and I guess I
could just say ditto to what Amy
said because we're in the same
situation we are uh a building
with all the outbuildings we're
trying to become one to be more
safe because Sandhone if you all
know, is the last school
district when you leave 40.
going east and so we're right on
I-40 in Route 66. So go into one
building is gonna be incredible
because I have 2 custodians.
It's really hard for what
they're doing now, so we're um.
Asking for this because we've
gone and been working for months
with our community and the
community try to get down to,
because we're going from 95,000
square feet.
to 55 it was gonna be 45 until
the adequacy about the size of
the classroom.
And uh we didn't give up our two
gems we fought to keep two gems
because our opponents are 2.5
hours away, so that means on a
Tuesday night kids might not get
back until 2 in the morning or
1:30 so we wanted the two plain
gyms and that's, we had to loose
some spice some other areas. We
talked about our um ag
facilities we are, we have a
great act facility now and we've
over the last few years we've
gotten a lot of grant money to
bring all this equipment in.
Well, with that is we couldn't
get our.
The new facility we can bring up
our equipment it's, it's great
shape and it's, I mean we spent.
Hundreds of thousands of dollars
on this equipment to start more
programs and we have started
since I've been there we started
4 or 5 programs. I know right
now our, our enrollments down to
119, but I believe I'm staying
home and get back.
up to 150 just because um.
Being the newest school in the
best facility in the area will
draw back the students we lost
over the last few years.
So that's why we're asking um
for this space and also the
match.
Um, or the waiver for um.
Help us finish this project.
We're very excited about it,
have a very safe school and um.
The state being able to do this,
so.
San home's excited about being
here and hopefully we get vote
yes.
Thank you, Superintendent, we
have a motion that the bread so.
Uh, I would, uh
Could I ask a couple of
questions.
first for both Maxwell and Sand
Home. How many days a year do
your kids go to school? We go 4
days, yeah, 4 days. What's your
total number of instructional
days are in total is one.
147.
Um
pita, do we have an estimated
total?
costs of this.
Yeah, those 4 days that you're
talking about, we're up there on
every Friday because that's the
days we can meet with our groups
of students and our activities
and we did our tournaments so
the buildings used more than 4
days a week.
to do this.
How many hours do you in your
calendar year?
We, we, we, we did the, the, um,
required.
We go over the 11:40.
We always go a little bit like
extra to be safe.
We do do the hours.
And you, you mentioned that you
would be coming back for a
waiver.
Do you have an estimate about
how much or it's too early to
tell. It's too to see what the
um.
Yeah I just said this is a good.
Time for us that we're looking
over the horizon to, you know,
all these small combo schools
that we've.
Approved
We now have a new calculator all
moving into.
You know, what was above over
adequacy is now within.
The new allowable square
footage.
They want to increase the square
footage primarily in gym space,
some admin.
And then some CTE.
Um
But they're all creeping up
towards that.
New amount, even though it's
still below.
I just want us to start.
Positioning ourselves.
To know what we're getting into,
if we're going to increase
square footage.
The cost per square foot's gone
up, you know, through the roof.
You're gonna come back for a
waiver. We want them to flag
that for us earlier. Are they a
district that's gonna qualify.
For a waiver in this case, I'm,
I'm guessing yes.
Um, but so that we can as
sooner.
And not have one, so I would ask
staff as we continue to see
these. Let's prime the pump on
what we're going to be seeing
over the next year.
For some of these, avoid any
surprises or we know what
standpoint with that, Mr.
Chairman, I
Uh, make a motion that the
council approved the award for
San home.
For the combined school to
increase the maximum allowable
gross footage from 45,000 to
54,900.
We have a motion in a second,
all those in favor of approving
the motion, please indicate by
saying I.
Hello
Thank you very much.
OK. One more action item.
feel
6.
We do have a motion on this.
to start with.
A subcommittee, uh, is
recommending for approval, uh,
waited New Mexico Condition
index or WNMCI ranking based on
criteria and weightings
previously adopted by the
council, released with the
ability to make a formal all of
these tables. Thank you. Good
afternoon, um, yes, it is
afternoon at this point. Um, I'm
gonna just go ahead and go
through the key points.
And then um I'll talk about the
exhibits, the ranking themselves
under summary about um schools
that moved into and out of the
ranking based upon uh sense of
data.
Super NA 6278, the PSFA must
produce data to determine the
condition, index, weighted MCI
annually. The PSCOC is going to
release a preliminary ranking to
school districts prior to the
release of the official WNMCI
final ranking.
They give Dietrichs the
opportunity to review their
ranked position and provide any
additional input.
This ranking is used to
determine which schools have the
greatest educational and
facility deficiencies for the
purposes of capital funding.
Um, in FY 26, the preliminary
ranking was produced with input
from PSFA assessors, school
districts themselves.
Facility master planners and and
in conjunction with CID via plan
review.
The FY 26 preliminary ranking
contains SY 2425, 40th day
enrollment.
The FY 26 ranking also considers
the.
The average ranking the average
weighted MCI of DFY26
preliminary is 26.74 here.
The FY 26 preliminary ranking
FCI is
The districts themselves where
we sorted by district and then
by school.
Exhibit D is essentially the
deficiency categories and
associated weight factors that
the AMS and the PSE have adopted
several years ago, and those
have not changed.
finally exhibit E is a ranked
list movement comparison between
the FY 26 preliminary, which is
this ranked list.
And the FY 25 final which we
have already funded based upon
that ranking methodology. Um, so
let's just go ahead and we can
start by looking at exhibit A.
And we can see, um, I'll break
down a little bit of how the
rank list works.
For those who don't have an
understanding of how to read it.
This first page where we see
this ranked list.
This ranking column of 11 to
elementary school.
If a school has a ranking or
it's a date followed by a ranked
position. Those are schools that
we've previously funded and are
in some um type uh on the books
relative to a award.
So the first page consists of
all those projects, the years of
those projects were awarded the
ranked physician.
The type of project, the square
footage and the weighted MCI at
the time of the award.
So we have roughly about 120
pages that we have currently
have awarded and have on the
books.
Starting in the middle of page 2
on, I guess it would be at this
point page 205.
We see that the number one
ranked school still maintains
its same position.
Uh, state chartered school of
dreams, uh, academy.
That is a charter school that is
completely comprised of
portables and their ranked
position is one of the schools
with the highest need.
We would then go ahead and
follow this, um, ranking all the
way to the last school, which
would be, I think number 633 at
this point.
And that school is uh Santo
Domingo Elementary Middle
School, and it's current
weighted MCI is 14%.
schools at the top of the list
are gonna be needing the most
uh.
Prioritization as far as.
Educational adequacy and system
related issues are going to be
associated with schools that are
relatively new and don't have
any square footage deficiencies
and or system looking at page.
213. That section is reserved
for charter schools that have
reached have yet to reach
through their five-year grace
period, relative to the PEC and
their ability to maintain that
enrollment.
So those schools are demarcated
with NRCs with the years of
inclusion into the rank list
associated there.
Uh, the schools that have the
asterisks on them or charter
schools and privately owned
facilities.
And they are not eligible for
PSCRC funding, therefore they
are not ranked in the body.
The next two listings, uh, which
would be exhibits BC and B and C
are simply those same rankless
sorted a different way.
We can go and we can take a look
real quickly at exhibit D.
On page 234.
is essentially the um applied
weight factors that are
associated based on our
observations of systems, looking
at that applied weight factor,
which is the furthest, most
column to the right is
essentially how we increase
additional repair costs
associated with any observe. So
the council has thus prioritize
the things of greatest concern
based upon these applied weight
factors.
So the highest applied weight
factor is associated with a
safety issues that applied
weight factor is 3.5.
Then followed by a category type
number 7, which is associated
with overcrowding.
Then a number 3.0.
So essentially, our assessors go
out there in the field, they
identify their systems, um, it's
an observable condition and
they'll take no notifications of
it.
Um, we'll create a note about
it, we'll provide pictures as
far as all this gets
incorporated into to calculating
those weighted and I'll
transition to it into exhibit E
at this point, which is movement
to the top 100. Typically we
fund schools or we look at
schools or within the top 100,
they're they're usually
applicable for standards-based
funding.
So this first page, which would
be on page 235 is essentially
the ranked position, this, this
listing is sorted in category C,
I mean column C, excuse me.
So it's a, it's a copy of the
previous rank list that I had
shown you.
And after we look at column C,
which identifies its ranked
position. I, I would refer you
to column R, which is on the
furthest right.
We had 31 new schools, uh, new
schools to the top 100 this
year.
This cycle rate for this
particular assessment time
period?
was between 116 2023 through
321, 2025.
During that time period, my
assessors assessed 203
facilities of a 633. So we
essentially looked at 32% of the
school facilities statewide.
Um, relative to, um, that does
not take into consideration the
schools that were previously
funded.
Within those schools that are
new to the top 100.
23 of those were associated with
assessment.
Two of those schools new to the
top 100 are associated with
systems projects that we
previously funded that got
completed.
Yes, we did provide a systems
project for that particular
school, but it still had other
issues, so we got re-ranked into
that top 100.
5 schools, we can assume to be
associated with the changes and
the updates to the adequacy
standards as well as um some of
the systems for these school run
um family or reaching their
natural aging, some of those
systems expired.
And then we had one charter
school that was classified as a
privately owned charter, now
being uh in a position for an
LPA, so that school was in a
poor condition and got ranked as
well.
So call R itself is gonna define
the last data set input into the
fat itself. So you can see there
are a lot of those ones that are
highlighted with the yellow.
are new to the top 100 based
upon our assessment.
A lot of those other ones are uh
in within that same column are
associated with the last data
input.
So, of course, if we're going to
have new schools to the top 100.
We're also gonna have schools
that get pushed out.
And there were, of course, 31
schools, the reciprocal of that
31 that moved in.
We had 3 of those schools fall
out because they had plan review
of new construction, so the
district had a project.
Um, the district had their own
non-funded projects, such as
like Royal Del Oso and Santa in
Albuquerque, where it was a
completely new campus, that
school got reassessed based upon
plan review and is no longer in
a position that needs funding
because it has a brand new
facility.
3 awarded 3 of those schools in
the previous top 100 from the FY
25 were awarded in FY 26 of
funding cycle. So those schools
get pulled out.
We had 12 schools that were
assessed by PSFA assessors, and
we found conditions that weren't
as bad as what they were
previously known.
So those schools were pulled
out.
We had one charter school that
had a change in ownership.
And then we also had 8 schools
that, um, we kind of pushed out
based upon schools that were
found in a in a.
in a worse condition in uh um
assessed uh.
So with that being said, um, I
was very happy with my team that
they were able to address 32% of
the schools in the state in a
cycle year. I don't think we've
done that well, so I'm very
comfortable with the level in
the confidence of the
assessments and once again I'll
restate that the districts
themselves have their full, have
the ability to review this data
throughout the year. They don't
just have to wait through to a
preliminary to get posted to, to
reach out to me to say, hey, um,
we did some additional.
work. It's not represented here.
Or we're having additional
issues with our roofing system
or HVACs, can you send a guy out
to go and look at that. Um, we
also, we, that's part of the,
um, our collaborative partners
with us, with that, I'll stand
for questions.
Thank you.
Good question, when will these
go out in Final Four. So I will
post, uh, Mr. Chair, I will post
the preliminary ranking tomorrow
and then I miss Director Romero
and myself will send out an
email.
Um, it will, uh, saying that the
preliminary ranking has been
posted. Review your data, um,
get any of your technical
corrections or your data
corrections to me by May 15th. I
will then work with the district
to confirm those, get those
incorporated for to be released
uh the turn of the fiscal suits.
I get to sometimes I'm talking
to the district officials.
Low and
They have some work that needs
to be done, but they say they
don't want to do the work
prevalent is that and is that uh
They penalized that way if they.
They make if they do the work,
right?
Mr. Chair, that is, uh, the dual
edge of this sword here is like,
OK, we can allow our facility to
degrade at its expected life
cycle. We don't invest any money
into it.
It's a, it's a, they don't get
deemed in any sense.
Um
But it doesn't necessarily help
them get re-ranked if they're to
continue to do system projects
over and over to prolong.
It, it, it's, it's a tough
conundrum. It's like, do you
want to provide your students
with a suitable environment or
do you not wanna uh move in or
remain in a facility that is in
disrepair.
Whatever we can do to encourage
them to, you know, to at least
temporarily.
fix or address the problems.
While they wait for funding,
that would be the Mr. Chair, I
think it's also extremely
helpful that there's that 5%
provision for FMA scores that
kind of incentivizes them to
maintain taking care of your
facilities and not allowing them
to fall into that disregard.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. uh,
Andrew, uh, one great work it's
really helpful. I've never seen
the list presented to the
committee, so it's really
helpful to see it in this form
and all the different sheets.
Um, I guess this is more a
question maybe for
Uh, Director Rometo about.
So
Clearly there's a, there's
There's probably schools who
have been in the top 100 or top
50 even for a very long time and
I, as I was looking through the
list earlier, I'm seeing some of
these districts actually have
the majority of their schools or
more than a handful of schools
in one district on in the top
100 for sure. Some of them even
in the top 50.
Which means I guess it says to
me that they're not coming to,
to the council for, for
projects. They've, they're, or
for whatever reason they feel
like they can't fix these
schools right now.
And I guess, so what does, what
does staff do to reach out to
folks?
Uh, on this list to encourage
them either to fix the problems
that they have or putting them
on the list or potentially I'm
assuming these.
Without knowing the top 10.
Maybe they all need to be
replaced.
Right
And so I guess I'm just thinking
about the overall state of
schools in a particular
district.
And what students are
experiencing in that district if
all of the facilities or the
majority of the facilities in a
particular district are, are on
this list. So what does staff do
to reach out to them to
encourage them? What are some of
the conversations and then what
are you hearing from some of
those when you do, about why
they haven't come.
Thank, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, I, uh, I think like
my, my concern here is that.
You know, you could have someone
who
Who's number 100.
Right and qualifies. And you
have particular districts that
continue to come back for
projects over and over again
because maybe they have a really
great facilities with this
system or whatever the, whatever
the reason might be. And clearly
we have
Finite resources.
And I'm actually concerned that
if we're not a little bit more
intentional about encouraging
these folks or helping them to
understand how they get here.
And we get to the point where we
can't fund any more projects.
And we never fixed any of their
schools.
Or we just did a little bit to
keep them moving. Meanwhile,
some other schools have rebuilt
their entire district because
they've come before us.
15 times, which, you know, more
power to them. I'm not saying
they shouldn't.
But just trying to understand.
You know, I would also argue
that to a certain extent here,
we might even be able to look
at.
student outcomes.
Based on facility conditions and
there may be some connection,
not necessarily correlation, but
some connection to the
facilities and student outcomes
and so just wanted to encourage
staff maybe to formalize some
process of how we get out and
talk to some of these districts.
I know you do that already but I
just, you know, I'm, I'm a
little bit concerned about that.
Alright, any other questions?
Yes, Mr. Chair, not a question,
just a follow up, John, to your
comments. So, um, I think it was
back in the fall, um, PSFA
summary of some of
Some of the barriers to getting
money I need school districts,
and this was listed as one of
the kind of areas that needs to
be focused on or that we could
bolster some of those efforts to
ensure that there's the least
resources or ability to kind of
come forward, we can start, um,
trying to encourage that a
little bit more. So it was on
that list, uh, so I do think
it's something that AMS would
like to put on as kind of maybe
an informational item on that
proto to see if we can't um be
encouraging, uh, some of those
most in need districts to be
coming.
forward.
And thank you for the report. We
appreciate that.
Oh, yes,
yeah, we had the most
for a second on the
subcommittee.
OK
Thank
So I'll in favor of the
subcommittee motion, please
indicate Massena.
I supposed
Now we have, uh, you know, it's
laden, uh.
I know the the rest of his
information, so if you would.
So, pick and choose and.
Make it
If you don't.
Go ahead.
Mr. I may, I would actually
propose maybe we kick the um
project close out cause I know
you guys were gonna do a little
bit more effort on that and
bring another update. So I would
actually propose that maybe we
can do that next time.
What's a little bit more of a
robust report. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members, I'll
make this brief. You'll turn to
page 239 in your e-books, the FY
24 PSFA audit report.
Starting with the key points are
audit auditor's opinion was
unmodified, which provides a
reasonable level of assurance
that the financial statements uh
present a true and fair
reflection of the government's
agency.
Agency's results. We had a total
number of one findings, which is
um great. We always strive for
zero, but just having the 1 is,
is OK. Uh, there was two pieces
to it. First, there was a
delayed transfer um from our
internal funds from 947 Capital
to 943 operations. It was just
not performed in a timely
manner, although it was
performed.
And then finally our outstanding
liability we owed Board of
Finance money due to our project
and bond reconciliations, um, so
that was something that we
encountered some issues with
regarding expired bud refs and
project codes through SAR.
Um, so we have taken corrective
actions and I've as of March
28th actually met with the
statewide financial reporting
and Accountability Bureau under
the state controller's division
DFA um sometimes referred to as
Aquifer. Um, so we have
strategize some things to be a
little more proactive as we come
into the fiscal year end and
then the 998 period for audit
and preparing for the audit.
Uh, as far as exhibits, Mr.
Chair, remembers the first one
is the authorization from state
auditor Maestus releasing our
audit.
And then finally, exhibit B is
our final audit, uh, provided by
Court of CPAs. With that, I
stand for any questions you may
have.
Yeah, I had, I didn't get a
chance to, Mr. Chair, just the
first one. I kept looking for
that and it.
Went through, but it wasn't
veto. Yeah, there was a list of
pockettos and those that uh.
Anyway, how about
Mm
Listing
Yeah
Went through, but I didn't
assume a pocket veto, but the
few questions on the legislative
report.
We'll take a look at it. Thank
you.
Whatever you feel.
OK, good.
OK. Thank you.
OK, so thank you, uh, members of
the council meetings don't
again, though.
Thank you, and I would entertain
a motion to adjourn.
move
