Charles Sully.
Ashley Lee.
Randall Terry Elizabeth
Groginsky.
Mariana Padilla.
Stewart Ingham.
John Senna.
Martin Romero.
Joke again.
We have a quorum present.
Mr. Chair, I believe, Mariano
Padilla is trying to get on
virtually.
OK
She's not gonna be here.
Mr. Chair, is your my God.
So I start all over again.
All right.
Very good.
Uh, so, uh,
As all of you know, we had this
long discussion at our last
meeting on the project and
Uh
We
And decided based on all of the
questions and comments.
Uh, from all concerned here to
go back and take a look at
things a little closer.
And uh try and come up with a
plan to move forward.
pleased to report that I believe
that we've made quite a bit of
progress.
And uh we're able to do that.
I'd like to thank all that were
involved in that.
death.
uh
Is the oaks
and our council members as well.
So, at this point, I would like
to subcommittee chair to lead to
Brief us on the discussions and
where we're at.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to start out by uh
thanking Miss Carswell, Mr. Liu
on my staff, as well as PSFA
staff in the superintendent from
Hobbs on being able to quickly
come together and dig in and
roll up our sleeves to come up
with a, a way to um move these
projects forward, but also
preserved, I think what the
council was concerned about it.
not getting in a situation of
the state funding above
allowable kinds of costs, but
figuring out how to kind of come
to an accommodation. You've got
a lot of people in front of you,
but I think the key page uh
looks like this, it's a table
that's got
The two projects.
And the scenario that will come
in the form of two different
motions, uh, Mr. Chair, but they
kind of go hand in glove. If you
look at line 31.
In the middle on the base case.
Basically what we are presented
with, uh, last week because we
had two projects that were
essentially
Um, we had a shortfall of almost
$50 million for being able to,
to pay for those projects. What
was driving that shortfall. Uh,
it's a couple of different
things. One is what we've seen
for the last uh year or more of
construction bids and costs
coming in well above what we
originally anticipated. These
are projects that have been in
the queue for uh many years, um,
so, you know, we started out
thinking that they're gonna
cost.
$350 a square foot, and they
come in at, you know, 500 to
$600 per square foot, which is
still lower than what we've seen
with other projects, but that's
a major driver, um, and it's,
it's a challenge for districts
because they're going out on
their uh award cycle to their
voters thinking that something's
going to cost a certain amount
and then, you know, a year later
they get surprised with
additional cost.
The other thing driving uh the
the cost overruns on, on these
projects is uh a designs for
both of them that exceeded what
the new calculator, uh, for for
sure under the old calculator,
but the new calculator would
consider uh allowable for the,
the state to fund.
We've dug into uh some of that
space, um, uh, working with the,
the district and with PSAA
staff.
A sizable portion of that above
allowable were for auxiliary
gems, normally, uh, middle
schools are, are not afforded
the, the option of having
auxiliary gems come at the
stated expense or or part of
the, the matching uh program,
but in this case, the district
is demonstrated that it's part
of its core academic
programming, uh, and that it's
necessary. And so once we move
that so basically 5200 square
foot per school into allowable,
uh, we're able to, um,
Uh,
that fits underneath the, uh,
what our rules are for, uh,
that, that kind of space. So
that was a, uh, another change.
The
scenario that you see on the
right.
You can see where essentially
for the total project, some of
these numbers won't line up
exactly to what you'll see in
the motion, and that's because
what we're taking action on
today is for the the
construction. So design
advancement, you've already done
those sorts of things, so that's
why there's a little bit of a
discrepancy, but essentially a
shift of 19 million uh to the
state.
For the auxiliary jam cost um
rewarding the district for its
exceptional, uh, preventative
maintenance. Uh, we talked about
that, so an extra 5% match.
And a recognition that
The reason we have these two
projects before us.
It's because, uh, at the time
that the district was planning
these, uh, the middle school
enrollment was growing at an
exceptional rate.
COVID hit.
school closures.
Uh, disrupted that their
projected enrollment for middle
school, uh, would well exceed,
uh, those thresholds that are
laid out in statute, um, for
awarding essentially a partial
waiver.
And that's what you see online.
Uh, number 6.
So
Taking advantage of the um the
council's uh statutory authority
to recognize that districts that
are growing and also needing to
like replace schools at the same
time, that's kind of an
unaffordable situation and the
state does have the ability to
waive a portion of those costs.
We do not want to recommend
waving above allowable, um, and
so, uh, this preserves, uh, that
ability to recognize that this
is a new school, um, and the
state can share in a greater
share of that. The key is lying,
I think, for the council is line
12.
You can see that the district is
going to be responsible uh for
19.6 million above allowable
cost for um the square footage.
Um
And again, that came down
slightly from what you see in
the base case and that's because
of the gym space that is in fact
was categorized as above
allowable, um, last week and
when we dug into it, we
determined that it is actually
um allowable, but they'll still
be on the hook for that other
amount. The other thing that we
worked with the district on is
Basically cutting some of the
project estimated cost, and you
can see that.
On line 26 by almost $8.8
million.
And once we started digging into
the soft cost estimates, that's
where we recognize that we could
bring some of those down
because, uh, a good portion of
soft cost have actually been
built into the construction bid
um from the contractor for.
Uh, tariff kind of concern, uh,
other kinds of uh price
increases, as well as gross
receipts taxes and a bunch of
other stuff. So we don't want to
double count.
That said, uh, this scenario
also makes the
Uh, about $7 million of soft
costs, the responsibility of the
district, so they're gonna have
to own continuing to make sure
that those, uh, any cost
overruns are gonna be on the
district and, and those are
gonna be uh help strengthen the
district's position to uh work
with the contractor to to keep
those.
Keep those low. So, basically,
at the end of the day, the, the
soft cost, um, come down to
about 10%.
Finally,
Um, Mr. Chairman, you can see on
line 33, that's so.
The the district shortfall
again, they're gonna be
responsible for the 7 million uh
for soft cost.
An additional 12 million we
would propose, uh, to make
available to help with cash
flow.
Um, for the district, uh, so in
advance, we've talked to them
about
Uh
Making that like as a last
resort, like when they run out
of cash, you know, don't take
out a loan before you actually
need it. Um, but we would
propose up to $13 million that
they could apply to either
project.
Um, if they need that cash flow
and then they come up with the
repayment plan over the next 4
years.
Uh, using a district resources,
including if they can get grants
from uh outside entities, uh,
any other local resources other
than their operational um fund.
I think it's important for the
council to understand that even
in last week's plan that the
district had set aside, um,
11 million of of operational
cash balances, uh, PED needs to
approve, um, the use of those
cash balances, and so, um, part
of this plan is that the
district needs to certify the
PED that it's operating budget
is sufficient to be able to
divert money from operations to
capital and PED is gonna have to
sign off on that, but in terms
of any additional
Uh, cash coming out of
operational above and beyond
that, we've talked to the
district about finding other
resources rather than continuing
to dip into the operational um
cash balances, Madam Secretary,
uh, if you can find this page in
your packet, that one I think
gives you the easiest kind of
10,000 ft level.
Um, the overview.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, um,
I'd be happy to answer any
questions or turn it over to the
superintendent for some comments
on how they see this package and
then uh we've worked with PSFA
staff, the actual motions will
come in in two different
technical motions, um, but this
is what the overall package
would look like in order to
advance, uh, these projects to
be able to start um getting them
done.
Thank you, thank you for the
overview and all the work and
getting to this point, I'd like
to hear from him.
Mr. Chairman of the council.
Good morning and thank you all
for being here. I do realize
that this is all cycle, not just
out of cycle, but it's off
cycle. And so we are extremely
grateful.
For your continued interest and
really engagement.
And what's good for kids in
hobbs as well, um, absolutely
recognize that the
Decisions this council makes as
far-reaching effects and it has
to be amenable to students at
every corner of the state of
Mexico.
And we realize that and we
recognize that.
And so we are absolutely
appreciative of your efforts. In
addition, uh, to directorelli's
comments, we too are extremely
grateful.
From staff of PSFA Director
Romero, her work and her team as
well as director and his work
with LFC uh to get us to go.
Um
as he mentioned.
A long history there and a lot
of work has been done even
leading up to, and I think we
all recognize that.
We're not gonna spend another
minute debating or not even.
Rehashing that, um.
We've got 2 projects that are
ready to put a shovel on the
ground, uh, one of them with a
groundbreaking schedule as early
as.
the end of this month.
Uh, yes, the end of this month,
um.
Man
Let's go back to the end of May.
Um, so, um, the, the work that's
gone in, uh, really to the
numbers that you see in front of
you, uh, has been a very
collaborative effort, uh, to, to
your direction, uh, chairman,
and we appreciate that. Pop
schools is in support of where
we are, um, the, the numbers
that we see here.
recognize some of the concerns
that we had in terms of what
should be allowable and, and we
absolutely are appreciative of
that in terms of a workable
program for the students of our
schools, and
We will, as we have maintained
for the better part of 20 years.
Continue to be good stewards of
taxpayers' dollars, because it's
not our money, but we need to
treat it like ours.
And, and make sure that we're
making good investments.
So that generations to come can
benefit from our good decisions.
So we appreciate the council
being a part of that team as
well.
We're all doing it together and,
you know, saying that it takes a
village, in Texas, and, and I'm
so appreciative of the state of
New Mexico and in the state that
I live in, that my kids receive
an education from.
That they're able to benefit
from that and now so many more
generations will be able to
benefit from that, so.
We, we, uh, do agree with what
we see here, uh, look forward to
the technical motion, um, and
any further question or debate,
so.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
I'll open it up for questions at
this point.
comets.
I want to first say.
Really
work so hard
um
Frugal with the state's money
and with your own money.
And for doing the things that
need to be done to, to, um,
Put together a project that is,
is reasonable.
Um
I do have one question.
Because it, it seems like it's
gonna come up again later.
And that is, um,
During the design process, I
gotta assume that you were well
aware that you were designing.
Quite a bit above adequacy.
My question is,
did,
did the design firm or anybody
else encourage you that that
was.
OK to do.
And that it would be
compensated.
Or did you
Feel like you had enough
reserve.
In your bonding capacity.
To cover that. I just want to
know is, was this a
Were you deceived or, or were
you caught off guard by the
Increase in construction costs.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Incom, I think
without getting too technical
with the details, um.
I don't think it was ever an
attempt on anyone's part to
deceive pop schools. Uh, I don't
think there was an attempt, I
don't believe there was an
attempt on the design
professional to deceive host
schools in terms of what was
necessary.
It's, it's my belief that the
design professional took the
educational specifications.
Which dictated the academic
programming for students.
And
Began designing to those
inspects, where their
conversations at various stages
of the design from schematic
design to design development,
then there was above allowable
identified, absolutely.
Um, so I think all of us in
terms of that project team
recognized that there would be
some square footage that would
be above allowable.
Um
or various things moving parts
at that time, from a, a local
match waiver reduction of 3 that
was in process, um, that would
affect
The overall funding percentage
as well as the new calculator in
a process.
So there, there was not gonna
say there was a moving target.
But what I will say is there
there was multiple pieces in
play at the same time as design
was continuing.
And so in terms of a very
crystal clear picture.
We were moving towards.
Designing a building that met
the necessary core academic
needs of Haas Municipal schools
and the students I hope that
answers your question.
Well, there is no concern that
you said that there was a
Um
It was out there that there was
a waiver that could be as much
as 1/3.
Um
I don't know
I mean
My understanding is, in order to
receive that waiver, your
district was not really ever in
a place where they could receive
that, that, so that's my where
I'm concerned is that, that the
notion was out there.
It
That we could
That you probably would be.
able to get something that we
can't offer now and that if that
notion's out there.
And that notion is out there and
we're gonna get hammered with
that.
After this
But you're not the last school
that we're gonna have to deal
with this.
And so
I guess what my point is.
I want the design firms.
To recognize that when their
designing a project.
That adequacy standards are
real. They matter, and I am very
confused about how
Ed's back, which I don't
understand.
How that somehow is
Encouraging a district.
To
Exceed adequacy.
And so that's my concern.
I, I would really, I do want to
say I feel for your district.
Because I feel like you guys
have done a great job and the
fact that you have exemplary
maintenance.
I, I
My standpoint, that is a huge
thing.
And I'm, I'm thrilled with that.
And so
My only concern is that we have
a narrative out there that's
gonna cause a lot of districts
problems.
And that we need to somehow nip
that.
Narrative
And say, look, you're gonna
design above adequacy.
About it darn well know that
you're gonna have to pay for
that.
And I worked for APS and they
they did that. We constantly
designed above adequacy.
By huge amounts.
They hit the taxpayers up for
that somehow they get it.
I don't think everybody's got
that, and also this when I was
working for him, we didn't have
these huge class.
So
I I feel for you, but I really
want to thank you for your
diligence in this project and
uh.
And I do believe, and I wanna
thank you, Chancellor, the, um,
you guys have put into this.
It's obviously been a real um
comprehensive.
A review of the project and uh
and a solution that hopefully we
can all live with.
I thank you.
Thank you
briefly to.
we have other.
Um, I can't speak towards what
that third waiver.
Uh, would have been. I did spend
some time over the weekend,
listening to all of the meetings
as far as what was discussed
with subcommittees and council,
um, and as far as the waiver the
the first mention of a waiver
was in January.
that district would be
potentially coming for a waiver.
Again, I did not hear anything
pertaining to a third, um, I
don't know if you want to go
into additional information from
the district, but I do want to
finally say that we are putting
protocols into place as we speak
to ensure that we work hand in
hand with the district, but with
the design professionals as far
as what adequacy standards are.
And if it looks like they need
to build bigger, we're going to
stop design.
Review those spaces and bring it
to the council to make those
determinations on whether or not
uh to allow to go bigger based
on the programming, based on um
based on enrollment. So we are
putting protocols into place to
ensure that happen.
I want to clarify just one
thing, that there was not.
And I apologize for using the
word waiver, cause that brings
about a different definition.
What that piece that was
processing throughout the
design, I think was a bill
originally sponsored by Senator
Stewart.
And I'm mess up the number. It's
either 76 or 67.
Um, and essentially what it was
saying was,
Senator Stewart was
Trying to
Offset some of the large costs
that districts were
experiencing, so taking whatever
their local match was.
And increasing that by 13, not
doing a local match waiver. So
that that was one of those
moving pieces that was happening
throughout design and so.
There was some misunderstanding
in terms of that number.
what was old to me applied, so
I, I hope that clarifies that
because I don't want to, the
perception to be that the the
PSFA staff were saying, well,
let's, let's go get it there.
There was not a 3rd. That was
never the discussion.
OK. Thank you.
turkey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have a
question, and uh this is very
loud and some comments, um,
first, I have a question about
the, the 10% so cost. What do we
typically include for soft.
Typically the um PSFA is
recommending 20%.
Uh, when we dug into this
project, we found that in, in
addition to the 20% above and
beyond the construction cost.
There were in fact a bunch of
soft costs already built into
the construction bid, um, as an,
as an example of 7% for uh
potential cost overruns as a
result of tariffs or other kinds
of issues. So almost like double
counting, and so that's why
we're able to say, let's bring
that amount down, um, and then
allow the district to really
scrub the remaining 7 million
above what's in the
construction, uh, cost.
Uh, to figure out if they really
need that or not. So they're on,
they're on the hook for that and
those costs may not materialize,
to be honest with you, and, and
that would further bring down
the cost of this particular
project and allow it to move
forward.
Mr. Chair, Director Slee, thank
you so much for that. I would
just ask for PSFA staff to look
at this in all projects to make
sure that we're not
Uh, double counting or um
creating a larger sort of
financial situation for the
LEA's unnecessarily, so just
moving forward, we should uh
really take a look at that. Um,
I would like to thank the LFC
Director Calley and Cali very
much and uh Superintendent
Strickland and your team and of
course PSFA staff for
Finding a solution. Um, it was
deeply concerning to me to think
about postponing these projects,
potentially another year. And uh
I think that uh PSFA and PSCOC
has a responsibility to support.
Um, facility improvements to the
uh highest possible level, and
that includes trying to move
projects forward in a timely
manner, so I think that this is
just an indication that we can
probably do this with more
projects and um looking at a
district, you know, that is
growing and enrollment. Um, we
need to make sure that we're
being proactive and um that we
are preparing for those students
and making sure they have a
appropriate facilities to to
learn in, and so, um, thank you
so much for the willingness to
call a special meeting to do all
of the work that happened from
our last meeting to this
meeting, and that we were able
to come to a resolution but
without delaying the project. So
I'm, I'm very happy and
grateful uh for that work. Thank
you so much.
Thank you.
It's fine. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So I'm sorry I was late, um, but
so the district, this, this 109
is in alignment with.
I know you have 126,000,400
square feet, but this compromise
or the negotiation with the
auxiliary gym.
This will, will get you to go
Madam Secretary, yes, it would,
and I think it's
It's a demonstration of the
effort on PSFA staff as well as
counsel to recognize that the
design process is not.
Perfect science.
Um, there are circumstances and
there are programming areas
where we do need to look at what
that design number is and so
director Romero mentioned that
as saying as that design is
evolving, we want to be able to
look at that and say, OK, what
are those spaces that we do need
to include early in the design
as a lab. So this is absolutely
an evidence of that practice. So
yes, ma'am. OK. And to know that
the adequacy allows for that.
Auxiliary gym, that guy that was
maybe not known before.
to like, what, um, if you were
to build the 126,400, what would
be the difference in the state
contribute, I mean, is that is
the state contribution the same
regardless of the square
footage, and is it more just
going over adequacy standards as
are concerned.
Yes, so, uh, Mr. Chair, the,
they'll still build to 126,000
square feet for each of these
schools, but they're gonna be on
the hook for the above
allowable, and you can see that
online 12. And so that's almost
$20 million that, you know,
locally, they decided that they
wanted to have larger, uh, space
for things like their science
labs, uh, then what the
calculator calls for, and they
will be responsible for paying
for that.
Thank you, Mr. Thank you, Doctor
Cilley and Mr. Chair, so you
will be able to build to that,
but you'll be the district will,
will carry the load of that
additional over 109.
576. Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
yes, that would be correct. We
will build to 126.
Other
I thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, I
don't want to repeat everything
that everybody said, just thanks
to Charles and his staff, that
was, I think, really great work
into the director but on her
staff with the superintendent.
Um, I think for me that I'm, I'm
This project obviously is is
secretaryly mentioned, offered
some lessons, I think for us in
terms of soft costs and, and
just how we approach these
projects, and I think that's
something we need to carry
forward. The thing that I, I
just wanted to say out loud, I
guess is um
You know, to hear Mr. Ingham
talk about APS building above
adequacy, Hobbs building above
adequacy, other districts that
have
Uh, the resources locally to do
this.
It, it makes me wonder.
What adequacy means, and I know
we just went through adequacy
standards again, and now we have
a new planning guide. Clearly
that's not addressing what
school districts think space
needs to look like for students.
And so I'm, I'm still very
interested to find out more
about
what these spaces actually look
like and why we think or why
some districts think they need
this space versus
How we're confining other.
Resource poor districts to those
adequacy standards.
And, and, you know, we were just
talking about the, the longer
study into state and local match
and some of these cost
discussions.
And whether or not
Um, as a council, I think we
want to provide the best
learning spaces for all students
across the state as as a
superintendent mentioned.
I still question whether or not
we're doing that.
Because if, if districts who can
pay for it are
Um, you know, I doubt it so that
high school kids can do
somersaults just because they
got a bunch of empty, empty
space in their classrooms, like
there's, there's an educational
lead that people are identifying
here.
And for those districts that
don't have these resources.
I wonder whether or not.
We're providing that adequate
space for them.
Again, I don't know whether or
not that's true, but if we, if
we continue to see people who
can't pay for this, pay for it.
It makes me think that other
people would do the same if they
could, and we're not allowing
for it, um, just because maybe
we don't understand that issue
well enough, and so for me, it
still goes back to
You know, the fact that we can
pay for some of these other
projects within adequacy doesn't
necessarily mean that they're
getting the facility that they
need. It means they're getting
the facility that we are willing
to pay for.
And, uh, as we heard from Chico
last week in Santa Rosa.
Aside from the construction
problems.
The space itself doesn't sound
like it, it fit the needs of
that school, when they built it.
And so I'm still, still want to
learn more and work with staff
and and school districts, uh, to
learn, to learn more about are
these spaces actually filling
the educational needs uh for
students.
Other comments?
Not then of
Let me just uh
a few things here. First of all,
Um, all of us recognized this
was a learning experience, so I
think all of us come out the
better because we've gone
through this.
It was a sad day last week when
we were here then we couldn't
resolve the matter at that time.
But again
Uh, putting our heads together.
The work that
to keep people here did.
We're very thankful for that.
And I think
We can go back and say that it's
a good day.
For us.
For the community of Hobbs and
particularly the students and
staff.
Again, thank you all for.
The work that you did to get us
to this point.
And it's my pleasure to call for
all those in favor.
Of course, we don't have a
motion yet, do we
we have two motions,
so, uh.
We're almost there.
Now we got to get the technical
stuff.
So I'm gonna read this.
Mr. Chairman, I
Just uh
Make sure that this is part of
the uh record, Miss. Romero.
That
Uh, for the council's, uh,
attention on line 12.
The district is responsible for
above allowable.
And that's what at the end of
the day, that was a concern that
the council had, um, them not
being able to move forward
without figuring that piece out,
and we figured out how they can
move forward, but they're going
to be responsible for above
allowable, you know, the
districts of
Have a different opinion about
what space they need. I mean,
some of it, frankly, is just
larger.
square footage for a classroom.
Other things are priorities for
locals like to have additional
um locker room space, you know,
as part of their gyms.
And if they can figure out how
to pay for that because that's a
priority for them locally, then
that's what we've afforded, uh,
them to be able to deal with
this, with this project. The
second thing is, again, the, the
Partial waiver for uh enrollment
growth on line 6.
This is allowing the district to
add a new middle school that's
justified when you look at the
totality of their enrollment
changes over time and was
projected.
Uh, it's allowing for uh a
rebuilding of an existing middle
school. They've got two other
middle schools that are
overcapacity right now. You've
got uh students that we, we will
be able to work with the
district to move out of
portables.
Uh, into like permanent
facilities.
Uh, they will, will probably
come back to the council to
replace.
Uh, either one of those or both
of them, maybe, um, but not at
the size of what you're seeing
with these two facilities. So I
want to make that clear for the
record that uh when we see uh
future projects come for middle
school space and hobs, uh, it
should not be absent some
radical change in, in enrollment
patterns uh locally. Uh, we
shouldn't expect to see as large
of of a a a potential to new
buildings um for those spaces.
Um, with that.
Chairman
Would you entertain me combining
these.
Into one motion, so.
Uh, we've got
Uh, language before you for the
new Hobbs Middle School.
Basically,
Uh, that would increase the
maximum allowable square
footage, um, to 109,576 gross
square feet, uh, would reward
the district with the 5% waiver
for the FMR schools for both
projects, a total of up to 13
million can be uh advanced by
PSFA, um, to, uh, move these
projects forward. cost will be
calculated at 10% uh for both
the allowable and above.
allowable.
Um, the district will need to
certified a PED that it has
sufficient operational reserves
to contribute $11 million to the
construction of both of these
projects, and PED will need to
approve that, uh, the use of
that construction phase funding
for the new school, uh, with
total 63.8 million with a state
match of 49% in local match of
51%, and for the new school a
partial waiver of 14.1 million,
uh, recognizing the enrollment.
Grove, uh, contributing to that,
or the higher Middle School also
increasing the gross square
footage to 109,576 square feet,
that 5% FA waiver, um,
So cost again uh calculated at
10% and construction phase
funding, um, at 68.5 million
with the state match of 49% in
district match a 51%, Mr. Cha.
Thank you.
OK.
Motion in a second, further
discussion, all those in favor
please indicate by saying I.
Hello.
Motion passes.
Congratulations. Thank you for,
thank everyone for all their
hard work and getting us to this
point again, I think, uh, again,
we've got some, some things to
do here at the council level and
and looking at some of these
issues that uh will certainly
come before us again, but again,
thank you for being here.
That's uh we'll break some
ground.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, counsel, and we will
head back to Hobbs and paint
some trucks
Mr. Chairman, I would like to
also recognize that
Uh
We're not for this certain
business activity going on in
Southeast New Mexico, we
wouldn't even have this.
The entire program, right, uh,
it's not to say that they're
getting special treatment
because they're not. I think
we've just demonstrated that
we're found within the rules,
but I, I do want to recognize
that, um,
You know, we're blessed with
resources, uh, in funding that
many other uh communities and
states do not have, uh, to the
point that we don't have to tax
our citizens at a higher level
to be able to afford to do these
kinds of projects, so thank you
for being here today as well.
It's a long drive. I appreciate
that. Excellent point.
All right. Uh, I would.
Entertain a motion to adjourn.
We do have uh
a date for our next meeting just
to read that and I do have a
reminder for you. The next, uh,
meeting will be May 14th, and a
reminder, most of you received
all of you received a survey to
complete.
Uh, that, uh.
We send out and also a request
for your calendars.
So that we can plan our meetings
for the rest of the year, so
please respond to that.
Survey and request.
And uh
So
Because, uh, is there a motion
to it or?
Almost
OK.
