Like to call this meeting of the
public School Capital Outlay
Council to order
Like to welcome everyone in the
audience and staff as well.
Leading
Uh,
Are there any amendments
there? There's no
So I would entertain a motion to
approve the agenda as presented.
Should I ask now to have that
one project removed? Not yet,
OK?
Motion and a second to approve
the agenda as presented all
those in favor. Please indicate
by saying, I, I
We have approved agenda.
Is there any correspondence? Uh,
to come before the chair
members? There's no
correspondence.
No correspondence.
Right?
So we're moving right along here
to item number Roman numeral two
on the agenda. Public comment.
Is there anyone in the audience
that wishes to make public
comment at this? If not, then
we'll move on to the finance
report.
Members.
Good morning, Mr Chair members
starting on Page eight with the
financial plan. I wanted to just
make a quick note. Um,
Unfortunately, some of the page
numbers didn't make it into the
financial plan after page 11,
which will be the sources and
uses detail, Um and that will be
a page that I will be referring
to frequently through the
executive summary, so I just
wanted to make note of that and
apologize. Um, but we do have
eight through 11 for the page
numbers.
Mr Chair members moving right
along into the executive summary
for the financial plan on Page
eight, starting in the key
points with the pre application
updates. Uh, this is reflective
of line 34 of the financial plan
sources in Roca.
Yeah.
Here.
Here.
No.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Here.
Thank you.
Apologize for that. We're trying
to get into the
OK, I wanna I wanna introduce Mr
Larry Tillett to be the new
deputy director of upper
Mr Chair, Appreciate the
opportunity.
I understand they wouldn't let
you in. Is that right?
OK, uh
We said you're on their way. So
We? We have a full council now.
So let's go ahead and proceed
with the uh, financial report.
Thank you, Mr Chair members
again. We're on Page eight on
the financial plan executive
summary starting at the top of
the key points with pre
application updates. Um, what we
have here is an UN commitment of
100 and $55.6 Million. The
reason for this UN commitment is
we have quite a few projects
coming for award this meeting,
um, to finish out the FY 24
application cycle, um, in
preparation for the FY 25
application cycle. Uh, we will
be, um, we have removed all
other costs.
I'm just in preparation and to,
uh
To better track projects as
they, um, an applications as we
receive.
Uh, next, um
Still on Page eight. We're
looking at the bottom half for
the out year funding updates.
This is reflective of line 35 on
the financial plan sources and
uses detail again. That's the
page after page 11 so
theoretically, page 12, but it
won't have a page number. Um,
here we have a net change of and
commitment of $20.3 Million. The
reason for this is we have two
potential out E. Local match
reductions. Um, coming, uh, in
the future years, one for
Hagerman for Hagerman combined
for $10.6 million, as well as
For Honda combined for $11.4
million. These are both partial
waivers and again just
Um the the main part of the
reduction comes from the local
match reduction or remove for
carrizosa as they are coming for
potential award this meeting, so
we have removed them from out
your funding and into the
awards.
Um, moving to page nine. In your
books, uh, very top for the
awards year to date updates.
This is line 36 of the financial
plan sources and uses detail.
Um so the net change we see
reflected here is 100 and $75.6
million in increase.
Um, so that would be a reduction
to the uncommitted balance. Um,
first we have 10 projects
across seven districts coming
for potential Capital Outlay
awards. The amount shown on this
page are just the state cost any
out waivers for construction
that aren't coming forward. This
meeting are tracked online 35.
Um, first, we have, uh, five
projects across four districts
for standards based projects,
including Artesia, Hagerman,
Hondo and two a PS projects. Uh,
next, we have three systems
based projects, one for Melrose
one for Clayton and another for
Albuquerque.
Um, Next. We have a pre K
project for Albuquerque for
Danni Elementary. And then
finally, we have one Teacher
Housing pilot program Project
for House municipal schools.
I'm going to the last third of
Page nine on the executive
summary for out of cycle
updates. Um, we have six
projects coming forward, um for
changes or rewards. Uh, first is
Los Lunas for Anne Parish
Elementary School. This is a
design funding request of $2.5
million.
Um, Next, we have, uh, Gadsden's
riverside on track Pre K center.
This is a construction funding
request of $9.2 million
Uh, moving on. We have Roswell
for Nancy Lopez Elementary
School coming for a construction
funding request of $18.8 million
moving on to page 10 of the
executive summary continuing
with out of cycle updates. Uh,
we have Kozo coming for the
combined School of construction
funding request of $42.4
million. This includes a state
match of $2.5 million as well as
$39.8 million local match
reduction request.
Um, Next, we have Magdalena
coming for an award language
change for their combined
school. Um, this is, uh for $3.8
million. This is a partial
waiver. They are requesting a
partial waiver of the award as
well.
Um my apologies. It was. Finally
we have a state charter School
of Dreams. Resending an award.
Uh, for 84,100 for, uh, pre K.
And then finally, I just wanted
to know a few additional
changes as you'll see in the
the, uh, bubbles right there,
starting with the first one for
the FY 25 PS FA operating
budget. This is reflected online
16 on that sources and uses
detail again on the page after
page 11, we have updated the
amount in FY 25 from $77.2
million to 7.4. The reason for
this increase is to account for
the 3% Cola and insurance
premiums coming in July.
Um, the the remaining bullets.
just detail any, um,
corrections. We had to just
audit, uh, record awards as well
as just, um, analyzing wind
projects, potentially re
evaluating the best fit.
Um, And with that, Mr Chair
members, I stand for any
questions you may have.
Thank you for the report.
Questions.
Hello.
Let me, uh, comment on Mr Liu,
Um
I understand we brought him back
from his honeymoon.
To attend this meeting. So thank
you so much.
For being here and
congratulations to you. Thank
you, Mr Chair. I'm on five hours
of sleep, and, uh
This is the first time seeing
this book, so I apologize.
These questions are redundant.
Uh, but thank you, Mr Chair, I.
I did have a question on the
financial
Given that there's so many
projects coming forward.
I guess. Do you feel like this
is
a extraordinarily larger number
of applications that we've seen
in previous years.
And is it because of the results
of the enacted or is it just
Because
Schools are ready to be
replaced. And it's mister Chair,
Mr Le. I'm gonna defer to Mr
Parks.
Um, Mr Chan, Mr. Liu? Thank you
For that question. I would say
that it's a combination of
things. So we did open. Um, the
the floodgates If you will this
fiscal year, and, um, this is
the last chance.
For us to bring new awards
before July 1.
And so, um, if you will, we were
cramming for the finals to get
these, uh, final projects
through
And then there are quite a few
out of cycle projects as well.
That just happen to be shovel
ready, um, and have bid
recently.
And as you'll see later on in
the agenda, we'll discuss the
work plan, timeline and ways to
ease.
Um this load, so it's a little
more even
Mister chair. Just a follow up
question. So I see there's
Projected awards in fiscal year
25.
Of about a billion online 36.
I know early on in the process,
we had sort of had a placeholder
of what we expected Schools.
To come in at us as far as
projects that might be in
Is there? Is there still a
placeholder holder there or is
that are all these projects
material? Mr. Chair, Mr. Liu,
There are material work very
closely with our field
department to analyze each
project. Where are they? Are
they still within the film?
Because we cleaned up the
programs have wiped out the
potential application being
there for a while in order to
start the new fiscal year, uh,
application process we don't
have that will be added to the
financial queue and then one
last
Question and
I don't know.
Member Lee might be able to
respond to this, but
There's a almost doubling of
Revenue for January and
25 and 26. Is there a reason or
And are expecting that to
continue.
Uh, yes, Mazzo. I don't I'm not
seeing And so, um
You're in the booklets, and
maybe I'm just looking at the
wrong place. But so I'm not
seeing the Purdue. It is on
page. It's gonna be on the
sources and uses so
And a question regarding, UM is
or the finance able to sell
bonds that if the council
determines the need is at full
capacity than chair, Mr Li I, I
just I don't know. I think I
hack it because I don't have
that page the sources in
but, um
So yeah, that for FY 25 that
capacity. It looks double. But
it's just because they're
putting that they win sale
versus two. So if you notice
for, um fiscal year 26 Online
two at zero.
So they're just not dividing up
that amount. But we've been
seeing you know, over the last
year or two and then projected
to move forward around 7 to 800.
That's all my questions.
Thank you.
Are you going back?
Keep going back to your
honeymoon.
You could be. It was very hard
to get my wife to to come back
because we are leaving to Carl's
bed to present at LFC later
today, she's like
Yeah, You're crazy
presentation. Thank you.
Um other questions from the
council on so we'll move on to,
uh, consent agenda before before
we get to the consent agenda. We
want to have a little bit of
discussion.
On a couple of, uh, on an item
that affects several of these
So, um, let's let's do that
first.
Then we'll go to the so do you
wanna give us a little
background on the, uh, issue? Mr
Chair members? There was a
question asked from PE D as to
what data determine whether a
district uh qualifies so I'm
gonna kind of give you a brief
rundown of the issues and
historical information and kind
of where we are what we're
currently doing, and
A possibility for a um what data
We should be using data from PE
at a certain but the PSC
establishes the application
process for all awards, funded
through the in accordance with
various requirements. Although
the act allows the PSC to
establish the application
process for all awards, subject
to the various, uh, is not
specify when the awards are to
be AIT. It's data
These are process to establish.
Historically standards and
systems based awards were made
once a year and therefore the
release of the mill levy rates
by with the increase in money in
the fund and the attempt by PSF
to release funds more rapidly.
PS FA moved to a Rolling award
application cycle.
However, this process has not
aligned with data and other
significant activities.
What we have discovered is that
significant events related to
the award process and as a
result, causing difficulties for
the districts and PSF and
therefore PSA has relied on bond
advisor data.
Regarding the mill levy
following the passage of the Geo
bonds.
The significant prior to 2022
award. Currently awards occur on
a rolling basis in fiscal year
25 PS FA has obtained approval
to make awards twice a year.
Geo bonds are issued prior to
award to demonstrate the
financial, uh, capability of a
school district or to become
In 2017, the legislator changed
the act to pass a bond.
And it moved from February to
November.
This has resulted in a in tax
rates set.
PE D data for tax rates and
mail. Levy is released in
therefore a districts data is
not abduction.
The data can take a per federal
regulations. Geo Bond monies.
Uh, 85% of it must be so that
alone with that lens
It is important to note that PS
FA has discovered that the data
is is
Uh, close to identical with very
slight fractional differences.
This may be due to the fact that
PE D data partially sourced from
the bond advisors.
Because the mill levy rate data
from the bond advisors, the PSF
recommends a all integral,
integral foundations to realign
the significant process. So with
that being said, that's what
we're using. That's what we felt
most comfortable with.
Uh, but again for the council to
then, uh and, um, I understand
that there are
Several projects on the consent
agenda that
Uh,
That happened to be affected by
The committees have with the new
information. Yes, if I could, Mr
Chair. I just wanted to first
thank the staff for all the
information during award
subcomittee this this came up we
talked about. You know what kind
of information do does the
committee need to make those
decisions? Uh, because there
were some discrepancies in the
data and the tax rates that we
were seeing.
Um, So we asked staff to do
that. And we appreciate and I
just wanted to mention I know
we're not talking about it yet,
but
That was part of the reason that
we pulled Carrizo off the
consent agenda to to further
talk about this, and maybe we
can talk a little bit about the
specifics in that particular
project that kind of led to the
between the tax rates that are
currently the school district
going out to bond and what we
assume the tax rates Antonio if
he has any comments.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um The
reason this came up is that it
was just a question I had is as
it was the timing issue. So the
ped we set the tax rates once a
year in statute were required to
set them every Y in and we do
work with the bond. Avis set
those rates. So the question
that came up. It's because we
had a virtual meeting and I was
actually had access to all my
files in the office. And so when
a couple of these came up for,
um
For approval for a waiver. That
was my question is at what point
in time.
Do we approve the waiver or
should we be approving the
waiver? Because I was looking at
my my data as as of right now.
The, uh the just was and that
was brought up was or the
information brought up as they
passed. They passed a bond,
which is which is true, But my
question was how much they did
They get authorized for the
voters to pass. And then I
further ask some questions just
because they get authorization
for to sell because I had just
how much are they gonna be
selling? And then And then, when
we set the rates in August,
which will be coming up here,
it's determined on how much of
that author is. They're selling.
And then what are the principal?
And sometimes some of the
principal interests aren't even
so That was my question. So at
what point in time, do we
actually or should we be looking
at the application or do we do
it? Uh Or do we waive waiver and
then wait until like August 5th
meet the rates. I think at one
point in time, and this school
was going back several years.
Prior to. I think that's
probably when we're doing it
yearly applications throughout,
so I think that's some of the
some of the questions I had is
like who's verifying the data.
What data is
Valid concerns. And I think
that, uh
It. It's good that we'll be
taking a look at
So do you feel, uh, comfortable
that we can move ahead? Maybe
with the contingency on these
projects that
Or or is that is that in these
at this point jigs are
You know, scheduled to be
approved here on the consent
agenda. Is there a five The the,
uh, mill levy rates?
OK, Uh, I wanted to have this
discussion again bef before we
act.
Actually, Mr George's quick
question for staff. If we
condition like the waiver
approved create an issue,
though, for the projects to
begin now because they won't
technically Mr Chair and
members. Yes, the if we award
the, um, design phase funding
Now the the projects can start
If if we need to wait until the
new data is
the concern that we have is that
Um, these projects, uh, move
quite rapidly, and we have three
years and so if we have the then
based on the current cycle that
we have
Then we, uh having to expend 85%
within three years.
We're gonna be probably Ryan. So
so we're already so that we
don't delay or I mean, I mean, I
think at this point in time, I
mean and I, I think I understand
the situation enough and I
confession as well. But I think
a MS can look at this and learn,
but I think, um
If awards is comfortable in
approving these now under the
chair, I just want to emphasize
that
As Miss Lee said, We were we
were we were comfortable
approving about the project, but
just to have the discussion to
raise it before the full
council.
Mr Liu.
Uh, thank you, mr Chair.
Uh, could you tell me
How many of these projects
Have a waiver.
And how many have we for? Uh,
projects on the
They were Hagerman Hondo.
Magdalena, Mr Chair. How many
more projects do you anticipate
coming forward?
Uh, Mr Chair and members what
we've seen in the last two years
cycle is that there have been
many districts that have
applied, uh, sent in pre
applications with the
requirement for a local match
reduction to occur in order to
fund their local match.
Many of those projects did not
occur. As of today, um, due to
the district's inability to fund
their local match and their, um
inability to be eligible for up
to today and trying to make all
of those awards that we can
waiting for those districts to
become eligible, So that's what
we're talking about. Today.
There were a number of districts
that went out for bond and
November pass the Bond award.
Um, so that's why the pre
application list has remained.
Oh, for the last years because
so many of them need that local
match reduction in Camp fund
their portion of the project. So
in
FY 25. I foresee more Apple
State local match formula.
Mr Chair. I guess this is sort
of a longer term question. Given
what local capacity is as far as
value
And how much we're asking. Do
you
You see a cut off point?
Based
I. I feel that
You know anything we can do to
To look at our options to help
speed up. These projects also
helps. I think, uh, I think
we've had a good discussion on
this.
Appreciate everybody.
To take. Take a look at this.
Keep in mind the the, uh
The volunteers that would like
to work on this as well. And,
uh, we thank Ed. Also for so
with that.
Oh, we can go to the consent
agenda.
And the consent agenda is rather
long.
Um
Uh,
We? We want to take all of
these In one motion. The process
is we will
Give a short summary on each one
of these projects.
And, uh,
Uh, also allow any
more, uh, member of council
member that would want to remove
any of these for further
discussion to do that at this
time.
Uh, yes, sir. I, um, chair. I
would like to ask to remove, um
project old Nancy Lopez.
Elementary for some specific
discussion.
Uh, hopefully it wouldn't take
much extra time. But I I really
Any others.
Removal for discussion.
If not, then please give us a
summary of each of these,
Um, stay I I'll be reading the
state Port 2 million
Hagerman.
Coming for a waiver of the
elementary Middle school and a
combined replacement with
million
Harrison, middle for only the
soft cost and contingencies of
the design phase, uh, of
Van Buren Middle School, Melrose
is a systems based 0.4 million
Clayton, west of their old
junior high building at two.
Albuquerque, Demo of the
Albuquerque Duran is, um we have
the program over the
Eligibility. Want to be out of
cycle?
And perish, which is a Reno
design funding of 2.5 K,
Gadsden, Riverside Phase two
Request of constructive Nancy
Lopez, which Magdalena is a
systems pay of those, and, um,
an award language change to
include full roof replacement.
They're coming with a, um,
School of dreams Board of
approximately a June bond sale
where we demonstrated the need
sales.
We also have the Oba
Intergovernmental Agreement as
vendor for the strategic plan
will be for any questions or if
you need any further look into
those
So again. This is the consent
agenda. But are there any brief
questions? If not, then I would
entertain a motion to approve
the consent agenda, with the
exception of, uh, item O letter
O.
And we have a motion and a
second to approve the consent
agenda.
Um
As amended.
All those in favor. Please
indicate by saying, I I It was a
post
We'll go to, uh and I know
there's a
Uh,
Officials in the audience that
may wanna have a comment, But
let's let's take care of item.
Oh, and then we'll do that.
But you do have short summary on
Idaho.
Roswell, Nancy Lopez Elementary
School.
I'll Hand it over to, Mr
Ficklin, uh, to present
Mr Chair members, Um so we have
a potential motion to, uh,
Council approve it amended 2018
2019 Standard Space Award to
Roswell Independent School
District for Nancy Lopez.
To include construction fees.
Funding for 28.4 million with
the state match of 18.8 million
in a local match is 7.681.
There were two general
contractors, um, that provided,
uh, bids for this project. One
was way construction. The other
one was Holloway construction,
both local contractors.
Um, there was, uh
I say, utility work that, um
Uh, extends beyond the property
lines of the school and
considered above allowable.
And the difference between the
300 student program and
enrollment of 205 is about 95
students in these 95 students
don't resent represent a single
co cohort, but most likely fall
within each grade level.
Many of the, uh RSD elementary
schools are pretty at, uh at
capacity or over capacity.
And as part of the planning
activities for Washington
Avenue, which is another current
active project with the PSCOC.
Um, the district will study
existing boundary boundaries
determine a strategy to balance
the enrollment at New Washington
Avenue as well as other schools.
I mean, should the district in
Brooklyn. These adjustments
there could be an additional 30
to 50 students, Uh, society as
the Lopez
And with that, Uh uh
He has to face after myself
would be available for any
questions, and the district is
here as well. And Mr Chair if I
may just chime in on one more
point. I know that. Um one of
the questions was about the the
scoring criteria.
Um, for the technical proposal
of this RFP.
Um And it was it was a A
technical plus price.
Proposal, um and combined.
Those total points shows the
apparent winner.
Um and
And in this case, the the
district and the UM committee
Selected weight construction.
um over the other, uh, ho
Holloway.
Um, but I can answer any
specific questions There.
Members I'd like like to also
add that there's about a
Um
$180,000 difference between the
low bidder and the high bidder.
Um And and this. The procurement
type was a request for
proposals, which is a
qualification based not only,
uh, it it's not a low bid
proposal and, um Mr Chair,
That's a very good differential
between those. That means that
the the drawing set was was
buttoned up tight.
Um, when you when you don't have
a lot of space between two
bidders or even three
Um, that tells me that the the
drawings and specifications were
were sewed up very
Thank you for the overview.
Well and I. I agree. I'm very
clear that there's a It was a
very good bid.
Um, it is.
I feel incumbent on, um us as a
termination to have
justification for
Taking even if it's a small
amount.
That we should have something
that we can
Um, point to that gave us the
Just just in case if we're
taking a higher number.
Um, in the
The
Um, guest in one right before
this it it had at least the
Um
How the reviewers scored the um
or the bit and gave evidence for
that.
I would just ask districts to
provide that level of detail to
give us so we can if we ever get
questioned about why we awarded
or or voted to award a project
why we did that, and I just
That's what I wanted to bring
up.
Was that for me, young people.
So when it says why
So that was my whole
justification for pulling this
off the consent agenda.
I don't really feel like there's
any need to, um
Top up the project. Obviously, I
just would encourage
Um, maybe PS FA to also
encourage the districts to have
adequate justification when they
make a choice that is
Mr Chair. We appreciate the the
feedback and we can certainly
provide the, um the technical
proposal breakdown.
On every single out of cycle
project.
Um, just so this council knows
that is our job is to vet those.
Uh, reviews and, um, the
determinations made by the by
the school local school boards.
Um so we we have vetted these.
Um and we do agree with the
outcomes but to, um Mister
Ingham's point, we do understand
where we're constantly balancing
too much information and not
enough. And if this is something
that, um
The council feels is necessary
information. We're more than
happy to any further questions,
comments.
Not, then I would entertain a
motion to approve the project
Construction funding request. I
would
Very good. Thank you for that
motion. Do we have a second?
Uh, any
Discussion. If not, then all
those in favor. Please indicate
by saying, I, I all those
opposed.
Ocean passes and, uh, we have a
full fully approved consent
agenda.
And we would take any comments
from anyone in the audience that
would like to, uh, take this
opportunity.
Mr Chair while we have folks
come up, Uh, I got a call from,
uh, Superintendent had a and art
She and her chief financial
officer couldn't make it to the
meeting today because they're
doing audits Lucky them, And so
she just wanted to to share her
appreciation to the council for
the approval of that project in
Artesia.
Good morning, Uh, Chairman and
members of the council. I want
to, uh, on behalf of Roswell
Independent schools. Thank you
for continued support of the
building program as well. I also
wanna highlight, uh,
Part in the district. Uh, coming
to terms with, uh, land swap
agreement.
Between, UH, General Services
Department.
And the
Roswell Independent school so
that we can find a new piece of
property adjacent.
Um, both of the that was a huge
success. A win district.
Support you have given us in our
projects, especially now, with
our
Uh, that we all we look forward
to work with you in
40 superintendent. Good morning,
Um, Chairman Guan, members of
the board. I just like to
express my heartfelt gratitude
for the approval of, uh, you
know, on behalf of Herman
schools, you know, in the
approval of our project, so just
thank you very much. I know it's
a lot of work, and it's going to
be a lot of work, and I also
like to thank the members of
the, uh, ps F for the heavy
lifting.
Matthew. Thank you very much. I
know it's it's been a lot of
work and
You know. Thank you for your
patience, your guidance and, uh,
you know, we just look forward
to working with, uh, everybody
and again. Thank you so much,
You know, because on behalf of
everybody from Hagerman now
they're gonna have hopefully a
better learning facility. So
thank you very much assistance
as well.
Mr Chairman and the board. I am
Alice Velasquez from the Hondo
Valley school, and, uh, on
behalf of the Valley.
And our our small little school.
I just wanna tell you Thank you
for your consideration. It's
been a long time in coming it,
It sometimes becomes a part or a
point where we keep fixing
things that just it just takes
forever to get fixed. And now
our students have an opportunity
to, um, definitely turn the page
and, uh, to to have a brighter
future with an immediate impact
in their education, and that
Is what is so appreciated for
your efforts and considering
little bitty districts like us.
We live in a valley that is
composed of, uh, 4 to 5, small
communities, and even though our
numbers tend to start declining,
but we have an opportunity here
with a new school and new
facilities to finally not just
be, uh, average. Our kids are
gonna be able to step into an
immediate impact and to be able
to do something even better and
greater. The build is
It's been a long time coming and
we appreciate you very much. So
on behalf of Hondo Valley, thank
you very much.
Thank you and thank you for
being here.
Good morning, Mr Chair and
members. My name is Brian Stacy.
I'm the superintendent of
Melrose schools.
Uh, we were awarded on the
systems basement. I appreciate
that, Um, I appreciate the
counsel and PS, FA and and the
communications and the
questioning that you guys have
done even this morning. Uh,
remember, Lou brought up some
some great ideas. Melrose
schools probably needs to be
looking at a standards based and
because of our, uh, bonding
issues, uh, were having to look
at systems Three weeks ago, We
had graduation at Melrose
schools and the educational
building.
Just celebrated our 100 year
anniversary. We were built in
1924.
And so I appreciate all the help
and things that you can do and
and you'll probably be seeing my
face here again in the future.
So thank you very much. Thank
you.
Good morning, Mr Chair. Members
of the PSCOC. Um I'm Ryan
Tatler. I'm the superintendent
for Los Salinas schools. I want
to thank you for approving our
design funding request, and it's
very important to our Anne Perry
school community and as it is
all of lona schools, uh, we
appreciate the support. Uh, we
look forward to getting this
project moving and completed,
uh, within the next three years,
so appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you to the council for all
the good work in approving the
In the
So let's move on to
Item number uh, Roman numeral
five awards cycle.
Hey.
Mr Chair.
Just to be clear. I'm still
substituting coming off the
bench for director warning me.
So So if I'm missing the queue,
I see a lot of people like
nodding at me like I'm supposed
to be doing something here. So
I'm gonna I'm I'm gonna I'm
gonna start talking and they may
regret it. Um so, uh, item A,
uh, under the word cycle, Mr
Chair is, uh
Is a housing project, part of
the Housing pilot project.
Um
The reason I asked to have this
pulled off the consent agenda
was not because of the project
itself. And and I and I would
ask staff if they could to just
give us a brief summary of the
project, Um one because, uh,
House took a unique approach I
think to to this project for
their district, but it also in
conversation around some other
housing projects.
Brought up some other points
that I think are are worth the
council discussing, Maybe
considering a little bit, not
not for decision making
purposes, but just as we
continue to fund teachers and
housing projects across the
state.
I think it's it's continuing to
raise issues about consistency
and the process by which
Uh, both staff and the the
subcommittees And, of course,
the council ultimately make
those decisions and how much
money
Um, and the share that the state
is willing to take up on on on
behalf of
Some of these projects. So if I
could ask staff to maybe just
give a brief summary of this
particular project, and then I
can talk a little bit more. If
it's OK about some of the issues
that came up in the
conversation, Mr Chair members,
Mr Senna, this particular item
is for a teacher Housing Pilot
Capital Alley Award for house.
Um, the school district of
houses requesting teacher
housing units, Um, for their
districts, they're requesting
three units on district
property. Um, the potential
motion is for a total project.
Cost of, uh, 531,000.
$160 with the state share of
430,888, which is 81%. This is
construction funding to complete
the four Excuse me, the three T
project.
Um
If you would like me to go
through the reports, Um, I think
the most important pages on 275
Um, that shows the aerial of the
whole community of house.
And, um and then the zoomed in
view of the school, which shows
the proposed site for these
teacher housing units. As you
can see, houses are very rural
community on the eastern side of
New Mexico. They, um, are having
a difficult time recruiting and
retaining teachers due to their
remote location and their far
distance from amenities and and
therefore the the district is
requesting three units, um to,
um recruit teachers for both.
A vacancy and, um, potential
retired, retiring teachers.
Um and that is a very brief
Um, description. If that's OK,
and I'll turn it. So, Mr Chair
and Council members, I think,
Steph thank you, Elise for that,
Um, and you heard from the
superintendent for housing and
and the fact that I think he's
actually lost some teachers
because there wasn't a place to
live in house. They were easily,
uh, work in other districts
where there actually is housing,
so there's a clear need for for
the housing in this particular
district as we talked about, um
This project, and you can see
that the the total cost here is
is about $500,000, or three
units and staff mentioned in the
subcomittee meeting that this is
due to the fact that the
district was able to find, um
Essentially a supplier of
modular housing in Clovis.
So that those folks are just
gonna
All the things out and set him
down and and it's pretty cheap
for them to do that and course,
because Clovis is relatively
close, they're able to do that
pretty efficiently.
You all have already considered,
you know, um
In previous meetings, housing
projects that, uh, equal a
million dollars for one unit.
And so, um, as we were having
the conversation in subcomittee,
we started to talk a little bit
about and I should say I. I
really appreciate the staff
dealing with me being the
substitute on the subcomittee
too, because I ask a lot of
questions and they were really
great about that.
Um
At what point do we start
considering
Some actual criteria around
housing projects.
Uh, having to do with
Percentage of staff.
That needs to be housed in a
particular community. Obviously,
there are other variables
because
Some of these districts are very
remote and may potentially have
to just to house their entire
staff.
Others are just making choices
based on we know we are gonna
have three vacancies. And so
maybe we should have three
houses.
Or, um, you know, the the the
criteria right now is pretty
subjective and districts are
coming to the council.
With requests based on
Various
Criteria.
And so we just continue to talk
a little bit about the need as
we continue these projects.
To set forth some guidelines for
staff. They're doing their best
to make recommendations to the
subcommittees for awards. Um, As
I said during the meeting,
They're sort of building
building the plane while they're
flying here.
And so I think the as we
continue to to consider these
projects. What are the long term
criteria that stand when looking
at the projects both based on
cost because we're seeing other
projects come in at over.
507 $150,000, a unit.
Um
And again. Also, at what point
does the does the council
Um, determine what is the
appropriate proportion or
willing to to pay for again.
Those are not set down anywhere
and so districts could
potentially come and ask for
houses for every teacher. And of
course, staff does a really good
job of vetting those proposals
and making some decisions but
still very subjective and you
know, and I don't I feel a
little sorry for them. They come
before us and then we have a
bunch of questions about. Well,
why did you decide this?
And they're they're doing their
best.
Based on what the the
information that they have.
But I think they would
appreciate some clearer
guidelines clear criteria as we
as the process moves forward,
and of course, that's part of
evaluating the pilot project. Of
course, I just wanted to bring
that forward to the discussion
here. Not so much a comment, or,
uh,
On on this particular project
just
Thank you, and, uh,
Understand the subcomittee. Mr
Chair. Yes, I am. Uh, we the
subcomittee recommends approval
of
Um I really appreciate you, um,
highlighting around eating to
have to say
Um, we're seeing conversations
that we've had in a MS.
Are a need to as a whole
community and not just thing
that needs to happen. Um, I also
wanna commend
We're really looking at trying
to create housing extremely high
again. I think you know this is
some
Um, I do wanna say that this is
a need clearly to support the
housing need. We have highly
qualified teachers and
Um, thank you, Mister Sheridan.
Thank you and the words of
committee for bringing this
forward step. Can you? Um, tell
me so. When did we set up the
pilot, and when did we amend it
for manufactured housing? And
since we amended to allow
manufactured housing
Uh, Mr Chair and members, Madam
Leach. Um, we've released the
pilot program last July.
Um, I don't have the the date
when we release or the allowed
manufactured housing to date
with this. This will be the
third.
Award made for the teacher
housing pilot, So we haven't had
that.
OK, Thank you. Um, I think my
comment on that is I know when
we originally brought the the
pilot forward we intended to and
lo and behold, we're right about
there. Time flies, and so I
think that we can add this to
the A MS, Um, agenda again to
revisit one thing that I would
ask a staff is through your
experience, even though I know
we've only had three I. I would
ask for any proposals from staff
since you're working with these
districts on what you see needs
to be
Or addressed. You know, this is
a a big
Issue.
Uh, we have some other projects
that are currently pending.
That we're looking at.
All the resource that you
mentioned, Uh,
Other resources. Maybe we care
of all the housing needs in
particular community. We look
forward to a MS, Uh,
We move forward, so
question question.
Thank you, sir. So on on this
particular units, Uh and
Mr. Chair, Mr Romero. That's our
understanding. Yes. So I and I
guess my other
The question is, are we S? Oh,
and or modular and the reason
why I ask that is that there's
other manufacture.
No, it's my understanding that
well, they don't sit on a frame.
They sit on a foundation.
You know that Price point is on
up. So is that something that,
uh, school districts look at
Mr. Chair, Mr Romero?
Absolutely. In fact, we've had
discussions about build wise
build wise in particular. Um, I
would say that
Similar to how
We're not dictating how big a
school is going to be where
we're telling the districts we
can fund up to this amount. I
think that's what that's where
we're at with the teacher
housing as well as
There are districts that are not
on board with manufactured
housing. They want site built
housing.
Um, they they have full
communities.
Already and so to change.
Stream is, um
Uh, not in the cards for those
districts, they would rather
stay with the site belt.
But
Um
This council and recommendations
from the agency could
Get to a price point that
everybody's comfortable with,
and I think that's kind of what
we're looking for is
Is that 500,000?
Is it 300,000?
We? We do need to revisit that
when we bring the the pilot, um
back to aml, So just, uh we're
actually and I like to extend it
and participate and send you an
email. So
Where do we stand in the pilot
program on cost for for that or
not?
Mr Chair and members. Yes.
Everything that goes into
building that teacher housing
unit and creating that community
is included if it's on the
district product,
infrastructure, sidewalks,
lighting driveways and and
mister chair. I should
Point out that, uh, I think one
of the reasons for such a
reduced cost on house is because
The utilities are are plumbed
and ready.
Um
They They went with a very
simplified version. So again,
uh, we'll bring some
recommendations and some
information to the subcomittee
and council.
So that we can tighten up those
Um, those parameters.
Uh, thank you, mr Chair.
How does this affect
Are standing with the zoo, the
teacher pilot project sort of
limiting it to select group of
Districts.
Across the state.
Um, Mr Chair, Mr. Liu. I think
what you're asking is, um right
now. The the guidelines are
rural or tribal.
Um
And so
That is the criteria. Um, it's
not open to municipalities and
and larger communities.
Um so I think we are.
Addressing it, Um
From an equity equability
standpoint.
Uh, However, we we do need to
Revisit. Um, the kan um some
teacher housing and one of those
communities and Mr Chair, I
believe
I'm recalling this correctly
State statute.
Says that the minimum district
size can
Um
I don't think we have any
districts that small but
Have we ever looked at?
Functionally.
How small can a school to ensure
that
All the great, Um, is there a
way to look at like, what is the
very bare minimum?
And how many
Mister chair. That's a great
question, I think for ped
Um, we we are happy to space
allocate, based on findings from
PE and LES C.
But
I don't think we have the staff
to make to make that
recommendation or to answer that
question right now.
Go ahead.
They're talking about, Um,
that's about we're talking about
when at the time it was debt,
got down to nine students. I
think it was down to six wasn't
take their kids with them, And I
believe it that
Or a district decision. They
just at the time they were
actually applying to Mr members.
It would take legislative action
to close a district or or to
It could take
Anyway. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Uh, those are all my questions.
Thank you. We have a motion on
the floor.
Uh, search further discussion
unless there's any further
discussion. All those in favor,
Please indicate by saying, I I
all the post
Passes.
We make, uh item B Capital
Outlay Awards overview.
Mr Chair and members. This is an
informational item to both
review the awards that were
made, um today as well as
throughout the fiscal year, 24
So as you can see on page 277
These are all of the awards that
you made mostly on consent. With
the exception of house, um
We may
Potential, um, state funding for
for, um, standards based in the
total of $14.2 million
For systems based there were
three awards made today for a
total state match for Phase one.
5.2 million.
We made, uh one pre K award with
a state match of 800 111 and
then one teacher Housing Pilot
Award just now, Um, if you could
see on the next page on page 278
there have we have the the total
FY 24 Awards approved this year,
So we have a total of 11
standards based awards.
With a phase one state match of
31.3 million with a potential
out year of 259.5 million.
We made 25 systems based awards
with a phase one state much of
21 million and a potential out
year.
Date match of 6 million
We made two pre K awards with a
phase one state match of
931.8000 with a potential out
year of 683 Teacher Housing
Pilot award 2.3 Million for a
total of 41 awards made in FY
24.
Um, a potential um or the phase
One totaled 55.6 million, with a
potential out year of 282.2. As
you know, the application closed
in December, and, um, the FY 24
awards were made august 23
through today, down at the lower
half of the page on on 278. We
have the list of free
applications received but not
awarded. Um, there were a total
of 20 pre applications that were
not processed or awarded due to
the district's ability to start.
Project, inability to fund the
local match ineligible for a lo
local match reduction or that
they did not meet the
eligibility requirements. As you
can see, there were nine total
standard based five systems
based one pre K and five
teacher, housing and Mister
Chair. If you would like me to
go through the details of those,
and, um lastly, on page 281, we
do have our, um final
spreadsheet showing all of the
FY 24 awards that I just
mentioned in the total phase one
and out.
Um
And with that, mister chair, I
will stand for questions or go
into more detail if you any
questions.
All being handled by our staff.
So yeah.
The cycle awards and item A. Is
there still a need to
Mr Chair. I don't I don't think
so again that this was, uh,
related to that first
discussion. So we've, uh
Subcomittee recommends approval
of the
It's just a brief one page or
one line summary. It's money and
Mr Chair members. Uh, just a
brief summary here. Uh, carries
all of those schools is asking
for construction phase funding
for 42.3 million.
Um, and also asking for a waiver
of 39.8 million. Uh, their mill
Levy is 7.5 per the information
we receive from PD this week.
Um, And with that, That's brief
enough. I hope and, uh I'll
stand for any questions. Thank
you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair, I. I did
have a question.
Are they using any of their bond
toward this build above the
adequacy level?
Mr Chair. Uh, Mr Liu? Yes. Um so
we've held back part part of the
money they have left, and that's
part of the HP 505 money and
part of their bonding money
That'll be for anything moving
forward that would fall outside
of above allowable funding that
the council would not fund.
And and Mr Chair when they
passed their bond. Did it
include Mr Chair, Mr Liu? I
believe so. But I will turn to K
from RBC.
To answer that further.
Good morning, Mr Chair members.
My name is Keeley Weiner skiers
with RVC Capital markets. I'm
municipal advisor for, uh, carry
Zozo schools, the district's
last general obligation bond
election was in November of
2021. That bond election
approved general improvements
and purchases across the school
district. So yes, Uh, those bond
proceeds could be used for PS FA
purposes also
For the question.
Once again. I'm gonna make this
point. Um, again. This this was,
uh, a project where
We awarded the, um
Um
Project.
To not a little bitter.
Um, but also
Without any justification for
changing that or for so I just
ask again for the district to
please provide
That understanding when you pick
a
Contractor That's not
intuitively obvious from being a
little bitter that they should
have some justification for
this.
And and I. I have to say I'm
I'm I'm a little
This project with, um no
Local match at all.
I. I don't know enough about the
project to be able to make a
determination it feels
Um, you know, with things that
are a lot of the the bid lots
That were
Things that are are are, in my
estimation, at least a little
bit.
Gonna use I. I just gonna say
that
They they pricey items.
And that I
I understand that these small
district need to have equitable
facilities. But I also recognize
that, um, a
A district that can't fund any
Of its
Of a match. Be pushing a real,
um
Extravagant design. And I I'm
not I. I didn't III. I wasn't
gonna use that word.
An expensive design.
And so that's I just wanted to
make that comment for me. It
makes me uncomfortable. I have
to say that
But I would again.
Really?
Request that districts give us
enough so we can say Well, this
is the reason we
Approve this contractor.
Mr C, Mr. Ingram, Um, that is
actually our fault. Uh, PSF. We
will make sure to provide that
in the future like, Ryan said,
or Mister Park said earlier
going back and forth on what the
council wants to see what they
don't so this will go moving
forward. It will be a part of
every out of cycle Award.
Yes, sir.
And Mr Chair. I would. I would
argue that this is not an
extravagant design. It's a
designed well within. Um current
Money budget. Um
And
It. It was our consultation with
the district to hold money back
for things that this council
cannot fund
IE scoreboards. Uh, security
cameras. There are just certain
things that are outside the
purview of
The fund.
That are, um, necessary for a
school to function like all the
other schools in the state, and
so
Um, yeah, that was our
recommendation to hold money
back for the kind of contingency
as well as items that
Uh, we cannot make
recommendations. What? What is
the dollar amount that you're
Dollar amount on what parts or
uh, the dollar amount of the
local funds. You're holding back
that we're holding back is, um,
we've got, uh, this
Thank you, Mr Chair members,
also and about 450,000 of that
860,000 will go towards, uh, B.
Lots that are, uh outside of the
what we can find.
Further questions.
Motion.
Go to that all those in favor of
approving the
Project. Please indicate by
saying I
All those opposed.
Let the record show me the
motion passes and we'll move. I
would like Mr Chair members of
the committee I'd like to
greatly appreciate y'all's
approval on this. Um I invite
you all to come see kzo, um at
any time, um, us to like, you
know, our students who are in
great need and have been very
excited in the planning process.
I think PS FA for their very
hard work and guidance on this
So again. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you for being
here.
Let's move on to, uh
Other business.
Work plan.
Uh, yes, Mr Chair. Um this is
bring brought forth by a MS as
an action item. Um, I'm gonna
provide the motion. I'm I'm
gonna defer to, um, staff to
provide a very brief summary.
And then I'll make some, uh,
any, you know, comments after
that to elaborate on what was
discussed in a MS, um, following
Mr Sonas Path, which I feel like
so, um, the motion on the table
brought forth by a MS Is that,
uh, for council approval to
adopt the proposed FY 25 PSCOC
work plan Timeline scenario one.
Yes, you see in some committee
meetings held once a month for
out of cycle ore.
And then, uh, with that, mister
Charles. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair and Miss
Leach.
I would just point us to, um,
the calendar on page
It's
Scenario one potential meeting
cycle.
Um
The reason we're proposing this
is, um
For a couple of reasons.
As we all understand. When a
project bids there is AAA clock
starts ticking on how long that
bid
Is good for
Um, And while
The six week cycle worked very
well, I think for staff and for
council
Um, and the flow of information.
Um Some of these projects have
gotten to where we're asking the
general contractor to hold their
price for up to 90 days.
Um, and that is not industry
Standard industry standard is 45
to 60 days. And so this is an
effort to bring out of cycle
awards.
Every four weeks every month.
To keep those projects that are
shovel ready to keep them going.
Um, I think we we feel a staff.
The other thing that this does,
is it it is going to, um in
combination with the change in
award cycle that Miss Ramos.
Um, has previously presented in
this council approved.
I think it's gonna greatly
simplify the meetings. Um and so
we don't have
40 items under award at at the
meet at the meeting.
Um
And with that, I, I will stand
for questions.
And Mister chair. Um so I
believe a MS was supportive of
this, Uh, scenario one. We do
recognize that it is a monthly
meeting. Uh, primarily for
awards.
Uh, subcomittee. Uh, but I think
the justification and this is
what was discussed at a MS is
the justification for you know,
not wanting to ask for bids to
be held, um, for out of cycle
awards really makes a lot of
sense. So even though there will
be a monthly meeting, uh, those
meetings specific to just out of
psycho
Will be pretty expeditious and
it's my understanding all staff
should correct me if I'm
remembering this incorrectly, um
You know these out of cycle
awards will eventually phase out
and we will be back if we
continue the year award cycle.
Well, I think we'll be looking
at different. Um
Uh, meeting cycle awards phase
out.
Um, but I also would like to
note that even though a MS may
not have items you know every
month as awards would it does
provide us the opportunity
should an emergency come up that
we can address items as well?
But I think this is a a really
good compromise to make sure
we're not putting the districts
in a difficult position. Uh, but
we're also not having, uh, you
know, full meetings every month,
mister Chair. Uh, thanks, thanks
to the A MS and to the staff for
the proposal. Um, I think
Just sort of re emphasize how
important it is, and that we
that we standardize those
processes because I think, uh,
you know,
Again. I'm coming off the bench,
and I hope when the coach
reviews the tapes later that I
did OK, um by her, but I
obviously everyone's busy.
That that additional monthly
meeting, you know? Could be, uh,
you know, additional work. Just
stress how important it is that
that those presentations and
that the information
So Mr Ingram's point earlier
As we start to search,
standardize those presentations
so that
All of us get
Get used to seeing the same
information for every
presentation so that we can
streamline our review of those
processes. And I say the the
royal Hour cause I won't be
doing it, Uh
But I think the the this the
subcomittee members would
appreciate just having that
consistency having that. Thank
you.
Thank thank you, Mr Chair. I
could just have a point of
privilege to go slightly off
topic.
I think that it's
Really good that we are pivoting
our process internally to
address
Sort of the awards that we have
to review, But I also think you
know, in a in a broader way.
We kind of did this
To to ourselves in a way by pro
providing so many award hing in
and I often wonder, you know.
In reflecting on
Sort of artificially creating
this demand for
We should be thinking more
strategically about
Over time, because these
projects and maybe 4050 years
are gonna be
Coming back up again, and
You know, we're gonna have a
huge bubble and a big as for
construction and our financial,
um, just thinking out loud about
that the
Is there. I'll just say Mr Chair
is
Yes, Mr Chair, OK?
Uh, so all those in favor,
please indicate by saying I
All opposed to the next item.
Here. We have a speech, Mr Chair
members. So as of the last item,
I'm actually gonna end it with
item. We do have a lotion to
approve the rere release of the
2024 final ranking with recently
awarded schools removed for use
during the FY 25 application
cycle. Uh, there was a lot of
work. Um, that occurred over the
last. Uh essentially, I, um, you
know, with peds roll out of the
novo system.
PS FA staff have had to pivot a
little bit, uh, in the data that
they've been utilizing for the
ranking list and other uh,
metrics that they utilize
enrollment data for
Um, last Tuesday, right before a
MS.
Uh, we held LES C, uh, PS, FA
and myself to talk through the
data because there was some
confusion around, uh, the data
that had been permit or not, Um,
I think that meeting was an
excellent meeting. I think it
really brought a lot of, uh,
stakeholder importance of this
data to not only PS FA, but LC
and others. Um, but also to
understand, uh, the efforts
while we're still in kind of the
early stage of, uh, new system,
so I thought it was a very, um
Productive and very hopeful that
that cafe PE D, um and others.
Uh, one thing I would not and I,
I'll defer to staff to get into
any nitty gritty on it. But
staff are and a MS are proposing
to utilize the previously
released ranking list but
removing any schools that
received awards. Uh, that is not
utilizing the ads. Um, but that
said that 80th day data which
has been provided at 1/20 Day,
certified data will be utilized
for the state local match for
the lease assistant. So, um as
we move
Again. I think this this
partnership had their leadership
for coming to based off for for
being there to describe sort of
their needs and and get those
questions and critical concerns
addressed. So with that, Mr
Chair, I'll defer to staff for
any additional, so we're
bringing this item to release a
final ranking. As you may recall
in December, we did release a
final ranking for We've since
decided to move on the fiscal
year, So our thought is well and
and specifically in this version
to remove all of the awards that
have been wouldn't to be,
including
Those reserved in a plus a spot
in your
Mr Chair members. I have nothing
really, to add. We look forward
to working with PE D. As far as
the Yes please.
Uh, miss.
D.
Leadership progress that's been
made
To to that department being
better integrated into what
we're doing.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I guess I
want to take this opportunity to
ask him.
With the adjustment in the data.
Do you anticipate a lot of
fluctuations or changes in the
rink? Mr. Chair, Mr. Liu? Um we
had seven schools that vacated
top 100. Based upon the upcoming
criteria. We're gonna fund that
top 100. So the seven schools
that got awarded vacated uh, the
seven. So what would be 101
through 107 in that ranking rose
up in this case, it's Simone
High school. Roosevelt Middle
school, Lalu.
Uh, Goddard High School La Cueva
High School. Los Palos in Mr
Chair. Can I ask is the
Waited in in
Formula still heavily.
Uh, Mr Chair, Mr Liu. That is
one piece of it. Um
Of course, we're looking at the
enrollments for all all cohorts
or all grade levels. It's just
one piece of a large puzzle
associated with the physical
conditions of that facility as
well as the utilization as well.
Um
We can. We can get into the
details at at a different
discussion of what constitutes,
uh, the comp the the way it is.
And this chair. I just wanna
bring that up because I think
you know the
We did MC A, which is what we
use for rankings and the FC A.
We had overcrowded classrooms
and
I no longer think that food
recommend staff. Look at that.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you.
Mister chair.
This is an action item as well.
So this is further discussion or
questions.
All those in favor. Please
indicate by saying, I
all those opposed
We'll go to the informational
items.
First one is I do session
initiatives.
So
Yeah, I can do a short that, uh,
from me and staff have been
working on
Legislate. Um
Before we got much further to
have each each of the
subcommittees. Look at these.
Uh unfortunately, we didn't get
them money. We do want you to be
aware of these
Possibly prioritize if
necessary. Agree they're all
priority. Then we'll just move
them on. Uh, yes. This list has
kind of
Steps that were taken.
Was number one staff voiced the
fact that we kind of wanted to
be a little more proactive. Uh,
due to the fact that they are
out in the districts celebrating
their successes, but also, um,
sharing in their struggles, and
so we just thought it was a good
idea that we kind of have a, um
I did review it with Miss Leach
on. Uh, Gwen was unable to
attend a chair. Also so some,
some things have transpired
since those conversations.
Um as we were requested from our
organizational meeting, so we
took this list to them.
And there were were. They were
on board with seeing where these
items? Um, there was one topic
that we need to kind of, um, not
necessarily speak to as it could
get.
Uh, addressed in the state local
match con so with that being
said they were excited to see
what kind of work we can do with
our partners at LFC and LES C.
Then we had a meeting with our
partners to include PE D, as
well as to again prioritizing
but also seeking guidance as
this is a first time endeavor
for, um this administration at
PF so
That was a very good
conversation. Um, with those
partners and what they've kind
of helped us realize is a lot of
these topics can be addressed by
addressing one topic and that is
the state local match.
And those topics would be we
know that the local Mach
reduction, but we also know that
we can do probably something to
sh to state local match. Um,
when it came to the
appropriations or
Um, this is the lesson on page
329 The appropriation 3 23 3 23.
And and you're going down the
line. Is that what you're doing?
That is correct. I'm kind of
kind of jumping around based on
the conversations we've had with
these, uh, entities.
Um, but so if you look at role
Three.
When it came to the ear marking
of the
Fund.
It was stated that, um, it
really not necessarily was our
place.
Request those that legislators
don't use the fund.
Um, So it is where we stand in,
Um, informally, whereas, um,
bypass you in the future. Um, so
as far as legislation goes, uh,
correct me if I'm wrong, Uh, my
colleagues that they didn't seem
to be legislation that needed,
um, again with the offsets that
will
Very touchy topic. I believe
that will be, um, addressed when
in
Funding available within the,
uh, public school cap outlet act
that we pre K classrooms and and
then if we move on Mr Chair and
members to the, um grains these
pretty much can be done mainly
and even respond mode when it
comes to the N Mac roles we
undergone
Uh, where we feel the rules need
to be updated or review and
approval.
Um, as it pertains to broadband,
we all kind of know what has
been transpiring and the fact
that broadband wants to move
over to buy. And so what was it,
Um
And working with broadband to
try to
Achieve what? It did it,
whatever it is where they need
to be. They're taking notes that
broadband right now is enough
legislation for the
Um, When it comes to maintenance
funding, it was suggested that
Mr Tillotson do a presentation
at the task force emphasizing
the success of going on
throughout the state of New
Mexico, requesting additional
funding and finally, lease
assistants. Um I'm gonna again
defer to mister to simplify the
formulas.
And with that, I'm gonna
summarize kind of what the list
actually looks like for your
priority. Um
The local match reductions.
Yeah.
Um
I'm not clear on what the
discussion with LFC and LES C,
Um Callie brought up the
potential to revisit the
language and statute to ensure
that the funding can surpass the
Thank you and is one more thing
is essentially in the past every
year, Except this past year,
there was a $5 million
appropriation from the fund to
the so I was happy that that
appropriation didn't happen this
year because I've talked to
districts who saw that $5
million limitation and decided
not to apply because they
thought, well, my projects for
me, um
But it would be helpful to
ensure that we do non pre K
projects and, um ensure that
needed as the full day rolls in
and that it could be mushrooms
we will be needing to
Build cafeterias and kitchens.
There are some consequences that
Private providers. Oh, I'm
reading the wrong line. I'm
sorry.
Um, I. I think these these were
just our stream of conscious
notes. Um as in conversation
with with you all in AC CD. We
private providers, the head
start the federal programs and
everything.
What
Make
Thank you. Mr. Chairman. Are you
done with the presentation
Generally, because, um
In your summary at the
beginning.
I. I would, uh
Ask that when you say working
with other legislative bodies
that include the L CS we do the
bill drafting. I understand
Education policy belongs to LES.
C funding belongs to LFC.
But sometimes turning that into
legislation does require
What we're gonna put in in in
the bill, and if we get that at
the last minute, um or late, and
we can't comment and help, um uh
particularly when it comes to
appropriations from the fund.
And Miss Leach and I have had a
number of discussions.
About the appropriateness of
sometimes and picking on my
bosses.
House appropriations Senate
finance taking money not just
out of this one, but other
funds.
That may have some limitations.
Uh, sometimes states, sometimes
constitutional and sometimes
federal.
Uh, so I would really urge that,
uh, this that the new staff
member who is, uh uh, staffing
the task force Simon Suzuki.
Be included in any discussions.
If he can't make it for some
reason, Uh, I can. Um I'm sure
that, um
Sea, a case bureau assistant
director can have somebody. I
just think it's important to
have the L CS in involved. Uh,
earlier rather than later. Thank
you.
Yes. Go ahead.
Just to add. Um uh
I appreciate that ped was in
Again. That was the intent. Uh,
you know, our council has never
had a legislative package that
we've
That well, you know, agreed on
altogether and, uh, I appreciate
the initiative.
Uh, that Iris took to put and
the staff to put this together.
So, uh,
It. It'd be nice if we can all
be on board. You know, we all
represent G on some priorities.
That would be very helpful and
We're all we would all be
involved in.
And, uh, because a lot of times
we were surprised with LFC or
LASC, Um
Initiatives.
And, of course from the
oversight task force. We've been
involved and we've seen those
develop, but
Uh, again, All of us working
together would be a lot more
more helpful and beneficial and
effective Now you said, uh, II.
I got three of them. So it is
the stately
No, You didn't discuss the
offsets any now they're in
place.
Permanently.
Are
Pick con or for or against.
Where, where our concern was.
It is our understanding that
Since they are now gone well
that eventually affect the
lawsuit.
To appease the lawsuit.
That was our concern. Um
We've been told to tread lightly
around that topic. And so I just
wanted to clarify that. You
know, I. I certainly don't want
offsets back in our district or
school districts don't either.
But there is a an increased
amount every year. I think there
was 75 million this year that
went out to school projects
throughout the state.
Hopefully they were for projects
that we can't fund but again if
that number continues to you
know, there are some districts
that have never come to us Santa
Fe schools, for instance,
they've never come here.
Mr Chair members that was part
of our concern and discussions
that could bypass the P
consequence in terms of
something like the off.
Well, I think we can continue to
model money.
So
Uh, Mr Chair.
I think
The sort of root question here
is dressed so
Maybe rather than just saying
this is the after broadly look
at ways to make
Access to capital funding.
Equitable solutions.
Is that
All of
Thank you for the discussion on
these, so everybody
On board on the priorities, Mr
Chair. It's really just a
clarification. So these what?
What we're saying is that we're
moving these forward for
discussion and collaboration,
and we're not necessarily see
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
All right.
So unless there's further
discussion, let's move on.
To item B measurement and
verification procurement
violations.
Chair members. Uh I mean
Um, project right after that, Um
PS FA Self reported procurement
violation in where the vent the
reason why it's brought back
today is it was requested that
we show um how we're going to
and so what? I will preference.
This presentation with is what
we are about to go over with
you your findings, so I want to
Where it is, Um
Where his measurement and
verification um memorandum of
understanding.
That is the first place where,
um
The process starts. Uh, the MOU
between PS FA and the district.
Establishes responsibility of
both parties, including the use
of so these items, one through
five
Are put in place to show number
one that it has been awarded.
But when they receive their
award letter, uh PSF.
The MOU is then created.
The MOU is, uh, filtered all
this through, Uh, the EBU is
established.
Um, the senior project manager,
then also reviews the MU and
sent to the district for review
and signatures. The subsequent
review on signatures are put in
place.
And finally the deputy director
reviews the MOU for completing
to the project.
Then we moved down to, uh, where
the
Buns WC
This is where where the
disconnect took place. Um, not
necessarily solid process where
it's the project and then the
project manager works with our
procurement.
Department to work. Uh, work out
that contract.
In order for it again to be
filtered through the E builder
system, where the disconnect was
is at some point during our
process, the vendor commenced
work.
Um, we weren't sure why, or
But that's where the disconnect
happened. We I I can definitely
continue to go through this
process. Um, but as again and
that, um DF thank you.
Thank you for providing that
clarification. Let's move on to
maintenance program status
report.
Good morning, Mr Chair members I
eight C in your books is the
update to what's transpiring in
the state of New Mexico
regarding maintenance
performance.
One piece of good news that we'd
like to start with is
The status of preventive
maintenance planning in New
Mexico is 79.12%.
7272 of the 91 New Mexico
school.
And I just wanted to, um
reflect.
That this is probably one of the
highest numbers we've seen in
the state of New Mexico for a
good 10 years.
Says a lot about the outreach
that PS FA staff is doing to
encourage New Mexico districts
and recognizing the value of
creating a plan and driving
what's in and we continue with
what I like to call
aggressively inspiring new me
that that that don't have a
current prevention.
To again inspire them to update
according to New Mexico State
statute and because of the state
provided facility information
management system, currently
maintenance, direct and
preventive maintenance. Direct
the use across the theater. New
Mexico Is it a 64% average?
Utility direct is still at a low
47% use rating across the state
a definite opportunity for
improvement. And again, we're
starting to create a little bit
more aggressive methods to
encourage our district business.
Uh, personnel to that open those
billing statements to really
collect the data. Look at it.
How much are we paying? Who are
we paying to?
Um, as we've said, in the past
utilities, if you don't have
control of them, they have
control of you. It's definitely
the second large to encourage
them to use in.
Yes, Mar. Uh, Of course, the
platform has come a long way
through the PS FA. Uh, districts
are now recognizing its value.
It's been implemented since 2011
and another success story here
that we have to tell is cycle
over cycle we're seeing in
Mexico districts pay more
attention.
They're fixing what's broken
through either their maintenance
budget, uh, maintenance programs
in the budget or through capital
outlay.
Our current performance rating
is 75% nearly 76% against cycle
over cycle. That is a tremendous
improvement. We're seeing more
outstanding performers across
the state of New Mexico and more
people responding to fixing
what's broken that's identified,
Uh on charter schools, uh, also
are performing very well as a
matter of fact. Uh, the recent
This last quarter. January,
February March, a charter school
was recognized as having one of
the highest performance ratings
on record, a 97% which indicates
they're taking excellent care of
The minor and major deficiency
summary again. We're really
proud that we are able to assist
other organizations with this
data and and providing
Better informed decisions on
where we need to, uh, provide
training to our new get a recent
training session on May 20th of
this year really focusing on uh,
some of the life safety issues
that were recognizing so we're
using the data to really drive
informed decisions across the
state. Uh, life safety is still
a high topic, and what that has
led to is more and better
outreach to our new Mexico
school districts. Formally a
formal letter is sent out to New
Mexico districts. We want to
know, uh, what Their plan is.
To replace aging facility
systems in the life safety
system category, either through
maintenance and operations or
capital outlay. Uh,
improvements.
A meaningful maintenance metrics
report, uh, that we provide to
New Mexico school districts.
Nothing but data driven. It's it
comes from the use of their, uh,
fins and it's a very powerful
report.
We're still trying to push New
Mexico districts to use this
model because it adds value, its
data driven and it tells the
story, good or bad of how
they're doing in their
maintenance.
With that I stand for any
questions.
Thank you.
Questions. Uh, thank you, mr
Chair.
So my I understand we have a
Statutory provision that allows
us to
Mr Chair. Yes, sir. And Mr
Chair, Mr. Chair, Sony, if
you'll, um
If you like. That's actually my
next presentation,
informational.
Like that.
Job so
Just in time.
Mr Chair members. Item AD in
your books is the update to the
exemplary maintenance criteria
at the council visited last year
For the first time ever. We
approved the exemplary
maintenance criteria for New
Mexico public schools. Of
course, it's provides a
financial incentive.
For New Mexico school districts
that are recognized as driving
exemplary maintenance programs.
In a nutshell. We wanna be able
to give incentive financial
incentive to New Mexico school
districts that are recognized as
extending the life of their
facility. We're really happy
that the criteria was it was,
uh, proved last year, and every
year we wanted to give an update
on the status of potential
districts that might be eligible
as we move towards that two year
mark. Uh, currently we have in
this fourth cycle.
We have now since January of
last year.
We have visited 55 New Mexico
school districts.
206 of the 784 schools have new
FR assessments fresh using the
new criteria.
Currently there are two new
Mexico school districts that
would be eligible at the two
year mark if they continue down
the path of their performance.
Those two districts,
respectively are Clovis
municipal schools.
They have four assessments done
during this cycle and all which
again recognizes they are doing
excellent maintenance. They are
maintaining any investment that
the council may make through.
Capital outlay Very well. They
are very dedicated through
staffing models.
Driving good preventive
maintenance. Um
Asks and getting to their work
orders in a timely manner in
many respects, the second school
district that is
Eligible would be eligible at
the two year mark would be the
Farmington Municipal School
District again, driving four FR
assessments above the 90
percentile range again
recognizing
Excellent stewardship, spare
dollars and really taking And
with that, Mr Chair, Mr Liu, I
stand for any questions.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Thank
you, Mr Closson. For the update
on on both the, uh, maintenance
program and the exemplary
maintenance program.
Um
You may recall a number of years
ago that I asked. You rather
pointed question about whether
any improvements were really
just
Reporting improvements or they
were actually
Uh, substantive.
Improvements in the schools. Uh,
I was skeptical. Quite frankly,
Uh, when we when we, uh not we
PS FA did a lot of this, Um
But I
At the time you may recall.
There were changes to
legislation.
To talk about building systems.
And providing, Um, uh, funding
for building systems, not just
for entire construction like
because we were seeing a lot of
roots. Uh, HVAC systems and and
other
Systems that were just not being
maintained.
Uh, which just added to the
cost, and, um they weren't being
prioritized.
Um
And granted. Some of this
happened after 2008.
When money was short and and
they didn't put the money into
me. They should have they being
the school districts and the
schools. But, um, it's been my
experience the last few years
that we have seen fewer
Issues like that. Come up. We
have some, you know, building
systems that need to be fixed
and like, but
I wanna come in you and PSFP on
I think I've been on it. It's I
can see the difference. And I
appreciate, uh and I hope it
keeps up so that we don't
Uh, an onslaught of schools, you
know?
30 40 50 years. I mean, a change
that we can maintain them. Thank
you, Mister. Chairman, Mr.
Chair. Absolutely appreciate
that comment, Um
This is this is the new Mexico
school districts doing their
work, albeit I do wanna
recognize my staff as as driving
some
Uh, again, that motivation that
that that's not
Was a gentleman in the audience
that noted 100 Year old school.
Does he get any kind of
recognition for that?
It's still up. Hopefully, Mr
Chat will get that one. No, I
have not.
Any other questions coming? All
right, So we're
On to our next meeting, and I
See a conflict? Yes, yes.
Future.
July 18th. Actually, that's my
anniversary wedding. Sony You
look forward to that. OK, Mr
Chair. I guess you gotta you
gotta move it. So we have been
informed that Mr Chair and
members, um, something that we
didn't discuss with the work
plan timeline is that we
Collected as many of your
calendars from your agencies as
we could, and we tried to
Align the meeting so it didn't
interrupt too many things, and
so in doing that, we think that
the 23rd should be available for
all of you.
Um and and I think that's as
good as we can get with the
meetings. You all have.
The weeks prior.
Mr Chair while while you're all
looking OK?
I. I just wanted to point out I
did kind of glaze through. Um,
some of the great work that we
did trying to, um
Minimize changing of schedules
and meetings in that, um
So we tried. We tried to land
the meetings.
During the middle of the week,
Not on a Monday or a Friday. Uh
we tried landing on Wednesdays
whenever possible. And if we
needed to shift we tried to do
it on that Tuesday or Thursday.
Um, being conscious of
How tough the Mondays and
Fridays can be by me, mister
Chair. Um I talked about this a
little bit with stuff when they
brought the schedule. I mean, I
think it's it's best to not move
things around as much as
possible. So and I've been
saying this for a while and
admittedly just haven't gotten
around to it. But, um, we're
gonna seek additional design or,
like additional designee
letters. Um, so, for example, I
am the designee for Secretary.
Um, I'm checking to see if we
and I believe that, uh, legal
counsel at PS F had stated we
could have a second do designee
as well.
That might be a a helpful I
would encourage members to avoid
that as much as possible. But
that would be and that brings to
mind that I think each one of
the subcommittees should have a
we can either appoint them or we
can have the committee. Anything
else.
Objection.
Yeah.
It. Thank you, Mr Chair. OK on
the 23rd. In the meantime, we'll
have subcomittee meetings a week
before Probably Mr Chair and
members will likely need to keep
the subcomittee meeting. Uh,
July entire week of the 15th
through the 19th.
So, uh, Just wanna thank the
staff for all their work and
preparation for this meeting and
Uh, all the other things you're
doing and like the council for
taking time.
To from your busy schedules to
be here and and make schools
happy and
Performing well, so, uh,
entertain a motion to adjourn.
Uh, we have a motion and a
second. All those in favor.
Please indicate by saying I
Get
Over a downtown.
You know, we have We have
