Right.
Let's get a
All the order?
Recording in progress.
Good afternoon, Chairman and
members.
Chairman Farr. Present.
Member Garcia Kozlowski.
Present member Trujillo.
Remember you said?
Anna Silva for Robert Dess?
Thank you, Anna.
Remember Condit?
You
Remember Collins?
Here.
Remember Rayal?
Present
Remember Lucero?
Member Garcia.
President
Remember Landes?
present?
Member Bishop
Member Martinez.
Present
We have a quorum
Right.
Thank you.
So you remember he's read the
agenda, it uh
Motion to approve unless there
are any comments. I wouldn't
move that, Mr. Turner.
So moved or 2nd Kozlowski.
Motion by Meanda.
And second
Mzowski.
All those in favor?
I. Bye.
He posed
Right, and is approved.
4 minutes. Yeah, that's.
His favorite part is reading
board minutes from the last
meeting.
And he suggested edits.
I can get a motion to approve
that.
Mr. Chairman, I moved to
approve.
OK.
Mr. Fernandez, Mr. Garcia.
All in favor?
Right.
OK. Bye.
Right. Did he pose?
Right.
Next up, approval of the
Final amended and restatedun
Enterprise and housing
Development Review Board rules.
No
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before
I turn it over to Ryan, I just
wanted to give a little
backdrop. We have been working
towards these amended rules
since May 2nd when you initiated
the rulemaking process. We have
since gone through public review
and comment on the 20th and 21st
of June, these rules and their
final in their proposed final
form we both before the
commercial development Committee
as well as the housing
Development Committee. Um, there
were different recommendations
coming forward.
So there is a little more
discussion that we're going to
have to have today about uh the
various recommendations coming
forth from the committee.
With that though, I'm gonna turn
it over to Ryan Decker, who will
walk through the public comment
and the final set of proposed
rules.
Thank you, Markia Decker.
Thank you, Chairman and members
of the board. So I know a number
of you have um uh participated
in the prior discussions, the
commercial Development Committee
and also the housing Development
Committee where we reviewed the
public comments we received, um,
uh, I'm gonna go through those
and how um staff's
recommendation to the OEB on uh
how to incorporate those into
the proposed rules, um, before
you today for potential
adoption. So, uh, we received
two sets of uh
public comments, uh, one from
the New Mexico mortgage Finance
Authority or Housing New Mexico,
um, the, those comments were um
largely related to clarifying
definitions, um, and then the
second set of comments was from
the AFL-CIO housing Investment
Trust.
Uh, they proposed creating a
$400 million set aside for a
separate program uh that would
prioritize the creation of union
jobs in the construction
industry.
So in terms of what's been
incorporated, um, we, uh,
largely addressed the uh New
Mexico or housing New Mexico's
suggestions by incorporating new
definitions into the rules,
which I'll go through. There was
one definition that we did not
change. That was the definition
of milk, uh, middle income, um,
uh, as written, there is some
possibility for an overlap in
funding available from this fund
relative to some some of MFA's
programs.
Um, we're not quite sure uh if
there is sufficient sufficient
funding available um at Housing
New Mexico or if there is an
overlap. So what we thought was
we'll leave the definition as
is, and if there is an overlap,
if, if this fund receives an
application for a project that
in fact, one of Housing New
Mexico's programs can uh move
forward with NMFA would refer um
that applicant to Housing New
Mexico for that workforce
development project. So that's
where um
We left that particular um
definitional uh suggestion. All
the others we incorporated as
well into um the company's
policies which are, um, on the
agenda later uh today um for
discussion, including the
definitions of low market
housing employment centers,
infrastructure, and zoning
reforms.
Um, on the second set of
comments received from AFL-CIO,
so a staff determined uh in
terms of the creation of a new
program that would focus on um
you supporting union jobs in the
construction industry, um, that
action stop determined was
really beyond the scope of the
OEB, um, and the statutory
authority of the OEB, um, and
that is why we did not, um,
incorporate that, um, into the
rule. Um, what we have
is looked to in the policy allow
for additional points for
projects, um.
That are addressing some of the
elements that AFL-CIO brought
up.
Um, and what Marquita was
referring to earlier, this, this
particular um uh set of
comments, the housing
Development Committee, um, uh,
advanced.
The rules, uh, with that
recommendation of sack of not to
incorporate that set aside in
the rule, um, the commercial
development committee
um requested that the OEB uh
consider incorporating and rule
that that set aside in that
language proposed by AFL-CIO.
Not be incorporated, I'm sorry,
Mr. Chairman, so yes, we're the,
the commercial Development
Committee recommended that,
that, that the common from the
for the HIT be incorporated and
the housing development
Committee recommended it not be
incorporated. Either way, we
believe that creating a separate
fund is beyond the scope of the
act, and if you'd like to
accomplish the purposes that it
would be most appropriate to add
a set aside to a policy
said that you would only use
this amount of funds, but
relative to the rules, we don't
believe that at this point in
conversation with our council
that that can be incorporated
into the actual I would agree,
right, set aside that wasn't
what they proposed. That's not
what we proposed in past in the
commercial Development Board,
right? We didn't, we didn't.
We, we talked about it set
aside, but that wasn't what.
Resubmitted.
You know
Like two pieces
The Apprenticeship piece.
And then the other 4 pension
investments.
Uh
And like a couple of points.
So that, that was stricken.
By the
Residential
of the committee.
Mr. Chairman, I think, I think
there are two different things
this morning.
Did not get them until I, I, I
contacted Theresa said I didn't.
Oh, I'm sorry, that's that's OK,
so I'm still catching up, so
forgive me if I'm uh a little
clumsy, uh.
As, as we work our way through
this.
Mm
So there were a couple of pieces
that came out of uh the the
commercials.
Mhm.
Right that we submitted that the
pass.
And then I was recommended that
they get stricken on the on the
residential side.
Mr. Chairman, if I could find
just a little bit of context.
There are 3 things today that
are proposed for final adoption.
One is the rule, which provides
the framework for the funding
and the the uh the AFL-CIO um
public comment related to the
rule. There are two other things
that the amended the approval of
the amended policies for the
opportunity enterprise revolving
loan fund, and I think that's
what you're talking about member
condit, and then there's another
a proposed uh set of policies
for the housing development.
revolving fund. So there are
policies that are going forward
as well, and so, and they get
intermingled pretty quickly
intermingled pretty quickly, I
agree, um, so is there a final
version of what, what we are
talking and discussing today
that's completely
Clean and ready, I looked in the
packet I got and I saw different
iterations of the rule that
we've been working on for a
number of months, but is there a
A
Document that has all the
changes in one place.
Uh, or
in the materials, there's a red
line that I haven't.
And the opportunity yet to run
the board through,
but starting on page 18 for the
rule. Um,
And as
So before you is
The amended rule.
Reflecting comprehensive
changes.
Starting on page 18.
Yeah, I'm on
18 with
18, right there. I'm with you.
Thank you. OK.
So the version before you just
um to make sure um it's really
clear.
So, the black
Lines
We um reviewed by the OEB and
that was the version that went
out for public comment. The red
that you see.
There are the suggested changes
that have been incorporated on
the back of the public comments.
This version in its entirety.
Is the the version that was
advanced by the housing
Development Committee.
Incorporating changes that staff
recommended on the back of the
public comments.
I think I'm with you. OK, not
necessarily agreeing, but I, I
think I'm with you and
understand where we're at right
now. I'll walk through um what's
been incorporated, so, uh,
starting on page, um.
One that's a uh uh couple
clerical changes in red there
then on page 19 or page 2 of the
proposed amended rules, um, B,
the new definition of affordable
housing infrastructure project,
suggestion from Housing New
Mexico that uh definition itself
has been pulled from statute.
Um, the other changes in red uh
in in former section B, um,
those were just to conform with
um the changes uh past uh during
the session this year, um, Kay
Enterprise Development projects
similarly, this was an updated
definition um passed during the
session, uh, M Housing
Development Assistance. This is
a statutory definition, um, we
included for clarification
purposes.
Page 22.
Uh, minor clerical, uh,
Change
the housing Development
Committee pointed out, uh, page
23, um.
Uh, again, clarifications, uh,
to the language.
Um, and that is the extent of
the changes that have been
incorporated into rule.
And
It's mud
Um,
I'm going to scroll down to.
Page 109 and look at a different
iteration.
Um, and that I think that's.
I know the
purpose of my lack of
understanding.
Trying to do today.
Mm.
So that version.
on
And Mr. Chairman, if I might,
those are the policies for the
commercial development revolving
fund. That's a different.
That's a different item than the
rules.
That went out for public
comment.
They're all interrelated.
So what I'm looking at here.
Opportunity and uh section
purpose and implementation,
that's your policy start?
That's your policy?
Not the regulation.
That's correct.
That's correct, Mr. Chairman.
And so,
Under the
Um,
That language exists in policy
but not in regulation.
Uh, and I think when you go
further down, it also reflects
that the scoring.
The apprenticeship issue.
Uh, was modified in the
regulation as well.
Mr. Chairman, the scoring is not
in regulation, so that's where
it gets a little confusing. The
scoring provides the framework
and directs into policy how
these, uh, the, the kinds of
criteria that will be considered
in selecting the projects that
move forward. The policy is the
one that actually outlines the
specific elements and assigns
points to them. So the rule
itself just deals with some
definitional things. It shows.
Tes applicants how they'll be
treated, um, describes uh the
general process for uh applying
for funding.
But the actual selection
criteria.
That is, I think, a section 4.1
on today's agenda, and that is
the opportunity, uh, the, the
policies.
Please proceed, I'll listen and
write to it.
Right to
Yeah, I think I got this.
here at about 10 o'clock this
morning.
I'm so sorry. Yeah, me too.
Right, Ms. Decker, you complete
your
Synopsis
Yes, sir, for the only other
thing I'll point out just in the
book in case it's helpful on
page 14 and 15, you'll have the
full text here of the public
comments submitted on rule by
the AFL-CIO uh HIT regarding the
set aside so on page 15, um,
they proposed, uh, to set aside
$40 million and um the language
is, is here, the language that
they proposed. So staff's
understanding from the
commercial Development
Committee.
I was the request that the OEB
consider incorporating this
specific language in the $40
million set aside in and that is
what the HDC declined to
incorporate and uh it is staff's
determination that to do that in
rule would be beyond the
statutory authority of the OEB.
Mr. Chairman, if, if I could.
Um,
I chaired the commercial
development committee and um
It was
The discussion as I recall it
was.
Whether this set aside should
occur in policy or in rule.
And um I, I think what we
recommended was that it be
Placed in rule rather than
rather than policy. Now,
a comment was made by staff that
there was a potential legal
issue with doing it that way and
maybe we need to um hear what
that issue is, um.
But before we make our decision.
Thank you, Mr. Collins.
I'm guessing that the issue was
the fact that it was determined
that the
At you
Didn't allow for that.
Mr. Chairman, that's correct. So
our understanding of the of the
proposal is that a separate fund
be created.
The statute provides for two
funds to be created.
The housing development fund and
the opportunity enterprise
revolving fund. Those are the
only two funds that this board
can oversee.
So that was the substance of the
comment, which is why we believe
that cannot move forward.
However, there is, we think a
path forward to the board wish
to go that direction, to put
into policy uh the potential use
for a set aside as if it were,
for instance, a rule set aside
or affordable housing
infrastructure set aside or some
other kind of set aside. You
could earmark a portion of the
existing fund for that purpose,
but
But as it relates to rules of a
new fund cannot be created by
rule. Thank you, Ms. Russell.
That's how I read the uh
The letter from
American Federation.
Mr. Mr. Chairman, um, would
To create a fund, is that
something that would need to be
done legislatively?
I'm not an attorney, but I would
guess that's the case.
OK.
So I guess that's remember and I
guess uh that's the
The biggest issue we have is uh
We can't create funds that that
have to be done by the
legislature, I guess.
No
Thank you, Mr. Collins, and I,
I, I'm not disagreeing that that
that does, right? But I think, I
think I've stepped back from a
uh uh a segregated fund
completely that
that completely like there were,
there were, there were 3 things.
There were 3 things left over,
right? Um, there was somewhat of
a, I think we discussed it in
the uh commercial board, uh,
kind of a tiebreaking.
Component, uh, and I, I, I think
that was stricken as well.
I don't know if that's unlawful
or
Yeah, what was the rationale
besides
We're removing that. Mr.
Chairman, so that as it relates
to the policy for the
commercial.
Pardon me for the opportunity,
enterprise revolving fund, and I
think we'll be in a better
position to discuss that when we
get to that item because we'll
have people that were actually
responsible for some of that. I
don't mean I don't mean to.
I don't mean to brush that
aside, but Ms. Decker only dealt
with the actual rule and that
concept of the
the I don't I might be a little
bit uh out of sync here. I've
been looking at this thing now
for a couple of hours today and
just trying to put it back into
it.
And
In order I can
Where these things went.
Rational
You know it's, it's a bad policy
or a bad idea.
Um, and to have the discussion.
Right.
So back to
Item number
4.1 regarding the restated
rules. Mr. Chairman, if I may,
um, let me just offer a motion
to approve the final amended
restatedun Enterprise and
housing development vole board
rules as recommended by staff
and the housing Development
Committee.
Thank you, Mr. Garcia. Mr.
Chairman, I've moved a table
that until we kind of get this.
Get this taken down, at least I
can.
Maybe you all do, maybe all the
people on the, on the Zoom
cameras do.
I don't, I, I hope all of you
received your packet you know.
than I did.
Um
I do
Yes.
I don't see it and
and I maybe
maybe when we get to approve all
of these and then go to the next
step I think is premature,
right? If, if we can, if we can
structure the policy as it
relates to the regulation as it
relates to the statute, and but
to prove this without having a
clear understanding of what
actually exists in the policy
and what precedent that the
policy has over the regulation
of the statute.
Right.
Mr. Chair, my name is Susan
Peter. I'm counsel at NMFA and I
was part of the discussion at
the commercial uh development
committee.
Start with your statute that
provides your your legal
authority. We need the
legislature can amend that. It
goes down then from there to
regulations that gives you a
framework over your the program.
From that you
Create your policy, not the,
it's not the other way, Mr. But
they, my, I guess my question is
if my understanding on how the
policy fits together with the
regulation.
Maybe maybe I don't have as many
concerns as.
I feel like I do.
I think
For the policy basically create
the mechanism to implement the
rules and regulations that are
in place.
The framework for the statute.
So
I think it's
I feel it's premature, at least
to my level of understanding.
I mean I think unfortunately, I
don't get to.
Mr. Chair
Yes. My recollection of the
discussion and the request at
CDC was that um AFL-CIO HIT's
requests to include the set
aside in the rule that the OEB
consider that and discuss that.
Otherwise I'm, I'm good with
understanding that the legal
ramifications of doing that
without legislation. So just set
any set aside or or
contemplation of a suicide.
Aside
I want to talk about the
apprenticeship piece and the
other.
Uh, I was always under the
understanding we were trying to
attract resources.
Right.
So we've got a nice $6 billion
fund that is demonstrated some
very serious uh interest and uh.
Investing in the Mexico.
And I
That was the second piece, uh,
that I believe was in the
policy.
Um, that was
as well.
Right, on the
On the uh on the.
And
Union pension fund investment,
that piece.
So Mr. Condit, um, with all due
respect, um.
I'm, I'm glad that the fund is
working well and it's, you know,
just not here.
Well, it's, it's, that's not the
purpose behind this.
Fund in this legislation.
This fund is designed to try to
get money out there for
development purposes.
In association with funds like
that, but not to the exclusive,
you know, use of, of any
particular.
What
We've already conceded that we
are not asking for an exclusive
set aside period or not
what we're saying is that and
let me, let me find it here.
I've got a motion.
How entertain a second.
Mr. Chairman, I'll second the
motion.
Thank you.
Hernandez?
Um,
All those in favor? Wait, what
motion are we on?
Mr.
Chair we had a motion to table.
Did we dispense with that?
His motion superseded yours.
I have a question or comment?
Online?
Heard somebody
Mr. Chair, that this is Anna
Silva. I think I'm a little bit
confused on which motion um we
are uh voting on and um it
sounds like we have a little
bit, sounds like this is the
first time that we're seeing
these documents holistically
with all of these changes as a
board and um I apologize that,
you know, this, I'm coming onto
this board, um, as a
representative for um Mr.
Doucette, so I have read through
the documents.
But have not had an opportunity
to meet with the board, um, on
all of these edits um together,
so I wonder if it is possible
to, uh, as the chair described,
maybe go through each one and
then come back and take a vote
after um.
Or do, do we have to run through
them one at a time, take a vote,
or can we run through each of
the items, um, and then come
back and take a vote
individually.
Uh, thank you, Miss Silva for
your comments. We've got a
motion, we've got a second. We
need to take a vote on that
motion, which is to approve the
rules as amended.
In section 4.1, our agenda.
In the event
Not voted on
You don't get a
Agreement on it and proceed to
whatever comes next.
So we have a motion, we have a
second.
All those in favor?
Hi.
OK
Bye. Bye.
Any opposed?
I
I
Motion passed.
1, Mr. Chairman, if, if I could,
if I could explain my, my vote.
I don't know if this is
appropriate or not.
I, I, I support what member con
and and the hit fund are are
proposing, I think it's good to
have those funds coming to New
Mexico, the issue is that we
can't create a fund. The
legislature creates funds, so I,
I'm reluctant to support him and
initiative that we can implement
because we can't create buttons.
Um,
So, anyway, I just felt it was
important to explain where I was
coming from.
Thank you member Collins, and I
appreciate that sentiment. It's
always good to attract money to
New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, as, as we move on,
I just wanted to know two things
that relate to the rules we move
into the policy, which is there
are two sections in rule. One is
2.93.1.8, which is on page 2 of
your materials, which talks
about the uh what the board
directs shall be in policy
relative to project selection.
So for the commercial side, it's
demonstrate local support and
financial need, create and
expand economic development
opportunities with
In the state contribute to
diversification of the state's
economy, advanced
environmentally sustainable
economic development goals of
the state and other means of
financing a proposed enterprise
development projects are
unavailable or uh insufficient.
So that's as it relates to the
commercial. There's a similar
provision for housing, um, which
is in the new sections.
Um, and that is, sorry, losing
my own thoughts here.
Um,
Which page is that on? Oh, here
it is, uh, section.
2.93.1.15, which is on page 22
and relative to the housing,
it's uh policies shall give
priority to projects that
demonstrate local support and
need, create and expand
attainable housing units within
the state are located in
political subdivisions that have
implemented zoning reforms and
other means of financing or
proposed housing development
project are unavailable or
insufficient. So those are,
that's the, what the rule
directs the policy.
To contain for purposes of
prioritization. So as we move
forward, I just wanted to
mention, you know, the, the
inner connection of the two.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I, I
have a question.
Uh, Ms. Russell on the
commercial development
committee, the 5.1, the review
and approval of the evaluation
of the policy. Um, this is
exactly what was approved at the
committee level, correct?
There's no changes to this? OK.
So this was reviewed and
recommended by the commercial
Development Committee, no
changes. This is just for the
full board to, to, to review
and, and uh
And entertained, correct?
Mr. Chairman, that's correct.
OK.
Thank you, member Garcia.
Ms. Russell.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
again, the two sets of policies
that are coming before you now,
one is the amendment to the
Opportunity Enterprise
Development revolving fund
selection, which we're calling
the commercial prioritization
policies, and this is, I think,
gets to the crux of the issues
that Mr. Condit raised earlier
in terms of the changes. I'll
just remind the board that one
of the things that we have faced
with the commercial development
program is that it's a very
large number of projects that
are eligible.
Under that. And we tried at the
very beginning as we were
looking to see what kinds of
projects, um, you should take
priority over another was to
look to see job creation
ultimately at the end, and we
had an incredibly difficult time
for true spec development it's
Typically you're unable to
determine the kinds of jobs that
may be created. You don't know
the number, you don't know their
wages, and so we had, um, we
were basically giving some
priority for sure to the
developer who knew what kinds of
jobs would be created,
potentially to the contractor,
um, and, but generally not to
necessarily to the future
business occupant as we called
them. And so there there was
less certainty the further you
got down the line and
ultimately, you know, the jobs
that we're gonna be created or
supported.
were some of the most important,
not, not all, but very important
projects. So we proposed uh um
proxies with the um
With with these changes to the
policies, and that is to say
rather than direct job creation,
we would look to the size of the
facility being created, like in
terms of square footage, we look
to the amount of the investment.
And the industry that's being
supported so that we could look
for both the proxies for direct
job creation and spin-off jobs,
and that is, that was the, the
driving force behind the
recommendations that are before
you today, because as we heard
from applicants, it's incredibly
difficult for you to determine
what the ultimate number of jobs
that we're going to be created,
what kinds of wages might be
supported.
Some of them kind of guessed and
made it up, and others said, I
don't know and got 0 points for
it. And so it was the big, it
was the biggest area of concern
from, from applicants and
frankly from reviewers. So that
was the area we were trying to
address um in the changes that
are before you today and I just.
Just by way of a reminder before
I turn it over to my colleagues,
Mr. Brooks and Mr. Dub.
Yeah, I, I recall a lot of those
conversations.
Yeah, gentlemen.
So Mr. Chairman and and board
members, which you see before
you are the um the revised
policies for the uh commercial
prioritization policies, um,
just in a way of background, uh
staff conducted on several, uh,
conversations with uh local
economic development reps, um,
various applicants, uh,
representatives from um
municipalities and counties, um,
and so, and some of their uh
and economic development.
Um, area, uh, agencies, and in
those conversations, we
developed and and took in uh
some of the changes that they
recommended uh for these
particular policies in order to
spur on economic development uh
through this particular fund.
And so today, um, after we
presented these original
policies and at the June OEB
board meeting and in which
outlined some of the, the
recommended changes and then we
took it back out for a public um
uh review period and now with
the combination of those
comments and and the comments
from the public uh review
period, we are proposing the
final draft of of these
particular policies, and I will
uh turn it over to
colleague, uh, Brian Dubbo to
kind of go through some of those
some of those items.
Thank you, JB, um.
Chairmanar members of the board,
um, the item before you uh for
discussion, uh, is, uh, the
proposed revised Opportunity
Enterprise revolving fund OERF
commercialization prioritization
policies.
Um, a little further background,
this memorandum, uh, and the
documents uh in your board books
discusses the proposed revised
Opportunity Enterprise revolving
fund commercialization or
commercial prioritization
policies.
The policies were reviewed and
approved by the uh Opportunity
Enterprise Review Board, um, and
were then made available uh.
Or public review and comment.
The staff received feedback from
the public as well as NMFA
stakeholders and incorporated
some changes, including one
clarifying the evaluation of the
training and apprenticeship
metric.
To dividing the total square
footage into 4 ranges for more
precision.
And 3 aligning as much as
possible the definitions with
legislation and OE housing
policies. The updated table in
your book, uh presented here
reflects the changes.
The proposed changes to the
policy parameters include the
removal and addition of
definitions, preference for New
Mexico-based developers.
Changes to the evaluation
criteria for the community
impact and support.
Valuation of project location
and building type.
And changes to the evaluation
criteria for application need
and readiness.
The recommendation is for the
approval of the revised
commercial prioritization
policies based on the changes to
the OERF legislation and I will
just add one other thing, uh, as
a little repeat, uh, these are
the same exact, um, um.
Allies that were presented uh in
the committee meeting, um.
that we just had, uh, and so,
uh.
The committees have seen this
and some of you have seen these
uh these documents as well.
With that, Mr. Chairman, staff
does recommend approval of these
uh these policies. Thank you,
Mr. Brooks and Mr. Dub.
Mm
Any comments from the members.
Mrs. Sherman.
Mm.
This is Anel, I have a quick
question. Um, thank you very
much for the um report. Was
there any um consultation with
the Department of Workforce
Solutions regarding prevailing
wage and uh contractors and
their responses and reporting to
determine um, you know, what,
uh, how many um employees were
going to be, um, staffed per job
just to help with some of these
numbers.
Mr. Chair, um, members Silva,
uh, we did not reach out to
workforce development on, on
those particular items, but we
did um speak to um the economic
development department and also
we spoke to um other um
Um,
Officials in in regards to that
particular item and and they
were all comfortable with the
metrics that we were using.
Thank you. um, Mr. Chair, just
wondering if we are looking at
um adding new scale as a square
footage um of a project as a um
as a metric, I just don't see
the uh correlation between, uh,
being able to capture, uh, how
that would, uh, determine the
amount of employees or um the
number of um jobs that we would
be increasing per
Footage if we are not um
You know, getting a Department
of Workforce Solutions maybe
they could have.
So uh
To me
Ask a clarifying question member
Silva.
Are you saying that the other
folks within the
Government that had been
consulted.
have no bearing to weigh in on
this.
I'm sorry, what was the
question? I can Mr.
Brooks.
stated that they
spoken with other departments,
including economic development
department and others.
Are you saying that they have no
bearing on this? They have, they
have no say.
Oh, Mr. Chair, no, absolutely
not. I was just wondering
because one of the um criteria
was they add a new scale for
square footage of the project,
so increase the um square
footage of a project because
they couldn't determine um what
the increase in staff or jobs
would be so we're using square
footage as a metric. I was just
wondering if um anyone spoke to
Department of Workforce
Solutions, so when there are uh
jobs
are reported to workforce
solutions, anything $60,000 and
above, um, the contractors have
to then report through their
prevailing wage, um,
documentation, all of the uh all
of the employees that they have
on particular jobs. So I'm just
wondering if a metric was used
to capture uh the increase in
jobs and opportunities if we
reached out to the Department of
Workforce Solutions. That's the
question. So,
I'm not an economic developer.
I'm not a developer, but I can
tell you square footage of the
project makes a difference.
Which is why every
City that I'm aware of has
zoning codes for parking.
To establish some sort of an
idea of many employees and
visitors and staff are gonna be
there.
So it does have a bearing, and
if they've already spoken with.
The economic development
department and others, I think.
I'm good with it. Mr. Chamu, if
I may just to clarifying point
for Miss Miss Silva, was, is
your real concern that we're,
we're not gonna be able to fully
report the jobs created out of
the program, is that, was that,
is that the point?
That's correct. Yeah, OK. So I
think the point is that we just
want to be able to measure how
much jobs are created to report
out to whomever, whether,
whether it's workforce
development or whoever.
Um,
So my, my suggestion is, if I
may, Mr. She, I, I don't know if
this is necessarily a policy,
but maybe a directive to staff
to say to make sure that we can
track jobs created by projects,
and that's something that they
could, they could track
separately. That's not, it
doesn't necessarily need to be
in policy.
Is, is that fair?
That make sense?
Mr. Chair, that makes sense.
OK, I, I misunderstood your
question or your comment.
Um, they're already reporting in
their application how many jobs
they expect, correct?
Um, Mr. Chair, that is correct.
So they have an estimate of how
many jobs they're going to uh
create and then through the,
through the construction period
and the life of their um um
program, we will expect that
they will report to us at least
on the annual basis, the amount
of jobs that are created.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
Um, remember so what is that?
Satisfy your concern?
Yes, it does. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Miss Turman, that's a
requirement that they report
these job numbers, Mr. Chairman,
so yes, so we will ask, we do
ask questions in the application
that don't directly relate to
the to the prioritization we
collect basic data and that data
then we, we will track all the
way through. So job creation is
one of those elements. We'll be
looking ultimately at the
project cost and whether they um
the ultimate benefit of
beneficiary.
Of the uh proposed project. So
we're gonna track through to the
completion till somebody's
actually in that building,
who's, you know, what we're
gonna track from where they
expect it to be, to where they
ended up.
From their application to the
ultimate use.
Mr. Chairman, no, that's gonna
be, that's, that's part of our
standard operating procedures.
Mr. Chairman, yes, and, and we
could certainly amend our rules,
the loan fund rules, which you
will consult on at the next
board meeting, um, to include
that specific compliance
element, we're happy to do that
so that it's crystal clear to
you all and to the applicants
ultimately that we will be
tracking that compliance item.
That's, that's an easy answers,
one other question related to
that, aren't we required to
annually report to the
legislature on jobs created in
those sorts of.
Metrics
Um, Mr. Chair, that is correct.
So we would report to the over
the NMFA oversight committee,
the jobs that are created um in
this particular program. And,
and so it's really, it
technically is a requirement
anyway for us to collect that
data to be able to provide that.
Great. Thank you. Mr. Chairman,
if I may, uh, make a motion.
Um,
A motion to approve the
evaluation and prioritization.
Policy for the opportunity
enterprise revolving fund. I
think that's great, 5.1. Just a
reminder to the full board that
this was unanimously approved at
the committee level as well.
Thank you, Mam Garcia.
I get a second?
This is Anna Silva all 2nd.
Thank you.
All those in favor?
Bye bye.
Bye.
The opposed?
Motion passes.
Right.
Housing Development Committee
review and approval of
evaluation and prioritization
policy.
Ms. Decker.
Thank you, Chair, our members of
the board. So before you today
are um uh proposed evaluation
and prioritization policy for
the housing uh fund.
Um, we reviewed these with the
housing Development Committee
incorporated one suggestion, um,
that I'll point to, um, and
otherwise that um housing
development committee approved
um these policies in this form,
um, they incorporate uh public
comments received a set of 10 of
them uh during uh the public
comment hear hearing uh public
comment period. um, and those
are summarized for you on, um.
A uh 70.
Yeah, 76 and 72 of the packet
that you all received on Monday.
Um,
I'm gonna go ahead and if you
don't mind the the packet also
contained full uh full set of
public comments. Um, if it's OK,
I'm gonna ask if we could move
to page.
115.
This would be the, the final
proposed red line version, um,
also that the housing
Development Committee
recommended for approval,
including the one change that
I'll point to. So, and going
through, um, just summarizing
the comments, um, you'll see the
definitional inclusion, um, and
some, uh, uh, conforming with
statute on some of the
definitions on the page there of
115 on page 116, you can see
where um definitions, uh,
clarifying definitions as
recommended.
by Housing New Mexico have been
incorporated on below market
housing and employment centers,
uh, specifically.
Uh, also the clarifying
definition of, uh, for
infrastructure.
Um,
And we wanted to point to, we
adopted the or the recommended
the definition for that housing
New Mexico recommended, uh,
including under uh sub bullet 8
there under M um just emphasize
the electrical transmission and
distribution facilities that
does include renewable energy
infrastructure. Um, on page 117,
so we clarified um instead of
total development cost, it's
total project cost.
That's looked at um later in the
policy, we refer to project cost
and um we clarified that um
planning costs and
pre-development costs can be
included in total project costs,
um, also including costs for
market studies. Um, so there
were several comments we
received from public that um
particularly for nonprofit
developers that sometimes
pre-development costs can be um
a challenge so um while this um
fund cannot um fund those with
grant funding in
Advance, um, it is an eligible
reimbursable cost for um
projects that receive funding.
On page 118, that's the
incorporation of the clarifying
definition of zoning reforms.
Um, on page 19, so community
need and alignment, um, one of
the major changes we
incorporated here um in
increasing the amount of points,
uh, a project can receive in
this category from 35 to 40, um,
5 were taken from the next
section fund efficiency, and
that additional 5 points are
awarded to um subsection here, a
see projects that directly
support a registered New Mexico
apprenticeship program or other
approved.
Training initiatives are awarded
points, so that's an additional
5 points that projects
demonstrating those
characteristics can receive.
Um, staff noted that
apprenticeship and and union
jobs, those are not.
Um, prioritize or or
highlighted, um, anywhere in
statute, um, or now in rule, um,
but we did seek to address some
of that feedback that we
received in public comment both
in the rule and the policy by
allowing those projects to
receive additional points. Um,
section B, fund deficiency, so
that um section came down from
30 to 25 um due to the, the new
category we created, um, under
B1.
Um, fund leverage, um, just
highlighting, um, and this was
on the back of some comments
received that um uh secured
commitments can be also from um
public.
Um, entity. So for example, if a
city were to donate land to a um
affordable housing project.
Um, that that, uh, that
infrastructure project could
could consider such type of
public resource donated for that
project as um in the leverage
calculation and in the total
project.
Supportive land use practices um
further down on page 120 that's
just some clarifying, uh,
language, uh, 121.
Um, so project limitations, so
there were a couple comments,
um, pointing to a need for
funding for smaller scale
projects, um,
uh.
One comment suggested reducing
this project limitation per
project limitation all the way
down to 5 to 7 million per
project, um, another respondent
just highlighted the need for um
funding for projects that were
smaller than 2 million, um, the
housing development committee um
felt like, um, perhaps a
reduction might make sense, but
um something down to 10 million
which was staff's initial
recommendation, um, my, um,
might
Leave, leave out opportunity to
fund larger um uh projects that
were really satisfying, um,
housing needs that this fund was
created to support. So, um, they
recommended uh 15
million as a um cap um for
housing development assistance
that one project could receive.
Um, in terms of, uh, so next
page 122, you'll see um the new
section training apprentice
apprenticeship, and we've
incorporated um uh 5 points for
projects that um demonstrate
that they're supporting
registered New Mexico
apprenticeship programs.
Um, we also highlighted, um, uh,
that, um, rehabilitation of
vacant facilities, um, also, um,
projects that are, that are
accomplishing that um are
considered, um, that is
considered redevelopment
activity that could, um, a
project could receive points in
that category. Page 123. Um,
this is where you'll just see,
oh, and my apologies, there's a
um.
Typo here, um, we'll have to
adjust the um sub bullets there,
um, because it says 15 points as
the max in this entire section
has come down to 10 points
instead of 15.
So I'll have to make that
adjustment.
Um,
But this is coming down because
those 45 points were
incorporated into the previous,
um, the previous section.
On page 124, um, project
readiness. So, um, we've
clarified that projects do not
need to have complete architects
and engineering uh plans, uh, so
those plans don't have to be
completed when an applicant
submits an application, they can
have at that point a schematic
set of construction plans.
On page 125 under the section
Supportive land use practices,
um, we highlighted that under
varied housing types, projects
integrating affordable below
market and market rate housing,
um, uh, fall into that category
where they would be eligible for
that 5 points.
Um, and lastly, on page one.
27, um.
Uh
1 point may be awarded for um uh
evidence if
Evidence of expedited permitting
and shovel-ready development
sites, and that was a um housing
New Mexico pointed to that um
aspect of uh zoning reforms, not
evidence. So those were all the
um changes that were
incorporated, uh, the housing
Development Committee reviewed
and discussed these and um uh
recommended adoption, um, uh.
Including that change from uh
20 million is the maximum for a
project to 15 million per
project. And I believe the
housing Development Committee
also pointed to that um point
error on page 123. My apologies
for missing that in this final
version before you for. Um, page
127, support of land use
practices is also a typo.
Within
Doesn't have a G on it.
Oh yeah.
Thank you Jeffer.
Mr. K, OK.
Was for a friendship within the
that's right we also gave.
I have a question. Yes, sir, uh,
the, the rationale behind 5
points awarded for a local
developer versus any developer.
And why wouldn't we expand that
to contract.
I mean,
Maybe I'll look at this
differently than some of the
bankers in.
So you're gonna have a developer
that'll hire contract.
So the local developer.
That
Is
A local developer under this
proposal gets 5%, 5 points.
A developer from Phoenix gets
fever.
So we're not trying to attract.
With that, with what's the
rationale besides.
Why are we trying to
Uh,
Subsidized
The local development.
Not that I have anything to do.
I guess
Right, but if we're trying and
we have this.
Yes
Incredible challenge in front of
us that we're trying to address,
right?
we don't, we're not gonna give.
Everybody at even playing field,
what we're going to do is local
developers, which there are very
limited number of them that are
actually based.
So we're excluding by 5 points.
I mean, it's not.
You know,
I get into discussions with
people that chase these things.
They're shooting for 100 points.
They want all of them. They're
not gonna leave any on the
table, and some of them are
pretty competitive.
So I don't know where that came
from or what's the rational of
this board, I'm saying.
What we want is we want to
prioritize local developers, but
not local contractors or even
craft workers.
I mean if it's, if it's a thing.
Uh, about trying to support
local entities.
Why does it stop with this?
And then it just
Do you remember kind of? So Mr.
Chairman, um, the, the set aside
the extra points for the local
developers addresses a um a
public comment we received at
the May 2nd meeting, I believe,
uh, from, I think the Home
Builders Association that they
wanted to
Encourage more development in
state and those developers that
are here are generally staying
here. That was the concept.
We're not certain at the time
that somebody applies here that
they'll necessarily know who
their contractor is.
So, because many of them won't
go out to bid till they have all
their funds or so they lined up
their capital. So we had a
difficult time trying to
determine, we did talk about
this because we do.
Um, want to encourage and
incentivize construction
companies to grow and stay in
New Mexico. Absolutely, we face
that shortage, um, but we
weren't sure how we would, we'd
get back to that sort of future
business occupant, if at the
time you apply, you don't know
who you're going to use as your
contractor, it gets very
difficult. You're, you're
playing a guessing game and some
people will say they're doing it
and if they don't, what happens?
So we got into it, we we didn't
know how we'd score those.
That's ultimately.
Why we did not include that set
aside. I was a little like the
PRC and, you know, we're gonna
build here as required by law,
except those people defaulted,
so now we're, we don't have to
do that anymore.
Yeah, well, I don't know
somehow,
maybe I have to digest it.
Mr. Chairman, if I could, um,
If, if we could go to page 122.
In the, the scoring grid.
Under local preference, it shows
points will be awarded to
projects that are developed and
contracted.
By New Mexico businesses.
So in this section, it appears
that
If you have both a a local
contractor and a local
developer, you get 5 points. I
guess if you had a local
contractor in an out of state
developer, you get 2.5 points.
Am I reading that right?
So Mr. Chairman, um,
The developer has to be local to
get the 5 points.
This is developed in contracted.
122. 122.
We certainly can take out that
that language if we think it is
confusing, but it's in, cause
again, we did discuss this at
some length at at the staff
level, um, because we, we are
aligned with Mr. Condon's
reasoning, uh, but we have a
difficult time understanding
that at the time of application,
how they would know necessarily
who is ultimately going to be
the contractor.
to Mr. Collins's point, um,
If it's both developed.
And contracted they get 5 points
here and if it's developed to
get another 5 points later.
Mr. Chairman, it's the only 5
points they get is this, this is
the only section. So we can take
out the end contracted by I
think that's going the wrong
direction.
Agreed. I like the contracted in
there. I, I think it's important
to hire local contractors. I
think that's more important than
hiring local developers.
Um,
is where I'm at, if we have to
strike one, I'd strike
developed.
But I, I like having a local
contractor, um.
In the local preference.
Mr. Chairman, we would certainly
agree again, what do you do
though if they don't know who's
going to ultimately be the
contractor?
Well, if they want the points,
they commit to using a local
contractor.
We're happy to change it. Any
other comments from other
members. Mr. Chair, um, we could
also ensure that it's um in line
with state statutes, state
procurement code.
That the local preference is in
line with the Mexico procurement
code.
Yeah, I don't wanna.
I don't want to go down that
road.
The idea behind this is to be
flexible and convenient and make
it easy, adding more rules where
they've got a
you get out of state developers
come in and figure out what the
Mexico procurement.
OK. Just a local preference
here, um, could mean something
different if it's um local
preference for New Mexico
procurement code. That's, that's
just all I'm saying. I think Mr.
Chairman, what I'm hearing is
that we should reword this to to
have it be clear about who gets
the points. Our, we responded
initially from staff.
staff's proposal was a response
to the homebuilders Association
that they wanted local
developers to receive some
additional points, um, we're
happy for it to be either or
both, um, may I make the
recommendation to change it to
either?
Developed or contracted.
Gives
Most opportunity for people to
Get people involved from New
Mexico without penalizing them
if they're uh modest state.
Mr. Chairman, how about we split
it and go 2.5, 2.5.
2.5 for the developer, 2.5 for
the contractor.
Mr. Chair, I think, you know,
along the lines of, of what was
just proposed, maybe if we just
change the word end to or.
Um, with, with guidance given
that partial points can be given
for just being contracted or, I
mean, but then you get into
issues where
Is it one of the contractor? Is
it one of the contractors
working on the project, or is it
all of them? Um,
And, and to Ms. Russell's point,
many of those decisions won't
have been made, and it might
determine how do we claw back
that money if, if those, if
that's not actually fulfilled
and followed through with later
on the execution of the project.
Um, it's just a slippery slope,
um.
And as a local developer, um,
Our tax dollars and profits stay
here and get reinvested here out
of state developers' profits
don't, um, that's why I
sincerely and, and at least I'm
biased, but I believe um
preference should be given to
local businesses. We have a lot
of state-funded projects that
are taxpayer funded that
disproportionately benefit out
of state companies and, and all
of those um earnings leave the
state and don't stay here.
Mr. Chair, I have a question,
um, regarding the local
preference, are we stating that
the local preference, um, the
vendor must be a resident, they
must have an address, their
corporate headquarters are in
New Mexico.
What is local preference mean?
Well, that's a good question.
So Mr. Chairman, we'll certainly
add that to FAQs. Our goal was
to get New Mexico people
registered in New Mexico that
operated in New Mexico that pay
their.
Taxes in New Mexico.
Mr. Chairman, if I may, maybe,
maybe to remember bishop's
point, um, let's say you have a
$10 million project.
Um, and say you have a developer
and then a
That's in-state and then a
contractor that's out of state
is the total profit.
Then have to be taxed at that at
that 10 million.
Or so what I'm saying is we want
the most amount of tax dollars
to be staying here, whereas if
it was the opposite, if it was a
local contractor and an out of
state developer. My guess is
that's less taxes here. I, I
think the preference would
probably be for the developer,
if the net tax is on the
developer, not the contractor.
The net, the net highest tax,
correct?
You follow Mr. Bishop,
am I correct?
Well, I, I won't pretend to be
the uh the corporate tax um
expert. Um, I do believe that,
um, where the work is completed,
they'll have to pay, um, I don't
think anybody is gonna be able
to get away from paying their
necessary, obviously gross
receipts tax, um.
You know, a, a local in New
Mexico-based developer is gonna
pay um
Either pass through or corporate
income tax, um, and, you know,
the, the, the issue is, is I, I,
the issue for me is less about
the where the taxes are cause I
don't necessarily know that it's
a huge tax change one way or the
other, um, I'll defer to staff
on that and that might be
something to come back with if
that's important for
consideration. For me, it's more
about where the profits stay and
where the investments stay. Um,
and I think the Mexico
developers, those profits get
reinvested in the state at a
higher
percentage than say a Phoenix
developer who wants to come in
and just build 3, 300
apartments, um, and then they
never make another investment in
the state.
Yeah, I would agree. I, I would
agree that the developer might
be the the preferred emphasis.
If we're gonna emphasize one
over the other.
OK.
Any other member comments?
Well, I, I, I disagree with
that. I think the contractors,
the critical piece, that's the
one that's hiring all the, all
the local workers and
And um
You know, the, the developers
won one and done, you know, with
those contractors, I, I think
those dollars turn a lot more in
the local economy, but that's
My opinion.
So McCollins, how would you
address the point of you
sometimes don't know the
contractors themselves.
Until you have the funding lined
up.
Well, I, I think they, they
commit to using a local
contractor when they submit the
package if they want the points.
And to me that's a more
desirable.
I mean, the whole reason that
we're having a point system is
to
Encouraged deals that are shovel
ready and ready to go and
utilize local contractors,
utilize local um developers and
those things. So if someone's
got a hot project and they want
to for sure get the financing
and they want to get 100 points.
Well then, use a local
developer, use a local
contractor and commit to it on
the front and do it and um and
you'll get all the points.
Um,
You know, if, if you want to
have that flexibility of, well,
you want to use an out of state
develop or out of state
contractor, well then you're
gonna leave some points on the
table to have that flexibility.
To member Bishop's point, um,
there's no clawback if they
don't use a local contractor,
so.
It's kind of tough to
Hold them to that.
There's no, Mr. Sherman, there's
no clawbacks in any of them.
True, there's not 0, right? They
default, I guess they default,
that's it, yeah, true.
Uh, we've dealt with local local
contractor preference laws. We,
we advocated them for many, many
years, right? Basically, uh, a
business for Mamoroa can come in
here and, and register in New
Mexico and they're registered
Mexico contract.
I mean it's not
For a Phoenix contractor to come
into Albuquerque and saying, all
right, here's my PO box that uh
7107.
I
I mean
I don't know the description of
what that is, a traveling
developer or a local developer.
5 points, you know.
5 here and 5 there pretty soon
here.
You're talking about enough
points to potentially sway.
Mm.
Qualifying for some of these
resources.
Thank you, Makanda. My
And it just general thought
leave it the way it is, let's
see how it works and we can
tweak it as we go on later. Any
other member comments?
Mr. Chair, I have another
comment, but not on this section
here. OK. Um, any other comments
about this, Mr. Chairman, just
to make sure we're tracking from
our perspective, so are we
taking out the phrase and
contracted and just leaving it
projects developed. And they
could just leave it the way it
is and.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um,
Unless there's any other
comments, I think we need a
motion to approve.
Mr. Chair, I have another
comment. OK.
Um, on page 117, uh, item W
total project cost.
Um, right now, um, as, uh,
Right now we're saying planning,
acquiring, constructing,
renovating, um, but we do not
have a design in here, so
propose um adding design.
Design, comma, planning,
acquiring and constructing.
Designing as part of
Capital projects, Mr. Chairman,
that's consistent with, with
staff's intentions, so we're
happy to add that definition.
OK.
No objection. Any other?
Comments from members on that
point.
I support that edition as well,
Mr. Chair. Mhm.
In in the Mr. Chair and the
committee um meeting, we
discussed that intent and and
thought planning encapsulated um
design fees, um, but I don't
pick it certainly hurts to make
it clear um that design fees
would be incorporated.
Thank you. Sounds like we're in
agreement.
Mhm.
Mr. Chair, I do have a, just a
clarifying point for myself on
the, on the whole policy, if I
may ask a question for Steph.
Yeah,
um.
So just as I want to present a
hypothetical, say a project, um,
is only housing infrastructure,
and it doesn't, it doesn't do
any dwelling. Is that possible
under the policy and
And kind of evaluation.
That it's strictly only housing
infrastructure.
Do you understand the question?
I believe I do. So if it it it,
yes, it could just be
infrastructure, Mr. Chairman,
for affordable, that's all it
can be for workforce you could
have lined up the, the, the
vertical construction funding
from someplace else, and we
could fund just infrastructure
with the with these dollars. So
yes, under, under everything
we're doing here, it could just
be an infrastructure project.
Chairman, that's correct. OK.
Thank you.
Any other comments?
Mr. Chairman, I just want to
circle back to one item which is
on the fund efficiency, which um
where we had a total of 15
points initially but didn't make
the adjustments, wanted to what
we believe we're doing is if
it's 10% or less, they'd get the
maximum of 10 points. If it's
greater than 10%, but less than
25%, it would get 7.5 points and
then uh if it's more than 25%
but less than 35% they get the 5
points, and then nothing after
that.
So we just prorated it rather
than a 5 point increments in 2.5
point increments.
Make it nice and easy to
calculate.
All right. I appreciate that.
Any other comments or questions?
I get a motion to approve as
best.
Motion to approve as amended.
One second.
Uh, who's that?
Remember Bishop with the motion.
And I seconded
Thank you. Um, all those in
favor?
All right.
Any post?
Great. Motion passes.
Mm
structuring policy?
So Mr. Chairman, this is the
first of um
one of the wrong section. Um,
this is the first of the
comments of the consultation
that the finance authorities
required to conduct with the OEB
um regarding rules and policies
that we establish.
Get to the final item, um, so
our goal here today is to start
the conversation on where we
believe we're heading with our
structuring policy and rule for
the housing development
revolving fund, um, and, uh,
what we'll do from here, it's a
little more complicated because
they're the final uh rules for
the housing development
revolving fund have to be
approved by the Finance
Authority Board of Directors and
by the New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight Committee.
And they, we have to consult
with the opportunityity
Enterprise Board. So there's a
bunch of different steps that
have to be taken. I've left for
several of you in person, a copy
of what looks like it'll be an
ultimate schedule that I'll go
through at the end, but there's
a lot of different stops and
I'll, I'll bring it up for this,
uh, for the folks after we've
gone through just the general
discussion of what we're
currently looking at, but what
we anticipate doing is having
another meeting in early August,
which allows us to final
our consultation, or required
consultation with you to set the
parameters for the first round
of applications to set the
schedule for the year for the 3
applications we anticipate
opening, um, and
Then allow us to then open an
application like very early
September. That's the current
goal and I'll go over that
schedule again at the end. But
in the meantime, this is brand
new to the opportunity
Enterprise. A lot of folks are
listening and are interested in
where we're heading with the
policy, uh, structuring policies
and rules, so, um, Mr. Brooks
and his colleagues talked to the
housing development committee
about the general concepts of
what we were thinking and
We wanted to have that
conversation in a more public
setting, so that when it comes
back for consultation uh in a
couple of weeks, there's been
enough public discourse and
airing of this that it's not a
surprise to anyone. So that's
the reason for this. It's not a
an approval item today, it's an
information item only, and
again, as much sunlight as we
can put into the process. I
think it'll help ultimately get
to a better program, so.
Um, and Ms. Russell, I would say
that I applaud that because
there's a lot of people
watching.
And they'll be texting if
they're not.
Um, Mr. Mr. Chairman and, and
board members, so what you see
before you is an informational
item as Marquita um described.
This is the outline of what we
think are going to be the loan
structuring policies for the
housing development revolving
fund.
Um, what
With staff did is consulted with
the board and the rules and what
we're looking to do is put
together what we use as the
structure for the uh to make
loans in this particular
program.
In the loan structure and
guidelines that that are on
pages 128, beginning on 128 and
129 outlined some of the ideas
that staff has put together uh
for this particular, uh, um, um
loan program, we did uh staff
did have conversations with the
uh the.
Mortgage Finance Authority, um,
and, and their lending staff and
also and and and also other um
Um, experts in, and lending in
this space to come up with some
of these guidelines, which
you'll see um is uh a particular
loan amount and not to exceed
$15 million the use of proceeds
to include the proceeds for
workforce housing projects of
proceeds for affordable,
affordable housing,
infrastructure projects, and how
to um to assess developer fees.
Um, and I see, uh, loan terms,
uh, for three different types of
structures, uh, single family
loans, multi-family home loans
and infrastructure loans. Item D
talks about prepayment penalty
which we are not proposing any
um item E is proposed debt
service coverage uh requirement
for this uh particular um
Uh fun
The proposed interest rates in
item F, uh, which is going to be
set at 60% below the prevailing
rate of um.
Of the Wall Street Journal prime
rate, I think we're using and
then um item G, uh, the loan uh
loan to value requirement, and
we're expecting a loan to value
up to 75% um of the fair market
appraisal value, uh, equity
requirement and item H, which is
a 10% equity item.
I I, uh, personal and corporate
guarantees are going to be
required for this particular
program and it outlines um what
members uh would be required to
have a a guarantee, and then uh
uh item J uh credit history and,
and evaluation of credit
history, then, uh, item number 2
would be the reporting and
monitoring of the uh the loans
that we were made, uh, some of
these items will be.
They're dressed in um loan
agreements that we make with the
borrowers or um in the policies
itself.
And so Mr. Chair and board
members, this is the
informational item and I stand
for any uh questions or one that
we'd like to point out is one of
the, uh, my colleagues that
presented this item uh a week or
a few weeks ago or a week ago.
Yeah, a week ago they made an
amendment uh to change the
construction period from 2 years
to 3 years on the maximum loan
term under item C, and that was
based on a comment at the
committee at that time.
With that, I, I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Brooks.
Do we have any questions or
comments?
Mr. Cherry, I, I have one just
My question is, why, why 15
million is the limit?
That was part of a discussion
that was had uh originally it
was 10 million, then it was
discussed to move it to 20 then
with as much interest that we
have in it right now, it was
brought back to 15 million.
Um,
And we can tweak that as we move
forward and that's the, that's
the great part about having
these as guide.
Mr. Chairman, I, I think these
are some generous terms of, you
know, 75% of appraised value,
not 75% of cost.
Only 10% equity uh requirement
10% of the loan amount.
I mean, 60% of prime, these are,
these are great terms, I mean.
I, I think these are fantastic
so.
That's my comment. The whole
idea to encourage people to
build more.
Heck yeah, I think this does
that.
Mr. Chairman, they're, they're
consistent with the commercial
um program as well. We tried to
keep the interest rate the same,
so that there wouldn't be a lot
of confusion if in fact there's
a, a mixed use project where
they might be looking for both
spec space and housing, we
wanted to make sure they were
consistent as possible.
Oh thank you.
Any other comments or questions?
Right.
See none. Do I have any public
comment?
Mr. Chairman, if I could just
run through the.
Schedule so that everyone's on
the same page on what we, what,
what has to happen next.
Um,
And again, several of you have
this in person. So, uh, our
What will happen next is that
the finance authority board of
directors will review a final
set of of loan rules and and a
draft set of policies.
Um,
At its, I'm sorry, it's meeting
in a week or two on July 25th.
Um, the final rules that you
approved today will become
effective if we file them timely
on July 31st, so we'll have
actual rules in place.
We'll then be able to um on
August 8th is our proposed
schedule right now for the next
Opportunity Enterprise board
meeting, where you can do a a
more formal consultation on the
loan rules and review the loan
policies. You don't, you're not
required to consent there or to
consult there, but we think it's
consistent with the spirit of
the law, review the application
and as I mentioned earlier, set
the parameters for how much
you'll allow for the first
application, if any, on the, if
you're gonna restrict it at all
on the housing development fund.
Our oversight committee meeting
uh is currently scheduled on
August 12th and 13th. They have
to approve the set of rules as
well. So we have to consult with
you, the oversight committee has
to approve the set of rules and
the finance Authority board has
to as well.
So we hope to have that board
approval at the end of August,
um, in the meantime, we'll be in
a position to start doing our,
our, uh, outreach, putting
together the materials so that
we can do webinars and other
things, open an application in
September.
Early September, we have it
currently scheduled for
Wednesday, September 4th, um, we
would then go on, have a six
week application for the 1st 1st
period.
A couple of weeks to prioritize
those, the board would meet
again and
Roughly on November 21st.
You would approve the priority
list, look at any amendments to
the policies, make sure there
was not any bias that you were
not intending to have in there.
Um, and then ultimately open the
application again on January 8th
of a five week period.
approve the list at the end of
March.
And have the last application um
on at the end of April through
the end of May, a 4-week period.
So 1st 16 weeks, cause it's very
new.
It would be much easier for
people to get an application
together by 5 weeks, there might
be some modifications to policy
when given a little more time,
but certainly by the last
application period, they should
have that ready to go in 4
weeks. That's the concept here 3
application periods during the
fiscal year, um, and with enough
time, our goal is to have this
as part of our outreach
promulgated so everyone knows
the timelines, that there is no
surprises, and it would be
consistent for both the
commercial development fund and
the housing development.
fund, and that is, that's the
proposal, we'll sign off on that
at the next meeting, but I
wanted to give people a flavor
because as we talked about
earlier.
There's a lot of interrelated
pieces. We, the finance
authority will be operating
under 3 sets of rules and 4 sets
of policies for the for the work
that you all do, um, and the
work that we ultimately have to
do. So it's pretty complicated,
um, if it's confusing, there's a
reason, and so just wanted to
kind of line that out for folks
because there's a lot going on
here.
Thank you, Ms. Russell. I
commend you and your staff for
putting all this together and I
think that uh
I think we've learned from the
from the round of uh
Rules and policies from the
commercial.
All right. Any, any comments
from any of the members before
we go back to the public.
Right.
Any comments from the public?
Really.
See, no hearing. Um.
Take a motion to adjourn.
movements.
Thank you. Those in favor.
I.
He posed.
And it might pose stick around
here.
all you want to.
I've never used this, so I'm
gonna use this is passed.
