have you
Good morning. Just a reminder
for our guests to sign in.
There's a sign-in sheet to the
right.
Recording in progress.
Because he is logging in right
now.
Good morning, chair and members.
member Trujillo?
Here
for
Here
Members loan
I'm sorry, member Sloan.
Yeah.
Remember Thompson?
Member outburst.
Remember Kenny?
Remember Kenny, Kelsey Raver.
Kelsey Raider.
Are you on Kelsey?
Remember Sparsson.
The US hears
No joy is on.
Can, can you all hear us
that are on the
On Zoom
No.
Those that are, can you hear us
can't do that.
That one I know.
Yes, there was an echo, but yes.
OK,
I will begin, Angela, because we
heard an echo.
Dangerous?
Can you hear us?
Yeah, I think it's it.
OK.
The computer creates the echo.
Remember Kenny
Never. Me Raider.
They can't hear.
Looks like we're having the same
issue we have potential
solution.
Last time
I think the issue is, Mr.
Chairman, there's a, there's a
need to connect this computer.
To the um microphone. Like you
didn't get it back.
Yeah that's the extent of my
ability.
Can everybody hear us?
Yes, much better. OK. Remember
radar?
Members Barton.
Yes, here.
Remember Lucero?
He remember him again?
Remember Nygrin?
Member John
John, excuse me.
Thank you.
Remember Chang?
Present.
Remember Roy Ball? Is it?
Remember Russell?
Here.
Remember Van Dyke?
Remember Maitland?
Thank you. We have a forum.
Wonderful. Thank you. We have a
motion for approval of the
agenda.
So move, Mr. Chair in second.
You
All in favor?
Bye. Bye.
motion for approval of the
minutes.
Some of
Second, all in favor. All right.
I.
OK, we need
A nominating committee.
Marquita, Mr. Chairman, I would
be happy to serve on the
nominating committee. We need 5
members, 2 of whom must be
members of the public.
And uh, you know, as is typical,
we usually invite those that
aren't present to serve.
Kidding, of course, um.
Uh, but we do need, uh, two
members of the public and then
others. Do we have volunteers
before we're volunteers and Mr.
Chairman, this is for the
unexpired term of the chair, um,
and that would be until June
30th, at which point a new term
kicks in.
All members of the board of
volunteers?
So, Mr. Chair, I'd be happy to
volunteer if I, if I fall within
the requirements. She does,
Madam Chair.
Mr. Chair, I'd be happy too as
well.
OK, so we have 3 and
We need 2 more.
Oh.
Remember you.
Excellent.
And then
and you
OK, we have 5.
I will coordinate that meeting.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. OK.
Um
who is the um the we have public
members, Madam Chair, we have,
um,
Oh.
We have 4 we have 4.
The only one I have is um Member
Lucero.
Joy.
Yeah, we need to, Mr. Chairman,
you need another 11 more.
Yes.
I think
So, Mr. Chairman, that would
leave us with.
Remember outburst, remember
Baker.
Remember, actually it's just
remember McKin Albers and Van
Dyke.
is that
Um, what I recommend, um, again,
I believe he uh was on the last
nominating committee.
And staff will reach out to him
if that would be all right. OK.
Mhm.
We only volunteered one person.
Yeah.
Excuse me, chair, I believe that
member Raider is on.
OK.
Yes I'm here. Let's move on to
item number 5.
In Europe
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the board, this is a
bit of a housekeeping item and
one that is outdated since the
last bylaws that were put
together before the Water Trust
board were sometime after the
turn of the century, or in 2007,
the board has changed
dramatically since.
You can make if you approve the
bylaws today.
We didn't pull out.
Gonna be even louder now.
Mhm
All right, I'll move it back.
Uh
Section B, we pulled out.
Um
To
Remove the it's a redundancy. It
it it already, the board, the
act already outlines who's a
member of the board. We just
pulled that out uh to, to kind
of streamline the bylaws
essentially.
Uh, Section 4.4, 1 of the more
material changes, there's a
fiduciary bond that is actually
not required by the Act. I don't
think any of the members here
have had to post a fiduciary
bond. You might have to do that
in your role as a cabinet
secretary uh in in that world,
but there's no other fiduciary
bonds, so we removed that
provision from being a
requirement.
The organization of the board,
Section 5, outlines the
officers, uh, the chair, the
vice chair, a significant
removal was the treasurer.
Again, when these were put in
place uh back in 2007, I don't
think anyone really understood
what how the board was gonna
play out. There is no treasurer
of the board because again, your
role is finance is, is to
recommend projects, so there's
no money that comes to this
board. The money lies with the
finance authority as the
administrators of the Water
Project fund and the
Finance Authority is the one
that governs that, so we remove
the the the requirement to have
a treasure to, to be the, you
know, custodian of all monies
that come before you. So, uh,
that is, that is surely not
needed. Uh, we updated the uh
streamline the provisions for
the secretary, uh, to simply,
uh,
Again,
Previously they had the
secretary's role as being much
broader of what the secretary
really does. The secretary's
role is to
Um, in the absence of the chair
or the vice chair to run
meetings and to, to make sure
and oversee the, you know, the
overall uh uh runnings of the
board, uh, but not, uh, because
those, those roles fall to the
finance authority staff to make
sure that the board operates
smoothly.
The election of officers, which
you already.
It just did in some respects
with the nominating committee.
So Section 5.9 talks about how
officers are elected again, 5
members of the board for a
nominating committee, you all
accomplished that a moment ago,
uh, you, the, for clarification
a nominating committee will come
before the board at the next
meeting with a recommendation
for the election of the chair to
fill that vacancy for the
duration of the term.
There are no significant changes
to the committee structures in
section 6.
There are uh no significant
changes to the meetings
provisions of Section 7 again
conforming changes uh of how uh
the regular meetings, all, all
by law, they, they don't change
your regular meetings, uh, you
have to have a quorum present,
special meetings can be called
on 3 days' notice. The notices
have to be published. The
finance authority takes care of
the notice provisions, uh,
quorum provisions, uh, a
correction.
There, uh, with the change that
used to say 9 members of the
board.
Constitute a quorum.
Uh, and we almost dealt with
this a little while ago. What we
did is we changed it to a
majority of members then in
office of the board. So that
gives you leeway when there's a
true vacancy rather than if you
know if there was 15 members,
you would need 8. You have 16
members, we needed 9 today. So
that gives us the flexibility to
act in situations where we might
have a vacancy and no one
filling the position.
There are um some changes in
section 8.1 Mos of the Water
Project fund. It was previously
money of the board, uh, that
now, uh, again, uh, lines up
with the practice of how the
water project fund is run and
the finance authority
administers the water, water
project fund for projects that
this board recommends.
The
Again, no other significant
changes through sections 9.
There's an update in section 10,
the the report that this board
has to submit to the governor's
office and the legislature
previously that was in October,
now it is December 1st. That was
a change in law.
And section 13, we removed the
official seal. You've never had
an official seal. The finance
authority is the one when we
sign our loan closings and our
loan documents. We have an
official seal that gets on
there, but it's in a relevant
provision for this board.
And with that, that's uh that's
a, a rather quick overview, but
again, the changes are not very
significant in many respects,
and they're just overdue because
of the uh to to line up with how
this board operates.
You know, these are, these are
essentially the internal
processes that govern how the
board, how the board runs and uh
with your purpose. So with that,
Mr. Chairman, I would entertain
any questions and ask for
approval.
Mr. Chairman, I have one
question. It just sort of came
up a minute ago, is that, are we
able to put into our bylaws a
deemed resigned provision.
Someone hasn't shown up, for
instance, for 7 years.
Uh, and they'd be deemed as
having resigned?
Mr. T,
remember Russell, I, I
I will double I will double
check the, the, the issue there
is that you have
Um,
You have statutory
You know, the, the, the
membership is created by statute
and says it's gonna be A, B, C,
and D.
Um,
We can look at adding a
provision, um,
And see if that's if we're
allowed to do that, the problem
is you can't, um, we ran into
this in a different board where
we had a member that did not
attend meetings and
You can't
We weren't able to say that they
were a deemed to res uh
resignation or or kicked out of
the board. So I think you just
have to follow the approvals
that are how a board, how a
member can be removed.
Um, because of that restriction
that we have in the law. So I
think if you have a, as a board,
if you have a member that is not
showing up, is not fulfilling
their duties of the board, then
you should look to the
provisions of should you seek
removal of that member from the
board and have someone else.
Keep in mind that sometimes you
have to go to another source to
have, to have, so there's,
there's always a timing
mechanism involved with having
someone removed because then
they have to be appointed, you
know, by you say the speaker pro
tem, and, and that's where you
get into some.
Murky water, but the deep
resignation or uh removal is, is
a little bit tricky when you
have the statutory mandates of
who sits on the board, Mr.
Chairman, just on that point on
Section 55.8 on page 11 of the
bylaws and 23 of the materials,
it seems like the board can um
remove an officer but not a
member.
Is that correct? That's how it's
that that that's, that's
actually, that's correct on
On that provision, and I will, I
will go through on, on the
membership, but again, I think
um
I think the membership comes
down to
I think that's, yeah, I, I think
that's, I think you have
obstacles. Mr. Chairman, I would
suggest is that we approve the
bylaws as they are amended and
presented today and have our
staff look into it and if it's
possible to add any other
provisions to board resignations
or deemed resignations or
removals, then we'll bring back
another red line set with that
in place because they in fact
have been members that have been
absent for.
6 years. Um, their terms have
expired, but pursuant to the way
in which they're appointed, they
serve until their successor is
named.
And so they haven't shown up.
The term has ended, but a
successor hasn't been named.
We're sit, we're sitting then
with one fewer member that's
active on this board and I
think.
That's kind of the issue that we
face, at least with one member
here, um, because we don't have
a resignation on file. We don't
have anything that says that
they resigned an email, nothing.
So that's something that we need
to look into and again, if we're
able to do it, I would recommend
you prove it as it is and bring
it back if we find that there's
a provision that allows us to do
that and that.
I do, Mr. Chair. One question
places on section 81.
Could you please provide some
more explanation of the change.
And my question relates to
The, the mechanics of this, so
it says all money is of the
water project fund from whatever
source derived.
Shall be deposited in the water
project fund.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and, and
member Trujillo.
Previously it said money,
money's of the board.
And the way that the statute is
is drafted, and again going back
to this, this board's limited
role in handling.
The review and recommendation of
projects, which then separates
it out and recommends that over
to the finance. So the water
project fund is actually created
as a fund at the finance
authority and not with the Water
Trust board, and that is uh
money gets distributed each year
and put into that fund so that
we can make the loans for the
projects that you all recommend.
um.
I'm probably not answering your
question, so maybe expand a
little bit on more on what.
It
It just was confusing to me to
have the same term like money is
from the fund shall be deposited
in the fund.
And I didn't know if it was
referring to the fact that there
were.
If if it should save money
appropriated to the fund shall
be depos I was not clear on
exactly what problem it was
trying to solve or maybe that.
First sentence isn't isn't
really the heart of
What
this understood. I think
Marquita is gonna.
Mhm.
Mr. Chairman, I think you're,
that's an excellent question. So
there are a couple of ways that
that.
Um,
There are the appropriations
that we receive annually, either
special appropriations ongoing
earmarks of severance tax bonds
or whatever. There's also loan
repayments that flow back into
the fund as well in
administrative fees. So I think
it it's trying to capture both
the concept of as we, as loans
are repaid, whereas
administrative fees are captured
and that they return to the
water project fund in addition
to the appropriation. So I think
that that's part of the
awkwardness of that sentence.
Um, but if they are appropriated
The Water project fund, and they
are, and or repaid to the water
project fund. They are all
considered monies of the water
project. I think that that was
the hair we were trying to split
there initially, um, and I'm not
suggesting it's artfully worded,
um, but I think that was the
issue.
I, I think that's right. Uh, it
is, it is a bit redundant, but
it's an accurate depiction of
how the fund.
Receives its money, so I think
the redundancy is in this case
is necessary. And I, and if that
answers your question, then,
thank you. Thank you.
And I thought the drafting was
masterful.
Additional questions on the
board
My only question then is gonna
be Article 9.
Page 29.
Is there, what is the reason
behind taking out employees. The
board does not have any
employees. You are all appointed
members of you are not employees
of the Water Trust board does
not have employees or appointed
members or uh.
From
From your respective positions,
employee, again, I think it goes
back to the creation of the, of
the water trust board and
Probably an urgency, uh, from
past, uh, you know, going back
to '07.
Using a more uh corporate form
of a bylaw provision that really
becomes.
It becomes irrelevant. So we
removed employee to avoid any
confusion because you're not
employees of the Water Trust
board. You might be employees of
your prospective physicians,
obviously, but it just clarifies
and removes that, that
discrepancy that you are not
employees of the Water Trust
board.
And Mr. Chairman, I would note
that the finance authority
employees are covered under a
similar provision by the finance
code of conduct. So we, we have
this provision in our code of
conduct.
In no further questions.
You have a motion for approval.
OK
Like
Good
All in favor?
Um.
Right.
Bye.
Item number 6.
Mhm
Members of the board, this, this
is uh
We'll have
Our, our team come up.
What we're trying to do here in
Rebecca and Chuck will present
on this. Several years ago, uh,
our policy team ran a bill for
airports.
Uh
So Alison put together data on
airports.
To understand what the need was
from 49 municipal airports.
What we learned from a health
safety economic development
perspective, it was 314 million
in needs for municipal airports.
Everything from turnarounds,
hill farms, fire suppression.
And working with Chairman Munoz.
He drafted a bill.
314 million to show the
legislature what the true need
was.
Throughout the state.
The outcome of that bill was $55
million to help.
And start addressing those
needs, and it went through DOT
aviation, a very efficient
model, similar to the Water
Trust board, but taking on that
concept, policy department at
the league wants to do this with
water in a very clear
understanding of what the needs
are.
and in the future.
Um, so with that I'll turn it
over to Rebecca.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and members
of the board. Uh, my name is
Rebecca Martinez. I am the
senior policy analyst with the
New Mexico Municipal League and
super thrilled to be here today
to share and provide an overview
of the municipal leagues um
water infrastructure needs
assessment.
Um, as Chairman mentioned, um,
being able to provide a
comprehensive assessment of
municipal water infrastructure
needs across the state is
fundamental to us being able to
advocate for the needs of the
106 cities, towns and villages
that we serve.
Um, well, there is much data
scattered across the state.
There isn't a consolidated data
inventory. So as an organization
that is devoted to serving our
members were taking a
data-driven approach to
identifying the needs. Again, so
that we can properly advocate
for the resources that are
needed to complete water
projects within local
communities. Um, so why are we
doing this? Well, first off, we
all know that enormous water
infrastructure, uh, we have
enormous
infrastructure needs. One of the
primary responsibilities of
local governments is to provide
adequate and safe drinking water
and wastewater disposal services
to its communities.
The Water Trust board has been a
phenomenal resource um
allocating funds for water
projects, um,
And so basically what we want to
do is we want to have a full
universe and an understanding of
what our water municipal needs
are. Um, the preliminary data
indicates that unfunded
municipal water projects totals
roughly 700 million over the
next several years.
Um, the second reason we are
doing this and you all are well
aware of this is we have aging
and deficient infrastructure.
Um, many water and wastewater.
Infrastructures are aging and
deficient due to insufficient
funding posing threats to
health, safety, and economic
development.
And just to give you a few
examples of what our communities
are grappling with, um, in June
of this year, Las Vegas faced
water restrictions due due to
compromised clean water after
heavy rainfall.
In May of this year, Cuba
declared a state of emergency
due to water shortages,
um, primarily brought on by
pressure issues caused by
antiquated water lines. This is
the 2nd state of emergency in 2
years due to water shortages in
Cuba.
Simply stated there is
insufficient investment and
funding challenges. Investment
in water infrastructure is
lacking, and while you all as
the water trust board have done
a phenomenal job in providing
funding resources. Funding is
limited and cannot meet all the
needs. Um, we all know that
funding is often piecemealed
leading to incomplete projects
is documented in the 2021
legislative um state funded
water project report.
So here with me today is Chuck
Thomas. Chuck Thomas has
experience in local government
for over 30 years, um, primarily
in this area of water working
for um the uh scafka as well as
energy, minerals and natural
resources department. And I'm
gonna hand it over to Mr. Thomas
who will providing more details
regarding the assessment that we
are undertaking. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, members
of the board.
Happy to be here for that, yeah,
trying to find that optimal
distance here.
On it. So, uh, as Rebecca
mentioned, we have a tremendous
need for drinking water
infrastructure in the state
that's at the heart of why the
Water trust board was created in
the first place, uh, going way
back, and so I'll provide some
of the more.
A detailed analysis from where
we've gotten to at this point.
And I will say right now we're
still in the first few layers of
the onion, so to speak. There's
a lot more.
Data and information to kind of
unpack on this process to really
uh drill down and identify a
specific.
Specific number. So when
I started looking at all of the
drinking water infrastructure
projects. I really wanted to
focus on uh direct drinking
water infrastructure.
So your source development and
rehabilitation, transmission,
distribution storage, treatment,
water conservation,
regionalization projects and
also watershed restoration.
Watershed restoration probably
wouldn't have been a selection
of mine 5 or 10 years ago, but
since we've had some of these
massive wildfires. They are, it
does show the impact of.
How these watersheds are
reacting, you know, post fire
and the and the need for
additional infrastructure just
to address the broad scope of
these fires that we're
experiencing. I think it's a
valid category to add in.
Uh, what I've excluded to this
point is projects for water
rights. Obviously, water rights
can be highly volatile, um, you
know, they're, they're kind of
difficult to assess and then the
adjacent projects, so anything
that's kind of connected with
agriculture, uh, wastewater
reuse.
I know a lot of wastewater reuse
has targeted at reducing the
demand from the drinking water
side of projects.
Um,
But those were excluded from
this analysis, we anticipate
moving forward with a separate
analysis on the wastewater side,
at which point the water reuse
aspects will be brought in and
captured.
Study. So again, this is really
focused purely on on drinking
water.
I narrow that down.
Um, from an overall need
perspective, uh, there were 3
primary sources of information
that have been used to date to
get an understanding of the
total need, uh, and that
includes all public water
systems, not just
municipalities, but just to get
a kind of a feel for.
The overall need. So there was a
2021 report completed by the
legislative.
The LFC uh using 2018 data from
the state water plan, uh, in
2023, uh, the EPA uh completed
the needs survey, so it's part
of the drinking water state
revolving fund process.
They periodically do an
assessment of the need for
infrastructure, so the drinking
water infrastructure needs
survey from 2023, uh, and then
the, uh,
Complete pool of all the data
from the.
Infrastructure capital
improvement program database. So
all of that information that
he's used to generate AA
projects and all the projects
that the community put in for
that.
So they're distinctly different
sources of information. I think
one of the, one of the
interesting facts that jumped
out at me right away is that
when all of these sources were.
Kind of modify to try to make
sure that we're identifying the
same types of projects, so it's
an apples to apples comparison
and also adjusting for um, you
know, to 20 $24 all three of
them came in with a very close
approximation of the total need
in New Mexico. So the LFC report
came in at about 3.2 billion.
The EPA survey came in at 3.3
billion and then the ICIP
database information produced a
need of about 3.18 billion. So
very close in terms of those
numbers, which I think is, is
good to show that we're seeing a
lot of the same, that same need
kind of coming in from multiple
sources.
There are a number of
areas where there's a lot of
overlap, but there's areas where
they don't all kind of agree on
their methodology. So the LLC
report at a minimum project size
of $10,000. So a lot of the
smaller projects were lost. The
EPA needs survey, a lot of that
is estimated information, so
there's no specific projects
identified and, in particular,
New Mexico is a partial, um,
we're a partial participation
state, so all the water systems
with the population between 3300
and 1000.
or just estimated. There was no
data collected, so they used,
you know, other data sources to
estimate that need, uh, and it
extends out to 20 years, and
then the ICIP projects, you
know, that time frame is
variable, but we're looking at 4
years' worth of ICIP data for
what communities we're looking
at installing in the next 4
years to get to that data. So
there's, there's some variation
there, so there'll be some work
to kind of unpack that and get a
closer uh.
Number on that
But I think it's heartening to
see that a lot of those data
sources are are very close
together.
Uh, there's currently about
1,071 public water systems in
New Mexico.
Uh, and of those, the
municipalities make up about 106
of those water systems. So the
total population served is what
2.1 million with all the water
systems and the municipalities
serve about 1.4.
So you're looking at uh a group
of uh water systems that make up
about 10% of the total water
systems that serve about 70% of
the population for which see
water from a public water
system. So I think there's a
tremendous opportunities to
really leverage the fact that
we're dealing with a smaller
number of systems that serve a
greater percentage of the
population really address those
those needs. So if you start
digging into the numbers on that
and really the ICIP data was the
only data right now that has.
Uh, specific projects associated
with it of those three sources.
The rest were all uh summary or
statistical data, what you're
looking at is Rebecca mentioned
about 713 million in need uh
identified in the ICIP and
that's really just the 4 years
worth of projects that they've
identified and decided to add
into.
Uh, the database for future
funding purposes. So I think
that just bespeaks that there's
a, there's certainly a higher
level of need, um, with the
water trust board looking at the
3 applicable categories, you
have water storage, conveyance,
and delivery, water conservation
treatment and reuse and
watershed restoration, uh, just
over the past 3 years, there
were $439 million worth of
projects submitted for funding.
Within that, and of that 230
million were submitted by the
municipalities. So again, we're
looking at just over 50% of the
funding request has come from
the municipalities moving
forward to the water trust
board.
Uh, so you have that need there,
uh, now we're starting to get
into additional future demands
and need for infrastructure uh
created by additional
regulation. So you have the lead
and copper rule, which is coming
in right now, uh, the estimate
through EPA is it's gonna cost
about $111 million annually
nationwide and that's an
annualized cost. And if you look
at municipalities which, which
serve approximately 0.05% of the
population.
And just to get kind of a
pro-ration figure on that.
You're looking at an annualized
cost of about $5.6 million.
Uh
For the lead and copper rule
here in New Mexico. And I think
that number may be a little bit
low if you start looking at all
these data sources, start
pulling out the project, so
Grant is seeking $1000 to assess
their service lines, um, Las
Vegas is seeking an additional
$5.2 million so we've already
exceeded that annualized cost
right there with just two
communities seeking funding. So
I think there's going to be a
greater need the lead and copper
rule is going to require every
community to go out and
positively identify whether or
not their service connections
are.
lead or lead impacted or they
are free of lead.
That's just going to be a
requirement of the process and
that's going to take a
significant amount of effort as
well as the replacement of any
of the lines that cannot be
determined to be completely
free.
Um, one of the other rules
that's coming up is the PFAS,
uh,
Um, you know, the, the
perfluoricate perfluorinated um
Um,
Contaminants and those, those
impacts are not really going to
approach for about another 4
years. The MCLs don't become
active until 2029. So there's
very few systems have really
started identifying project
costs for that, but if you look
at the annualized cost across
the nation, whereas lead and
copper was 111 million lead and
copper is looking at one point
or um ethos is looking at 1.4,
$1.5 billion.
Nationwide. So that's going to
be a significant cost here in
New Mexico.
Right now, the particular impact
is a little bit unknown. The
testing still hasn't been
completed to determine how
ubiquitous the PFAS
contamination is, although it's
likely going to show up at, you
know, a lot of locations, and I
think the particular impact it's
going to really be driving uh
infrastructure needs for New
Mexico communities is the need
for the treatment
infrastructure. Right now,
you're looking at specialized
granular activated carbon or
very targeted um ion exchange
treatment systems that are going
to be focused on this.
The existing systems that are in
place where communities have
those.
are not effective at removing
the Ploss, they're going to have
to be adjusted. So pretty much
any community that's going to be
dealing with this is going to
have to be investing in new
treatment infrastructure as
well. So those costs are gonna
come up significantly, uh,
particularly in the next few
years.
So these are additional costs
that will need to be evaluated
and added into our to our need
as we start looking into the
future.
Um, and then of course we have,
you know, additional changes
related to climate change and,
and other issues with the
drought and whatnot, um, as
mentioned, the Calf Canyon and
Herman Peak fires with the city
of Las Vegas, their water system
is going to need some additional
resiliency uh elements to handle
all of the negative impacts to
the water quality that are
coming in. Uh, you have the
South South Fork and salt fires,
so Rudos and Rudoso downs are
going to be struggling with
that, and they were previously
already trying to address
watershed restoration from.
Fires. This is just aggravating
that situation. And of course we
have the Ogalala aquifer, which
has been a major source of water
for many years, uh, historically
for all the communities on the
eastern side of the state, and
that continues to drop and it
continues to be an issue where
communities are having to
replace water sources that have
been dependable but now are
starting to, you know, lose that
capacity to provide the level of
water that's needed.
So all of these impacts are
going to continue to be um
You know,
Increasing the need for water
infrastructure funding within
New Mexico.
Uh, so I wanted to kind of give
a brief overview of kind of
where we're at and what we're
looking at, and if the board has
any questions, I'll be happy.
The members of the board.
to you
Comment suggestions.
I
All knew where we were
It
Hey, this is member Raider. Um,
I think that was an opening for
questions, but I'm having a hard
time with the audio over at uh
in the main conference room. Is
that I, am I right on that?
How about now? Can you hear me
better?
Absolutely. OK, so yeah, we, I
was just saying that, you know,
we're open to suggestions, you
know, our goal is to be
presenting to this committee
during session, you know, our
sponsors are going to have lots
of data, but what are we
missing? That's the real
question to this board, this
group, um.
What else should we? Thank you,
thank you.
Yeah, I would really like to
recommend that we um and we, uh,
by we I mean the team at EDD,
the leadership team, uh, circle
back with them, with everybody
on this project on this. I think
there's a couple of things
happening right now that could
help influence the scope of this
project that are a little bit
out of sync with the
presentation as we're, as we're
being given it right now, so
specifically some of the things
that we're, we're working with
right now is with the LFC is
coming out with a new updated
report on the state of.
This, so I know that they did a
2018 report that you guys are
just referencing, but there's
going to be in the upcoming
weeks as we understand, an
updated report on the state of
exactly these issues, um.
And making some serious
recommendations about uh how the
government should be approaching
infrastructure and capital costs
for these projects for drinking
water projects and wastewater as
well. One of the points that I
want to bring up that um we're
experiencing over here at NED if
there's not actually, we're not
experiencing that there's a lack
of funding for uh drinking water
projects in particular, I mean,
we're looking at anywhere
between 5 to 6 different sources
for those types of projects and
um and the total between
FY 19 and FY23 was about 941
million and so really what we're
seeing is that oftentimes there
is, there are, there are many,
many different avenues even for
just partial funding which will
which will totally acknowledge
there are many different avenues
for drinking water capital
infrastructure projects.
However, the issue that we're
running into is that especially
when it comes to um
Some of her revolving loan fund
programs so our low interest
loans. There's not always the
ability for water systems to
qualify for that funding because
of their debt capacity, their
ability to complete audits in
addition to that, we're also
concerned that there is funding
out there available to fund
these projects. However, there's
a limited capacity on the water
systems level to be able to
implement that funding from a
managerial standpoint, financial
administrative, legal, however
you say it.
And then beyond that too, these
costs don't cover operations and
so we're putting a lot of money
into projects potentially, but
there's a limited ability of
water system to be able to
actually operate and maintain
those systems over time. And so
to that 0.1 of the reasons I
love to circle up again with
these folks with with everybody
on this project is that uh from
NED's perspective we're trying
to put a lot of more a lot more
resources into exploring
regionalization from the
perspective of not just physical
interconnection but things
about how water systems are able
to share resources,
administrative, financial, legal
resources to be able to truly
maintain systems over time so
that not only are we deploying
infrastructure funding
effectively, but that it's
actually going to make a real
difference in the long term.
So with all that being said, um,
you know, I'll put it back on
everybody else, but I just
wanted to share again that I
think that there is really some
development in the conversations
that are happening out of NMED
LFC on this and that um this is
definitely hitting at an appoint
an important part of the problem
and, you know, as it relates to
some of the upcoming issues that
we're having with lead service
lines and PAs. There is funding,
especially on the PAS side that
we have just received that we'd
like to make sure it's
integrated into this study as
So, um, again, I just think that
there's an opportunity for us to
kind of regroup a little bit on
readjusting what we think is
going to be the bigger issue
that we're trying to tackle with
the study.
Great, thank you. Additional
comments, suggestions from the
board.
Yeah, Mr. Chair, this is
Priscilla.
So I wanna, I wanna just come
in, Kelsey for bringing that up
because I want to talk about
what the reality is, and we do,
we've always known that there's
been a great need for dollars
for doing uh system
improvements. But I'm gonna
elaborate a little bit more on
the local level, what's
happening with capacity issues
because I really want uh and
what I've heard from legislators
and what I've heard from
concerns from counties and so on
and so forth. And that is number
one, some of the data we need to
Collecting number one is, do we,
do we know if these communities
have been doing their 40 year
water plants, number one,
because really that tells us
about where their water source
is coming from, and the
viability of that water source
and for how long, right? So
that's one thing and I can tell
you some of my communities
haven't done that since the 90s,
cause I've been doing this a
long time, so that's always a
concern for us. Um, the other
thing we're seeing right along
with Kelsey was talking about is
the capacity. So when I talk
about a couple of most recent
situations.
That I really wanna just focus
on and that where uh we have a
mutual domestic that it was
noncompliant with audits for 7
years, um, and didn't, was not
compliant with budget and so now
they went without water for 4
days without notifying anybody,
right? Which left the people in
a predicament. That goes back to
the capacity and the board
understanding of their
responsibility and understanding
that
Water operators also have a
responsibility and sometimes
they don't think they have to
listen to the water operator and
all of these things. So now
what's happening is you have
water operators that are
resigning, water operators are
already doing 2 or 3 systems,
right? Because they're so sparse
anyway, and so a lot of these
water operators are not passing
their chest to become water
operators, so we have a
challenge there and so what that
resulted in is what I want to
make a point in is that now we
have
local governments from an
municipal side that are gonna
have to take on the financial
management and the managerial
piece of that, which is part of
the regionalization piece, but
there's challenges with that
cause now they have debt, right
now they have to figure out how
we do that. So we're doing that
right now in partnership with
RCAC and some of our
communities. So that's the
reality. We need to know how
many of those
Local governments are now having
to take over systems and then
the the concern comes from the
county standpoint is the county
says are now are we going to
have to be in the water business
because these are unincorporated
areas, right, that fall into the
county, and what do we, what
role are we gonna have to take
as a county to be able to assist
them because there is no
capacity. There's no volunteers
for the board. They can't
conduct business, and so, and
the list goes on and I think
that's exactly what Kelsey's
talking about and the
challenges.
And I'm dealing with those
challenges as well every day and
I, I'm, I don't even know what
to do anymore because the
challenges are so many. So those
are things I think we need to
account for. The other thing I
think about is how many of these
local governments are already
selling water to domestics as
part of this, right? And cause
what I'm seeing is that that
local governments now are taking
on billing, they're taking on
some of that water operational
side of it because there's
another.
Other alternative, right? So now
we have all these other things
with compliance issues that I'm
doing to help the systems become
compliant because they don't
even understand the basics of
consumer confidence reporting.
They don't understand, they,
they, they don't have this and
they can't secure the funding.
So in my history, this is the,
this is a, these are years that
we've had the most funing ever
to do these things, but now the
money is not moving in some of
these cases as a result of the
non-compliance piece. So we had
to figure out how
We, we do that and I think um
sometimes board members are
threatened by just all the
paperwork and the bureaucracy,
right? It's, it's not easy to
learn and understand and so
we're always trying to figure
out how to do that better. Um,
the other part too is that
sometimes people don't even know
in some of the systems, um,
exactly how old their system is,
what kind of pipes they have in
certain areas, which just goes
back to an inventory, the asset
management of the system, which
a lot of times
Marquita and I have had these
concessions about we do the
asset management, if you have
it, but then who implements it,
right? So there's no, there's no
process and so those are things
where I have.
Um, community members coming to
me saying, OK, my well just went
dry. Are we documenting how many
wells have gone dry and now have
to be um tapped into another
system that may require a mile
of pipe to do that, or it may
require um changing the lease
agreement with that local
government to do that. So I
think this is a much bigger
discussion, Kelsey, and, and,
and to the consultant who's
doing this. I, I'd like to, to
participate with Kelsey at some
point and having those much
further discussions about
Well really assessing what those
needs because those are the
things we're gonna need to show,
and I think that's one thing
Mexico finances that is going to
be able to help with the
capacity money is to make change
from that piece, right? Um, and
I've got some thoughts and ideas
on how we could do that better.
From a local level, and so I
think we need to account on it
because we need to really show
the data.
About what the reason needs
really are cause it's not till
these things happen, do we
realize that it's 40 years that
that system has been touched and
um things have been replaced and
so they don't really understand
and we have a lot of new people
coming from other states that
have ample water or sufficient
water and come here and not
understand why we're dealing
with the issues we're dealing
with, and then we can get
bombarded with the complaints as
to why. So just a few comments
on that and thank you for
letting tag on to Kelsey.
To help support um the data that
we need to move this forward.
I just wanted to quickly
respond. Thank you so much,
Priscilla. I'll be following up
with you personally as well
because I love to, I love to
chat and connect with the
connection with the team as
well. The only thing I wanted to
add on top of this that we
haven't mentioned is the braids
conversation and the
conversation about what type of
mechanisms need to be in place
as we're deploying funding to to
communities to make sure that
the rates that are being set are
appropriate for the ability for
the community to be able to
continue to manage and operate
whatever system that they are
that they're managing.
Because, um, it's effectively
what we're sort of dealing with
like on a big picture scale here
is that we've got state
government who of course wants
to be able to help, to support,
to be able to put in
infrastructure in place that's
going to keep communities water
clean, um, at the same time too,
these water systems are
historically supposed to be able
to be self-sufficient to a
degree and be able to set rates
that are going to be able to
allow for them to pay for
upgrades, maintenance, when
things go wrong with these types
of infrastructure.
And so, um, I just wanna put
that out there again too that
really, of course, there's a
really important focus on
looking at what the actual
capital infrastructure needs our
communities, but there's a lot
of sort of supplementary pieces
that have to go with it to make
sure that that infrastructure
investment is going to be
sustainable over time and grains
is a big part of that.
Great.
Thank you
Mr. Vice Chair.
So this is Tanya to hear from
the
State engineer office and I'll
um support the comments from the
Environment Department and I
think it's appropriate if they
take the lead on following up
with some of the next steps and
some of their questions. I was
gonna make two points. One, I
think it's important to
coordinate with the governor's
infrastructure office as well,
and I don't know if they've been
communications there because I
think some of the elements that
we're thinking about in this
project are definitely
complimentary to what the.
Governor was thinking about in
connection with the 50-year
water action plan. So trying to
make sure we're um thinking
across the board of of all of
our agencies' efforts in that
regard would be great.
And then I was gonna ask for uh
if there's a specific summary of
the presentation because I think
there was a lot of good
information in there and
particular sites to different
reports and things that were
compiled and that I didn't see
in the board packet unless I
missed it somewhere.
Thank you.
Oh, as far as.
You're good.
There we go. Uh, yeah, just a
response to, uh, 2's question,
there is not a current summary
yet or you know,
a report put together this was
summary information, uh,
preparatory.
So, Mr. Chairman, I think this
conversation is a really
gratuitous one right before the
technical assistance
conversation that we're about to
have, but I just wanted to make
sure I understood some of the
numbers. I think I heard you say
there were 1,071 public water
systems.
Um, and that you had identified
through the ICIP about 700
million over the next couple of
years of needs.
I heard. That is correct. So
what I'm hearing is that
And that 70% of the population
fall under that 106.
So it sounds like we have
roughly 965.
Water systems that are not
municipal and that may or may
not be contributing to that ICIP
number, right?
Uh,
no, so what the, what the
Report information that I
provided was set was separating
out the municipalities and
identifying them as a group. So
the, the overall ICIP database
evaluation of water need for the
state which includes mutual
domestics, water sanitation
districts, counties, uh, tribal
entities, basically all entities
throughout the state that
submitted a project that fell
into that water category, that
came up with about 3.2 billion
in need stable.
That still seems low to be very
honest, and I think if you look
at how, you know, it's not, it's
the same thing like with the
water trust board, you know,
data. It, it's projects that are
being submitted.
For application purposes, it's
not really, it doesn't really
line up necessarily with an
overall water need projection or
a water project infrastructure
need. It's just this is the
project I'm submitting now, you
know, in particularly with the
Water Trust board, you know,
with a short timeframe for
completion of a project in order
to be eligible, you know, I, I
would suspect that a lot of the
communities are not putting in
long-term projects into the
requests, so it's a very small
subset based on the structure of
how the water trust board
operates, similar with the ICIP.
Um, you know, from my
perspective of my experience
working with that, it wasn't
necessarily a lot of the long
term projects that communities
were putting in there. It's more
of the short, short term needs
that they expect to be seeking
funding on either through the
legislature or very soon. And so
again, I think we're only
looking at about 4 years of the
data, so, uh, yeah, so I think
the the need is much greater
than that, um, but in terms of
what the data is available now
that we can look at that's,
that's the need that we've
identified so far. I appreciate
that. Thank you.
And it's like and Marquita.
If I could just respond to your
question because I, I agree with
you 100% just from the data that
I know. So I know when I look at
all the public what we call
political subdivisions of the
state that can receive state
money. I believe there's about
300 of those, um, um, 1071,
right? From my, my understanding
and the other, the other
challenge we have Marquita, is
that a lot of the mutual
domestics are not doing capital
improvement plans. Part of the
reason that my communities have
capital improvement plans is
because I do it for them.
Um, but a lot of them don't
really know and a lot of times
we don't put um the big, bigger
projects on the ICIP for the,
for the reason that they're
going to capital outlay, and we
know that Cara is only going to
fund a smaller dollar amount and
so usually they may put those
water system projects like Wares
colonia, if they're putting it
on there, they're putting it as
a lower project because of the
role of the top 3 for the Caley.
So that kind of changes.
The numbers too as far as what
potentially could be the need
because I do agree that it's
much greater than that.
Mr. Chairman, I think even the
more salient point is that there
are 965 public water systems
that are not municipal and
likely have only the revenues um
under from their ratepayers um
that are supporting them. Um,
and I think that that is a,
that's a, that's a large number
of water systems out there that
are probably ill prepared to
frankly run sustainable water
systems.
Say that in advance of our next
item, so it's just, it's
shocking. I hadn't seen the
numbers and I appreciate you
providing that to us.
Thank you.
Item number 7.
So Mr. Chairman, while Donnie
makes his way to the um uh.
Speaker's desk, I will just
mention that this is really
interesting conversation
dovetailing the conversation we
just had, um, as you know, House
Bill 211 provided us with some
great ability to start solving
some of these problems, just,
you know, it's gonna take a a
number of um different efforts
and approaches uh to start
making a dent in the need that
you've just identified and the
need that we all know exists.
Um, House Bill 211.
And was I think a short term
solution, honestly to what the
water infrastructure task force
had recommended um over the last
two years, uh, Chair Hammond had
led an effort with a number of
water stakeholders across the
state and uh there were 3
categories of recommendations.
Category one dealt with water
systems, in particular, and
capacity is, I think uh both uh
member Rader and member Lucero
mentioned capacity.
Both at the
System level but also at the
oversight and and state level,
uh, and frankly, our consulting
engineers and contractor level
just lacks, we even if we could
apply the money, there wasn't
the ability to absorb the money,
um, and I think that, you know,
sort of.
One of the big issues that we
have, the recommendation that
came from the task force was to
create an entity that could be
more proactive in planning and
helping these small communities
and reduce the number of
potentially capital outlay or
other things that that are state
partners um have to oversee
would potentially provide for
more ability to, um, you know,
combine some of these things to
help regionalize them.
Ultimately that separate agency
didn't.
up going forward as an idea. It
could not gain any traction. And
what House Bill 211 allowed for
us to do is to hire some
contractors explicitly uh that
doesn't provide for NMFA to use
any of the funds to hire folks,
but we could hire contractors to
help kind of solve some of those
needs, maybe even pilot some of
the efforts that that first task
force was trying to achieve. And
so what uh what our group has
been working on led by Donnie
here are some concepts about the
Ways in which that effort could
unfold, and our goal here today
is to seek approval of a plan, a
general framework of a technical
assistance plan that would
provide NMFA with the ability to
both amend our budget because we
don't currently have that in our
budget that we set aside the
dollars uh from the funding for
2025, so $3.5 million was held
back from our funding
recommendation so that we could
use those dollars for technical.
Um,
so the finance authority needs
to put those expenses into our
budget, um, and then also RFP uh
on behalf of the Water Trust
board for these technical
assistance contractors. So our
goal today is to outline what
we're trying to achieve, uh,
that would trigger, uh, what we
need to do on the finance
authority side to get the money
in place and do the RFP and then
come back to both the policy
committee and maybe even a
special task force, um, to then
finalize the
and the ways in which we might
prioritize the application of
these dollars because there is
significant need out there, um,
and we're just, we're just
getting started. Uh, so, uh,
don't wanna steal any of
Donnie's Thunder, but the
conversation, the setup that we
just had is a perfect segue for
some of the stuff that I think
we're trying to achieve at least
trying to.
You know, find out if it's gonna
work. Um, I think we're, that's,
that's what this is about, so,
uh, with that, Mr. Quintana, I
would send it to you, sir.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, board
members, uh,
Before I begin, I tell you it's
it's great to see all these
familiar faces, uh.
You know, I'd be remiss if I
didn't go back to my days of
director of local government.
With GFA uh 4 years ago and
recognized that we had
preliminary, you know, I think
apply this body as well as all
the other stakeholders out there
that are doing tremendous work.
An effort in regards to this
issue. And listening to the
board members and radar.
Um,
You know, we recognize that not
all our water service providers
are equal.
The municipality definitely has
the revenue, uh, other revenue
sources to help sustain their
The programs and their services.
I challenge anybody to go to the
unincorporated parts of New
Mexico and I think this is what
this Russell was alluding to is
they don't have the capacity
necessarily revenue sources to
sustain their operations. You
only have 100 members on your
system. That is not going to
generate enough revenue to
sustain our. So I think there's
solutions for the different
levels of service providers
there.
I'd like to do this morning is
provide you a very succinct.
a plan, if you will, on how we
think that we can address some
of it.
Obviously it's going to require
a lot of uh coordination. I used
to say to the legislators and
just, you know, the state of New
Mexico doesn't lack for
initiatives. Sometimes we just
slack from a collaborative
initiatives. So the more we have
the ability to collaborate and
maximize resources.
More successful will be able to
do.
You know, the bottom line is
it's waters our most precious
commodity. Right now, majority
of these water systems are
staffed by volunteers.
Which is a challenge and we keep
continuing to put requirements
and and regulations on that.
Put a challenge on these folks
that are
volunteers and the truth be
told, some of these volunteers
are 7, 80 years old, and they're
not having folks that are
replacing them.
Fortunately our youth are not
lining up to this.
Uh, that has to be into the mix,
but again, I will provide you a
succeed overview. I'm gonna
stick to my notes so that I stay
on schedule, so you know.
I want to pull the jump through
or.
Some
Um, today we are seeking as Ms.
Russell alluded to, approval of
a technical assistance plan or
what we wouldn't.
to asta.
And a request to utilize 3.5
million to uh out of the water
project funds to hire
contractors. Don't get caught up
in 3.5 because I think that is
moving toward, but the bottom
line is, uh,
Rather than provide funding
directly to water service
providers and we just
acknowledged through this
conversation.
Several of them don't have the
capacity to be in compliance
with procurement, they don't
necessarily have the staff to
follow through with any of you.
Biting process and project
management and those kind of
things.
Mar goal here is to instead of
providing the funding directly
to the water service providers.
And my face the issuance of
RFPs.
Your contract with respect to
contractors to provide that
technical assistance.
Services, um.
You know, as you're well aware
of. And Ms. Russell alluded to
as well, amendments to build
211.
Authorizes the Mexico Finance
Authority to use water project
funds to hire contractors for
this purpose.
So the staff proposes that the
board adopt a technical
assistance program or TA.
That focuses on two needed
efforts.
The first is the focus of
regionalization.
Facilitating regionalization.
I'll talk about that here in a
minute. The second, and I think
this was a great part of the
conversation earlier is the need
for individual system planning.
So 2 parts, two pronged.
First is facilitating
regionalization. The second is
individual system planning.
Originalization enables
utilities to become more cost
efficient, right? Uh, economy is
scale, thereby increasing the
likelihood of sustainability.
For purposes of the proposed
technical assistance program.
Regionalization is defined as
the integration of physical,
economic, informational or
personnel structure or water
projectsization.
Building on the 2013 legislators
Senate Bill 1, Regional water
system resiliency bill.
Mexico Finance Authority staff
proposes to allocate allocate
funds to directly support
incentivize various statewide
water distribution service
providers. Realize their
respective water delivery
systems.
I think we've all toured the
city of New Mexico and they have
identified where there may be
one water system and across the
road is a whole different water
system.
Even in that I reside. The
village of Paco unfortunately
not in the village.
So I have a domestic water
association that supports me. I
wish the village of Eck merge
and regionalize with.
Mystic because I think there's
some good opportunity.
Uh, we are all keenly aware of
them without regionalization
that many water service
providers spent twice as much
money on operating and
maintaining existing systems.
So not only do they have the
challenge of capacity.
We also now have the challenge
of cost.
Again, the economy of scale.
Uh, on capital expenditures to
rehabilitate, replace, or expand
existing systems here before you
to tell you that the majority of
those 900 small mutual domestics
struggling just to maintain
existing systems.
Not necessarily even expanding
and growing, uh, we were talking
earlier about one having basic
infrastructure so that you have
access.
the water. Then the second item
is, is it safe? What is the
quality of the water?
Having that ability to have
operators that are testing the
water to ensure and I applaud
the Environment Department to
the recent articles and
identifying the multitude of uh
water providers across the state
that are not necessarily in
compliance with the.
This the staff proposes to hire
contractors and the contractors
that we are looking at.
And recognize that we don't
operate in the bubble and we are
part of the solution of we spoke
of the will of the car.
And when one leverage capitalize
on all of the key stakeholders
and partners that are involved
in this process from one venue
or another, we want to be able
to leverage resources. We want
to be able to leverage thoughts,
uh, brainstorming, anything to
do that would allow us to
maximize efficiency and
effectiveness.
So we're looking at being able
to our feed.
Contracts for attorneys.
Accountants, community
facilitators, project managers,
and others.
Uh, in regards to the individual
system planning.
As we've been conversing about
this morning.
We all recognize that not all
systems are ready and able to
reach. Or because it maybe
geography, it just isn't the
solution.
And many of them improvements in
the infrastructure.
In addition to the water trust
board, USDA Federal drinking
water, water loan programs, they
all require planning documents
as part of the plan. So what
we're proposing is that the
water trust board through the
Mexico Finance Authority and
hired these consultant, uh, in
this case, engineers to complete
the documents
Under this program, the systems
would apply to the water trusts
board for the planning document
itself, rather for funding to
perform a planning document.
It's a shift in mindset.
Rather than having these small
900 mutual domestics. That's the
number we're gonna.
Gravitate towards. Um.
Um
OK. Thank you.
I appreciate that.
So, I'm not gonna start all over
again, OK, if that's fine with
you. Um, but, uh,
You know, the concept is we
recognize they don't have the
capacity.
So why keep challenging them to.
Deliver on what we're looking
for. Why not?
Take that challenge and place
the capacity requirement on the
entities that have the capacity
to deliver.
New Mexico finance has authority
has the ability to issue RFPs
and oversee contracts that
ultimately benefit small service
providers that the services that
are gonna be contracted for.
Um, you know, additional benefit
of this effort allows NMFA
specifically.
Uh, the use of water project
funds in support of water
service providers.
would allow us to complement our
recent policy changes on our
local government planning fund.
We were providing uh planning
funds for domestic service
providers through our local
government planning fund.
But this would allow us to do is
shift those charges to this fund
to to fulfill and complete those
requirements or documents, and
it will allow us to maximize the
use of the local government
planning fund for what it was
intended to do, which is
economic comprehensive plans,
and now with the most recently
changes in statute, the
affordable housing.
So it'll allow us to shift those
uh prior to those costs at the
local Grammy, uh, local
government planning fund and
ship the cost of these planning
documents and so forth in
support of the water service
providers using this 3.5
million.
And so a key item here to be
eligible for this technical
assistance, water service
providers will be required to
regionalize in compliance with
the regional water system re
resiliency statute, Senate Bill
1.
So that basically gives them the
framework on how they got a
regionalized statutorily.
Uh, NMFA will solicit letters of
interest from entities that are
committed to regionalization and
have adopted at the local level,
a local resolution.
And have executed a joint powers
agreement, a memorandum of
agreement, a memorandum of
understanding or any other
document, legal document that
demonstrates support of
regionalization.
NMFA will provide oversight and
manage the respective contracts,
as I mentioned, we'll develop
the scope of work and
deliverables will establish
contract amounts and timelines
and pay contractors directly. So
the small utilities will not
have to be concerned with
setting up any payroll any
systems for invoicing or
anything to that nature.
And I do want to highlight a key
priority of the use of the funds
and commitment of the use of the
technical assistance program and
its services is to ensure that
small and disadvantaged
communities benefit equitably.
So today,
we uh we request approval for
the technical assistance plan.
Number 12, we request approval
as CEO Ms. Russell alluded to,
to allocate up to $3,500,000 of
the water project fund for these
contracts. So the bottom line
again is this is an opportunity
and it's not the sova Kero
for addressing it, but I think
what we do here is have an
opportunity to benefit those 900
or so small, large.
Domestic service providers that
just don't have the capacity to
get this done.
And and I'll end with this.
Everybody in the state of New
Mexico should have the same
right.
and access to safe.
Audible drinking water,
regardless of where you live.
So thank you for your time.
Thank you done.
Questions from the. Mr.
Chairman, I just want to make
one other point, which is, as
Donny mentioned, we have been
operating the local government
planning fund for since 2001,
and we have primarily been
funding preliminary insurance.
Reports for water and
wastewater. Um, and what we have
seen over the last couple of
years is that those preliminary
engineering reports which meet
the USDA standard and are
usually bigger than what a
community needs for to apply to
the water trust border to either
of the two federal drinking,
drinking or clean water
programs. Um, it's taking them
to maybe 3 years to complete
those documents. So that's that
because they don't have capacity
because they have a hard time
finding an engineer to be
Engineer may be doing.
3 or 4 at a time and so they're
relatively sullen getting back
materials or getting
participation with the board
that that delay, that just means
they're gonna be 3 years.
Longer before they can even
apply for funding or, you know,
not even get funding, but just
apply for funding. So our goal
here is to have some
efficiencies of scale, higher
enough engineers that are local
within the communities, get some
efficiency so they know how
they're getting paid. We won't
have to hire someone to oversee
the contractor of the individual
preliminary engineering courses
because they'll be done to a
standard that we understand, um,
that our contractors will know
they can mean that.
Um, and they, we won't go
through the hurdles of the
community having to figure out
how to secure a grant agreement,
apply for a grant agreement, and
do all the reporting. So we
take, we eliminated a number of
hurdles currently and we think
we can then, therefore do a
right-sized preliminary
engineering report, something
that allows them to apply for
the funding.
Um, and, and get these done
faster so that the communities,
these small systems have access
to funding sooner on the
regionalization side, we've
looked at Lower Rio Grande water
uh lower whatever that is, the
lower rigro system which has
been held up as the real model
of how regionalization happens.
We asked them how did you get it
done and they said they didn't
send us an engineer. They sent
us an attorney, and the attorney
worked through how all the
documents would work, all the
loan provisions, uh, you know.
The legal issues, we, we expect
that as we do this more, we'd
also want community
facilitators. We would want uh a
project, you know, uh, some sort
of project, um.
A person, white person on each
of these will likely need
accountants to help take care of
it, so.
Xenoph one provides a great
framework, but you still need to
kind of get some, you need
someone to help facilitate that
effort. Um, so those are the two
things that we have in front of
us. We, uh, again, we'd like to
go out for RFP so we can find
out how much capacity we really
can provide, um, uh, you know,
we only have one provider that's
interested but certainly gonna
limit our abilities if we have
sex, that certainly opens up a
lot of potential opportunities.
So we want to get out there and
um bring you guys
a solid plan for how that money
would go out the door and help
folks can access it and so.
What I would, uh, add.
There's no question. Mr.
Chairman, I am familiar with the
background of this subject and
I'm very supportive of moving
forward with this concept. I'm
willing to make a motion of in
favor of both of the components
the development of the
Technical assistance plan and
the authorization for the
funding.
Second Olympic.
Alright.
Um
Thank you, Donny. Thank you.
Appreciate your time.
Yes.
You.
So I bring it for you.
The
This is basically an update on
the construction cost overruns,
um,
they
That has that have happened
since the last time that we met.
So just as a a quick background,
in April, the board, uh April of
2022, the board did set aside
funds for projects, um, that
were awarded for construction
cost overruns for the 2021 and
2022 awards in August of 2023,
the board um approved some
canceled projects um in the 2023
cycle for construction costs
Runs for the 2023 cycle. So
right now,
And um
Sorry.
This year.
So, in the legislative session,
Then in Bill 275 allocated $18
million to the finance authority
to address construction cost
overruns for projects that were
approved by this board from 2023
and previous. So we're looking
at any from 2023 and and older
projects for construction cost
overruns. We did have Seattle
Regional Mutual domestic that
was awarded in the 2020 cycle
for design and construction of a
water storage and facility, um,
and
Distribution lines. The design
was completed, and went out to
bid shortly after, the low bid
came in double the project cost
of the estimate. The association
did apply for the 2024 cycle,
the current one that that just
ended um to help with this
construction cost overruns. So
because of the funding that we
received in the 2024 cycle and
in hopes to eliminate any
further delays in
Leading this specific project,
staff brought forward a
recommendation to the finance
authority for these additional
funds from the Senate bill 275
allocation to complete this
project. The additional funds
would allow the construction of
the remaining water lines and
meters to provide adequate water
to the west settle service area.
The finance Authority board
approved on June 27th, um, the
additional amount of 1.2 million
which will come to
and 100% grant. So if we look at
the table.
Of what we currently have.
You'll see that in 2021, uh, we
have 4 projects that have used
that construction cost overrun
that the board approved in 2022,
we still have the remaining
balance of 5.1 million. We do
see that of the 2022 projects we
have about 31 projects, an
estimate of about 66 or uh 31
projects were awarded about 66.9
million.
Of the 22 of the 31 projects we
have 15 projects that have been
identified as in construction or
being uh um awarded for
construction dollars of those
15, we have 16 or 6 that are
currently in construction, so we
believe that once the others,
the remaining, um, go into
construction, we are going to
see some more construction cost
overruns in 2023, we had to set
aside a little over $6
million.50 projects.
Awarded by this board of 122
million out of the um
50 projects, 31 of those
projects were awarded for
construction dollars and we
currently have two that are in
construction. So even though we
are in the 2025 cycle starting
or ending in 2024, we believe
that um with regards to the
remaining 2022 and 2023
projects, not only do we believe
that we can use that 18 million
up quickly, but also to set
aside that we had that this
board set aside for those
projects.
And so with that, um, Mr. Chair,
I stand for any questions.
Again, this was just an update.
Comes from the board.
and the number 9.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And this is the, OK, so, uh, Mr.
Chair, so what we bring before
you is the 2nd iteration that I
think everybody was has, has
been waiting for. So if you'll
recall, the board set aside.
Um, this year we had 167.1
million available for funding
and that came from the severance
tax bond. It also came from
House Bill 2, appropriation or
direct appropriation, I think it
was 50 million. So on April
23rd, this board awarded 45
projects in the amount of 136.6
million.
With those that weren't awarded,
we had 6 high ranked projects
which equal about 10
applications that could not be
awarded or certified due to not
meeting some regulatory
compliance. We had 4 that were
EO compliance, which is the
state audit rule, and we had two
that were environment department
Drinking Water Bureau
compliance, um, due to the
timing of when the project
review committee met and made
recommendations, and from when
the Water Trust board awarded
that project, these
could not meet that compliance
deadline.
Um, in that same meeting, the
board extended the compliance
deadline for these individuals
or these applicants to July 5th,
um, and to meet those, the board
also postponed the funny
decision of the remaining
balance of 30.4 million until
this meeting, um, in addition, 6
applications that were um were
not awarded, have met
compliance, but they were on the
lower ranking of the um.
Uh, the, the ranking scheduler
or um spreadsheet, uh, we're not
um awarded as well in the event
that any of the high ranking
projects could not meet those
compliance, those other 6
applicants would come before for
recommendations on any funding
that was available.
So what we have now is the
projects we prioritize the
projects in the order
determined.
Basically, in the same order
that was determined in the fall
of last year on how they were
ranking by their project type.
So, um, the 6 high rank projects
were um out of the 6 high rank
projects we had the city of
Espanola, which had 3
applications in El Rito Regional
could not meet the the July 5th
deadline. Uh, we have the city
of Espanola that anticipates
submitting or complaining their
FY 2023 audit in September and
we have El Rito, um, right now,
their last audit was in 2017 and
I know they're working on it.
But they could not um be it.
They have all of them have um
been uh reached out by staff to
recommend that they apply for
the 2025 cycle.
Um, we also have Luna County
that um had uh environment
department drinking water,
compliance if you'll recall,
they did meet that compliance,
but they removed their
application because the same
application they applied for was
in Collonius, and so they were
awarded through the colonist
program.
Um, of the projects that we are
recommending, we have some
projects and we'll look at the
next um spreadsheet that or
table that um we recommended for
phased amounts, we have the
Albuquerque Brunelio County
Water Utility Authority on their
expansion of their drinking
water treatment plant, um, their
initial request was 15 million
for planned design, surveying
and construction. What we
recommend is the phased amount.
of planned design and surveying,
have them complete that and then
come back for construction. We
have the village of Logan, which
was for their pipeline crossing,
their initial request was 2.2
million. The initial request was
for designing, surveying and
construction, we recommend that
they be awarded for design and
surveying of 381,800 and that
would, um, again, once they
completed their design, they
will come in for construction
dollars and then
We have the 2nd lower Rio Grande
um public waterworks Authority
for their uh regionalization on
the South Valley project. They
came in for again design right
away easements and construction,
um, we are only recommending
that they do the design right
away in the easement for over
700,000. So all of these
requests, the project review
committee has reviewed these
recommendations and concurs with
staff, staff recommends an
additional.
10 projects and the attached
spreadsheet um for the second
iteration, we also have a
remaining balance of a little
over $790,000 and staff would
recommend that as a set aside
for construction cost overruns
for the 2024 applicants at this
point we do not have any funding
for construction cost overruns
for the 2024 cycle, and all of
you have um or have the
spreadsheet so with
Mr. Chair.
Here is the spreadsheet that
shows those that are highlighted
are the ones that aren't
recommended. We do have that
that did not meet the compliance
with the exception of Luna
County that removed their
application as well as the city
of Albuquerque. They were the
last um rated project in the
flood prevention and
unfortunately, the requested
amount we did not have enough
money to fund them. And so with
that, I will stand for any
questions.
Questions on the board.
No. Do we have a motion?
All in favor? Hi.
Bye.
Hi.
It should be noted that this
board for the 2024 cycle ordered
55 projects or 166.7 million.
I did.
I think that totals like the 1st
10 years of
existence, by the way, I don't
think we did 165 million in the
1st 10 years, so it just
wouldn't know that that is one
year's worth of activity.
Yeah, we should sit on that for
a minute. Thank you. And we want
to add a 0 to it.
It's 30.
Yeah. We believe we will hit
that $1 billion mark next year.
Good
In water trust board funding.
Yeah.
Chairman, members of the board,
this next item is the
certification uh to add the
additional projects that Angela
just went through this board
back in April certified the need
to the state board of Finance to
issue the severance tax bonds
for the projects that were
attached for the 124,620,000.
This certification is an update
based on the 2nd iteration,
which adds in a uh exhibit A,
the 10 projects that Angela
mentioned. Uh, so this
resolution before you is
Just certifies that the funds
will be made available for those
additional projects we can get
that over to the state board of
finance and then everything
comes together.
Motion
All in favor.
Bye.
Right, the last item.
So, Mr. Chair, the last item.
Or the closest that is just.
It's just an overview of the
2025 cycle.
So that's what we, even though
we've just finished the 2024. We
are currently in the 2025 cycle.
Uh, so we had a notice of intent
period where we've asked all the
applicants, you know, kind of
the interest and that happened
in July 25 or 15th through the
31st, um, we received 90 notice
of intent for a requested amount
of a little over $329 million.
Um, right now,
On the table, you'll see what we
have. We are still accepting the
notice of intent up until the uh
application is submitted, the um
currently we look at about 122.8
million is available in funding.
Um, for this coming year, um, so
the online application again
will open on August 15th with
the submission by September
16th. Uh, so please, if, if you
have any of your communities
that have not submitted NOIs. We
are still accepting them.
And um basically,
What we're looking at is October
depending on how many
applications we received, we are
looking at a two day meeting,
October 2nd and 3rd for this
board to meet to look at project
presentations that may change
again with, with the scope, with
the amount of intent we're
expecting, you know, that
almighty applicants will submit
but, but if it changes, we will
let uh staff know. And so with
that, uh we had since 200
16, the, the rules have changed
um with regards to qualified
entities and qualified projects,
um, we believe that um
With, with that,
It still required that we have a
list to the legislative
oversight. So again, that's
gonna happen in I believe
November, so our next, or this
board will make an authorization
list or provide an author an
authorization list to the board
um on October 29th to the
legislature, excuse me, on
October 29th, so that's kind of
our days, you know, our, our
next meeting dates um to
Start off, or I guess the 2nd or
the first part of the legend of
application cycle, excuse me,
and the second phase of the
application once the legislative
um list authorization list goes,
will start in December and and
on January 23rd, and again, this
is just an informational item,
um, you'll see on the second
portion of that that we do have
the uh timeline.
That that we're looking at that
um all of the applicants will
have um on it as well, and it is
posted on the NMFA website. So
that's, that's just the overview
of our current 2025 cycle.
And I'll stand for any questions
on that.
Now the last item and again um
we have our project review
committee is going to meet on
September 25th to go over um
waivers.
On the applications that have
been uh
Brought forward or has been
submitted October 2nd and 3rd
are going to be discussion or
recommendation, uh, on the board
will decide on those waivers as
well as project presentations,
October 21st, the project review
committee will get together and
decide the authorization list
for recommendation in October
29th, this board will um look at
that authorization to be moved
forward for the next phase of
the 2025 cycle.
So
And then we won't see you until
April or May or something like
that. April.
I think.
We are, and at this point I, I
did not put um we may be having
some policy meetings in between
there because we have some other
rule changes that we have to
look at as well.
Yeah
And that's it.
That is in favor of procurement.
