You.
The Um Li. Is it written in a
way that makes it clear that
This isn't
We did it because we needed to.
But the the Executive committee
has a chance to actually
influence
That step.
Is there a specific section that
you're looking at? Just to make
sure
I. I think it's too yes after
consultation with the NF, A's
chief legal officer shall inform
the executive committee. OK, I
just want to make sure I was
I was just a little bit worried
that it could be an inform room
after the fact.
Um, I. I think in some instances
or the I think the short answer
is the the way that the process
would be designed to work and
we'll go back to it Is that, um
In this case what we're what
we're referring to is litigation
in the normal course of
business where the Finance
Authority is, Actually this is
not litigation involving board
members or employees. This is NM
FA business on a day to day
basis where we might need to go
out and enforce our rights under
a contract that we have with a
borrower, and sometimes we have
to act.
Um, you know, rather quickly,
depending on what what the you
know, it might be a risk of loss
of collateral or something like
that. Um, so there is some
wiggle room here, um, to grant
the authority.
Um
There's a I think there's a fine
line between, um acting within
the scope of our business and
the day to day handling the day
to day operations, which you
have passed your CEO with.
I consider these in many
instances.
The handling of day to day
operations. We have to go and
force you know, we have to go.
Uh, someone's not paying. We've
got to go enforce it. We're
gonna do it.
Market. I know you. I just
wanted to say, madam chair that
on the executive committee
charter page 41 of your
materials, initiation of
litigation. It's clear that the
it shall. The consultation shall
occur prior to initiating
litigation. So those two things
I think taken together. Um are
the way in which we intended to,
uh, make sure that that happens,
That's and that's absolutely
correct. And and thank you.
That's that is and that's why we
added that in the charter. We
wanted to have that mechanism
that link to address your
question. So thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Any other question, if not doing
her emotion, So, madam chair
Wait here a second.
Second madam Chair.
Motion is seconded on approval
of litigation and legal
representation policy.
Um, all those in favor. Say, I.
I
All those opposed motion
carries. Thank you for your time
this morning.
Next is a report from our CEO
Marquita. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I would just say
generally, April was a good
month for us relative to, um
employees. We added four really
fabulous employees. Um, let me
start by saying Fernando, who's
not here today. He was here, Um,
at, uh, the end at at the last
board meeting before he was at
one of our employees is out ill
today, so he's participating
via, um, zoom. Um, but he's not
present with us today, but he
started on April 1st No joke.
Um, as our deputy
Director and has hit the ground
running and is already you know,
tasked with a number of kin, Uh,
following through with a number
of key initiatives really happy
to have him on board. Also on
April 1st Rana Nava Bala, Who's
Our lead credit analyst, uh,
joined us. She was a long time
in the making. Um, and so we
were really pleased to get her
on board. As I mentioned
earlier. She comes with a lot of
credit. Uh, commercial credit
experience. So, uh, shes a
wonderful addition to our team
downstairs. Um, and then we have
Donnie Quintana.
Who many of you know. And if you
don't I don't know where you've
been. He has been in state
government for 25. Plus years.
um, and brings an incredible
resume to the finance authority.
He is our, um, project, uh,
oversight manager and we'll be
working with our two program
departments in ensuring that the
projects that the Finance
authority is responsible for
overseeing in terms of their
implementation are happening
correctly. We'll be working with
a team of consultants in many
instances, but there needs to
Somebody that really is tasked
with overseeing the construction
is happening the way it should.
Um, we did have for a long time
partners at the, um, Environment
department on our water
programs, Quote unquote. They've
had to pull back some of those
activities as they, um,
portfolios have grown at the
same pace that ours have. And
they've had, um, difficult to
get people to do the job that
they do. It's very hard job.
They've done it quite well for
us. Um, but we can't rely on
that, as we had been in the
past. Plus, we have all of
Private program, So we were
really happy to have Donnie.
come on board. Um and then Trish
Grego, who's in the back, has
joined us as program. Uh,
administrator, Uh, Bo board
administrator, um and she has
had she started on April 15th as
well and we've already had. I
think three board meetings this
week. So 42 Committee. We're
just It's a ton of activity in
April and may. So, uh, suffice
it to say we were really happy
to have her on board.
Unfortunately, we lost Mark
Montoya, a regional finance
manager. He went over, Um
To, uh, Legislative Education
Study Committee. Um, and that's
a big loss. So with that we are
with four open positions. We
expect to have two filled, um,
by the end of May, um, hopefully
14 by the end of this week, I
actually we did. We saw the one
yesterday. Um so we'll be down
below 5% before this next budget
happens and I'm really excited
to get to that point. As you
know it. It's taken us a while
to keep on top of natural, um,
turnover and then adding all
these positions year over year.
Um, so we are.
Um, we're at 69 folks, uh, with
the offer that was accepted
yesterday. That brings us to 70.
So, um, we're we're in good
stand. Um, the budget is, uh,
underway. Uh, we I just I shared
last month. The underpinnings of
that budget. The assumptions
that the, uh Finance and
disclosure Committee reviewed
and accepted were building that
budget now, um, I would, As I
mentioned last time, the primary
activity is to support the
implementation or redevelop
Of 10 programs. Um, I won't go
through them, but we've had seen
we've seen funding of just in
this past year alone. 245
million for the new programs. In
addition to the, uh, money for
the water trust board in other
areas that were increases.
Um
So we have a lot going on, Uh,
the budget shows the shows that
are, uh most of our new staff
will be needed in the second
half of the year. That's
coincidentally when we'll
actually have space for them as
well. Um, so that that was a
nice, uh, serendipitous moment.
Um, but we'll be marketing these
programs towards the end of this
year. Um, and then really
expecting to see the increase of
applications starting, uh, in
the next calendar year.
Um
That roughly leaves us with you
wanna go to that next page?
Um
Of expansions necessary. We're
right now, seeing about four
additional staff members that
we're gonna need, Um, so in
addition to filling the vacancy
from Mark, we'll need to add
another regional finance
manager. This is as we increase
our outreach to banks, which is
gonna need a brand new
initiative. Um, we expect to see
a need for more another person
on our credit department. Um,
that is, uh, that's becoming a
Really important function within
our agency. They're taking on
more of those of you in the
Economic Development Committee
are seeing some of their work
firsthand. Um and the public
lending committee will start to
see some of that as well.
Um and we either need to add
someone to our program
Administration team or add
someone to Donnie's team at the
program Oversight Project
oversight level as that, as he
starts to develop that program,
we'll be able to tell, you know,
more importantly, where that
position is, and then we're
looking to add, Um as we build
together, all of our programs
there needs to be a central
reporting mechanism out so that
we can create those dashboards
internally to see where we are.
That's gonna need someone, uh,
just purpose purpose built to,
uh, oversee that system.
Flow workflow to take tickets in
for the areas that aren't
working, Um, to take the reports
of where we are successful build
those dashboards. So we're
looking for what we're calling
at this point a system workflow
administrator, Um they'll be
running our Zen desk. We we
trotted out the idea of a Zen
master. But, um, seemed like a
hard thing to, uh
Recruit with as a title.
Um, And so I think at this
point, I would just mention that
we are looking at, um, a base
increase of the the new folks
would be about 8 10% and then
the 8% from regular activities.
Um, I'm sorry. The other way
around. One time initiatives are
8% increase. Um, regular flow
of, uh, increase of our existing
programs is 10.
So it's about an 18% increase
that we're expecting at this
point to see.
Um the 8% 1 time cost include
the relocation to the new
building those moving costs to
get out of our existing building
and into our new one It
includes, um some planning for
our system Integration project.
It includes the start up, uh, of
a completion of that risk
management tool that we're
implementing, Um, as well as
continued work on our records
retention project, so that 8%
while it's significant for a
year, we don't expect to see two
years down the
For instance.
Um So at this point, we are
expecting to see that budget
Come in, Uh,
Finance and disclosure saw a
draft of that they'll see a full
draft of it of of final product
in May for their consideration
to, uh, recommend to you. So at
this time we expect you'll see
it in May.
Um And then, lastly, at the end
of the meeting today, we'll go
over a strategic plan kind of
update. Um, and that's in
anticipation of our, um
Strategic Visioning Sessions.
Special board meeting on Friday
May 17 so I won't spend too much
time there, but we're really
excited to bring it, you know to
this next level and start
working in the next fiscal year
with a strategic plan in place.
Um, And then Lastly, um, with
this being
I'll be back in the Capitol. We
are starting our interim
oversight committees. Uh,
season. So, um, we'll meet on
May 9th for the first, um,
meeting on the afternoon and
then we expect to have I think
about four or five meetings.
It's an aggressive schedule this
year. Um, we'll actually need it
because we have a lot of rules
that they'll have to approve. So
we are, um, welcoming an early
set of, uh, committee meetings
so that we can get some rules in
And, um, thank you.
Any questions?
Thank you.
Next on the agenda is the public
lending committee and an update
on activities from acting chair
to heel.
Good morning. I'm Madam Chair.
Uh, the public lending committee
met last week on April 17th and
we did have a quorum during that
meeting. We did cover four
agenda items, the first being,
um we reviewed three planning
grants. Um All of those were
recommended to the full board
and will appear on the consent
agenda to follow on the next
item that we reviewed were, uh
two projects related to the
drinking water state Revolving
loan program on those projects
that we reviewed were
specifically tied to one service
line, a replacement project and
one comprehensive upgrade of an
existing well, water.
System project both of those and
will appear on the agenda to
come. One of them was, um,
really large, so it will be on
the regular agenda. The other
one will be on the consent
agenda. The third item on that
the public landing committee
reviewed where the Public
project revolving fund projects.
There were seven of them. All
seven were recommended to the
full board. Four of those, um
will appear on the consent
agenda and three of them were on
the regular agenda. The last
item that we reviewed were the
committee chair, Um, which the
board already took action on And
with that
I would defer to staff to go
over the consent to
So first on the consent Agenda
project 7.1.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Good morning. Um
Madam Chair members of the
board. Um, the consent agenda
item 7.1 0.37 0.3 have been
brought before today.
Uh, 7.1 is La Jolla Mutual
Domestic Water Consumers
Association. They are located
between Berlin and Saro area.
Um, they have come to the local
government planning fund for a
preliminary engineering report
and this plan will evaluate
alternatives cost estimates and
recommendations to their water
system in the amount of $50,000
Um, item 7.2 is for Springer.
And this is for a preliminary
engineering report as well, and
this plan will assess their
water distribution system,
primarily
And the amount of 50,000
Item. 7.3 is for Green Ridge
Mutual Domestic Water Consumers
Association, and they're located
off of I 40 in the southern
foothills of the Sandia area.
And they also a preliminary
engineering report, focusing on
recommendations to their water
system as well.
And this also is in the amount
of 50,000
Um, we recommend these projects
and I stand for any questions
for good morning, madam chair
members of the board of
directors item 7.4 through 7.8
were reviewed and recommended by
the public lending Committee for
consideration for your approval
on today's consent agenda.
So item. 7.4 is on page 65 of
your board book, and this is
request from the Rio de Ana
Arenales
Arenas LLC Sorry. Um
Also known as Park at Whiskey
Creek, which is a long term RV
trailer park, located in Grant
County.
This will be the first private
for profit system supported by
the
Drinking water State Revolving
loan fund and the proceeds will
be used for a comprehensive
upgrade for the existing water
system.
According to conversations with
local leaders. This project will
provide existing and additional
workforce housing, which is in
high demand in the Silver City
area.
I, mentally driven by the mining
and the health care industry.
So their request is for 100 and
1000. There will be no subsidy
or principal forgiveness and
their net interest costs will be
4% and their term will be 22
years with the two year
construction period.
Net system revenue will serve
our pledged revenue, giving us
14.96 times coverage.
Because for this support profit
entity, we will also request
collateral, which will include
property that will be secured by
deed of trust and a first lien
filed through a UCC filing.
On the equipment and the
conscious sea, giving us 33
point.
05 time low to value a percent
loan to value.
Uh, receiving the appraisal is a
condition of closing of this
loan.
We have also included the
community impact report and, uh,
also a description of the
management team.
Item 7.5 on page 78.
It's a request from Quake
County.
For the Bard in the Fire
department to finance the
purchase of a fire apparatus in
respective equipment. This loan
is for 100,000 at the
disadvantaged rate of zero based
on the county's MH I and will
carry a seven year term. The
county will pledge its state
fire protection fund
distribution as a revenue
source, and this gives us 3.54
times coverage.
Item. 7.6 is on page 87.
And it's a request on behalf of
a Taro County for the Otero
Vista Volunteer Fire Department
to finance the purchase of a new
fire apparatus and respective
equipment.
This loan is in the amount of
100 and 50,000 at the
disadvantaged rate of 2%.
And that's based on the county's
MH. I and this will carry a nine
year term. The county will
pledge the fire protection funds
distribution as its revenue
source. And this gives us 1.95
times coverage.
Item 7.7. This is on page 96 of
the board book. It's a request
from House Municipal District
for a loan in the amount of
400,000 of which they will
receive 40,000 in disadvantaged
funding.
Based on the district's MH. The
district did receive voter
approval in November of 2023 and
the description of the various
projects that will be funded are
outlined in the project
Descriptions. The final item on
today's consent agenda is item
7.8. And this is, uh, this can
be found on page 110 of your
board book, and this is a
request from for the Magdalena
Municipal School district to
finance the costs of an
educational technology note for
the district.
The loan is for the amount of
209,001 45.
Which they will receive 100 and
15 disadvantaged funding based
on the district's MH I. The use
of the proceeds are detailed in
the project Description section
of your board summary
Madam chair members of the board
of Directors. Staff recommends
approval of items 7.1 through
7.8 on today's consent agenda,
and we stand for
I have some quick questions.
There are two projects 7.5 and
7.7, in which the applicants
have findings on their annual
audits.
Um, material weakness and a
significant deficiency. Can you
talk to us about what our policy
is? Um, especially with organ
organizations that you know
we're putting on how we vet
those sure some Madam Chair Um
Madam Chair the, uh, policy
Currently, states that all
mature weaknesses will be listed
and a corrective action plan
will be submitted. Um, it also
states that significant
deficiencies that are repeated
will also be included in the in
the UM or summary in this case.
Um, in case of
This is quake County. They did
provide a corrective action plan
in which they are switching, Um,
accounting systems. They are
consulting with an accounting,
um, system to get their, um,
finding resolved. We do ask for
the corrective action plan, and
they do provide it and we
provide we in the various
committees we do discuss those.
We are also looking at, um
Looking at ways of
Of, um
Uh, solving some of these issues
that that have come up. Uh,
previously we're looking at, uh,
being more consistent with the
way we we look at this. And so
with that manager
And man, I would just mention
one other thing. The policy
requires that the project be
core public health safety,
welfare, um, that the revenue
stream be, Um, uh, unrelated to
the project itself, so you'll
see these a lot with general
obligation bonds. Um G, RT, um
and even fire protection funds.
Those are things that come from
other sources. And so we're not
relying on the information they
provide. It is a sign of
governance. It's a sign of
operational efficiency. It's not
a sign. We believe as
Whether the loan will get
repaid. And so there's this.
this kind of a delicate balance
that we have to watch. These are
loans that comply relative to
our, um, credit policies that
say yes, they have a very high
likelihood of getting repaid,
but it is an overall sign of
weakness or deficient of a
potential vulnerabilities in the
operation. So we are focusing on
what they say They're going to
do whether they're following
through. But if, in fact the six
tests that we have to apply
pursuant to policy we find
They're not going to be in a
position to, um
Where they've increased the
risk, then we would not be
making that recommendation. It
has happened. You don't see
those Come forward. Um they get
stopped at the credit committee
when we feel like there isn't
uh, an a way for us to justify
lending the capital. And they
really frankly don't know how
much money they have, for
instance. Um so you you don't
see those? Um, but there is a
six a six part test that
pursuant to policy. We have to
apply.
Thank you. Thanks so much for
that explanation. Any other
questions from board members if
there are no miniature to prove
that item 7.127 0.8 as presented
Hearing. No objections will take
this vote right? Any discussion.
If not all those in favor say I
I
All those opposed.
Motion carries.
Next to the regular agenda.
Morning met him chair and board
members. Can you hear me?
Everybody? OK, good. Um which is
before you the city of
Farmington? Uh,
Uh, it's part of the BIL lead
service line Inventory
replacement program.
In December. 2023
The city of Farmington applied
to the P, Uh, the drinking water
statement following fund for
Uh to finance? Uh, an inventory.
Uh, survey of the city's, uh,
determine the city's lead lines
and, um, due to increasing costs
of the project, uh, they've
requested approval to amend the
loan and increase the amount by
$2.2 million. You know, uh,
The original loan amount was for
a little more than what
principal forgiveness of more
than a little more than
$450,000.
Um
The city is not drawn down any
of the funds at this time. New
amount of the loan is 3
$3,728,540 with a principal
forgiveness amount of 1,118,000
and, uh, $562.
Uh, even with this new amount,
they do have a coverage of 5.76
times
with pledged revenue of net. Um,
this project.
Was originally, uh, on the
fiscal year. It was number six
in the fiscal year 2024 BIL that
service line replacement funding
prior priority list. No
weaknesses. This is the second
time this project has appeared
before the board and staff does
recommend approval. I will now
stand for any questions that,
uh, the tide to Johansson
myself. My answer for you.
Just ask how Johansson to
mention this is one of the first
that we saw come through, Um,
and it had fairly significant
cost overruns. Um, you wanna
just give a comment on where we
think the others are going with
the, uh, service line
inventories. There's a mandatory
due date of October 16th 2024 to
submit their service line
inventories to the environment
department. So Farmington was
one of the initial respondents
to the program, which allowed us
to apply for the funds. There
was a
Play between
Collecting the projects and
then, um, applying for the
capitalization grants from the
EPA, which led to the cost
overruns as these? This deadline
is fast approaching. Um
The people who do these surveys
are becoming more in demand. Um
So the cost they went out to bed
with with this project before we
close the loan, and we're going
to carry those costs so they can
make sure they may meet that
deadline, so as this was one of
the larger projects, and it was
one of the earlier ones that had
that submitted their cost
estimates earlier. We do think
we might see some more cost
overruns. But a lot of the
communities did in do like a
20% contingency on this going
forward.
Any questions?
If not do I hear a motion to
approve the project for the city
of Farmington.
So I'm sure
Motion is made. Is there a
second?
Second madam Chair seconded by
member Constantine.
Is there any discussion?
Not all those in favor say.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you Next,
the Cimarron Municipal School
district.
Morning be and chair and board
members. So what you see here in
front of you on page 134 and
your board book is for Cimarron
Municipal School district home
in the Rams, which is located in
Cron, New Mexico. This is a PF
2020 14 obligation bond loan
request, and in November of
2023, this district did receive
a voter approval for $5 million
and that approval is valid for a
period of four years and similar
around in municipal school
district does have a loan
request for you today and it's
for $1,250,000. It is for a
Year term. It is what the 3.53%
net interest cost.
And as you look into the project
description, you'll see that the
proceeds of this loan request
will be used for but are not
limited to to the items that are
listed in your board material on
page 134. And as you review that
project list, you'll notice that
these items are to improve the
school in different aspects for
the benefit of the students and
staff, which is important to
that district.
The proceeds will also be used
for cost of issuance.
As you look at the strengths
you'll see strengths to include
that major taxpayers do equal
3.7% of the total assessed
valuation, which reflects a low
concentration risk of the tax
base.
And the total cess valuation has
steadily increased since 2019 as
well.
With respect to weaknesses,
you'll see that there's none to
report.
The fiscal year. 2023 audit was
unmodified. It did have 12
findings, But none of those
findings are irrelevant to this
particular financing request
whatsoever.
This is the first time that this
project has appeared before the
board staff does recommend
approval, and I'm happy to stand
for any questions.
Any questions from the board on
this project?
Um, I. I have a question.
Speaking of cost overruns on a
loan like this that has a 1.0
debt service coverage, which
means their CAS can just barely
support the the loan. What
happens if there's a cost
overrun?
And then your debt to coverage
is below one.
What? What's the path forward?
So, Madam chair and um, member
of Collins. It's a good
question. So we do look at Adar
taxes, which is, um you know a
general obligation bond. And so
if there's any type of concern
with respect to that particular
revenue stream than it is
addressed with that particular
as you know that particular tax
revenue and it has the ability
to be, um increased in order to
be able to meet this demand. I
don't know if Marquita has
anything she wants to add. I
would just say that by law, they
can't collect more than is due
on the bonds, so it'll always be
one times coverage, even though
they may
Additional tax capacity and even
voter authorization so they'll
only ever collect what's on this
debt service schedule. Um, what
I think you're really getting to
is they They're given a fixed
amount of money, and so they
have to really choose how to
spend those limited proceeds so
they'll it will reduce other
parts of their project so you'll
see long lists, um, for these
school bond deals in particular,
Uh, the voters give broad
authority generally on how they
can spend the money and they
tend to prioritize within those
A and complete the projects
really sort of on a priority
basis. Um, so if they don't end
up having enough money for the
top priority, they will probably
hit the next. You know, several
priorities and wait until either
their cost. Their project can be
redesigned or something else. It
is a project implementation
issue. Not a not a bond or debt
service issue, So something gets
cut. Something gets cut.
Or the reasons you've mentioned
OK?
Me, Madam chair. Just a brief
comment. Uh,
Help Sam's with Sam's question.
Um, you know, in in actuality, a
lot of times on these general
obligation bond projects, the
Governmental entity or
educational, uh, institution
will put out bid lots so they'll
they'll have, um
You know they'll they'll have
alternates that they either
accept or don't based on, uh,
the bids that come in for the
project. So, uh, that's kind of
how they handle the project
implementation and staying
within the budget.
Thank you.
Thank you, member Burke.
Can remember.
Any other questions? Not do I
hear emotion so mood.
OK, madam Chair.
Um, motion is seconded any if
not all those in favor. Say, II.
I
All those opposed same sign
motion cars City of Espanola.
OK, Madam Chair and board
members, which you see here on
page 148 in your board material
is a PF 2024 fire equipment loan
request, and it is from the city
of Espinol and the Espanola Fire
Department. This is a loan
request for an amount of
$870,881.20. And it does have a
2.36% net interest cost.
It is for a 10 year term, and
you'll see that the coverage for
this request is 7.33 times
because they're utilizing gross
receipt tax as a revenue source.
So the espinol of Fire
Department is planning on
replacing its current older
brush truck that is nearing its
end of useful life.
This. The Espanola Fire
Department plans on purchasing a
new brush truck with the loan
proceeds. This new brush truck
will allow the city to continue
to deliver for uninterrupted
firefighting services for the
city of Espanol and the
residents, which is important to
this community.
Espin Fire Department will also
be providing a total of $400,000
in contributing funds for this
particular transaction.
As you look at the strengths,
you'll see that the fire
equipment will provide for the
health and safety of the welfare
of the community.
And the proposed loan does
present a 7.33 times coverage
ratio, which is, um, a strength
as well.
Now, when it comes to
weaknesses, you'll see that the
2022 audit had 13 findings,
seven of which were material
weaknesses.
The 2023 audit has yet to be
submitted, and it is expected to
receive a late audit finding
The city did provide us with a
corrective action plan that
addresses all the material
weaknesses.
The city is also working to get
that 2023 audit submitted.
They are focusing on hiring
appropriate staff currently, and
they're implementing measures to
correct these items identified
in the 22 audit.
So as you can see, in the sports
summary report, there's a lot of
information provided with
respect to the audit findings,
So to summarize all these
findings for you and the Craig
de plan that was provided
The city did lose their previous
finance director and a new
finance director, has been hired
recently and is working to
address all these findings along
with getting that fiscal year.
2023 audit submitted
So as you can see, we do have a
special guest with us here
today. Um, Her name is April
Marie Moya, and she is the city
of Espanol's new finance
director.
She is here to address any
questions or concerns you may
have with respect to the audit
findings that I must bring it to
your attention today, and we
sure do appreciate her being
here with us today.
Um, This is the first time that
this project has appeared before
the NM FA board staff does
recommend approval, and we are
happy to answer any questions
you may have.
Thank you. Thanks for the
presentation.
Just that you got your work cut
out for you. I do.
Madam chair. I got a quick
question. Yes, Madam. Chair
Ryan. When do you expect the 23
audit to be completed? I know
there's been change out in
staff. But is there a timeline
on when that is gonna be
delivered to the state order? So
currently there? 2022 1 was just
released in January.
So, uh, we're in the process of
cleaning up the books.
And, uh, we just sent a letter
to the Office of State auditor
today that as soon as we get
that completed, we will begin
it. We've already started part
of it at least getting the data
over to the auditors, But I
don't have a time frame at this
moment. Thank you for that.
About staffing and what is
appropriate staffing? Who do you
have in place? So currently it's
myself. I'm chair of finance
director
I just recently a month and a
half. I've been with the city of
Espinol since late October. I
have an accounts payable. I have
Um
A August, uh, procurement and
then I also oversee utilities.
Um, billing, So I have three
staff and there's I have three
vacant positions right now,
which is an accountant, an
accounts receivable. Uh,
financial Ana now, so ultimately
I'm lacking three.
Positions that
Are
Oh, I had. Yeah, I need to have
the need of at least three
people posting to the general.
we are trying to put in place
right EPA auditing firm to help
with getting the 23 on track.
So that may speed up that time
of the 23 Q. Thank you.
Any other.
If not do I hear a motion on
this project. Some of you
There's a motion to approve a
32nd Second Madam motion is made
and seconded any discussion.
If not all those in favor. Say,
II. I
always do.
Next time on the agenda, Union
County General Hospital.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the New Mexico
Finance Authority Board. Excuse
me. I believe I have some guests
online today.
Do we have, uh, brandy?
Thompson, who is the Union
County manager.
And we should have a clay, who
is county commissioner and then
two principles from Union County
Hospital.
Both Melissa and Tammy. So with
that, um madam chair.
And would just like to stay, Uh,
start by saying
That what you have before you
today is basically next steps,
and this is next steps from our
executed. Um, second, um, letter
agreement that this board
approved last November at last
October, executed in November.
And the actions that I have
before you today are listed in
the memo.
Firstly, what we would like to
do is start receiving payments
for our three loans starting
September 1st 2024.
We would also like
To amend the call date for P PR
F 4931, and by amending the call
date it will allow for an early
payoff of this loan.
If we continue receiving
payments in September, starting
in September.
Our first two loans. P PR F
3145 in P PR F 3384 are gonna
pay off at their original
maturities, 2025 and 2026
respect by amending the call
date were actually going to have
an early payoff.
Of 4931, which will be 2026, as
opposed to 2029.
We would also like to waive for
each of the loans. The
replenishment of the debt
Service Reserve funds.
We would like to continue with
the active intercept agreement
that we currently have with the
gross receipts tax.
Also
We would like to continue using
the current debt Service Reserve
fund and the debt service. Uh,
account to make May 1st payment
2025 and the November 1st
payment of 2025.
And lastly, what we would like
is to continue receiving the
quarterly financials until our
last loan is paid off in 2026.
So with that staff recommends
approval as noted, um, actions
in our memo and also just
reiterate amending the call date
for 4931 in any other actions
needed by legal for these loans.
And with that, um, I will turn
it over should, um, our union
And contingency have any, um
added comments or should the
board have any questions for
them?
Thank you.
So I is chair Keisling with us.
Uh, yes, I'm here. Thank you for
being here. Is there an issue?
Is there anything that you want
to say to address the board on
this matter?
Uh, no. Just I mean, uh,
Yeah. This loan, uh, amendment.
I mean, we've looked at it and,
uh, yeah, it'll help the
hospital. Um, you know, I mean,
we that intercept agreements in
place and you know
With the the new bills that went
through, uh, the Legislature
recently recently. Um, I think
the hospital will be on really
good sound footing. And, uh,
yeah, This just helps out a lot.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members for
On this project or
So, Madam Chair. I just wanted
to say that you know, we started
this back in the I guess fall or
late late summer, um, and the
the the problem we had before us
is that as a result of the
change in Medicaid
reimbursements the city was, uh,
the hospital was finding itself
without enough operating cash to
stay alive and our loan was a
major drain on its operation. So
the steps that we've taken over
the last two terms have been
short term in nature because we
wanted them to find and fix
before we were able to fix it
out. So we're
Quite there at the final place.
Um, because all the rules from
the latest, uh, legislative, um,
session have not yet been
implemented so they don't know
to what extent they can rely on
some of those remedies, but we
saw it as a really good step.
And so this next action, um,
allows us to basically con
continue as we've been doing, Um
and then I think we'll continue
to provide updates to you and
there will likely be, you know
an additional, um, there may be
an additional action taken
later. But this puts us in a
place where they can
Great for the near term and make
sure that the hospital can stay,
Um in OO open. Frankly, it's a
really critical piece up in that
part of the state. So
So a quick thank you to everyone
involved for working through a
solution.
We know health care and pre is
important so
Thank you for bringing to us a a
fix here and continuing our
work.
Any other input from the board.
If not do I hear emotion.
Motion is made. Is there a 2nd
2nd?
Motion is made and seconded Any
discussion. All those in favor.
Say, I. I
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you for
being with us today. Thank you.
Mhm.
Next on the agenda is the
economic development Committee
with, um, acting chair Trujillo
reporting out
Madam chair. The Economic
Development Committee met on
April 16th. We did have a
quorum. Um, During that agenda,
we did have three items that we
covered. The first one was
reviewing on the program
monitoring report. Um, which is
a monthly report that's provided
to the committee going over the
status of payments by portfolio
and then also the individual
loans. That was just an
informational item. The second
item that we covered was, uh,
the venture capital program
staff did recommend a commitment
of up to $4 million for Guo's
venture fund on the commitment
will be split using two
And from the federal state. Um
small business Credit Initiative
and $2 million from the state
funds, and this is an action
item and stuff will be
presenting this. Um, I believe
next. The third item that we
reviewed was a committee charter
on which has already been
presented to the board.
So next on the agenda is 9.2 a
commitment of $4 million
Almost venture fund.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. Can you
hear me? Ok, OK, just one second
Can members online here, OK with
us microphones now.
And in the back of the room. I
think that was the last problem.
OK, good. We've got thumbs up.
Yes, we can hear. OK, great, um,
really excited to be with you
guys here today? Um, uh, I'm
going to, uh, make some high
level comments and then handed
over to, uh, who's joining us?
online? Uh and they're gonna
cover some of the details from
the due diligence that they
conducted and then we've got two
members of the Vamos ventures
team here today. They're really
excited to present to you all
and to meet you. Um And so, uh,
Vamos Entres is a venture.
Capital firm that was founded in
2016, and they invested it by,
uh, diverse founders and with a
specific photo focus on latinx
entrepreneurs. Um vamos mission
is to empower diverse
communities by supplying capital
mentorship networks and
strategic sort of areas. Uh,
Marcos Gonzalez is the founder.
Uh, he started his career at IBM
in Boston consulting group and
also has experience in private
equity. Uh, before he founded
Vamos Ventures in 20.
He raised his first fund. Uh,
$50 million.
Um, that he's deployed. Uh, he
and his team have deployed to 30
portfolio companies. All of
these and they're currently
raising. Uh, their second fund.
This would be a $4 million
commitment into that, uh, fund
too. Their target Capital raise
is $100 million for that fund.
They've already closed on
approximately 30 million in the
second close that we would
potentially, um Marcos has built
his team. Uh, today they're
including himself. Um, and
they've also recently made, uh,
a part time operating partner.
Time CO that will be on board,
um, through operations.
Um, high level because Ethan and
I'm sure they're gonna go a bit
more into their strategy their
on this fund is a national fund.
Uh, their fund one had, um
Uh, deployed to, uh, businesses
in eight different ST. Uh, they
have offices in in California
and in New York.
Um and they expect, um, fun to
will also have justified,
including, uh in Mexico.
Um, in terms of the program fit,
so you'll see on on the Maquis
analysis. Uh, relative to our,
uh, this potential commitment
scores, uh, very strong on
benefits for underserved
communities and their ability to
attract additional private
investment. So, uh, they are
100% focused on investing
lenders. Um, and they're also
have a lot of credibility. Uh,
their ability and networks to
help on capital. Um which we
know is AAA gap here in the
ecosystem. Uh,
Early stage businesses, Um, and
they also have a lot of
credibility with impact
investors. We had the
opportunity to foundation. Um,
but this is a highly credible
team in in the industry, um and
really viewed as leading in, um,
um in terms of the
recommendations, so we're
recommending, uh, a total
commitment of 4 million
Unlike some of the prior, uh,
commitments that we've made out
of the venture Capital program
fund. This recommendation is not
an up to because they've already
raised the match. Um so, uh, if
we're, uh we did recommend a
split on $2 million from SSB C
funding in $2 million from, um,
the state appropriation. Um,
this, uh, fund is actually
highly aligned with SSB C. Uh,
study founded and led
businesses. Um, However, um, we
determine the allocation out of
So SS PC over all the award 75
and we have about a $7.5 million
to businesses based based
outside the state. Um so we're
putting that 2 million in the in
that bucket. Um, we we still
think it makes a lot of sense
for S BC I because it's it's
highly mission. Alize business
owners. Um, but for that reason,
um I'm gonna go ahead and hand
it over to Ethan and let him
highlight. Um some of the some
of the points in front of you
strengths and weaknesses from
the diligence.
Thank you, Ryan. Good morning,
members. Uh, good morning. Good
morning, madam Chair and members
of the board. Pleased to be here
again and joined by my
colleagues, Uh, Sabrina Ciampa
and Michael pellets online. Uh,
who did a lot of the diligence
work here? Um, I'm gonna cover
two things, Uh, ms Process and
then strings of weakness. This
is the opportunity and give
plenty of time for the bas team
as well.
In terms of Nikita's process.
Um, this is actually a group
we've known since 2019. We've
had another client commit to
their fun one. So it's good.
We've spent a lot of time with
over the years and see how they
acted and, um, so that was very
helpful in our diligence
process. Um, we also sent our
standard. DDQ, uh, conducted
background checks. Um, and
conducted reference calls on
this group again for this fun,
two investment.
Um And then this has been
through our complete private
markets Research Committee
process and, uh, our private
markets research team concluded
that this would be a reasonable
investment for NM FA given the
program's goals.
In terms of the strengths and
weaknesses of the opportunity.
Um, first of all, the biggest
strength is that this is a very
nice fit with the program's
goals. Um, and there's not
another fund of this size. Uh,
that we are aware of that
matches up so critically with
the program's goals, um and and
funding set entrepreneurs,
underserved markets and could
bring capital to the state from
from the outside.
Uh, second, we believe the team,
uh, that Marcos and Maya and
others have constructed a vamos
is really impressive and has
grown, uh, at the right scale
for the fun size. Uh, so we've
been and we've, uh, the
reference calls, uh, agreed with
that as well.
Uh, Maya, who you'll get a
chance to meet here will be one
of the point people in New
Mexico and so another strength
is that they will have regular,
uh, touch points with the state
at least four times per year
coming to the state and and, uh,
sourcing opportunities as well
as holding office hours, as well
as finding a seat scout or two
in the state of New Mexico to
source opportunities.
Uh, third, uh, Bas has a strong
network of particularly with
diverse founders, um, in
reference calls really back that
up.
And then fourth, um really that
connection to, uh, New Mexico?
We We haven't found another fun
that really offers the same, Um
Uh, level of interest in diverse
founders in the state. Um, as
well as
Terms of considerations. Uh,
like many of the opportunities
you've already reviewed, this is
a newer firm. They're on their
front to. So that's It's not a
fun one. But it is still an
early, uh, fun for them. And so
there's limited track record for
us to assess. Um, and they're
still developing their team.
A second. Uh, the fun one did
not make has not made any
investments in New Mexico. We
have seen a pipeline, uh, of
potential deals in New Mexico
from the Vamos team. So that
does somewhat mitigate that
factor.
Um, In addition to having the
seed scout and the visits, uh,
that they're planning per year.
Third, There's key person risk
here. Uh, Marcus has built a a
nice team, but, uh, he is a a
key person for this fund, and,
um, there's risk around that.
And then finally, um
One of the strengths of the
group, which I didn't mention is
that they have a significant
backing from other high quality
institutional LP S foundations
that you've heard of other, um,
Apple Bank of America. Other
groups. Um and that's great
because it'll bring additional,
uh, dollars into the state of
Mexico. Um, One of the
considerations is a few of the
groups that back their fund one
such as Twitter, and PayPal and
Carter are no longer investing
in diverse uh, founders or
diverse funds, and so they will
not be part of fun, too. Um, we
actually see that as
As a weakness in terms of the,
um the other investors, But it's
actually um
More of a statement of I think
where the market has gone and
unfortunately for diverse L
opportunities
So with that, uh, we'll turn it
over to the Vamos team for and
then Ryan, I thank you.
Madam Chair members of the
board. Good morning. Good
morning. I'm Marcus Gonzales.
I'm as you've heard already the
founder of managing partner of
Thomas Ventures.
I'm very happy to be here.
Uh, New Mexico has played a role
in my family's life.
And my is, too and, uh we'll
describe it in a second.
Um
When you start a fund like this
That is focused on generating
returns, but doing more than
that, and that's having an
active role in the ecosystem.
And being a role model.
For diverse entrepreneurs you
have to find aligned LPs,
aligned Asset owners aligned
investors, they're going to be
willing to sign up.
For the same mission.
Um, that's not easy to do.
Um, it's getting a little easier
as the world changes, but, um,
so I'm very excited to be here
when it says a lot about what's
happening in the industry and a
lot about you all.
What we're all trying to do
together.
My connection with New Mexico.
Uh, starts with my sister. She
is a professor in Oklahoma. But
she teaches in Taos as well.
So my nephew was born in
Albuquerque.
Um And she, um, will be actually
she's the head curator over here
in Santa Fe, which we're all
very excited about. We're all we
will all be, um and, uh, my In
fact, my older brother had five
bypass surgery in Albuquerque
Successful surgery.
Um so
A lot of things have happened in
this state for us have plenty of
friends from the state as well.
Maya has two and I'll ask Maya
to Good morning, Madam chair and
members of the board. My name is
Maya Trujillo.
I'm an analyst at the fund, and
I'm a part of the investment
team and also support our
fundraising efforts.
I'm really happy to be here
today because my family is from
New Mexico.
Both of my parents were born in
Espanola. My mom went to Valley
High School in Albuquerque and
later UN M for both undergrad
and law school.
So this is a really great full
circle moment for me and really
excited my husband with us for
about two years now, Um and
we're super happy to have her.
Uh, we're building a great team.
One of the important things for
me has been. How do we build a
platform that's gonna be, um
This fund is not called Marcos
and company.
Or Gonzalez and company. It's
called Vamos. And, um, we have
four full time folks now. Ashley
Ayden, who's in New York.
Larry Martinez in Los Angeles
and Maya, who is an analyst. We
have two part time, folks, one
of them will become full time
now this month, if not this
month next month, and that's
Andreas Min who's gonna be our
COO. He currently is 50%, and
he's joining us full time and we
have a venture partner who's
part time as well will be hiring
a couple more people as we grow.
Um, but it is a great team,
because not only do they have
great academic and professional
experience, they come from the
communities we want to serve.
So you cannot teach that
Or buy it, And that's very
valuable for the work that we're
trying to do.
So why moms ventures? Um, my
career and I won't go through it
again. But, uh, was in private
equity asset management strategy
Consulting and I did a start up
in the nineties, the first
Internet days in the late
nineties Me into, uh, other co
founders. We raised about $8
million. We ran a business. We
lived through 911. We were based
in Boston in New York. We lived
through the Internet bubble,
which imploded and we survived
and we eventually sold the
company.
Um, but I got to see the value
and the importance of starting
companies.
And so, uh, maybe eight years
ago, I got to the point in my
life where I thought we need to
do something more interesting
here and I left Washington. I
came back to California I
started almost ventures to do
two things. One is to focus on
opportunity that
Is obvious to me, but to a lot
of people is not
Uh, And then second is to do
something meaningful with our
professional careers and our
personal interest.
So Obama's ventures is a fund
that focus on diverse teams. Why
diverse teams number one. We
think it's a meaningful
opportunity and number two. We
We care about that.
So it takes intentionality to
really put money to work in the
marketplace.
Um, we focus on early stage
companies.
We look at diverse teams and we
have a particular focus on the
latinx community, not exclusive
to the audience community, but
that's one of our areas of
focus.
We have four sectors that are
important to us.
I'll describe them a little bit.
Then I'll ask Maya to describe a
company or two and I'll I'll do
the same.
Uh, the first one is health and
wellness, Health and wellness
for us is very broad.
But really, what it comes down
to is four key sub sectors
Number one chronic disease
management to mental health.
three affordability and
accessibility and for age
And we got to these sub sectors
because there's a lot happening
there broadly but especially in
diverse and underserved
communities.
So there's an overlap there.
So that's what our focus
So, for example, you vote one of
the companies we've invested in
is a company that capitalizes on
the trend of fee for service
going to value based care.
And they help federally
qualified health, um enable them
to access value based care
contracts. Super important As
you know, FQH DS are the front
lines, uh, for the uninsured or
the underinsured.
They have, um they're active.
Uh, nationally, they hope to
come to New Mexico. Um, they're
part of that's part of the plan.
That's an example of one of the
companies in health and wellness
for Absolutely so for our
sustainability thesis. We know
that climate change affects
everyone.
It's a huge problem, however,
when looking at the US, diverse
communities and specifically the
latinx population is
disproportionately affected.
And so due to this, we think
it's imperative to invest in
this area and we've identified
four key areas that we think are
especially important from an
impact perspective.
Those areas are waste reduction.
AG, Tech and Food tech.
Renewable energy and EV and
transportation tech.
And within renewable energy.
We've made an investment here in
form energy.
This is a company that does long
duration energy storage.
They're one of our later set.
Companies have raised a lot of
money have an amazing
co-founder, who is a Latino
leader in the space and we're
really excited about the
progress that they've made
there.
The four sectors were focused on
health and wellness financial
services, sustainability and
future work are large sectors,
which is why we're focusing on
them. There's a lot of movement
there. There are big markets and
they're important to underserved
communities and others. Um
By the way, Health and Wellness
is led by Ashley Aden in New
York, Fintech by Andres in
Austin, Texas. FUTURE OF Work by
Valeria by Maya
How are we doing? I? I think
we're doing great.
Um, you've I think seen some of
the information some of the
numbers. I'll just give two data
points. One is the portfolio
that we've invested in so far
for those that have gone back to
market to raise money.
They've increased our investment
value by 38% so far, so that's a
great early indicator of
performance and number 2 100% of
those companies are led by
diverse teams that have created
over 700 jobs.
Two thirds of those have been
filled by diverse professionals,
which is major because those are
the future founders and
entrepreneurs.
Um we're very happy about the
results so far, and that takes
us to New Mexico.
We've talked about our personal
connections to New Mexico. But
other than that,
Um, I won't tell you your own
stats, but
New Mexico is a heavily diverse,
uh, number two high growth in
terms of Hispanic community and
other underserved communities,
And we think there's a lot of
natural resources here and I
don't I mean natural with a
under, you know, not a capital
N. So we see a lot of deal flow
here.
Um, we've already seen a good
number of opportunities.
Um and we've already started to
Maya will talk about a few
meetings that she was just at
earlier this month.
Yeah. Thank you, Marco. So, a
few weeks ago, I was in
Albuquerque for two days and
attended a few events. I was at
an event that brought Latino
leaders together out of an event
that brought together social
economy. Businesses start ups
and supporters across the state
and I also attended a founder
and funder gathering was able to
meet a lot of founders and
allies in the ecosystem.
This is a really great example
of how we would engage with the
state on our visits. We plan
around key events and make sure
that we jam pack our schedule
with founders, allies and other
investor meetings.
Um
And you know, I saw one of the
weaknesses was we've yet to
invest in New Mexico and and
that is true.
Um, but we have invested in 30
companies up to end of your last
year. Now, 32 most recently.
And many of them have actively
done business in the state of
New Mexico.
And have, um, but we know that
New Mexico is not just a state
of consumers. They're a state of
builders, too.
And which is why we want to
invest here.
Um and we believe we can. We've
already seen some interesting
opportunities that for a variety
of reasons we haven't been able
to pursue but we are tracking
them.
In this business.
Um, Aside from investing,
there's the matter of building
an ecosystem.
Last year. We saw over 2000
opportunities and we made nine
investments.
That's hard odds. Um so we know
we have to do more than that.
And so we do at least four
things. We recognize the
entrepreneur we see you. We know
it's not easy.
Number two. We'll give you
honest feedback if you want it.
We will make introductions for
you, and for you will always
have an open door.
That's very important. I've been
on the other side and even those
things are super valuable.
Um, what are we gonna do about
New Mexico? Well, I think it was
alluded to already. Uh, we will
be here physically, Uh, Maya
will be the point person, but
I'll be here too. I will have a
regular cadence to be here on
the ground.
Um, Hopefully, if you come in,
we'll be here for one week. Kind
of kick off, or we be touring
and spending a lot of time here.
We'll also have at least one
scout in the state of New
Mexico. We have a scout program
We've had 18. So far, we'll have
at least one more in the state.
That person lives here is
involved with the ecosystem is
familiar to us. We know them,
etcetera. There'll be some input
in terms of who that person is.
24 7.
I know we are a little bit at
time. Uh, we have a lot more to
say so we're gonna just pause it
here, though. In case there's
any question I have a, um
I have a question about
engagement.
Of other funding sources with a
So you say in your presentation
that out of the 32 businesses
that you've
Funded so far that you've
invested in about 15 of them
have done second rounds. Will
you tell us what your strategy
is?
To get coves into those
businesses.
Uh, several things, Uh, number
one.
Uh, we have to have conviction
around the business.
As investors.
And, um other investors know if
you do or you do not.
Have conviction, so that's
number one.
Number two. You have to guide
the company and support the
company in terms of hitting
certain milestones that
investors look for in this
particular asset class.
We can help with that, and
that's what we do with our with
our companies.
Three is that unlike the private
equity world in the venture
world, no one does a deal by
themselves. Nobody makes you
need 2345, sometimes 10.
Uh, individual investors coming
in in an opportunity, so it's
imperative for all of us to know
who we are and share
opportunities. So having strong
networks there is very
important. So identifying great
companies in New Mexico that we
have conviction around.
Being able to guide them around
milestones and inviting
investors. We know to the table
early and then eventually
putting it out there in other
channels that we have access to
because of that opportunity.
Thank you.
No other questions.
I'll just conclude by saying
that the venture space is very
important to the future of the
investing in all Americans is
very important to the future of
this country. And, um, I hope we
have the opportunity to do
business here in the state.
We're going to do it.
Anyway, because we are connected
to it so
Uh, I look forward to staying in
touch. Thank you very much for
your time this morning.
Do we want to go to questions
now from for everyone?
So any questions from the board
for staff.
Um, review or the company.
Anyone on
Hear hearing nothing hearing no
questions. Um, Do I have a
motion on this project? You do
so, um, motion is made.
Um
For the investment commitment of
4 million to Aminos Venture
fund.
Is there a second? A second
member, Colin second. Is there
any discussion?
Not always in favor. Say II. I
All those opposed seems
thank you very much. Thank you.
Next is the Finance and
Disclosure Committee and chair
Swazi.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
very brief. Uh, we did, uh, meet
last Wednesday. We did have, uh,
a quorum. One of the things we
heard was the presentation of
the investment report that was
followed by the bond issuance
forecast. Uh, you know, I'd like
to add typically one of the
things uh, that that that we've
learned is both. Uh, Miss Marks,
Uh, team and and Brad's teams
are stellar. They perform well,
but, uh, when Mark's happy, uh,
Brad, not so much and Brad's
happy mark, not so much.
But they do an outstanding job
position is exactly, uh where,
where the where they need to be,
Uh, we had a detailed, uh uh.
review. Uh, of the draft of the
fiscal year 2025 Budget Oscar
and his team as always do a
fabulous, fantastic job We had,
uh, procurement notifications,
and, uh, we went over the
committee charter, which, uh,
we've already uh, approved and
That's my report Membership.
Thank you.
So, uh, Mr Lovato next for the
presentation of the investment
report.
Uh, good morning. Uh, madam
Chair. Um, we're members.
Starting on page 187 and kind of
skip over the memo and actually
go into the, um
The brief report.
And 187. You'll see. We have two
buckets of funds. In a sense, we
have the Finance Authority
funds, which at the end of March
totaled about 1.1 billion.
That compared to 838 million
this time last year.
We also have the Department of
Transportation funds, which were
holding 356 million
That compared to 372.6 million
this time last year.
So we're hope we have total
invested funds of about, uh,
close to $1.5 billion.
Well, not to the next page. This
will break down the M FA
portfolio.
Starting at the top. We have our
longest duration fund, which is
our debt service reserve funds.
Use a 0 to 5 year benchmark.
A current market value of 55.3
million that represents about 5%
of the whole portfolio.
The Book Guild is 2.51%.
Current mark yield is 4.68.
Compared to the index at 4.71.
The duration is 1.706.
Compared to the index at 2.096.
Government Total return 3.102.
Compared to the index at 3.05.
Next we have our operating
funds. These are funds that, um,
pretty much all programs that
the authority reside in this in
this pool.
Um, outside of the PP PR F.
Use 0 to 3 year. Um, benchmark.
We currently have a market value
of 350.5 million.
Represents about 32% of the
portfolio.
But killed is 4.41%.
Current market yield is a 5.06
compared to the index at 4.89.
The duration is slightly over a
year, 1.093
Compared to the index at 1.372.
12 month Total return 4.701.
Compared to the index at 3.676.
Next. We have, um
Is there one year on this group
of funds? It's mainly our PBF
project funds.
There's two of those there's
program funds and the G program
funds.
We also have our two bond debt
service reserve funds.
The Common Debt Service Reserve,
which is dedicated to senior
lane.
And, uh, Supplemental Credit
Reserve, which is dedicated to
the subordinate.
We're currently holding a A
around $500 million in that
group.
That represents about 46% of the
portfolio.
The book Killed is 4.68.
Current mark yield is 5.11.
Compared to the index at 5.25.
The duration is 0.702.
Compared to the inn at 0.491.
12 month total return.
4.599 compared to the index of
5.011.
Our last group of funds. It's
our shortest duration. It's
mainly debt service type funds
we currently have about 184
million in that group.
With the book yield of 5.21.
Again. Overall, we have about
$1.1 billion the Finance
Authority.
The overall average weighted
average book yield is 4.554.
The current mark yield is 5.058
compared to the index at 5.112.
The duration is 0.761.
Compared to the index that 0.799
12 months return 4.692.
Compared to the index at 4.56.
Finally on the last page.
The bottom of that page, you'll
see the net income.
Eight months into the fiscal
year of 24. We have a net income
of around
$33.3 million. That compared to
13.5 million for the this time
of last year for the eight
months into fiscal year, 23
100 and 40.
It's a good note to end it on
well.
You're happy. It's been a good
year.
Any questions?
Good question, Madam Chair,
Mark. I know you guys hold a lot
of funds for DOT. Are they faced
with any, um, arbitrage payments
for any project proceeds that
still remain under their
portfolio. Not not at this
point. Um
The only one that we were a
little bit worried with was the
14.
Um they have $7 million in
project funds remaining in that
fund, and obviously it's at 10
years.
Like those funds, Um they were
really, really low at, um
beginning of that whole 10 year
period that it's it's on a a
weighted average over that whole
life of it, So they're they're
still well under, um arbitrage.
But those funds will end up
being reverted back into the
state of that.
Great. Thank you for that. And
on that point, um, are there any
disclosure issues since those
proceeds have been, you know
outstanding for extremely long
period of time? No, the only
thing we're gonna need from the
department is actually
certification that the projects
that were listed within that
authorization, but there is no
reimbursement costs on those
Next up presentation from our
chief financial strategist, Mr
Pierce, and he is online. There
he is. Yes. Hello. Uh, good
morning.
Uh, ma'am, Chair and board the,
uh P PR F sold about $50 Million
of bonds that last week. We, uh,
opted to sell this issue as a
subordinate Lien. Um, because
all of the loans were
reimbursement. Um
Which does afford the
opportunity to do the
subordinate Li and because any
of our simultaneous borrowers
would, uh, typically prefer to
be in the senior league, even
though the ratings on the two
different lanes are the same.
They're still, you know, maybe a
marginal difference in the
pricing. So anyway, when we've
got a pure reimbursement issue,
it does allow us to dust off the
subordinate Lien and this was
the first issue of that Lien
since 2021.
Uh, we, uh, had a management
team of, uh, Wells Fargo was the
senior manager of Bank of
America, Uh, orally known as
Merrill Lynch was the was one of
the co managers, along with JP.
Morgan and the bonds will close
April 30th and Marcos Marcos
Trujillo acted as the board
representative during the the
pricing.
So, um, the market was not in a
great tone on, uh, last week.
Um, I It's funny when I was
writing this report. I didn't
have to change much of the
language because the two things
that hit us last October hit us
again in April. Those being, um,
a a retail sales report that
came out on Monday was hotter
than expected and then middle
Tensions, uh, have continued to
be a challenge. So
Uh, we we did have, uh, we
talked to the underwriting team
on the 16th came up with a scale
the market eroded a bit the
morning of the 17th. So we
adjusted the the scale Uh three
or four basis points.
At the end of the order period.
We had orders for about 27.3
million or a little over half of
the entire issue.
So we went back and forth with
the underwriter about at at
which, uh, what yields are they
going to underwrite, and so they
wanted a five basis point
adjustment. We managed to trim
that to you know 125 throughout
the maturity, and they they
agreed to underwrite at that
point.
Um, so at the end of the order
period with those adjustments,
they had total orders of about
33.1 million, uh, which left a
balance of 16.75 that they
underwrote. Interestingly,
yesterday I did have a
conversation with, uh, a member
of our selling group. So when we
when we sell bonds, we have the
management team, the syndicate
that is the senior manager in
the co managers. But we also
invite, uh, selling group
members basically.
Anyone who proposed on the last,
uh, underwriting.
RFP for the, uh, for the NM FA.
We invite to be in selling group
and it's kind of
You know, Typically, you don't
see much activity from the
selling group. Well, in this
case, uh, after the after the
agreed terms of the sale, uh,
later that afternoon, the the
one of the selling group members
got an order for over 11 million
bonds. So, um, that left a only
about a $5 million balance for
the, uh, for the syndicate to
deal with. So that was just
Yeah, I'd never, you know, been
doing this for a long time, and
I've never seen that level of
activity from the
Group, so kudos to them.
Um, I think
You know, I've got some detail
down here that the, uh, the
bonds matured Unit 44 average
life 5.82, So it's a very front
loaded.
Uh, mature, uh, structure, which
you'll see in the numbers later,
if you if you spend any time
looking at him, um, and a true
interest cost of about 3.39%
bonds are callable June of 34.
As I mentioned, the ratings have
been affirmed AAA from S and P.
Uh AA, one for Modi's on both
the senior and subordinate lane.
Uh, on the next page I. I look
at the
Yeah, we We've talked about this
before the the Fed increased,
uh, the short term rates. The
Fed funds rate 11 times since
March of 22. We didn't have any
increases since the last issue,
but we also didn't have any
decreases. I think at the start
of the year there was some hope
that we might see as many as
six yield reductions by the Fed
that is now
Diminished to maybe one or two
and there's you know about a 40%
chance according to the market
that, uh, there are no chain no
reduction, So we continue to
fight that, um, still in all we
did. The the rates are lower
than they were when we issued
the, uh 23 B bonds.
In this in this, uh, paragraph.
I say it's the 10 years has
dropped.
26 basis points As of today,
That's down to about 15 basis
points, so the market has
continued to, uh, erode from us
since last week. So even though
last week wasn't a great week to
sell this week is a worse week
to sell. So I guess we're we're
We're better off to have sold
one and we sold, um and the
yield curve continues to just
be, you know, significantly
inverted, uh, on the municipal
side.
You can get you have to wait
until like the 20 forties.
In order to get a yield that
matches next year's right and
that's It's very unusual for it
to be this inverted for this
long, but, uh you know, it is
what it is. The Fed is in a
tough position because like for
example, today, the the, uh
Um personal consumer expenditure
index came in at 3.4%. Year over
year. Um
At the same time, the the
quarterly growth in the GDP I
think was at 1.6% so
You've got two very, uh,
different reads on the economy.
And of course, the bond market.
Uh, chooses to focus on the the
worst of the two, which is the
increase in the in the P CE. So,
uh, again today we're seeing,
uh, the US treasury market off
about, uh, the tenure of about
five basis points in the, uh
Um, M. Mark is probably, uh,
indications are up 1 to 1 to 5
basis points so
You know the we issue bonds when
we need money to reimburse the P
PR F, we We don't time the
market and you know, I would
never suggest that we should do
that. It's um uh you know, I
don't I don't have a good enough
crystal ball for that. So, uh,
when the when we need the money
to reimburse, we issue that, um
lastly, we do have, uh, we did
get two new investors, uh, in
this transaction, even despite
the
Kind of, uh uh, headwinds that
we faced, Um
And I think this this just
reflects the the continuing
effort we pursue to expand the
investor base for the, uh, the P
PR program, um, following the
wordy part of the report. I've
got the number part of the
report, which just shows all the
details related to the, uh to
the transaction. So, um, I, I
don't wanna bore you with those
details, but I'm happy to
answer.
Any questions, if if you have
any
Thank you for the update Any
questions? I have a question,
Madam Chair. I'm just trying to
calculate the numbers. The total
orders with the nine buyers.
Looks like about 35. Yet there
was at the end of the sale. 33
were sold. But then you said 11
of the 16 got sold by so the for
the underwriter.
Is that like a?
Yeah, It's a great question.
What? What This shows is orders.
not necessarily allotments. And
so what? What we did have we did
have some maturities where we
had, uh more than you know, we
have maturity with 4,000,004
million of bonds, and we may get
orders for, uh, 6 Million or 8
million. So this is total orders
in that, Um
And that 11 million selling
group order that I mentioned
that is not reflected in here.
Um, that came after the order,
period. So, uh, you know it it
it certainly reduced the
liability exposure for the
syndicate. Uh, but it it didn't
occur during the actual order
period. I hope that answers that
question. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you Any other questions?
Thank you. So much for the
update. You bet. Thank you.
Next on the agenda is a report
from the audit committee with
chair Burke.
Uh, chair Keith. Members of the
board. Um, the audit committee
met on April 17th via Zoom.
We did have a quorum present we
had for agenda items. Uh, the
first being, uh, review of the
financial statements and
financial performance indicators
for February. Uh, next. Uh, we
heard a report about the
Operational excellence program,
which is intended to improve all
areas at risk. Uh, highlighted
by our internal auditing. Uh,
group. Uh, the third agenda item
was, uh, a quick
View of the NM FA headquarters
project, which continues to be
on schedule. And, uh uh we see
pictures, so we kind of visibly
see, uh, changes from month to
month, which look good, and the
fourth item was the committee
charter for the Audit Audit
Committee, which was approved
earlier in the meeting.
That's my report. Thank you.
Thank you any questions?
If not next. On the agenda is
our board training.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um we
will spend a little bit of time
today just to sort of a way to
level the, uh, ground.
Level set, Um, make sure we're
all starting from the same
place. Uh, in advance of our may
17th meeting, um, which will be
a strategic visioning session.
You wanna start with the next
page? Um
So what you have in the board
book is both this brief
presentation as well as, um, the
strategic plan and the way in
which it was presented to the
board when they last saw it, and
in January of 2020, so this
Strategic plan itself has taken
a couple of twists and turns and
I'll go through that. But in
each instance the planning
process started with the basic
question of you know if we had
that luxury to say.
A while ago. What? What should
the N FA be? Who should? Who
should they? What should they
do? What do we need to get
there? That's where we started.
Um, so the board started with
that the back in 2018, the
Finance Authority staff and
senior staff started with that
back in 2018. And, um, I think I
think this board will probably
find a different, um, vision. I
honestly think, cause we were a
different animal back in 2018 by
a long shot, but wanted to just
start with where we where we
were with.
We'll go to the next page, um in
2018. We had one piece of
research that led into staffs
strategic planning process, And
that was a 2017 Bieber report on
the impacts of the economic
impacts of the public project
revolving fund, So it was really
the only thing that we thought
would be necessary to really
inform our, um, planning
process. Um, we, uh in
Hired LEH Consulting That's
Leslie Hoffman and her group,
Um, to help both the senior
management team as well as the
board and focus groups in
helping us, um lay a path for,
uh, appropriate strategies for
the finance authority.
appropriate, um, identities. Um,
and they were really very
helpful in getting that document
together. They have also been,
um, uh, retained to help the
board at the Special board
meeting on May 17th
To kind of facilitate that
conversation to generate those
ideas. Um, but the the
Process that we used last time,
which was senior management
started. Uh, we started
drafting. Um and coming to some
consensus on identity
statements. The board then took
a look at those. We sent all of
that out to several focus groups
Feedback into a plan, which then
the Martinez administration
board. I'll just call them, Um,
that was several chairs ago and
in September of 18th adopted
that, um, we reviewed that plan
with the newer board. Um and
December of 19 and ultimately
approved it in January. 2020 our
F our staff, although as a whole
didn't actually see it until
February of 2020. So it was very
much a top heavy, uh, process.
It was not one that was sort
From the ground up, and we've
taken a little bit of, uh
A turn this time in the way in
which we approached what I'll
call the refresh of that. Um,
but we were starting back in
February of 2020 so that we
could start identifying the
appropriate Uh uh, objectives
and metrics to, um, guide the
Where we were in, Um, meeting
your strategic vision.
Uh, and then Covid hit so we
didn't get very far. Um and
We didn't end up identifying any
me metrics. We didn't end up
identifying any implementation
plans. And of course, there was
nothing to report. So, uh, we
have done a couple of things,
though. However we've, uh, took
on a couple of, uh, research
projects. Um, we
Hired the council to vote and
finance agencies back in June of
2021 to take a look at the
Uh, landscape of New Mexico.
What tools did New Mexico lack
that other states have, and
that's just not at the Finance
Authority level. They looked at
the Economic Development
Department. They looked at the
Environment Department, They
looked at the department of
Finance and Administration. They
took a comprehensive look at the
tools available to say what New
Mexico lacked. That gave us some
sense of what the Finance
Authority was in a position to
do, um, versus others, and they
made some other recommendations
for how to you know, uh,
Implement better some of the
tools in New Mexico.
Unfortunately, they mostly
focused on uh, the capital
Outlay process. That was their
biggest, um, contribution which
was that that needed to be
overhauled, But they did make
some other really positive
recommendations that we've taken
to heart, and they recommended
some products that frankly, are
in the mix today.
Um we also have done and
participated in, uh, the water
Policy and Infrastructure Task
Force. Final report. Um, that
was a I'd say about a nine month
process. Um, the state engineer
chaired, Uh, 28% task force to
look at various issues related
to water. Uh, we were obviously
quite interested in the funding
and some of the issues stopping
effective implementation of
water projects across the state.
Why can't smaller communities
get access to funding? Um
So that's an important report.
Uh, and part of the EF efforts
that we see going forward out of
the water Trust board were
really born from that report.
And then, lastly as part of our
venture capital program and to
set the stage for potential
implementation in the SS BC
funding. We, um, commissioned
that report from next street,
the small business capital
landscape, and so that looked at
the market and what need what
from a private, um, entity
perspective from business
funding, commercial lending
small business start ups what
was missing?
So we've looked at the tools
that are available in the
market.
Um, we've looked at what's
stopping communities from
implementing their projects, and
now we've looked at what's still
missing relative to the, uh,
private industry players, so
those pieces of research have
been done. Um and then I will
say lastly, uh, that one of the
things that has, uh, in addition
to the research that was done in
in advance of this one of the
things that's really clear to us
is that the Legislature now sees
us very differently.
And so you'll see here that
Since that 20 February 2020
staff retreat where we started
to look at ways in which we
could, um
I identify um, measure our
progress in meeting the strategy
of the Legislature gave us new
programs and we have taken
existing law with new money and
implemented others. So, um, we
are looking at 14 programs that
we have operated or on the
precipice of operating. Um,
since 2021 since fiscal year
2021. Some of them are complete.
They were one time programs. The
recovery funds.
You know, those are one time
programs. We did not anticipate
being in there, obviously, um,
but for programs, uh, for just
recovery. We've done some one
time funding for, um, the EE CD.
The early childhood education
and care department. Um, those
were through MO A. But we have
broad powers in our
implementing legislation that
allowed us to deliver those
dollars for them. So those
programs have come and gone. Um
and then we have the programs
that the actual
Has appropriated monies to which
would be the venture capital
Program. The Opportunity
Enterprise Charter School and
then the new Housing Development
fund. So all told, uh, we have
about $1.1 Million A billion
dollars. Sorry, uh, zeros. Uh,
$1.1 billion that has been made
available for initiatives at the
Finance Authority level since
2020 calendar year. 2020. We've
made more than 11,000 awards
since that time, Um
We still have a ways to go.
We've only utilized, you know,
less than half of that money.
Uh, we anticipate using, uh,
funding for particularly the
opportunity. Enterprise SS PC.
I, uh, our venture capital and
charter school. Uh, some
additional 325 million or so. So
we anticipate more than $700
million from the programs that
were initiated since we last
looked at this plan. Um and I
just wanted to put that in front
of you in terms of why
He had a a refresh rather than
going out to do a bunch of focus
groups was a good idea. The
Legislature, our partners have
already given us really good
indication from these programs,
Um, how they see us and the role
they think we can fill. So it's
you know, it's a I think a much
better indication than asking
some questions in a focus group.
Um, so I wanted to have Lynn to
me who you may or may not have
heard from before. She's our
managing director of
communications. She came in in
February. 2021 of the things
that she was.
With back in 2020 was, um,
helping, implement and report
out the progress we've made on
that strategic plan and then
Covid hit, so she's barely had
an opportunity to catch her
breath since that time period.
Um she's now been, uh, into the
weeds of our strategic plan and
worked with staff, uh, to help
refresh some of our, um,
identity pieces. Um
On page 50. We're there. Um, I
will say that, uh
Well, actually, do you wanna
start with this? I think that
would be a good time for you to
Absolutely good morning, madam
Chair and members of the board.
It's nice to see you this
morning. Um, I. I was very
pleased to be able to help with
the strategic plan because, as
Marquita said that
Old one was implemented right
before Covid hit, which is right
when I started at NM FA. So, um,
we started the strategic
planning process this time as a
refresh of what we were doing,
um, and started with staff input
to make sure that all voices
were heard as opposed to the
last, um last strategic planning
process that started kind of top
down with a few voices and then
the information was disseminated
to the rest of the staff. This
started with all of the staff
being
Not given an opportunity to give
input onto into the, um mission
vision values and core
competencies. And the way we did
this and let me um actually let
me just finish with this step
for with slide five just to give
you a a sense of where we are.
So the first two bullets are
done. Um, that's sort of where
we are. Now. The next steps will
be, um, when the board comes in
and does the visioning session
and then senior management, will
I
If I objectives that fit with
the board's goals and then
metrics and the implementation
and reporting will come from the
objectives that the senior
management does with the board
approval.
So that that sort of complete
slide five, then going on to
slide six.
These are the actually identify.
Um what NM FA does, And the
first is the New Mexico Finance
Authority Act, which says that
we do the co ordination and
planning and financing of state
and local public projects. The
other is the economic
development piece, which is the
statewide Economic Development
Finance Act, or Swed F and that
talks about that we finance
projects to promote the
achievement of economic
development goals for the state.
Um, When I look at these, I sort
of think this is a good external
view of what NM FA does. Um, it
doesn't really get to the how or
the why. Which I think is kind
of what feeds into who we are,
and that's when the identity
pieces come in.
So moving on to what we've done
so far with the staff as as I
mentioned, we wanted to create a
process that would give all the
staff members an opportunity to
give input, and so we created an
online form. That was a survey
to talk about the mission and
the vision and the values and
In that survey we received, um
39 responses. Which was about
62%. I think so, um, and with a
few reminders to the staff that
this was an opportunity, So I
think that anybody who wanted to
comment on the mission vision
and the values had an
opportunity and we did get a lot
of a lot of comments a lot of
good feedback.
Um on slide seven, the the way
that it started with the
mission, and the vision is the
staff was given. Um, the 2018
mission and the 2018 vision with
a couple of questions. Um, one
was which Which statement
resonates with you more.
And the idea is that the mission
is what we are currently doing
and the vision is more
aspirational. And of those 28
people said that the 28 vision
resonated more with them than
the 2018 mission.
And 13 said the opposite.
So the the feedback that we were
getting is that the mission
really should be that New
Mexico's partner in building
economic prosperity and stronger
communities is really what NM FA
is doing now and that the vision
is something that's more
aspirational that we don't know
what it is yet. And so that's
that was the feedback given by
all of the staff who responded,
Um senior management did not
change that when we met with
them to kind of tweak everything
that we had done so
That's where the UM the draft
measure mission is. And then the
draft vision may come from the
board visioning session.
So on the next slide.
Moving on to the values.
You'll see on the left hand
side a list of what the values
were in the 2018 strategic plan.
and what we did was we started
with those values as a baseline
to give to all the staff.
And this was also part of the
online survey and we asked
people you know which three do
you think are the most important
to strive for which three are
the least important to strive
for? And then we ask them to do
the same thing, but to rank them
And so based on that we got and
in the other thing we asked is
what's missing. Is there
anything that we're doing now?
Or that we currently are that's
not captured in these 2018
values. And so with that we came
up with, um what's on the right
hand side in the 2024 values?
and what what we did with that
was kind of crunch all the
numbers that the staff gave
looked at everything they said
was missing, Um, took
Comments and then came up with
Something that we felt was
workable. Um, the senior
management then took what
All the all the crunch things
that I had from the staff input
and then refined it into what's
currently listed there as a 2024
draft values.
The next piece we did for the
identity pieces on slide. Nine.
The core competencies. Um so
that for this part of the
identity pieces, um I held face
to face or virtual meetings with
every department at NM, FA and
I. I spoke with every single
person except one who's was
traveling and it didn't fit. But
I basically, everybody at the
organization gave input on core
competencies and
What we did was we started with
again with the 2018 core
competencies listed on the left
and in 2018. They had a core
competencies and then value
added compensate competencies.
And the way we worked. The
discussions was we started with
the question of you know. Is
this something we even do? Still
and so you know, so the first
one was create low interest
financing opportunities for
community and economic
development. So do we do that?
And if we do does this resonate
as a core competency to you as
something that's really key? Um
to what N FA is And if it
doesn't is, does it just need to
be tweaked? Or does it need to
be thrown out and so?
This created, you know some some
really lively discussions and a
lot of good ideas and a lot of
great input. And from all of
that,
And I and I, I wanna say that I
I was taking notes in each of
these meetings and taking them
almost verbatim and so I could
go back and
Look at what everybody was
saying, figure out where they
were commonalities figure out
where there were things that you
know people really felt things
resonated or didn't didn't
resonate but from all of that
feedback
We came up with some some good
draft core competencies that
then went who really worked
through it and refined it and
came up with what are now the
the
Draft competencies again listed
on the right hand side.
And Madam chair. I would just
say there. I think you'll note
both in the values and the
competencies that one of the
things we're striving for are,
um, a little more compactness.
It's an 18 page strategic plan.
Um, it it's a lot to remember,
Um, night vision. 88 values. Um,
they can't all be as important
So we were really working with
something that would we could
all remember and live by, um, so
that was a real goal of ours was
Make it a little more manageable
so that we could read it, um and
understand it and live it. Um,
So that is a core. Uh, goal of
ours And you? I don't think
anything reflects it better than
than the page. Uh, 206 where you
saw
I don't know.
I think we took it from about 20
down to about four. So I just
wanted to mention that that
that's very purposeful. Um, the
goals, uh, the strategic goals
that were set by the board back
in 2018 were integrated project
planning, uh, building capacity
collaborative financing and
operational excellence. Um, and
we only identified page 11 of
the next page. If you will. I
think we're on page 208, a
couple of objectives from those,
so that's as far as we
Before. Basically, um the 2018
initiative stopped, um, but the
operational excellence, um
included financial management.
Um uh uh, focus on people,
ensuring that we were getting
and keeping good people, um,
work on processes and systems
And clearly, that was one of the
things that, uh, that we took to
heart immediately and a lot of
the stuff that you've been
seeing a lot of the work on the
foundational stuff comes from
that initial set of objectives.
Um and then customer focused
programs so that when we went
out and went to the, uh, cap
landscape report when we've done
some of those other reports, it
was to really find out what was
still needed in the marketplace.
Um, so we didn't have, uh, we
didn't really implement any
programs as a result of the
organization objectives but we
did start to lay the groundwork
for future work to be done. Um,
so we were looking for needs of
the communities. Um, uh uh,
assessing the current programs.
And other alternatives that
could be placed. Um and then.
Lastly, communication and
outreach. Um and back in 2018.
We didn't have a communications
position. Um, And so what? That
was one of the core reasons that
we, um moved around some of our
jobs so that we could make room
for communications manager so
and to upgrade our websites and
make, um make it easier for
folks to understand who the
finance Authority is.
I mean, the lastly educating our
policymakers. Um, that's been a
I don't know if it's been a
mission or just a job, but it's
that's what I've done for the
last four years with the
Legislature in particular, um,
is having them focus on what it
is. We do and, um, ways in which
they can help us be more
effective. Um, and I think it's
starting to take hold a little
bit. They didn't give us really
too many new programs last year.
Um so I thought that was a
really good sign.
Um, And with that, uh, I think I
would turn us back to the
mission and vision. Um, that is
one place When we meet on the
17th. We won't have as much time
really to talk about the
mission, The vision and the
values. Um, because the goal
there is to generate ideas for
strategic themes and goals. Um,
and so they'll be a little bit
of time. But not as much time as
I think this board really
deserves in terms of weighing in
getting your, um general
feelings on where the staff
Up on, um, our identity pieces,
mission, vision values and
competencies. And so I don't
know if there's this is the time
madam chair for to open it up to
responses or, um, feedback, but
I would start here. Um
Again. We don't think we're in a
position to talk about
aspirations. Um, because we
don't really understand yet what
you think are
Really is our where we should be
going over the next couple of
years. Um, but I will say that
Our aspirational, um, statement
in 2018. We think we're living
today. So that's why we ended up
where we ended up. Um, but there
are certainly other options. Uh,
for us, if if that mission
doesn't seem to resonate with
you, as it did as much with
Madam chair if I can make a
comment, um I love the changes.
I love the thinking and the
enthusiasm on the part of the
staff and putting together the
reaction to the past strategic
plan and developing the future.
Um, I see
My job on the board is saying
yes, that's right. Keep going
and not to tell you what the
vision should be.
We need to hear that from you.
So I am really looking forward
to finding out what this group
has, as its aspiration
statement.
And it's exciting to think about
the fact that the 2018
aspirational statement you feel
like we've achieved
So, um, I'm looking forward to
the next steps on this being
being helpful.
So along those lines, Um at the
beginning, we talked about three
really important sources that
had fueled thinking I would love
to read those and make those
available to the board. Um,
we've had turnover, so I don't
know that everybody's familiar
with all three of those, and I
think it would be a good
starting place if we all were
familiar with us as we came into
the conversation.
You know, the other thing that I
think would be an
This is very, um
Positive folks. This is about
our strengths and how we move
forward based on our strengths,
But I think realistically, we
need to have a whole view that
we may have weaknesses as well.
And how does our strategic plan
work toward? Um, mitigating
those weaknesses so that we can
achieve our so and I and again
With member kit. I don't think
the board is necessarily going
to have that epiphany. We're not
in the organization with the
operations day to day. I don't
know what keeps you up at night,
but I think it's a healthy
conversation to have with people
who are working every day in our
programs and finances, knowing
that
What are our potential risks in
the future? And how does our
plan not only grow us but grow
them on the back of
Where, where our weaknesses
where our risk where our
pitfalls and what can we
strengthen? Madam Chair? One
thing I would add. I'm really
delighted to see how this has
come together and that you're
revamping it and streamlining it
because that's always one of the
difficulties.
One of the components when we've
done something similar that came
up from our board was and how do
you fund it? Because we had left
off the funding component
because when you're making
operational changes to reach
your vision, there is a cost
whether it's software
investments, whether it's
streamlining, so it would be
helpful as we discuss it. If
you've got costs that are tied
that those be considered in
conjunction with a strategic
plan is often that's not part of
the discussion.
Writing all this down, so, madam
chair in advance of the meeting.
Um I will send out the reports
that you've, um mentioned that
they have come to the board
Piecemeal. But again, uh, very
piecemeal As they're completed.
They get sent out, but I think,
um having them in front of you
again would be a great idea. Um,
I think we could also send you
some information regarding our,
um, Upper internal operational
excellence program. That's our
internal. Um, uh, internal
compliance If you will. We
focus.
Lot on our existing weaknesses
and vulnerabilities. It's an
enterprise risk management
process, so we are currently
looking at through that effort,
and it gets reported out to the
audit committee. Sort of what
are key. Uh, vulnerabilities and
weaknesses are on the way in
which we're addressing them. We
do an annual review of that, so
I'll get some general data out
so that you have that That's
part of our ongoing process with
the audit committee, um and
definitely include cost of
implementation will wrap up as
well. All the slides that we've
been showing you
Over the last four months. Some
of the data so that you have
that in front of you, so you'll
have a complete package coming
to you, and I'll remind you that
that included from January the
links to our, uh relevant
statutes and things that guide
your operations, so that big
package of stuff will come to
you electronically. Um so that
you can have that at your
fingertips. Um, this is fabulous
Feedback, though, And we
appreciate, um
That, uh, the feedback
And in the data that you're
going to send, you know, I think
it's always important at the
board level where we've been
since 2018. So you've given us
this nice list of 14 new
programs with million dollars of
extra funding that have come
with them, But there have been
other changes in the
organization that are pretty
significant. We've gone from
this amount of employees to this
amount of plays with a a big
growth there in the total funds
under management, we've
increased, so I think it's
important too, to look at the
growth that we've gone through.
And have any death. Those
indicate any indicators that we
have in terms of data trip at a
high level to look at the
organization as a whole.
Absolutely, um
Right. And then similarly, um,
looking at the page the about,
uh, the values.
205
Um, if there are any, uh,
reflections there that you want
us to consider as we you know,
go to do a final draft of that,
Um, you'll see that what we did
was combine some of the 2018
values. There wasn't anything
there. That wasn't important.
Um, but again trying to remember
seven values. It's harder for
staff to live by. We really do
want people to be able to look
at that and say this is who we
are. Um, so seven is too many,
Um, so any other kind of
Back from values. We are very
happy to hear them and start to
incorporate them. Our goal along
the way is to have you validate.
Um, these pieces of the identity
pieces ultimately, after your
strategic visioning session, Uh,
we will bring back We'll work
with the feedback come back with
a proposed list. Have that
validated before we start to
work on objectives.
And then the objectives will,
um, and the next steps that come
to that will be wrapped up into
a final plan for you to validate
at the end, so we wanna keep
coming back and touching base
with you so that we make sure
that we're all kind of going in
the same direction at the same
pace.
So if you have comments today,
or, um, you know, as we go
forward, that would be the, um
We'd love feedback on that one
and then competencies, which is
that next page.
Um
So our company is currently uh
we see them as can
differentiating between core and
value added, um, but to create
access to low cost capital for
infrastructure and economic
development to attract investor
capital into New Mexico.
Respond to challenges with
dedicated solution focused
people and agile, effective
systems and to provide trusted
stewardship and effective
oversight of programs and funds.
Um, we think that captures it,
but we would love your feedback.
If there are things that you
think we've missed. We would
love to incorporate those.
Keith. Uh, just a quick comment
on the draft values going from
2018 to 20.
24, and it probably fits under
client focus, But I'd like to
see um you know the world work
quality. Uh,
Or maybe the words Quality
service some sort of reference
to
The quality of, um the work that
you all do. I mean, it's
amazing, um, having been on the
board for
Five years. All the new programs
you listed earlier and on the
way in which, uh,
You know the the organization
staffed up and
Employed.
Great employees to provide a
quality service, so that would
be my comment.
Metal chair. Um and member
Burke. I was thinking the same
word. I wondered where quality
went. So thank thank you for
raising that, Um, in the
competencies page. This is the
one place where I thought
governance and the board itself
had some might have been
mentioned somewhere in terms of
the relate the working
relationship effective
governance, something that
actually mentions
The board as a competency. I
don't know exactly what that is
and how
How you might wanna fit it in.
But something to think about
Madam chair. We actually looked
at that, and I think we could be
more explicit. We saw that the
pro the effective stewardship.
Uh, trusted stewardship and
effective oversight of programs
and funds was very much a a
board element as well as people
as staff and the second and the
third one to respond with, um
focused people as opposed to
staff because again, you know
you you have had to do almost as
one shirk as we have as we go to
roll out those programs. Um so
you've taken action supported,
Um two or three Mid-level, Uh,
mid year budget changes.
To
React to the things that are
coming up. So, um, a lot of that
was there, but we will take a
second. Look, um, with board in
mind specifically, uh, but that
those were the two in which we
saw the board being really as as
active as everything as staff
was
Thank you.
So with that literature, we
appreciate the time to, uh, that
we spent on that again. The the,
um
Board meeting.
Strategic visioning session as
we expect to be about three
hours, um, with some breaks in
there, there'll be a lot of one
on a smaller breakout group so
that we can, uh, generate ideas
and a little more active, um,
participation. Um and I'm
looking forward to having the
Yeah, That's the plan. You
should read that when you have a
lot of time.
Uh, but we look forward to that.
The the idea is to be generated
there. Um, and I believe
everyone has RSVP. Thank you
very much for that. So I think
with that we are done with that
portion of the agenda.
F.
Thank you.
So next on the agenda is an
executive session. Um
So I need a motion.
We have a motion to go into
executive manager right? And I
think that requires
a he says the second manager.
We need a second.
I have a
motion made.
Madam.
Adam chair. I'll just say we're
hearing AAA big echo on.
Oh, no. When to say present or
vote? Yes. Is it gone now?
Now? It's gone. Yeah.
Thank you.
I said.
Members. PLA Yes.
Yes,
Yes, Burke.
Yes.
Better
step down.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Um
