school capital outlay council to
order?
And uh welcome everyone this
morning.
Um
Thank you for making time to be
here.
We have a
Relatively short agenda, so uh
are there any amendments to the
agenda?
Mr. Chair, members, there are no
amendments. OK. And before we do
that, let's do uh take roll
call. Charles Sully.
Shawna Capier.
Here
Ashley Leach.
Antonio Ortiz here.
Mariana Padilla.
Stewart Ingham.
You
John Senna
Yeah. Martin Romero here.
again here.
We have a quorum. Thank you.
Go out to the agenda. Are there
any amendments to the agenda?
Mr. Chair, members know there
are no. Thank you. So would
entertain a motion to approve
the agenda?
So moved. We have a motion in a
second.
To prove the agenda as
presented. All in favor, please
indicate by saying aye. I. I
post.
Agenda is approved and will go
on to correspondence. Is there
any course cue?
And uh next is public comment.
Item number 2 on the agenda? Are
there, is there anyone wishing
to make public comment today?
OK, one last chance. Anyone
wishing to make public.
Thank you. We'll move on to the
financial report.
Good morning.
Um, if you'll turn your
attention to page 8 or scroll to
page 8 in your ebook, uh, for
the PSCOC financial plan,
starting with the executive
summary. I'll take you through
the key points, and then we'll
walk through the the following
pages after the executive
summary just so you can see
where those changes have
affected the Mr. Chair and
members, starting with the
awards year to date updates.
This is reflective of lines 30
through 32 on page 10 in the
financial plan sources and uses
detail, uh, the net change for
this meeting is $26.5 million.
Um, and there's a few things,
uh,
That correspond to that change.
First, we have one out of cycle
update. It's a recension of a
demolition award for Kamado for
$105,000. Um, this is on the
consent agenda and and the
reason for the change was due to
a priority change at the
district.
Next, um, just a few other
updates. First, we have Alan
McGordo chaparral Middle School.
Uh, we've updated the out your
construction from 31.7 million
to $31.3 million and also moved
the estimated time frame for
that construction coming forward
from 2024 Q3 to 2025 Q4 based on
um actions at last meeting with
the reader. Next, that 2nd
bullet point for the FY 23 and
FY 24 awarded pre-K projects,
so, um, as you'll recall, uh,
last meeting we've been
Incorporating the teacher
housing projects into the award
schedule, um, so our next step
with that was also including our
pre-K projects, uh, previously
this was something that was
appropriated from the fund but
because it's a program at PSFA
now. Uh, we thought it would be
more appropriate in the schedule
to not only track the timing of
awards, but the out-year
construction just to see when
it's coming forward. Um, so this
will be reflected on line 31 on
page 10, and so I'll take you
there momentarily.
Um, but there below is a
breakdown of the projects. So
for Farmington, NMSB BBI for
fiscal year 2023 awards, as well
as Cuba and Albuquerque for
fiscal year 2024 awards.
Finally, still on page 8, the
bottom portion of the page for
additional notes. Um, just
wanted to highlight a few
changes. Uh, first, line 9, the
FY 24 lease payment assistance
awards has been updated from
24.2 projected to the 21.9
million that we uh actually
Uh, awarded, uh, this was
reflected again last meeting uh
we discussed this, and so this
was just the final number with
the 3 charters that we needed to
um shore things up with.
Uh, the final bullet point on
page 8, line 13, uh, pre-K and
FY 25 and 26 were both reduced
from 5000 to 0, um, based on uh
the pre-K projects being
incorporated into the award
schedule to remove double
accounting and also, again, that
line previously served as more
of an appropriation, and now
it's a program where we, they go
through the normal award
process.
Mr. Chair members, moving on to
page 9, the top of the executive
summary, line 16, the FY 24
emergency reserve for
contingencies was changed from
$10,000 to 0 as there was none
use, so we wanted to just make
sure to to shore that up, um, so
we weren't accounting for
funding that we didn't use and
to properly uh capture the
uncommitted balance.
Um,
Mr. Chambers, I'll stand for
questions right now before I
move on to the following pages.
Mr. Chair members, now moving on
to page 10. This is the
Financial plan sources and uses
detail. Um, you'll see a few
notable items first, you'll see
the highlighted amount on line 9
for the lease payment assistance
awards of the 21.9 million, as
well as line 13, the the two
items that were uh zeroed out
for this meeting for the pre-K.
Next, lane 16, emergency reserve
for contingencies has been moved
to zero. we still keep the out
your projection for the next
couple of years, um, but we just
again wanted to make sure the
actuals for FY 24 were captured
properly.
I'm finally looking on the it's
a fully highlighted line on line
31. This is award year to date
pre-K, um, in the award
subcommittee, we received
feedback that although we're
removing the pre-K from line 13,
um, the committee thought it
would still be a good idea to to
capture it as its own to keep
track of it separately from the
standards and systems. So for
this meeting, we had, we did
have enough time so I was able
to add that line so you can see
the amounts that have been uh
awarded FY 24 unfortunately it
doesn't capture FY 23.
Because that's already moved out
of um the view that we see on
the sources and uses, but it
does capture the estimated um
$25.7 million coming for
potential award this year
throughout the year.
As well as um this list will be
growing as we receive more free
applications.
Next, moving on to page 11 in
your ebooks, this is the summary
of changes, um, just a reminder
of items that, uh,
Transpired last meeting
regarding funding. Uh, first, we
had one funding construction,
additional construction funding
request it was for Portali High
School, just a reminder was
683,000.
Um, moving to the middle of the
table, PSCOC fun project award
schedule modifications, there
again, you'll see Camado's
demolition, the recension of
award, um, zeroing out the
project, um, so that is the only
potential funding at this
council meeting.
Finally looking at the bottom of
that table on page 11, financial
plan assumptions and summary.
This just shows uh the net
change of all of the pieces I've
just discussed with Kamado, the
changes in the the uses, uh, the
pre-K, this is just captures all
of the changes to the
uncommitted balance so you can
see where it was last meeting
and where it is, uh, this
meeting and what the changes
were.
Mr. Chair, members, finally
moving on to the award schedule,
I just wanted to touch on a few
pieces here. This is on starting
on page 12 in your ebooks.
Um, first, on the very top, it's
the 4th column from the left,
um, it's unlabeled, but you'll
see a few data you'll you'll see
A and SSTB um based on
discussions with Miss Lee, we
thought it would be beneficial
to start incorporating SSTBs
back into the award schedule, so
it's clear what projects have
been certified and the amounts
that have been certified on
those projects. Um, so this is
just a continuing effort as well
just to do our bond re
reconciliation with the projects
and I'm still on page 12, um,
Mr. Chairman member.
Looking at the FY20 table at the
bottom, you'll see the very top
P20001 for Alan McGordo
Chaparral Middle School. If you
follow all the way to the right
where the red highlighted border
is, um, you'll see a blue arrow
that's pointing from where we're
currently at in time with 2024
Q3, moving that project and the
estimated funding out to 2025 Q4
based on, again, last meetings
discussions with the district
and uh restarting the design.
Moving on to page 13 in your
e-books looking at that middle
table, the very bottom, FY 22
awards. If you go all the way to
the bottom before the FY 23,
you'll see S22 02 024. This is
for Camado. Again, going
following to the right all the
way in time you'll see at the
negative 105, just zeroing out
the project as we did or we are
rescinding the award.
Uh
Mr. Chair members also now
moving to the same page 13, but
looking at the FY 23 award
scenario, uh, you'll see two
highlighted items on the left
for K23001 and 002. These are
for farming and NMSBVI. These
are the projects that were
previously awarded in the fiscal
year but now are embedded into
the
Financial plan
Um, we also did receive feedback
during the awards committee
about potentially uh revamping
the award schedule to have like
projects, uh, grouped together,
so standard systems pre-K
teacher housing. So that's
something we're still kind of
working on in-house and so
hopefully in the future means
we'll have more information on
that.
Finally, Mr. Chair members
looking at page 14, this is for
the FY24 award scenario. Again,
just on the left you'll see
K24001 and 2. This is for Cuba
and Albuquerque, showing what
the last fiscal years awards
were for those projects, and if
you follow past where the red
line is, still staying in FY 25,
um, you can see the two green
highlights of when we anticipate
out your construction um for the
state match.
And with that, Mr. Chair
members, I stand for any
questions you have.
Thank you, Matthew. Um,
appreciate the report and all
the work that you've done.
Uh, you've made some adjustments
to the uh presentation uh lines
if everyone is comfortable with
those and.
Please comment or whatever.
Uh yes, Mr. Chair, thank you.
Um, I just wanted to recognize
PF's um.
You know, uh, cooperation with
Board of Finance and we're also
working with LFC staff, um, uh,
in looking at the financial plan
and making some improvements,
uh, one of the things that I've
expressed to, uh, the staff is
that um in the incorporate
schedule, I think the next step
is to do a true bond
reconciliation. I know there's
some work to be done on that,
um, but, you know, I think that
needs to be done and completed
before we consider probably
November time frame for a
December sale. I just wanted to
share with the, but I do.
I think we need to get to that
point where we can have a true
bond reconciliation, uh, to
really look back and make sure
we know those uncommitted
balances by bond series and see
where there's any funding that
might be sitting there. I think
more work to come and I'm happy
to be working with PSFA staff.
They're very, um, uh, good to
work with, very responsive. I
just wanted to be done to really
kind of understand that and
committed balance and where that
money sitting responses to Miss
Lee, yes, uh, and to just to
give you a quick update on
what's transpired, uh, one of
the
biggest hurdles in identifying
what those true bond balances
are have been the project
closeouts.
So, uh, we are happy to report
that we will be bringing an
update to the AMS meeting uh
coming October showing the mass
amount of work that close to 400
projects.
And show we versions will be
bringing um a kind of a bulk
amount of reversions that were
identified during this work.
So, with that being said, and
that piece being done.
They're already on on that.
Thank you for that information.
That number is I may, Mr. Chair,
an additional comment on that
too. I think that's great work
and I think um in our
discussions as well, we started
to really talk about putting in
place a policy for close out
project close out, um, so that
we're staying ahead of that and
also holding the doses out
because it has to be a joint
effort, um, both on the district
formation, so I think, um, once
we have that information in that
outlines the responsibilities of
sure that we're not falling
behind again on, on this.
Work because it's critical how
much money truly is available.
Thank you. Yeah, and anything
you can do in that implements
some incentives for
close up or
Expeditious close up, should I
say?
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Thank you for the report and uh.
We'll move on to the consent
agenda, so.
Could you, uh, go, go through
the consent agenda.
Mr. Chair, members, um, item
number 4 on the consent agenda
we have the August 4 PSCOC
meeting minutes.
We have as discuss24 Kimado they
are rescinding their demolition
award. This was due to at the
time of the award, um.
And prior to Senate Bill 131 and
the elimination of the offset
item C. These are the BDCP 2
awards, and finally, um, it is
item D, the research you
briefly.
Uh
Let us know what the uh.
Uh,
broadband, Mr. Chair, I'm gonna
bring up Mr. The district names
and mouth.
Morning.
An employee
um
of work with um.
PSFA pretty much since the
beginning.
Um, it's a turning of the page.
Um, but it's also a continuation
of the work that we do. Um, and
these awards are um in aligned
with um the work that we've been
doing for the last 10 years. Uh,
these awards are um for approval
of the state share.
For network equipment upgrades
to 10 school districts and
charter schools who received
their um their
Funding letters from the Eate
Funding letters from the ERA
program. Um, so it is
participation of what the EBA
program does not cover
approximately in on average, uh,
that distribution is 80% federal
funding, 10% state.
And 10% the district um to
upgrade equipment that is
necessary inside the schools to
be refreshed and every
approximately 5 to 7 years, uh,
to, uh, to allow access to the
internet and also collaboration
um and access to the technology.
So we expect every year we, our
team works on approximately 50
to 60 projects, um, and those
are 5
Your cycles. Uh, so after 5
years, the budgets from the
federal program reset.
Um, and then, and they renew, we
actually see that this is the
last year 2025 is the last year
of a five-year cycle, so we are
seeing balances that we hope the
schools are going to be able to
leverage um this fall early
winter for next cycle because
we're working uh concurrently on
previous years' projects to
close them up and, and really
make sure that the work gets
done as well as
The current year, um, projects
that are um have been approved
and just get into the
implementation phase and then
development of projects next
year. Um, that's a large number
of projects because we work with
all the 89 school districts and
approximately 100 charters, uh,
but I think we are on a, on a
good path and um and there is
predictability, uh, and
honestly, this work will
continue forever.
Um, it is needed. So 1010 school
districts and charters, um, in
the state shares approximately
130,000 7785 and 34.
Um
We expect um 40 more um projects
this year.
And the toll, um, the, the total
contribution from, from this
council, from the fund, uh, is
approximately 10,000,000.
Um, tolling $11 million and in
work that will happen um across
these different participants.
That I will stand for questions.
Thank you. It looks like this uh
On page 26, I was looking for
Christina districts that would
be assisted. I, I don't see it
here. Yes, um, Mr. Chair
members, I believe it's on page
25. OK.
We have leadership, um, high
school, Des Moines Municipal
Schools, Estancia Valley,
Classical Academy.
Grand Cibola County School
District, Los Luna School
Districts, Lovington Municipal
School District.
returned public schools, Roy
Municipal Schools, Santa Fe
School District and, and School
of Dreams Academy.
Um, and just an explanation, the
green part is projected on on
the very small uh table, and I
apologize for that. Um, those
are projected, um, based on the
application that the
applications that go to the
federal government. There are
some small adjustments uh in
the, in the value of the
projects as eligibility is is
assessed and established, and
then the blue part is the
Proved value um and you, you're
seeing there to tolling $1.4
million approximately uh worth
of work uh and uh Eate will pay
approximately 1,000,000, the
state will pay $130,000 and um
the the share, local share is
approximately 10040 $150,000.
Thank you. I'm glad I asked you
to read those off because that's
tough reading. Thank you.
So, um,
I believe that unless there is
any other questions on the items
on the consent agenda. Motion to
approve all of these items.
So moved
A second.
We have a motion in a second.
the items on the consent agenda.
All those in favor, please
indicate by saying ay all those
opposed.
Those items are approved.
We'll move on to other business.
First item is
Teacher housing, research, and
history.
Morning, Mr. Chair and members.
Um,
With me today, uh, I have Elise
Ramos, uh, to talk about teacher
housing and uh Daniel Warworth,
where was I'm learning new last
names today. Um,
Uh, from the governor's office
on housing.
And uh we wanted to
Bring this to the council, we
know that teacher housing and
housing in general has been a
major
Uh, topic at the scoota as well
as a council, um, and at our
office and we wanted to take
this opportunity to uh kind of
refresh everybody to how we got
here, um.
And uh so we had a pretty
exhaustive, uh,
Presentation at subcommittee
will try to make it a little
abbreviated today, um, but we
thought it was important just to
bring everybody up to speed with
what, how we got here.
Um, so I'm gonna, I'm gonna go
through the motion and the key
points and then I'll turn it
over to Ms. Ramos to go over
some of the history.
Uh, and
Um, and then we'll stand for
questions, so, uh, we do have a
motion on the table.
Or uh council approval to permit
PSFA to conduct research on
manufactured housing and site
built housing options.
Include issuing a request for
information for local housing
manufacturers and contractors.
Provide information regarding
potential pricing data design
options, and etc.
Um,
We think that this is a good
next step, um.
To collecting some data and uh
and bringing that back to this
council to provide maybe a
little bit more guardrails on on
this housing pilot program that
we've, that we've rolled out.
Um,
Just a few key points, um.
For, for your consideration,
really some questions.
Uh, that we have just to open
up.
Um, should PSCOC determine a
maximum allowable construction
cost for housing.
The PSFA originally suggested
setting that at 50,000,000 per
unit.
Um, however, at the time AMS
subcommittee did not approve
setting a maximum.
Due to the concerns of the
housing.
Costs, um.
The uh
The awards subcommittee and
Pascuta have expressed a need to
cap that limit, uh, at least for
participation by this council.
And so, um, because of these
questions and concerns, I think
going to industry and getting
some more information from them.
Uh, will be really beneficial.
Uh, one of the things
That we're going to ask is that
um manufactured housing company
provides some floor plans.
And then, what would that floor
plan cost in the four corners of
the state, if you will. So we're
gonna try to get kind of a broad
spectrum of
What, what things are gonna cost
where?
Uh, another question we had was,
should the teacher housing pilot
program allow for renovation of
existing
Housing units, we recently
received an application for such
a project.
And um,
We hadn't had one of those yet,
so, uh, you know, the, the, the
real rub here is, is that, um,
out of the existing, you know,
350 units.
Um,
Uh that they exist about 350
existing teacher housing units
are over 50 years old, so, uh,
we're gonna have to really think
about if we want to invest in
old old structures like that,
um, and what would be
appropriate.
Uh, renovation of existing
teacher housing may decrease the
need for new housing units in
some districts and have a lower
cost. So there might be some
benefit to allowing renovation
of
Uh
Houses with good bones, if you
will.
And finally, uh, which is part
of the motion, but should PSFA
work with these local housing
manufacturers and contractors to
develop potential housing
models.
and designs for various
districts.
And um that's a question we
bring for you today is to um go
and issue this RFI and come back
with some homework.
Um, and
With that, I will turn it over
to Miss Ramos to walk us through
just some of the background in
history.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members. Um, as you can see
they're starting at the bottom
of page 35, we have a uh brief
5-year history of the teacher
housing program, um, and
research that PSFA has worked on
um in my entire uh
position here at uh PSFA. We,
I've been working on this.
Um, this all started with the
ZUNI lawsuit as part of the
constitutional challenge to the
state's capital funding, the
plaintiffs asssert that the
system fails to provide
financial support for teacher
housing and so in at that time,
um,
In in
2019, there were some
legislative bills that passed
for the purpose of teacher
housing, and that's when this
ball began rolling.
Um, so therefore, we've been
researching existing housing.
And needs for new housing since
that time in 2019, as I said,
Senate Bill 280 appropriated
$100 million to pay off the
existing debt for teacher
housing projects in school
districts receiving federal
impact aid, those awards went to
Central Gallup and ZUNY to pay
for housing that they were
already building.
Um, and had occurred debt for.
That bill also appropriated 24
million from the general fund
for the expenditure in FY 19 and
2323 for the outside of adequacy
projects or school districts
that receive federal impact aid
for tribal lands, um, so in that
program, districts are eligible
for that were able to apply for
funding for anything that PSCOC
would not typically fund such as
um fields, dugouts, and teacher
housing, uh, 17
of those uh
17 awards were made for those
eligible districts and 11 of
those were for teacher housing.
Many of the districts were very
interested in this funding for
that purpose.
In 2020/21 uh in the application
cycle for our regular funding,
the PSCOC began funding teacher
housing projects through the
standards-based program, so
those districts that had schools
eligible in the top 100, I
believe, at the time, they could
attach housing to those
projects.
Um, the problem with that was
that only those districts with
those specific highly ranked
schools could attach housing to
the projects. So districts with
Housing needs that weren't in
that top 100 or weren't ready to
replace a school were
financially capable of replacing
a whole school could not apply
for teacher housing.
Um,
Through this uh standards-based
system, the PSCOC determines
that the housing must be located
on the eligible school site or
directly adjacent to it, it
couldn't be located elsewhere
within the district.
And those, uh, that were awarded
standards-based.
Projects with teacher housing
included Thoreau Elementary
tohatchie High School, Crown
Point High School, all from
Gallup.
Moscaro combined, Des Moines
combined, Newcomb Elementary
from Central, David Skeet in
Gallup.
Maxwell combined Sibada in
central and Springer. So all of
those have teacher housing
attached to the existing
projects.
Going forward in FY 25, we
recommend to the council not to
include the teacher housing
within the standards-based
projects, we will separate those
and have the districts apply for
both programs.
it will make the program uh run
smoother, and there are several
benefits to that.
In May of 2021, the PSCOC
directed the PSFA to conduct
statewide workshops and
distribute a questionnaire to
gather information on district
and teachers need for the
housing. This was in response to
PSFA coming to the council to
get approval to open a program
up and start, um.
Determining standards and of uh
standard sizes and, and how
these houses would operate on
the council requested more
information, so we went on a
whirlwind tour of the state and
learned about teacher housing
from both teachers and uh in
July of 2022, the PSCOC approved
the release of the teacher
housing pilot program to include
at that time rural areas only
where there was no housing
available within 10 miles or 30
minutes.
Uh, at the program was limited
to $1000 in waivers um were
allowable. We have not had any
waiver requests as of yet.
Uh, the individual housing units
must meet the size requirements
as listed, so we had a minimum
of 500 girls square feet and
then studios to two bedrooms had
1100 square feet and 3 bedrooms
a maximum of 1400 square feet.
Um, and as always, the housing
must.
Um, at a bare minimum meet HUD
standards.
Um, and all adopted state codes.
In July of 2023, the PSCOC
approved standards-based uh
projects including teacher
housing to align with the pilot
program rules, which meant only
rural areas with where there was
no housing available within 10
miles.
In July of 2023, the policy was
amended to include tribal areas
and additional policies which I
will go over on one of the
exhibits coming up.
In October of 2023, the policy
was amended again to allow for
manufactured housing to be uh
Included as an option for
districts to apply for and
install it in the district.
And an FY 24, the PSCOC awarded
a total of 3 projects for this
pilot program to Central Cuba
and house totaling $2.3 million
in state funding.
And as I stated already in FY 25
funding cycle, the
standards-based awards will not
include teacher housing. The
districts will need to apply.
We both programs.
Um, I have
Well over 100 pages of exhibits,
um, following this, um, I won't
go one by one, but essentially,
um,
Most of them are the materials
that were presented to the
council at each one of those uh
presentations. I would like to
draw your attention to page 38,
where this has the current
teacher housing pilot program
guidelines.
And I just want to um briefly
glance over a few of those, um.
As I stated again, this
The pilot program only applies
to rural and tribal areas only,
that is limited to districts and
communities with less than 5000.
Uh, population.
Um, where there is insufficient
reasonable housing available for
those teachers working at that
district to rent or purchase.
The district must demonstrate
the need for the teacher housing
and the intent to recruit and
retain uh.
Furthermore, the awards will be
one phase award issued directly
to the district for the use on
the teacher housing design and
construction, we will not run
these as we do the standard
space with its two phases you go
design, come back for
construction funding. We are
doing this in one lump sum, and
that's why it is very critical
that we get these costs right at
the time of award, and then the
district works with PSFA to
confirm uh that they are
complying with the gross square
footage and code compliance
requirements prior to bidding.
And that they are completing the
project to a satisfactory level.
Um, if additional funding is
needed for a project that is on
the district's responsibility
once the award is made that
state's funding is locked in, we
will not come to the council for
additional funding.
The PSCOC Awards will fund up to
that maximum allowable gross
square footage. This is just
like we do with our
standards-based projects if the
district comes in and um their
housing size is larger than the
allowable, they need to pay that
extra overage.
Um, in funding, the cost that we
do, uh, fund includes site
utilities, site work, and soft
cost, so it's not just the, the
house, it is what it takes to
make that house functional.
As always, the state local match
does apply and the housing must
be located on district-owned
property.
And be used within 3 years.
Um, and then on the next page,
on page 39, um, it lists out the
process. The process is
essentially how we run all of
our programs. The district will
apply, they'll send a
pre-application letter PSFA will
start reviewing that application
and talking with the district to
understand the needs and the
potential costs of potential
scope with that district before
we come to uh the PSCOC to make
that final recommendation. Um,
we did develop a prioritization
method when we released this
program, which
Um, has a questionnaire on
exhibit B on page 40, which the
council was very involved in in
determining these questions and
and what information we were
gathering from the districts.
Um,
At the time when we released the
program, we thought we were
going to get inundated with
requests and so we developed a
ranking system and a scoring
system, which is on page 44. Um,
we did this because we thought
we were going to have more
requests than we had that
$10,000 in funding that did not
occur. So the awards that we
have made, uh, they, they did
answer these questionnaires, but
there was no need to rank them
in order to prioritize for the
available funding. I would like
to draw your attention to the
last page of the questionnaire
on page 43.
Uh, on, on a question 25, this
was required by the council. We
added a question indicating that
the district certifies it will
comply with tax regulations for
the teacher housing units, and
then on question 26, the
district certifies it will not
benefit monetarily for the
teacher housing units. That was
very important to the council at
the time.
Um, and then on page 46, you'll
see the three awards that were
made last year, again, totaling
2.3 million in state funding and
1.3 million in local funding for
a total of 3.7.
Um, and then I'm gonna skip most
of it, but I, I would like to
just quickly go um to page 149.
Mm
At the very end, um, this was
part of a presentation that we
gave to uh task force.
In October of 2021, and I just
think that this presentation
gives a nice overview of
everything that we had learned
up until that point.
On page 149, we have a map of
our inventory that we had
gathered at that time in in 2019
actually, and these were the
districts of the top 10, uh,
with the top 10 number of units.
We have Gallup ZUNY, Central
Dulce, Moriarty, Artesia,
Animas, Hamas Mountain, Cuba,
Lovington, Corona and Reserve,
those last three tied for 10th
place, but as you can see on
that map, the housing is, is
quite spread out throughout the
states and on our workshops that
We went to, we heard from many
of these districts that have no
housing, they were very
interested in
Starting a housing program.
On the next page on one page
150. This shows the age and
condition of the existing
housing again in 2019.
Um, there were approximately
over 350 existing housing units
that were older than 50, and uh
you can see in that pie chart
the condition uh with about a
quarter we're in poor condition
and a little less than half were
in in good condition, and you
can see the number of units um
by the decade they were built
there, and so what we're
expecting is many of these units
are aging out and going to be
needing.
If not renovation replacement
soon, and you can see on page
151, these are some of the
examples that we're seeing
across the state of those older
units.
On page 152, uh, you can see the
schedule that we went on these
uh workshops. We went all over
the state to Central Gallup
Raton, Las Cruces, Cuba,
Artesia, and Albuquerque.
Um, and so what we, we heard
from everybody was that housing
was desperately needed across
the state, especially in those
rural districts, um, districts
that had previously not needed
housing. They were having a very
difficult time recruiting
teachers, um, and also what
we've heard last year with some
of our applicant districts is
that many of these districts
have retiring staffs that have
been there forever, and when
they retired, they're staying in
their house, they're community
members, and so there's no house
also vacating within the.
community for a new teacher to
come and take, we've heard from
many districts that couldn't
find a teacher to fill the
position in this past year.
Um, on page 155, you'll see the
findings that we found from the
survey from uh the tenants, the
teachers.
Um, they thought that the, the
top reason the districts needed
housing was there was no housing
available.
And um as you can see in that
pie chart, 64% that said that
they were working in the
districts they were working in
because of that housing.
And they believe that 67% were
in uh of the housing, um, that
was the condition of the house.
On the next page is the the
tenant or the landlord surveys.
And they indicated that only 35%
needed new housing to replace
existing housing, but on the
next pie chart 92.3% of the
district said that they needed
new housing to increase the
total number of housing
available, and they believed
that the condition was uh at
57%.
There.
And then on, on page 158, uh,
you can see some of these, these
communities that these districts
are currently building. The
first one was in Gallup, as you
can see they're they're
building.
Um, little communities adjacent
to the school sites, they
include roads, sidewalks.
Um, everything you need for a
little, uh, community on page
159. These are the housing units
that Central is
Building, they're building these
as they can afford them a few at
a time, 4 of these houses on uh
this site plan or what we funded
in that last uh round.
Um, and Mr. Chair and members,
um, I would like to hand it to
uh Daniel and for any
Additional thoughts.
Yeah, oh yeah, that's good. Um,
thank you, chair, members of the
council. I'm Daniel Wurworth. I
am a leading an office of
housing established by the
governor, um, and I have as part
of that work, then um
Trying to assist from a
technical side with the design
of this program, and thinking
about how to go forward with it
in the future. Um, obviously a
very challenging issue across
the state. We need something
upward of 40,000 housing units
to balance our current market,
um, and that's having acute
impact on uh even entry level
professionals. So, um,
One of the big challenges is
that the median new cost of in a
home in New Mexico is is
projected to be about $450,000
right now and the current
interest rates, that means your
mortgage payment is, um, nearing
$4000. Uh, this is just so far
out of reach. It's, it's
actually financially out of
reach for about 82% of New
Mexicans. Um, and so this is the
context within which you're
working and you're also working
within a context that um
construction costs have gone up
about between
30 and 50% depending on the part
of the state you're looking at
in the last few years, and then
interest rates both on
construction and for um
consumers have significantly
decreased buying power. It's,
it's hard to overstate that. The
median income family in Santa Fe
has lost about $100,000 of
buying power just from interest
rates in the last couple of
years. So we're sort of facing
this historic problem and also a
time of historic difficulty to
actually add housing. Um, so I
think, you know, the
This initial program has been
really interesting and done what
I think a pilot is supposed to
do, which is to give you an idea
of sort of the range of issues,
the range of challenges and the
range of costs you're dealing
with, um, and, and just looking
at initially and and um working
with staff to to work through
some of these um ideas. I think
some of the challenges and some
of the things to look forward to
is that one of the most
important things with housing is
achieving economies of scale,
and, and you are not doing
That when you're doing uh one
house here, one house there, and
often along with lots of
infrastructure, right? Um, that
infrastructure is one of the
most costly pieces, um, and
typically on a school site,
you're actually gonna have to
bring in a ton of infrastructure
to housing and depending on the
community, you may have very
high infrastructure standards,
um, or, or relatively low, but
even then you're, that's one of
the big challenges. So in the
future, thinking about trying to
utilize places with existing
infrastructure and I know
there's structural obstacles
there about
Be built on on school and land.
um, also just coupling
residential and commercial
construction together are uh are
really challenging. They're just
different methodologies. They,
they operate completely
different price points, and so,
um, thinking about ways to
decouple those, um,
specifically, if they're being
um done by the same contractor,
um.
And I think, you know,
ultimately,
You know, the best housing
development models um are public
private partnerships, right, and
um, you know, thinking long
term.
Looking at um the need for
housing around the state for
teachers, thinking about
deploying housing at scale
whether it be modular or through
larger contracts, um, that can
actually help blend some of the
lower cost housing with some of
the higher cost areas to
achieve um uh nominal uh pricing
for housing is really important,
but I think as we face sort of
the, the really big headwinds
around housing right now and
housing.
It's incredibly important that
we focus on special populations
that are really essential in
communities. Um, the work to
sort of fix the larger
structural housing market will
take years, and so in the
interim time, it is important
that we invest in
um key
key populations including
teachers. So, um, we're
certainly committed to helping
both the council and staff
working on developing this and
and looking at different models,
and
ways to purchase, I think
modular is a great option, um,
and something to look at, uh,
along with manufactured housing,
which has, you know, as Martin
can tell you has gone through a
really big revolutionary change
in in the last couple of years
in terms of um how those uh HUD
manufactured housing is built,
um, and, and some of the
opportunities around multi-unit
housing that that weren't there
before with modular, but um I
think from a a bigger macro
perspective, that's the type of
thing that public investment
right now.
very good in, um, we don't have
the workforce to build uh tens
of thousands of housing units we
need right now and so investing
in new models like modular, um,
are a good thing to focus on
from a public investment point
of view, um, and, and part of
that challenge is the existing
challenge, right, that we have
um a lot of public investment in
institutional buildings in the
labs in federal funding into
infrastructure in all these
things are sapping up
construction capacity right now,
so modular really help.
To be one of the ways that we
look at, so I'm excited that
you're moving in that direction.
Happy to answer any technical
questions folks have and, and on
a
Uh, Mr. Chair, we really
appreciate Daniel's input over
the last few weeks and it, it
kind of sparked this um this
Idea to go out and and cast a
net and get some more
information and uh you know, we
did, we did that a lot of
exhibits to this, but we felt it
was important to have a clearing
house for this council to be
able to review.
Um, how we got here over the
last 5 years.
Um, so,
Take, take it for your nighttime
reading and um.
In the meantime, Mr. Chair will
will stand for questions.
Let me, let me first ask the
subcommittee chair that.
Actually to uh.
Like.
Uh, sure, uh, Mr. Chair and
thank you and thank you for the,
the excellent presentation, uh,
the work that went into this
clearing house, as Ryan put it,
um, is obvious, and I think it's
really important that we have,
as Ryan said, an understanding
of the evolution because I think
since we've done this pilot,
which that's the purpose of a
pilot, but the, since we've done
the pilot, we haven't really
nailed down all the issues,
right? It's identify the holes
in the gaps. I, I know in
hearing concerns from the
awards.
Subcommittee, you know, one
district's coming for maybe
another district that's doing
manufactured housing. One
district is not charging, uh,
you know, X amount, while others
districts are charging teachers
X amount and so the management,
the construction and the
pricing, I think we all concerns
that were coming up that weren't
addressed by the pilot policy.
So I in AMS, I think the
discussion is we're very
supportive of this approach of
going out for RFI, um, we talked
a lot about um.
You know, again, looking at sort
of the cost efficiencies but
site selection also again
lookable to teachers, uh, you
know, looking at sort of a
baseline by region of the state
as far as cost because what's
right for one district isn't
always going to be right for
another, but the council is
tasked with making funds or
being used appropriately. So,
um, I want to thank staff for
this, you know, uh, the AMS does
have a uh a motion here, um, to
support this RFI, um, maybe one
thing that ranks and then.
Um, I'm happy to allow the
important for the whole council
to hear this, um, see the work
that's been done. Thank you.
And we'll go to the
The secretary said
um a better guidance and
direction committee.
I just want to reiterate part of
our discussion in subcommittee
about.
Including the infrastructure
side.
Of costs in point, it's very
important that we we can factor
that into aly also mention this,
but yeah, and I'm really happy
to see the has.
As this is.
Clearly, as uh Daniel mentioned,
a huge issue, something that's
For doing this work. It's really
important.
Thank you.
Questions, comments?
Thank you for the presentation.
Um, I've been obviously thinking
a lot about.
And
housing issue is, is bigger than
public schools, so I feel like
we're kind of off on our own
little silo approach trying to
figure out how to solve it for a
niche.
Population, but when you look at
projects like
Let's say Cuba.
We're trying to build a little
neighborhood. It's still not the
scale.
But that community needs more
housing than just for teachers.
I mean they've got a health
clinic there that they struggle
to staff.
Um, you know,
It's kind of a distant bedroom
community to.
Could be revitalized, but
there's no way to do that
without housing stock.
So it's, I think it fits under
this motion, but if there's a
way to like.
Look at that
Um, scalability of partnerships
within rural communities to.
Be part of a larger project.
That would be important, um.
To take a look at. I think of.
Larger communities.
unquote like
You know, our, our comprehensive
community.
Um, universities like Sequro,
Las Vegas.
I would have thought like coming
out of the pandemic.
You know, what if a company with
50 employees when to move out
of.
San Francisco and relocate to a
really beautiful area, couldn't
do it because there's no housing
stock.
In fact, they've got a big
barrier if they, even if they
wanted to expand, I don't know
that they've got the water
capacity.
To do it. So there's
Bigger, broader kinds of things
when you're in a very rural
remote, you know, there's only a
school out there and
You know, that, that's where our
teacher housing kind of program
makes sense, but now that we're
getting into like
Community issues of needing to
potentially replace.
Housing stock that's not gonna
come on the market because baby
boomers are gonna age in place
longer than.
The previous generations, uh,
what is that? Um
So hopefully that can be weaved
in and in some form or fashion
with how you go.
So, um, thank you, Mr. Chair on
Director Sali's point, we've had
that very conversation and even
when we were developing the
guide had that very conversation
about this really isn't a school
problem.
Um, and even talked about the
possibility of making that a
requirement, district actually
have some conversation with. Um,
how, what we do and how we get
there, I don't know, but, but
clearly, you know, and that
we've discussed.
Because frankly why um why I
requested that PSFA staff reach
out uh to Daniel. Um, we're
really not doing.
Go ahead.
So I just have a comment. So I,
I do like the idea of, you know,
partnering with some of these
rural communities, you know,
because a lot of the cost is in
that site development so there's
a way to, you know, partner with
rural areas. I think it would go
uh anything that, you know, CID,
you know, could do that. On
partnering with communities too
as well. I mean, one thing to
really look at is, um,
Uh, local government bodies, so
municipalities or counties that
have property that might be
available that they're not
using, um, having a transaction
much easier. So versus going out
and finding property that's
privately owned, um, I think
it's really important that their
community or even neighboring
communities that may have excess
surplus property potentially
that's located near
infrastructure that they could
tap into. Again, this is the
kind of thing that I think this
RFI will hopefully bring forth
as part of the policy is really
again looking at
Site selection and the
opportunities, so even if it's
not district owned, if it's
owned by the the village or the
county, um, that's immediately.
Thank you, John.
Sorry, not to, not to just talk
for the sake of talking, I hope,
but thanks, Mr. Chair. I, I
think part of what this is all
bringing to mind is um.
Your chronic absenteeism is
something that our committee has
been looking next week at our
hearing and
What we're trying to to to help
people think about is that
oftentimes we think about
attendance and chronic
absenteeism about is about
individual choices.
And what we're actually going to
talk about next week is how.
So much of this is a
manifestation of the health of
the of the school system,
partly, but also the health of
the community, in the community
systems and so I, I really
appreciate the conversation
that.
This isn't just about
Sort of a stopgap solution to
helping teachers find a home,
which is important.
But in those communities we're
probably seeing nurses on as
Charles said.
Nurses unable to find homes.
Social workers and he will
define comprehensive sort of
approach that I think would be
very interesting.
Thank you, John.
I have some comments on this,
uh.
You know, I'm looking at the,
the nice pictures here in Gallup
and.
Central, I think, but then I go
back to to look at page 46.
You know, um,
Again, this is just one small
portion of what we see.
Our responsibility is basically
facilities with the cost of
facilities going up as.
All of you have mentioned.
Taking on
Housing, teacher housing is a
big challenge.
We found that out by all the
work you've done, all the
research you've done, and the
experience we've had, so I
wanted to ask, you know, of the
We had 10 million. There's, it
looks like we only have.
3 million here that's been
allocated and how many units has
that gotten us? How many?
housing units that paid for Mr.
Chair, my quick math shows uh 9.
No. You know, at that rate,
we'll never get there.
Particularly if we're working
alone. So I like the idea of
partnering.
Cities, counties or so, you
know.
You know, at local government uh
division where I worked
previously, we worked very.
Hard to get uh.
housing money from the US
Department of Housing and urban
development through the
community development block
grant at the housing block
grants, so there are a lot of
resources out there that we need
to tap.
In order to
To have a make a dent on teacher
housing.
So again, it's very challenging
and.
Uh, unless we, we're able to
make.
Better inroads and fund more
units on an annual basis.
I'm, I'm not sure.
That the effort that our staff.
And the amount of money is
taking.
Is, is uh really.
Something that we need to
continue.
But
I'm glad that we're going out
for more information to see how
we can maximize our impact on
this.
Utilizing other resources and
Uh, you know, the, the big key
is keeping
Construction costs down and
I'm not sure how we sort of
mixed feelings. I'm glad we're
moving forward with a study on
more in and and getting more
information, but I do think at
some point we need to make a
hard, we're gonna have to make a
hard decision whether to
continue this effort or look at
us.
My comments uh
And uh again, thank you for all
the work that you've done.
We do have a motion on, on the
floor unless there's other
discussion or
All those in favor of approving
the subcommittee recommendation,
please indicate by saying.
Motion passes and thank you so
much.
Mr. Chair, if I may, uh, to
answer Ms Leach's question about
the timeline with this approval
we'll move forward immediately
and start developing the RFI in
tandem.
With Daniel and uh get that on
on the street as soon as
possible. Um, I think it's our
intention to bring you back
information by the end of the
year.
On this.
Thank you, thank you.
Next item.
Is the local match reduction
data source policy.
So that's.
A 161.
Mr. Chair, members,
Uh, before I get into your
executive summary. Closely lit
with hand in hand with Mr. Ortiz
as well.
So if you join me Vice Manor,
what the true issue? I do want
to mention that that this I'll
be able to voice their concerns
or questions.
Um, so, but I've been able to
said.
Um, what we're requesting is
that that looks like.
Indicating that PED.
Along with bondage.
As you recall, uh,
Real quick here get them ready
to come forward.
Or they ask. Not very often.
Um,
Differ from PED.
There has been a couple of
incidents and the true question
here is, and this came from PED
is.
PD's concern is if we're
utilizing bonded advisors data.
was actually validating.
So again, back to the key
points, many districts cannot
afford their local match.
Or current or potential projects
due to their bonding capacity
and available funds.
As a way to address this issue,
as you know, district in the
form of a waiver to fund up to
their portion of the local map,
as you see in the chart below,
these are the ways in which a
district can qualify too. They
need to reach either the 10 mLs
or the 7 miles.
Um, again, PED September.
Uh, page 162, the key issue
being timing.
Many districts go out for bond
election in November and
September.
And the district may be
dependent on that for a waiver.
The problem occurs when a bond
election is passed in November.
Whose bonds are issued in
September.
Therefore, dish 7 to 10 months
before they could be eligible
for a waiver project to start.
It is PSFA's understanding that
when the tax rates issues.
So they spoke about or had
discussions surrounding and
option one was just to continue
to utilize PED's data. Second
option was uh for council to
pre-approve an award.
When given a pre-approval spend
months, um, do they still have
to wait? Uh, there was just too
many Option 3 was PED4 in
consultation with Bond. We are
requesting option 3.
Keep that in mind, um.
But for now, I'm going to
Uh, Mr. Chair and members, uh.
I think all I want to add is
that that.
As Mr. Romero indicated, I've
been working with many districts
over time playing a long game to
get eligible for potential
funding through the PSCOC, which
includes uh game planning for
their financial ability to
become eligible for a local
batch reduction. Um, that is why
many of the districts in the
past year went out for bond. It
was specifically to obtain a
PSCOC award. They did their
homework, they did a good job,
they work with their bond
advisors and they are.
Um, very careful to make sure
that they are meeting that mill
levy requirement so that they
meet that criteria, otherwise
they can't proceed with the
project, so, um.
Myself and the bond advisors
have been instrumental in making
sure that these districts are
doing everything they can to get
the funding needed to replace
their schools or whatever
project uh they are applying
for. I think it's also important
to keep in mind that when the
district approves uh the
community approves the bond,
they've passed the election.
There is a timeline for when
they spend that bond money, um,
which, um, RBC can speak to, but
the, the clock starts ticking,
um, if we have to wait.
A full year for that PED tax
rates to become official. Um
we've lost a third of that time,
essentially, or at least a
quarter um and so the, the
projects.
Won't start, won't occur, and,
and we've lost significant time.
A lot of these districts, when
we go see them, they are in dire
need. They are patching as
quickly as as the holes start
coming, um there are band-aids
everywhere and that those
band-aids need financial funding
as well, so they are spending
money on maintenance.
That they would like to invest
on uh replacement schools, um,
and so they are doing everything
they can, which includes going
out for bonds, um, and
And this is the system that we
are, you know, caused to um work
within these frameworks.
Boarding, uh, Eric Harrigan with
RBC Capital Markets. So we work
with a number of school
districts around the state and.
While it's not uh terribly
common, there are school
districts that, you know,
encounter issues when tax rates
have been set in September 2
months, you know, 3 months
later, they have the bond
election, it gets approved by
voters and then they go and
frame.
But those tax rates reflecting
the issuance of those geo bonds
may not, you know, will, will
actually not be of that year.
So it really kind of comes down
to a timing issue, um, and
whether or not they can sort of
meet that, um, you know, you
know, levy, uh, one of the
things that I think it is
important to note is that when
school districts go to issue
bonds they they they do have to
provide notification to BED that
those bonds have been issued,
um, as, and then the other
component too, is just not with
bonds, it could be capital mill
levies. So if a district um goes
out for say HB 33.
In November, that tax rate won't
get set until the following
September as well, so, uh, it's
not only just, you know, geo
bonds, it can also, uh, it all,
it could also be just one more
thing if I may, you know, we've
been having this conversation
for a couple of years now. We've
seen an increase in requests for
this local match reduction, and
that is because we've seen the
local matches climb over the
past few years as the phase two
formula took effect, and, and
that's really the the crux
This issue, the districts can
only bond to so much in these
projects are coming in.
Um, with the local match far
above what these districts can
go out to bond for, and so these
local matches are very necessary
for these districts to achieve.
The needs and, and as you've
heard over the past year, uh,
the needs of these awards, we,
we have districts living in
school buildings that are 100
years old and and having
significant issues.
Um, and when we're making these
awards, we are being very
diligent to ensure that we are
um working to make sure that the
data is as accurate as possible.
To um strike and if you look at
option two,
the 70%,
Thank you. Um
I'd like to hear from
Uh, Antonio good um.
Uh, on the particular option
that's available and.
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, um.
So, so the, the issue in the
What I see is problematic is
when it says real time data.
There's no such thing as real
time data. You set the rates in
August.
You know, stuff transpired with
the next year and then reset
them.
We can certainly take a look and
work with bond advisors to come
up with a projection, you know,
based on things, but there's too
many movies at the public
education department to certify
something that a projection that
may change comparable doing, and
then the moving parts like we
can take a look so, so Ms. uh
Romero was correct. There's a
lot of different, uh, we take a
look at land valuations, we do
take a look at the projected
debt service but to, to the
components that we rely on to
set the rates, one, we don't get
the initial value uh lot of
value.
So we're looking at setting
something, you know, earlier in
the year and that changes if the
land valuation goes up,
obviously.
So there's a lot of moving parts
so we get updated uh collection
and setting the rates.
So that that's kind of the
concerns that I had when I saw
the this option.
Also there was a couple of
districts that were brought up
during uh some of the previous
uh subcommittees where they was
uh was stated that they're gonna
apply for a waiver.
They didn't qualify at the time.
I looked up their information
and then since the tax rates
have been.
That there's been a couple of
alleys that still didn't meet
the mark, even though that they
thought and they worked with
those are some of my concerns
that I have.
Yes, Mr. Chair. Um, so is, uh,
the director mentioned AMS
didn't have a recommendation on
this simply because we wanted to
get PEDs input, and I really
appreciate that input because I
think it makes a lot of sense,
um, but I do think that there's
a path forward here, um, I'm.
I'm concerned for that
certification to be awarded
simply because with Board of
Finance we we issue tax-exempt
debts when you issue that, and a
spend down requirement to
maintain that tax-exempt status
of those bonds.
Uh, and to lose 7 to 10 months
is very, that's a huge piece of
that for the IRS comes literally
time frame that's really, I
mean, that's a big issue. Um,
and I also think, of course,
obviously with the construction
costing landscape as well, but I
understand that, you know,
there, as far as real time, I
think what I could see is like a
path forward here.
is not necessarily sort like a
full blown analysis, but a
review of the bond advisor uh
projections, because I agree
that projection can be done.
I can see why PED is
uncomfortable certifying that.
It is still an estimate and it
may not come in exact and down
other factors might go up and
down, but if there's a review of
the bond to look at whether
they're reasonable and I
personally feel like the council
should be open to looking at
that or could be open to looking
at, you know, PED says
everything looks like, you know,
the projections make analysis,
um, it, it appears to follow,
you know, appropriate practices
for projecting, maybe that's a
path forward to give the
projected.
to make determined, uh, because
again, I am concerned BED's
concerns about certifying
mid-year. We don't, that that's
not a thing. They aren't going
to certify midyear. They're
gonna certify once a year as
they do, but there is a way,
because the bond advisors and
financial advisors are doing
that to evaluate those
projections to see if they'll
hit that waiver requirement. And
one question I had for Elise is
um,
It's my understanding that a lot
of the folks that are coming for
a local uh mass reduction.
Even if they max out and they
hit that 10 miles, they're not
anyway, so it's kind of, it's on
a moot point, uh, we want, but
even if they're not at the full
10 mLs, I mean, there, they're
already just not able to afford
the project, and I, that's my
understanding um Miss Leach,
that is correct what we've been
seeing the last uh couple of
years as we have districts that
can bond to 2 million in their
local matches, 15, um, something
like that and so we're seeing
districts that aren't even able
to afford phase
One of their local mattress is
10% of the total project costing
10% of the total local match.
Um, if that's coming in at 2
million and they only have
500,000.
Um,
It sounds like 10% isn't that
much, but it is a lot for these
little districts that have very
low bonding capacity and so if
they can't afford it, the
project.
stalled.
And and if I may, Mr. Chair, I
think.
You know, again, I know that we
have the 3 options and the 7 mLs
and the 10 mLs, but I, I do
think it's important for us to
be able to look and say, OK, we
know that we have the 7 and the
10.
And it's not to say that we
ignore those numbers, but we
don't want to delay this waiver.
Um, especially given that the
clock that's ticking on the tax.
So I think there there should be
maybe.
Um, I could see, and I don't
know, I'd love to hear Antonio's
thoughts on, you know, adjusting
it so it's not a recertificate
or not a certification. It's not
real time data but more you're
just reviewing the.
Let me ask a question and, and
With in in that pathway that
you're, you're laying out.
What if the the waiver be
contingent on that then.
You know, to go back after a
year.
Worth of planning would be very
I'm not sure I fully understand
the.
Uh yes, Mr. Turner. I, I was
thinking about that as well in
that question because we won't
know for certain it is going to
be a projection. One thing
before I answer that question, I
one question I had is how far
off in Antonio, you mentioned
that this has happened a couple
of times. How far off is it?
Like if they're not meeting the
mill, is it going to be by half
a mil? Is it by 3 mLs? I mean,
do we know how much that can
vary because my, my estimate is,
you know, they're working with a
bond advisor, especially like
RBC who's.
been in this market for decades.
They're, they're very
knowledgeable and um
In this analysis, you know, I'm
just curious as to how wide um
of a gap that could be and I
again, I know that the time is
there, but I, I feel like
And I know we're not talking
about the options here.
And I hate to use the term
wiggle room, but is there
something where it's like, OK,
if they're getting in within 1
mL of the ton, we have this
projection because I don't, I
don't think having a contingent
helps the situation because they
still can't. Mhm.
So I don't know. Um, Mr. Chair,
uh, Madam Lee, I don't know
exactly, but we can do an
analysis, but I would actually
like to do
Do that.
Um, but on Mr. Terrier point,
that's the exact point that I
had is if we could definitely
and we do support waivers PD
does support and work with them,
but there's so many the rate we
don't hit it, then what?
And I, and I think that's what
we talked, you know.
We don't want delay projects,
but should it be at the time
when they apply for
Um, Mr. Chair and I just like to
make a comment that one of the
challenges that school districts
do face.
When those tax rates get set, is
that, you know, we can work with
the district to to get their geo
bond tax rates set to try to get
it to that 10 mLs.
One of the challenges though is
yield control.
Associated with the.
We don't have any control over
that. That set statutorily.
Um, and, you know, we feel that
in looking at whether or not a
school district meets, you know,
the 10 mL is the unyield
controlled rate.
Um, you know, for example,
there, there are school
districts that.
Um, because they're, you know,
rates that voters have
authorized and approved.
Um, are over the 10 mLs but
because of yield control below
10 mLs.
Um, which the school district
has.
We think that's an important.
Another moving part.
Mr. Chair, if I can also add
another moving part that wasn't
talked about is in cash, the
school districts they have in
their debt service, they have
cash and we have to work with
the school districts.
In other words, we set a rate
and that whatever they call if
there's any excess cash that
goes into the rate like they.
No, um, I know that there's
people studying this at this
point. You mentioned the free
agency possibly changing the uh
waiver you see.
Uh
Is there any talk about?
I guess another solution would
be to
To make that not a hard and fast
statutory, you know, make it a,
you know, a goal, uh, Mr. Chair,
I, I appreciate that. Yeah, I
think that's, that's really the
issue here cause it sounds like
this is always gonna be a
problem, regardless of where you
set the rate.
It sounds like districts are
working in good faith with their
bond advisors to to ask voters
to approve a certain amount of
meals so that they can qualify
for the waivers cause they know
they're never going to be able
to afford these projects.
And if we end up in this
situation, whether the meal is 5
mLs or 3 mL or or whatever it
is, we're always gonna be here,
so I think that's important that
maybe there's some wiggle room,
maybe um, and then I just wanted
to raise, uh, to your point,
the, the idea that
If they go out and ask voters to
approve these bonds.
And then through all the moving
parts that Mr. Ortiz is talking
about.
Their meals come in below, you
know, we would never go ask a
district to go out and ask their
their their voters to raise
taxes again in a, in a year so
that they can meet a waiver
requirement. So I just think
there's some practical
difficulties in the way that
we're doing it right now, and I
understand the need for good
data and timeliness on your, on
your end but making sure that
Edi is, is also feeling
comfortable with the
determinations that that it's
made. Surely we can figure
figure out something.
So I, I don't, I don't think
we're gonna.
So this today.
Uh, or pass alleviated. So
let's, let's continue working on
it. That's the only thing I
could suggest.
See if there's any
Any procedure that we can,
everybody's comfortable with
that we can move forward.
The, uh, with those projects
that, that come to it from there
and uh when when we're able to
Come up with some language,
please bring it as soon as you
can. I don't know if it's uh
council service is this some
task force Mr. Chair for the
public
Second that. I think the key is
we need. Um, I think this is a
huge issue for those districts
that are struggling projects
going and and uh to Mr. Sonnen's
point, you know,
If they go out and they, they
ask the voters for that approval
and then they issue that debt,
and then can't spend down on it,
regulations, and then on top of
it, they don't eat the mills. I
mean they're just so then
they're voters have approved
something that they're not even
gonna get.
So I think it's this is really
um.
Really something that needs to
be considered right away. Chair
and members, uh, one last thing,
the application cycle is
currently open and will close
September 30th.
Um, so far I've received.
Applications from 3 districts
for standards-based projects,
two of which include uh
districts that will just went
out for bond in September. They
had held special elections for
this purpose and have applied
for replacement schools, and
they will be asking for a
little, so September is a really
weird time to pass bonds and so
I don't know how that's gonna
play into um this timeline, but
both schools are to request
those.
At the next round, so with words
in.
Um,
So, uh, with that understanding,
we'll just move on on this. We
won't take any action.
And uh I hope to come back soon.
Uh, with either a
Report on something that we can
do in the uh.
Interim
All right. So, uh,
We'll go on to the item C, the
FY 26 appropriations request and
we do have a subcommittee
recommendation on this one.
Thank you all for being here.
Mr. Chair, members.
If you can go.
183. Yes sir.
Mm
The recommendation from council
approval for PSC or C.
Approval of the proposed $7,828
operating budget for PSFA. PSFA
was requesting this amount with
an increase of $483,228 from the
fiscal year 25 operating budget.
Pursuant to a statue PSFA's
operating budget is based on a
total annual expenditures from
the fund for the core
administrative functions not to
exceed 5% of the average annual
grant assistance authorized from
the fund during the previous 5
fiscal years.
Based on the latest calculations
and you can see on page 185.
PSA is authorized to request up
to 11.7. The agency wants to
create a solid foundation in
current personnel and procedures
in order to prepare the next
phase of funding that's um going
so we're here aha taking a more
conservative approach.
Uh, before asking face.
Um, in the 200s, the total
personal services and employee
benefits request.
is 6.4 million.
This request is part of a
performance-based compensation
strategy in order to create a
strong human capital foundation
in order to prepare for the
influx of second-phase
construction projects coming
forward uh for an award in the
next.
Additionally, the strategy is
also geared to create mentors
for new employees as well as
create a growth and advancement
strategy that will help retain
staff and reduced.
And we were also requesting um
two additional positions.
Uh, one regional manager with an
approximate total of $23.
Industry standards indicate that
a regional manager manages an
average of 5 projects, while
PSFA's request will help.
Uh, towards balancing the
workload of the field
department.
There has also been a push
towards sustainable and energy
efficient design practices and
construction, energy code
changes, and PSFA is currently
spearheading the maintenance and
verificility cost savings. The
energy manager will help usafa
continue being uh to be being
part of this great initiative.
Back to the personnel, um,
performance based, um,
Compensation package we're
looking to
Um, management is requesting 3%
of the total again eliminates
the um executive directors, the
board.
Um, again, this strategy is.
Out of the box thinking, uh,
meaning in order for an employee
to be able to qualify for up,
they would have to.
Their efforts would take um in
addition to their advancement.
So this is not.
where we look at the evaluation,
they check mark all this is more
of out of the box thinking, and
again, getting PSFA to the next
level.
Finally, we are requesting in
the 300s, uh, an additional
choices.
Uh, the increases for
professional services to perform
various consulting services to
include development and editing
a public documents and materials
such as the annual report and uh
the PSCOC meeting materials, uh,
potentially the website redesign
and potential uh additional
consultant to continue to look
at the state local match in that
task force, and then with that,
Mr. Chair and Questions on the
budget.
Yes you do.
Yeah, yeah, no, you're fine. I
was trying to send a mind
message.
Uh.
Sorry.
Like, can't you see my eyes just
getting, I was not sending a
clear message. Um, no, uh, AMS,
uh, wanted to bring this
forward, um, to make sure that
the full council uh could see
this, you know, with the
High amounts, you know, as the
director mentioned, you know,
the 5 year average is pretty
high. They're um asking for a
small increase and I, I
certainly think that the um.
Uh, proposed employee, uh, you
know, compensation, uh, uh, idea
that the directors bringing
forth is good. Uh, one thing I
wanted to bring to the awareness
of the council is um I did have
Iris and staff look specifically
at some eligible, so those are
the systems that districts use
for purchase orders,
construction maintenance, or
management, all that kind of
stuff. Um, there has been some
inconsistency in the past with
it including that within the
operating budget.
That sometimes including it
within the capital budget, which
means the fund overall, and um,
Iris and and Mona did analysis
on that, uh, at my request
because that inconsistency we
need to have a final answer on
winning budget or capital, and I
wanted to thank Iris and Mona.
Uh, they did determine that, so,
um, and the reason I share that
is for transparency and for the
council to know that those are
that's what's within the
operating budget belongs there
because sometimes the fun just
sort of feels like a fund, um,
but it is important to, to know
what is appropriate
In each bucket of funding, so I
just wanted to share that with
the council, but again, a legal
determination and getting the
answer on that. Um, I'd also
note, Iris, do you want to
update a little bit on um
Simon and the budget process,
uh, since we're after the
bleach. I'm not quite. So the
budget has already been
submitted, correct,
um, Mr. Chair members, the
budget was due September 1st.
But I was able to speak with our
budget analyst and after your
approval to go. Any other
questions on the budget?
Not then all those in favor of
approving the proposed budget,
please indicate by saying I. I
opposed.
Revised adequacy standards.
So
Recommendation from the state
that recommendation before the
staff presentation.
Um, so AMS did a consider this,
and we do have a recommendation.
Uh, it's our recommendation for
a council to council to approve
to publish the revised adequacy
standards, PSFA staff may make
minor technical changes after
this approval.
Um, again, we didn't place this
on consent. um, I wanted PSFA
staff to uh discuss these
changes because uh as they
presented an AMS and was our
understanding is this is
probably one of the biggest
changes to adequacy standards in
quite some time.
The last update was in 2019, um,
and those were minor, and so
this will be impactful uh if
passed, um, I know we still have
a public hearing on, on the
calendar, but um it could have
some impacts to the rankings,
uh, so PSFA has a uh a plan for
addressing that uh with these
adequacy standards are passed.
By the council, but I wanted
them to walk through that and
all the good work that they've
done, but again, this is a
pretty big change to the
adequacy standards uh from
recent history, so thought it
was prudent to bring it forth to
the full council.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
thank you, Miss Leach for that
intro into this. Um, yes, it is.
It's, it's been a journey to get
here. We've, um, we've held
quite a few uh public meetings
in, in the past years to get
more information from districts.
Um, all the way down to kitchen
staff. I mean, we really drilled
down to see where, where we
lacking. Where could we do a
little better?
And just as a reminder, the the
adequacy standards are the
measuring stick by which we
assess school facilities for
educational deficiencies, it is
not what we designed to.
What what we recommend designing
to is based on our adequacy
planning guide and our girls
square foot calculator, but this
is the foundation for all of
that work as well, so, um, as we
get past this milestone, there's
more work to be done, uh,
including
looking at the girl's square
foot calculator and probably
about a year's worth of work to
revamp the adequacy planning
guide to bring us into the 21st
century of learning.
Um, but with that, I will walk
you through a few key points um
with some recommendations.
Um, so if
If we, uh, if this is approved
today, PSFA staff will hold the
required public hearing, um.
And address any comments that we
get from that hearing.
Uh, for that.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chair, we are,
uh,
We are hoping to hold it in
October and uh we would make the
council aware of that date, um,
as soon as it's set. It's kind
of a moving target just because
of the timing of those public
hearings, and so we don't have a
a set date quite yet. Thank you.
Um,
So with that being said, we, we
plan to hold the public hearing
in October, uh, with revised
adequacy standards, final um
being published by December.
If you remember, we, we wanted
to get this work done by July.
Um, we have not met that
deadline, um, but we felt it
important to take a step back
after we realized some of the um
movement that was going to
happen and really drill into
what this is gonna do to the
ranking.
Um, and some of our internal
processes.
And uh because of the good work
that um Andrew and Elise have
done on this, I think we're,
we're very confident in the way
we're moving forward.
Um, if, if the comments generate
major changes, however, we will
bring the document back to this
council for final approval and
that would just push.
The publication date out, um.
If need be.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, the, the
proposed changes in space
allocation are going to result
in some shifts within the
ranking and I'm going to let um
Andrew talk about that in a
little more detail, but this
could result in some school
districts.
Assuming that they were just
about ready to reach that top
100, only to be uh kicked out of
that top 100, if you will, and,
you know, that happens every
year anyway.
Just because of the good work
that our assessors are doing and
the master planners and um all
the information getting fed into
the system. The ranking is um
quite volatile. It, it moves up
and down, but um.
This, this will rock the boat a
little bit more if you will.
So, uh, staff is recommending.
If this is a, um, once it's
approved and finalized.
Uh
running two rankings
concurrently, so we would run
the ranking under the old
adequacy standards.
And we would have a new ranking
under the new adequacy
standards.
And
All that means is those
educational deficiencies would
not exist in.
The old, the old ranking, it
would be in the new ranking
system and so some of those.
School facilities, um, that
might get pushed up or down, we
would still give them that
opportunity uh for at least a
year to, to come forward for uh
application.
On the uh following sheet on
page 187. This is
This is information that was
previously
Uh, presented to this council,
um, back in May of 2024, um, but
I wanted to just bring it back
for.
A reminder for all of us as to
what we are changing and where
the biggest changes are coming
from.
I think, uh, 3 very important um
Spaces that uh we heard need to
be.
Updated our pre-K.
Uh, we have infused.
Pre-kindergarten into the
adequacy standards um throughout
the document.
Um, also CTE, as we all know, is
a very big uh topic right now
and so
Um, while the adequacy standards
do not address.
The size and scale of some of
these CTE facilities that will
be the, the work that we do as
part of the um adequacy planning
guide, but we have updated the
terminology to include that.
And I think most importantly a
special education.
Uh, we heard a lot that um we
have not been allowing enough
space in special education. Now
again, this is the adequacy
standard, so it's just the
minimum.
Um, but we're raising those
minimums up because uh.
We, we heard the importance of
these spaces, and sometimes, you
know, these OTPT spaces are
getting stuck in.
Um, little tiny rooms, uh,
you're putting, um,
You're putting speech
pathologists and electrical
closets as their office, so
there's just not enough room in
these facilities for this very
important work and uh I think as
a society we're getting better
at identifying um needs of our
students.
Um,
One of the other major changes
is um just general classroom
sizes, um, our minimums in the
state was a 650 ft square foot
classroom. That's a small
classroom, uh, national.
Uh, averages is around 800 to
9000 square feet per classroom.
And so those are some of the
numbers that are really gonna
buck the the ranking, if you
will.
Um, but with that, I will turn
it over to um Andrew to walk us
through some of the exhibits.
Thank you, Ryan.
Members, uh,
What I'll proceed to go through
today is essentially the
codification of the suggestions.
Provided by districts, uh,
school professionals, um, within
exhibit A and how we incorporate
those and we codified those in
exhibit A, um, to the fat
database. So what we're gonna
look at actually is exhibit B,
which is essentially a
reflection of what is suggested
in an exhibit 8. this is
essentially the codes that are
associated with the facilities
assessment database, educational
adequacy standards for each
adequacy standard, of course you
have to meet a minimum, and this
is essentially the calculation
on how this
Gets determined
So what we have on exhibit B is
essentially what our current
value equation is, and then what
the proposed value equation
would be associated with um
Uh, the adequacy standard change
and I'm sorry, this is page 199.
199 starts exhibit B.
So what we did is we then took
each one of these proposed
changes as when we modeled each
one of those changes. The
results of those changes can be
seen in exhibit C, which is on
page 204.
So what we're doing here is
we're controlling, we're
comparing the control ranking.
Which means a ranking with the
current adequacy standards, and
we are comparing that to each
and every change associated to
each and every adequacy standard
suggestion.
But what we really want to
compare is the control rank with
the all uh rankless associated
with column all 17. Um, that
takes into consideration all of
the proposed adequacy changes
and then we want to run a
ranking with those adequacies
changes to determine the
movement of that particular
school based upon the changes
we're proposing.
Um, I know that the council is
always really interested in the
top 100. So within the top 100,
based upon the application of
these new adequacy standards, 14
schools dropped out of that top
100.
Um, oh, the 14 schools that
dropped out that were pushed out
were pushed out to the 100s to
200s because they were the
highest on that line, they were
pushed further back. 11 schools
rose up from the top 100, 200, 2
from the top 200 to 300 and one
school from top 300+. So
essentially there was a facility
that was ranked in the 300s,
which these adequacy standards
greatly affected and got them
into the top 100. So, exhibit C
is just identifying.
And uh kind of providing us the
information associated with that
movement.
Exhibit D is essentially what
we're comparing, and this is on
page 2018. The results of this
testing, they result in a change
of what we call an index EA
index repair cost. So
essentially, the database has
determined based upon the
enrollment that they need a
certain square footage.
With the new adequacy standards
that minimum requirement has
been increased, so we are going
to need more repair costs to
make sure that that facility
meets the adequacy standard
minimums.
So essentially that's what
exhibit D is is it's just the
analysis for, in this case,
The inclusion of all category
changes, but this is the same
approach that was applied to
every single um proposed change.
And just to summarize, um, I
spoke shortly about that top
100, but the range of movement
for these schools, of course
schools are gonna go up and down
based upon the enrollment for
that specific year, results from
site assessments, from FMP
vendors, from the school
districts themselves.
But
Based upon the adequacy
standards themselves and the
application of new ones, 176
schools moved anywhere between 0
and 10 spaces, 205 moved between
10 and 20, 149 between 30, 20
and 30 spaces.
Uh, 50 schools moved between 30
and 40 spaces, 18 between 40 and
50.
Um, 10 schools between 50 and 60
spaces, 12 schools, 60 to 70
spaces, 13 schools, 70 to 80
spaces, 3 schools, 80 to 90
spaces.
590 to 100 spaces, one school
moved between 100 and 110, and
then we had 9 that made a
significant jump based upon that
update of those adequacy
standards, but of those 1010
that uh jumped greater than 110
spaces, only one of them moved
into the top 100, so we didn't
identify anything that was
grossly over um overcrowded
other than that one facility
based upon. So the movement of
the schools is gonna happen
every year, um, that's why we're
always
school districts to take the
time to review this data over
and over so that they're not
caught off guard when their
school gets pushed out. It's not
because their facility is in a
bad shape because it is, but
unfortunately there's some
facilities that are a little bit
more of a shape in them.
With that being said, um, I'll
hand it over to Lisa Ryan if
they have anything to add, and I
stand for questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, just
really quickly, I wanted to
point out some of the other
exhibits, we won't go through
them uh in any detail, but
exhibit 8 is the draft of the
adequacy standards.
Um, exhibit E is a comparison
that staff did um comparing.
Uh, our adequacy standards and
APG with Albuquerque Public
schools and um Santa Fe schools,
kind of a crosswalk between the
the um.
Uh, size of spaces, if you will.
Uh,
Exhibit F is um just a running
list of the comments that we
received at the public meetings
we held.
Um, and kind of what bucket
those fall in, do they, does
this affect the adequacy
standards? Does it affect the
calculator? or does it affect
the adequacy planning guide?
Um, it was kind of our road map
to uh figure out how to tackle
this.
Um,
exhibit G, uh, are the
Uh this um statewide meetings we
held.
And uh exhibit H is the
presentation that we uh provided
to Pskiff, I believe, last year.
Or 2 years ago, excuse me.
Um, and
With that, uh, we will stand for
questions, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. The uh
you've provided is pretty,
pretty thorough and it's clear.
In the uh
Summary on page.
187
What your, your target
priorities here. So, uh,
questions
from the council.
Deputy director of Parks and a
question on exhibit A.
Uh, page 193.
E3 and one of the proposed
changes.
We have on there all occupancy
spaces within the building shall
have a minimum of X air
exchanges. Do we have a number
on that?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Romero, my
apologies. Uh, that number
should be 3 to 4 air exchanges.
I'm getting that verified with
some mechanical engineers on
what industry standard is right
now, but that is my, that is my
current understanding.
If I could provide you a number
as well also because I think
that number has to be based on,
as well as on the current 2021
energy conservation code. So if
I could provide you that number
this afternoon. Uh, if you could
please, Mr. Chair, Mr. Romero, I
would really appreciate the help
on that. Absolutely. Thank you.
Other questions, John?
It's probably sort of a
technical question. I guess sort
of this sort of parallel
implementation or delayed
implementation of the rule.
So, are, are you saying that if,
if you go through the whole
process, you adopt the rule.
You make the changes, you're
gonna run a parallel list based
on the old adequacy standards at
this Mr. Chair, Mr. Senna,
that's correct, and that's in an
effort to uh
Not short change those districts
that might get knocked out of
the top 100.
Um, just for one. We, we're
recommending one year.
Um,
But we wouldn't be
Uh
Facilitating two adequacy
standards. There would just be
one adequacy standard in the
state as policy, but for the
ranking, we are recommending
that and we will bring that back
at a at a later date. Um, we
just wanted to kind of provide a
heads up on that.
So, um, Mr. Chair, the
Thanks for the for the number of
folks who are moving all over
the place according to the
changes. What's the, what is
that sort of volatility look
like in a year over year basis?
Um
Mr. Senna, uh
It happens year over year just
simply based upon changing of
enrollment and we can see up to
160 assessments a year, so that
very much feeds into the change
in ranked position we've got to
consider um PSFA's assessments,
the FMP vendors are also
responsible for providing PSFA
with facility assessment data
updates in conjunction with the
district. So it's dependent year
on year, but movement in a rank
list is not unique to the rank
list just because of the way
it's set up, um, with districts
having the ability
at any point during the year to
go in and review data and then
provide us with updates, so that
when a rankless does get
determined, it's as accurate as
it possibly can be. So the
movement is normal for a
ranking. Yeah, thanks, Mr.
Chair. Uh, I appreciate that, I
guess.
And I'm not a lawyer.
But from a legal perspective, if
you're gonna adopt rules that
you've
Expect folks to follow?
And then you suggest that we're
not gonna follow them.
That's a little problematic, I
guess, and I understand what
you're saying about.
People are gonna be surprised
that they may be knocked off the
100 list because of the changes.
But if those are the changes
that you feel are adopting.
Something like this, and then
saying we're just gonna choose
not to follow those for a
handful of folks because
They're, they're, you know,
detrimental, it's detrimental to
their to their ranking. Just
that's my concern. Sure, um, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Senna, if, if I could
elaborate, um,
There's, there's no criteria
that they're trying to meet in
order to get.
To applying, this is us going
and measuring and saying,
Um, your classroom should be 800
square feet in an existing
school and there's 700 square
feet. That's an educational
deficiency, and that will bring
them up in the ranking, and so
that's, that's the balance we're
trying to create right now.
Um, but I, I definitely get the,
I understand the concern.
And I, I think that based on
what I've seen,
The odds of that happening and
then applying for that.
School is my butt, but it is a,
you know, Mr. Chair, one
suggestion um based on this
discussion is, uh, you know,
when we, when we roll out the
new adequacy standards along
with that could come.
Um, warning is the wrong word,
but a heads up that this is
going to affect the ranking.
Um, and so for districts to look
closely at their ranking and
maybe if we hear.
Uh, any feedback or concerns, we
can bring that to this council.
And again, since you're running
them.
Currently, they can see what
what the impact is gonna be, Mr.
Chair, if we end up doing that,
we, we certainly can, um, but we
could also, we could precursor
that, if you will and just
release the adequacy standards.
With with a message saying, look
at your, look at your rank and
be prepared.
Or
This movement to happen.
Um, it's not a question but more
a comment, um, Mr. Sin brings up
way vet it in my head. I mean,
it is a rule, it's being
adopted, there's a public
comment period, there's a public
hearing. So, um, I do kind of
like the idea of, you know,
having the two lists
concurrently internally giving
that kind of notice and then if
an issue. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Additional questions.
Now this is an action item as
well.
So all those in favor of
approving the new adequacy
standard proposed that.
Indicate by saying I
was opposed.
Motion passes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Informational
How are we doing on time?
I
Right.
We'll go into the quarterly
maintenance status report.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
PSCOC members. Hope everybody is
doing well this morning.
Item 6A in your ebooks or your
handouts is uh informational and
reflects the current up to June
30th, 2024.
New Mexico district performance
status in the categories of
preventive maintenance planning
efforts, the facility
information management system
use.
The FM and we've added in a
brief
Ever so brief update on the
measurement and verification
program, um.
Moving right into preventive
maintenance planning for the
state of New Mexico 71.43 or 65
of the 91 New Mexico districts
have a current preventive
maintenance plan. It's a slight
reduction from last quarter that
we reported on. However, we do
have many methods that we use to
motivate districts to update
their PM plans and
Just a quick notice, the
maintenance program has is very
dynamic.
We could see changes from day to
day as a matter of fact, just
yesterday, this week, we
received two updates to
preventive maintenance planning
from districts, so it's again
very dynamic in nature. The
facility information management
system used to manage work
orders uh both reactive and
preventive at New Mexico school
districts.
Remains the same as last
quarter, 61% uh use the tools to
drive maintenance performance,
manage their work order tasks on
a regular basis or the
maintenance direct piece or
preventive maintenance Direct,
which is our primary focus, 67%
use that tool effectively to
manage their assets and last but
not least on this list is
utility direct 47% of the
districts use utility Direct to
manage their.
Energy management programs at at
their. Moving on to the FMR, the
primary measure of maintenance
performance at the PSFA for
school districts.
Some additional good news from
last quarter. We've seen a
slight
Increase in districts
performance from last quarter,
75 to a 76, which is um very
exciting news. We've completed
249 of the 784 school districts
across the state of New Mexico
in this cycle, 18 months into
it, spanning 160 New Mexico
school districts and 13 state
charters. Charter schools
performance, on average, is
currently above public school,
um.
Performance 78.05%, which is
exciting. It's really.
Kind of cool to give some
competition out there and and we
we like to see that and drive
it.
The percentage rate of districts
responding to their FARs. This
is the ones that take heed and
fix what we identify is broken
at their school districts, our
goal is 25%. We want to see 25%
of school districts responding,
fixing things that are broken.
Currently, we're at an 18.6%. We
have outreach methods uh that
are routine and constant poking
the bear to assist school
districts and motivate them to
responding and fixing what's
broken, not the number that we
want to see, but we're moving in
that direction.
The minor and major deficiency
summary in the state of New
Mexico, uh, cumulative, we have
692 minor major life health
safety issues in the state of
New Mexico recognized through
the FMAR.
Fire protection still holds the
number one spot, electrical
distribution #2, uh, and number
4.
is one of the categories that uh
kind of snuck up on us. We're
seeing more deficiencies in the
roof uh systems categories. What
do we do with this data?
We actually take the minor and
major deficiency data sharing it
with other organizations to
include CES in New Mexico Public
Facility Managers Association,
and based on the data, we create
training programs that are
detailed and focused on fire
prevention to hopefully
Educate and train our facility
managers at public schools and
recognizing the need to pay
better attention to these
categories and reduce minor
majors.
Meaningful maintenance metrics.
This is the very powerful report
that was created by PSFA. We
encourage New Mexico districts
to use this report to tell their
school boards and
superintendents, what's
transpiring in maintenance on a
routine basis. 12% of New Mexico
districts use this report to
report um information related to
their maintenance programs up to
higher levels at their districts
to include Albuquerque, Glenn
Clovis Deming Farmington,
Gadston Grants, Hobbs, and MSPVI
in Roswell.
Moving on into the final
category, which is new.
I'll provide some brief updates,
measurement and verification
program we've added in a brief
definition of what it is.
The handoff from the field
group.
Has occurred. It is now managed
in the maintenance division of
the PSFA.
Agreements have been executed,
and we have begun monitoring 5
New Mexico school districts to
include Burlio Farmington
Gallop, McKinley, Hobbs and Los
Lunas.
We've had kickoff meetings with
the vendor NPSFA staff to
introduce the districts into the
actual tool used that will
measure their data moving
forward.
We are encouraging the Mexico
districts through formal
processes to update their
Energy management programs to
include
Items in the M&V structure and
creating goals that they want to
see over the next 123 years,
which will ultimately reduce
their energy footprint across
the.
And then lastly, PSFA or it is
our intention in the maintenance
division to provide semiannual
reports to this committee
through the AMS with
recommendations including
potential expansion of the
program.
Once we determine
The viability and and um of of
that program.
And with that
I stand for any questions.
Any questions?
Mm,
I'm a little concerned because
actually the state farm
marshal's office reached out to
me.
And uh school.
Districts that are.
And fire, uh, some fire watches
are nearing one year of age.
So.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Romero, yes, they
are through the FMA process, the
assessment process that we have,
we identify major minor
deficiencies which are life,
health, safety issues.
At the school district, we,
through the AMS we now escalate
those districts. So if they're
identified as having a fire
alarm system that's not working.
We encourage them to number one,
create a fire watch. 2, we have
methods to assist them in
repairing the system.
And or replacing the system
through capital projects through
the PSFA.
And we now have a report that
goes to Palms and the local fire
marshal's office, uh, your, your
team, um, routinely to express
and share information so that we
can reduce and assist those
districts in need.
Yes, we do.
So I would like, you know, we
can meet offline, you know, what
do we have to do to get, you
know, some of these others.
Absolutely, I agree. Thank you.
Very
Yeah, I, I expressed to you in
the subcommittee meeting. This
is really drove some of this is
really troubling.
To me, when we have really poor
FR performance getting worse.
And in districts that are
applying for projects.
And I just really feel like we
need to have
If, if there was additional
teeth you needed.
To, um,
Encourage, but really this is at
a point where we have to go past
encouraging the districts just
can't get by with this.
And so I'm sorry if I'm being uh
blunt about it, but I just can't
see.
Continuing to go along and
They were encouraging them to um
work on their facilities.
At some point we have to tell
them they have to work on their
facilities.
And their their districts have
to come up with whatever they
got to do to do that.
So I just wanted to make that
comment cause it is very
troubling right here. Mr. Chair,
Mr. Ingham.
I agree, and our motivational
tactics are getting a little bit
more aggressive and um
But I agree, absolutely.
Any other questions or comments?
To share one more item if I
could. I've recently progressed
into a position at the PSFA of
deputy director of quality
assurance. I would like to
introduce the new maintenance
and operation support manager
for the PSFA, Mr. Jeffrey
McCurdy.
He comes to the PSFA with.
Well over 13 years of experience
in state government. He's
presented to the council before
on many occasions as a support
infrastructure. He knows the ins
and the outs of each one of the
criteria um in the maintenance
division, so we're excited to
have him on board. OK,
congratulations to both of you.
Thank you thank you.
OK, we're getting there.
Statewide education workie. How
are you again?
But it, um, um.
Vital
That um broadband come in.
This project has been going.
Um, that
Or bring back to council, what
was the original intent of the
SE?
Where are we now? Video and his
expertise.
Thank you.
Thank you, Director Romero, Mr.
Chairman, um.
Members of the council.
Um
Again,
Via broadband manager with the
Office of Broadband Access and
expansion, uh, and I would like
to introduce to you, uh, David
Rodriguez, uh David, uh joined,
recently joined um our small
team working on broadband for
schools.
Uh, he just completed, uh, his
1st 90 days, he's still here,
um, and, uh,
Uh, and we're really encouraged,
we're really happy to have
David, um, come in and reinforce
our ranks, um, Paolo, the, the
third member of our small team,
um, project manager, he is back
in the office holding down the
fort, um, and uh you'll probably
hear over and over during the
the conversation that um this
team is, um, insufficient,
although we, we work full time
on
The era projects and the stable
Education Network initiative,
which is a very large endeavor,
um, it's, um, the three of us,
um, with support from PSFA, with
support from the Office of
Broadband still, um, this is
insufficient for for us to, to,
to support um all the work that
needs to be done, but uh I'll
turn it over to to David for a
brief introduction.
Mm
I, um, good morning, uh, Mr.
Chairman, um, council members,
um.
I really appreciate you guys,
um.
Me to me giving me the
opportunity to speak.
Uh, my name is David Rodriguez,
just a quick background, um,
originally from Albuquerque, New
Mexico, grew up in the South
Valley, um, and graduated from
the University of Mexico last
May, so I'm happy to be here,
make a difference to the team.
261 um and um and truly, um, I
wanted to, to share with you
that this is an exciting time to
uh provide an update to this
group, the statewide Education
Network is operational.
Um, so, um, I'd like to add that
without the leadership from this
group.
Um, without the trust from the
public school capitally Council,
New Mexico would likely would
not have uh pretty much all the
public schools connected to
fiber optic.
The futureproof technology uh
for broadband and moreover,
Uh, the stable Education
Network. In my opinion, the most
consequential
and transformative broadband
effort in the state, um, in a
decade or longer, uh, would not
exist. So, so thank you for your
support and your leadership.
Uh, a few, um, takeaway points
to um before we go into the
presentation, um,
the first one, broadband with
all its components represents
infrastructure.
Uh, enabling all use of
technology. So education
technology, school security,
building automation, machine
learning, artificial AI,
artificial intelligence, you,
you, you hear these terms, they
do not function without
broadband. That is how
foundational and how important
um this, this work is.
Uh, the stable Education Network
just, uh, from a high level
perspective is a tremendously
capable tool that eliminates
distances and changes the access
to resources for in um
instructional process uh in all
the public schools that are
connected to it. Uh, the
content, the lessons plans that
can be delivered um over this
and I'm going to speak briefly
about, about that.
Um,
That is, um, we are not experts
in those, so, so that um effort
needs to be led by experts in
the field, what is going to be
delivered over this um network
that is functional now and it's
available.
Um, as an infrastructure
program, this network, um, has
to operate on a long term cycle,
or 5 years, 10 years, um.
Uh, even 20 years, um, um, long
view. So, so that is important
to uh to consider.
Um,
At its core, the education
network is a high capacity.
Highly scalable optical
broadband network that will
connect all the schools, public
schools together into the
internet.
A more secure internet, and that
is a significant distinction in
my opinion.
It is a state coordinated
effort.
But we are working with local
internet service providers with
them.
Internet service providers
throughout the the state. So uh
it is uh we are, we didn't build
a network, we just put it
together, assembled it.
Um, and that collaboration is
also key.
It is a more economical, this
network is a more economical way
to um in a more effective way to
make sure that the public
schools have access to Internet.
In a more secure, in a more
secure way, but it can do much,
much more, and I will go into
the detail because I think that
is truly crucial regarding this,
this work.
We expect about half of the
overall cost of the network to
be covered by the er program. So
that sets this network on the
path for sustainability.
Um, and as such,
Um,
The current estimate is that the
year projects that we talked
about that you awarded earlier,
um, as well as the cost of this
network will fit within the
existing budget that is
allocated for this work, um, up
to $10,000 for many years to
come, and that is, that is also
very important.
The focus
For the next approximately 3
years.
Um, will be the growth of the
network.
That what I mean by that is
connected connecting as many
schools as possible to the
network. And um
And getting to pretty much serve
up to 400,000.
Students and teachers.
Every day, day in and day out.
Um,
In a mission critical operation.
this is a 24/7 365 operation. It
has to work all the time
uninterrupted and there are
some, some considerations to be
made because of that.
Um, and lastly, I would say um
the effort.
I would just reiterate um this
team is just not sufficient um
to accomplish the enduring and
the sustainable um operation
that it needs to be um and I I
really need your help, uh,
identifying together with, with
the Office of Broadband Access
and expansion, how, how that
could be put on a track that is
going to do justice to to this
effort. But moving into the
presentation, um, the executive
summary.
Um
Page 261. I'm not going to go
into all the details here, but
the key points, uh, the
legislation that created this
effort 3 years ago is listed
here um under last point there,
um, it is, um.
Guidelines and um the council
would approve projects necessary
for a stable education work, um.
That supports all the operations
of the modern newer school
facilities.
Um, will be, could, could I ask
you, are you going through the
summary or through the
PowerPoint? I, I am, I'm on the
summary right now, yes.
Um, so just, just a quick
clarification, the broadband,
um, is uh the ability to base
base at the most basic level,
send zeros and ones from one
place to another, um.
Typically, large quantities of
those zeros and ones typically
over large long distances and um
I will, I will.
Demonstrate a little bit how,
how that works.
Um, it is the foundation for
Pretty much all the computer um
technology uh requirements.
The cin on its core, um.
Supports the transmission of 100
gigabits.
Uh, her, uh, per second that.
Means 100 billion zeros and ones
every second, that is uh simply
what, what that means, means and
um.
This establishes, uh, it is
scalable, so we, we can grow as
the need um increases and this
establishes the foundation for
sharing information, sharing
resources, um, supporting
collaboration now and into the
future.
So our read of Senate Bill 144
um was that um
The legislature wanted a focused
and properly resourced effort to
ensure that the students and the
teachers have adequate, reliable
and safe connectivity at school,
and the problem is that because
the state is wrong, most of the
school districts are small,
charter schools are small as
well. They do not have now.
And they will most likely never
have.
The expertise to support complex
networks, so, um, some, while
they can continue to operate
their networks locally, uh,
there needs to be some
specialized support.
Uh, provided to them to make
sure that these networks, these
connections are secure, and
they, they function properly.
This work has many components.
Um, has to account for a large
number of dependencies. So there
is extensive
Coordination that um in
intricate sequencing that is
associated with this work. It's
necessary for this work. Um, and
the work to establish this
network um is complex. It
involves many layers of
technical solutions. It involves
um operational requirements,
specialized procurements,
navigation of state and federal
funding sources and programs,
um, they are always evolving,
um, legal contractual
requirements.
And those
Cover hundreds of entities. So,
uh, that that's that complexity
that I'm, I'm talking about.
Um, we certainly have to to
remember that this is
infrastructure, so, um, the
predictability and the stability
is paramount for, for this, this
effort. Um, we, we have in place
multi-year commitments just
because this is how this um this
the industry works.
The sin cost is estimated to be.
Somewhere between $3.9 million
in $7.9 million per year.
And the reason there is a range
given there is because there are
many factors that feed into into
what that cost is, um.
And those factors are are ever
evolving. The number of
participants, the number of
hubs, the level of resiliency.
What broadband use um happens at
any given time, uh, and, and
what is being provided to these
participants. However, I can
tell you that
The network will provide to all
the participants reduction in
cost.
By maximizing the e-rate funds
in through economies of scale
it's pretty, pretty simple. Um,
we advocate.
For, for this for state sources
of funding in conjunction with
the rate dollars. Um, to cover
the entire cost.
For for this network because
that is going to simplify the
administration of this we don't
have to turn to the schools and
say we're going to charge you 2
$100 this month or whatever the
amount ends up being, we would
need an entire billing
department just to, to handle
that, um, version where in fact.
The state ends up paying for
these costs some way somehow
anyway.
Um, the reduction of the
administrative burden is
significant for all the schools
because the procurements, the
contracting, the rate
application for 89 school
districts, 100 charter schools,
um, is just a tremendous burden,
and it's not done, uh, it's not
easy to, to, to get
accomplished.
This network then provides
Um, the ability to provide
technical support to small
schools, um, district in rural
areas who struggle having
expertise on staff also for
charter schools, but not only
that, I can tell you that the,
the deficit of expertise in this
area in New Mexico is.
is significant, even large
school districts are struggling.
Managing their networks and
their connections.
This provides the network also
provides the ability to reduce
the cybersecurity risk to all
the participants.
Um, and that is important and
significant. I can tell you that
there is a cybersecurity
incident related to a school
almost every day.
Um, in the nation, in New
Mexico.
Almost every other week. Um, so
the need is great and I can tell
you that it's only getting
started. It's going to get
worse.
So, uh, this is an important
capability uh that we're working
really hard and seriously to um
to increase.
And offers finally the ability
to more effectively and more
securely share instructional
materials, lessons, plans,
specialized classes, share,
uh,
Platforms
Professional development, um,
collaborate directly in access
to health counseling so much
more um to quote one of my
colleagues, this sky is the
limit, literally, um, because
they can all these, all these
services can be put in place and
delivered um over this network.
I, I'm not going to, to go over
the, the, the timeline on page
263. It's a long timeline we've
we've been working on this uh
directly since 3 years, 3.5
years ago, um, but I would, I
would say that last summer.
We had the first agreement
signed for the backbone.
It's been a struggle to get
there, but uh we got there
these.
I think that that points to the
fact that these are complicated
agreements, these are complex,
um.
Arrangements and so it takes
expertise and time to to to get
there. It's going to get easier
over time.
Um,
In December, the office of
Broadband issued another RFP
request for proposal for phase
2.
And that has not been awarded
yet, so 9 months, uh, and again,
the reason is these.
Procurements are complex.
Um,
Well
More resources and.
If you were uh stumbling blocks
or or obstacles would help, but
nonetheless, these are
complicated procurementments and
complicated processes that we
have to go through.
In
July of this year, we, um,
became operational with the
first circuits delivered uh to
schools that are part of phase
one and the first um schools
with, with the circuit from this
education network available to
them are Gaston, Armington, um,
and 3 charter schools here in,
um.
In Albuquerque, 21st century
public academy, Mark Armijo,
um, in Mount mahogany and uh
there are more uh Albuquerque
public schools is in the first
um.
A of of this uh and we have
many, many more 50+ um schools,
uh, included in phase two.
In August, we also received the
um the approval for the first
year application.
Uh, up to $500,000.
Um, in federal funding toward
the cost of this. Now, that is
an annual.
Uh, applications, so that amount
is going to depend on where we
are and what we can um we can
invoice and request
reimbursement from the federal
government at any given time, it
will grow.
As the network grows, the, the
ask the request is going, so
again, that is also something
that that will continue to work
on and it's going to to be um a
little bit of a moving target,
so we can only provide estimates
because it depends on many
factors.
There aren't
Many next steps, um.
The rest of this this year on
board, uh, continue to onboard
the participants
from phase one.
In this fall, we uh we intend to
award the face to RFP 50+
districts and schools included
there.
Um, we have to issue another
procurement for the next batch
of schools, um, that have
contracts expiring next summer,
so we have to prepare for, uh
for that and otherwise just grow
this network. This fall, uh, um,
winter and spring, we're going
to develop, procure, and submit
the um the UH cybersecurity
pilot funding application that
is up to 4.5.
$1 million in a brand new
program just a few months old,
um, that is going to provide
resources for schools and
libraries, um, toward
cybersecurity protections. We're
going to, we're working with the
public education department,
uh, which school district
representatives with the Office
of Cybersecurity with higher
education um institutions
including the New Mexico, uh,
New Mexico Tech, the New Mexico
Ccybers.
Security of excellence, center
of excellence for New Mexico,
um, this entire group is
working, is assisting our team,
um.
In developing an app funding
application that is actually due
in the next 66 weeks or so, that
is the first step in this
process, uh, that once
established will probably again
set the, the sustainability for
federal funding to pay for uh
certain things that
We have to do anyway because if
we have a cybersecurity incident
that takes down this network,
then everybody.
Uh, one important tool is also
building knowledge.
So we intend to utilize the um
the operation, the running of
this network, setting up uh the
the tools and protections
towards cybersecurity to to
instruct and teach 12 students,
uh, several school districts are
interested in, in, in that path,
um higher education of students
in computer science and other
fields are interested in um.
Gaining experience, being part
of, of this work and and really
getting hands-on experience for
um on large scale networks that
otherwise really do not exist in
New Mexico, not, not this this
stage rate anyway.
So on page 264, we, we list
there that
We believe that 100% of the
school districts or charters who
want to participate, um, in this
are expected to um to be
connected into this network
within 3 years.
And um the last line there, um,
the fact that we have ongoing
support and operations, um, that
line involves includes a lot.
There is a lot there, people,
expertise, processes, tools that
we have to, to develop, to
support this, this effort,
obviously higher vendors
contractors, um, and, uh, and
truly the, the, I want to thank
you, um, counsel, because you
already awarded funding to
support that effort. So, uh, the
budgets are still in place.
There's still a lot of work to
uh to get done.
So
The, well, um.
I think uh
We, we're running short on time,
so.
Are you ready for questions yet?
I wanted to quickly go through
the through the slides, but it's
not going to to take long, um,
so the slides start on page 266,
um, that slide says the zeros
and ones say stable education
network in binary, that's
basically what we do, um.
Uh, related to broadband.
Um, Jason, on, on next page, uh,
Jason, if you could pull up, we
have a a
We
Video that that just demonstrate
or talks about what.
Uh, of the network.
Why would we connect all 840
schools in New Mexico to one
fiber network.
So any curious student in New
Mexico can travel anywhere in
the world.
So a Native American student in
Albuquerque can connect to their
culture from home.
So a budding chemist in Tula
Rosa can take AP chem in a Rio
Rancho school.
The state education network
connects all 840 schools to give
students, especially those in
rural areas. The opportunity to
take state approved courses they
may otherwise not have access
to.
Students will no longer pay the
price for lack of resources.
Teachers on native land can
spread their knowledge of
traditional language and culture
to students anywhere in New
Mexico.
The state education network will
improve upon and model how
education should be in America.
Unimpeded by distance or
location accessible to all.
Collaborative, secure, and
transformative.
Thank you, Jason.
So
On page 270, I think that this
is um really, really important
to, to review the, the
components of the network in the
estimated cost for them. Uh, so
on the left hand side you have
the connection to the internet,
somewhere between $100,000 in
$700,000 depending on the
capacity that that the network
needs in the center, we have the
backbone, the high capacity that
links the notes together, um.
Somewhere between 8,800,000 and
1.5 million every year cost and
network management just
Making sure that everything runs
properly, um, and things, uh,
things go the way they should,
um, in cybersecurity and you
have the ranges, respective
ranges there. The nodes
operating the notes throughout
the state.
About 400,000 to $600,000 in the
last mile. These are connections
between the schools and each one
of the nodes distributed
throughout the state. So that
composes generally the budget uh
for the sin in that range of 3.8
million to $7.9 million per
year, um, give or take. Next
slide shows the backbone in the
nodes where they are located.
A few, um, a few notes, um,
thank you.
Um, Secretary Padilla for uh
your leadership in securing the
Yin's funding that helped paying
for pay for the equipment and
and the the no upgrades, they
exist now and um that is a big
milestone, a big step.
So Farmington, uh, Las Cruces,
Silver City, Clovis.
Um, Roswell, um, are, are up and
running, um, most of them, them
are up and running, uh Socorro,
uh Las Vegas, and uh in Gallup
our um our uh scheduled are
projected to to be up and
running in the next 2 to 3
weeks.
The big challenge we have right
now is Santa Fe Indian School.
Uh, the node located there is
being delayed, but I understand
that um that that topic is on
the agenda for the board to move
forward, we cannot really
connect the schools in that area
until the node is established,
so it is an important uh part
that's uh that that needs to be
resolved. We have some proposed
notes there, um, Crown Point,
now with Technical University.
Uh, no that would serve the
entire area, we probably need
some, some notes, um.
In the north central and
northeast area of the state, um,
a projected node in Hobbs will,
will help with, with that corner
of the state, but by and large,
we have the core of this network
and now we just uh we, we can
work to improve that.
Uh, next, next slide shows the
distribution of phase 1, phase 2
schools, pretty much throughout
the state, uh, green phase one
already under contract.
Uh, blue.
Um, in the progress of, of
getting on the contract and
after that, eventually getting
them connected to the to the
network.
There are multiple technical
options for the, for the
connection on next slide. I'm
going to go into this, uh, but
again, that speaks to the
capabilities, um, central
service that is that.
Area where that needs to be
developed beyond just accessing
the internet, what type of
services uh can be delivered,
um, books, videos, lessons,
plans, classes, um, platforms
where.
I already spoke about
cybersecurity, um.
This is a picture of the
internet, um, if you're curious,
uh, and
Um,
The sand, otherwise known as
autonomous System 36858 and the
Internet world, um.
He is one of one speck in that
universe of the internet.
Uh, again, the relationship with
the internet from for this
network on next page, um, on
A H 277 and 278.
Pictures of the equipment that
compose the s, uh, and truly,
uh, when we talk about fiber,
this is what we're talking
about.
So here, uh I think 258.
Strains of fiber, 2052, sorry,
we use two strands.
To deliver 100 gigabits.
Um,
Multiple 100 gigabits and so on
and so forth. Um, and when we
talk about one gig.
Or 10 gig.
From an infrastructure
perspective.
This is the difference.
So this is um basically slides
into a piece of equipment.
Has a fiber jumper go into it.
And we'll send
I have to look at it.
One gig
Can gig
Zeros and ones.
From one place to another. The
difference in cost for this?
Less than $100.
So,
When we get to 100 gig, it's a
little bit more complex, but
it's the same system in concept.
This is the equivalent of
This for 100 gigabits.
So 100 billion zeros and ones.
That are transmitted every
second between these nodes and
these specific equipment over
fiber.
Two strands of fiber, these are
the same as this just with a
jacket.
So that is the infrastructure
now making it work is what, what
is necessary here.
That last picture here, um.
The ribbon cutting ceremony and
um 21st century Public Academy,
approximately 3 weeks ago. Um,
many thanks to Director Romero
for, for attending and for her
support, made a big difference.
Um, so in conclusion, uh, in, in
this picture really shows that
so many people were involved in
making this possible.
Um, it, it was a, a large
effort, um, but, um, it's a,
it's, it's an important uh thing
to celebrate.
The 3 asks, I would say, help.
To to staff appropriately the
support for this, the structures
for this.
Um,
Help remove the obstacles in
some of the bureaucracy, uh,
because anything, any delay in
one little step.
And basically take this network
turn it dark.
A PO that is delayed for a
license.
And make a piece of equipment
basically stop working.
Right, so that that is the sort
of implication that we cannot
think, we don't think about, um,
but it's, it is, is important.
From, from the government
perspective, we couldn't buy
more than 12 months of license
so we already have right now
have to start working on
renewing licenses, and that just
doesn't make sense. Um, that is
a ton of work.
Uh, that, um, we have to deal
with day in and day out and
again, hopefully we'll find
some, some better ways to, to,
to handle that. And, and the
third, um,
Item is help with.
figuring out
What we're going to do with this
network, it exists, it's
functional, um, how we're going
to leverage it effectively, so
we help, we can help the
educational outcome um in the
state and with that.
Um, I will do my best to answer
any questions.
Thank you, Ollie. um I
appreciate the presentation, a
lot of work, a lot of work and.
You're to be commended.
Um
You
Consistency and your.
dedication to this. You've been
working on it for many years.
Questions?
very fast.
Sure.
Um, and really it's more of um
described at the beginning of
your presentation, just how
critical and it is really easy.
So thank you for the work and I
did get to stop in and see the.
One note, uh, just came to our
attention.
I guess over the last couple of
weeks, and apparently there's a
challenge to the uh Eate program
at the national level.
And we're hoping that uh
That that goes away, you know.
That uh
I guess there's a challenge to
the constitutional.
Constitutionality and it means
so much to so many education
agencies in particular and
others, anything that you hear
that we could let us know.
Yes, Mr. Chairman, just briefly,
I will say that um yes, there
are conflicting, um.
Findings from different circuit
courts, um, and, um, ultimately,
I think that um there is a path
forward, uh, this is a program
that is utilized by all the
schools and libraries in the
country where 99% of them and
Pretty much all of them say
without these funds.
We could not afford the
connectivity that we need. So
even if there are adjustments,
um, I expect that um the program
will continue forever. It is
just too important.
So we're doing what we can with
the national affiliates as well
as let us know how we can do.
Yes, sir, will do.
Again, thank you.
I think that brings us to the
end of our agenda today.
And again, I want to thank
Staff for all the
Work
Getting ready for this and for
all to all of you as well the
subcommittees for all your work.
Um, I, I did want to acknowledge
a couple of things before.
We, we close up here and that is
one of course we, we, uh we lost
Gwen.
And, uh, you know, she was, she
was a jewel as John has been
appointed interim.
Director and we're hoping that
you remove that little part of
your time stay on with us.
Then of course, we have a new
You, uh,
I don't know how she's gonna
handle this. She's a, you know,
secretary, maybe she's gonna sit
in two seats here. Again,
congratulations to you on your
good thing for public education,
so.
Uh, and as a result, I was going
to announce some, some
appointments to an officer
positions and subcommittee
positions, but I think it's
because it's uh.
Uh, we're a little mixed up here
in terms of
Things happening. Maybe we can
wait till next time.
To do that, I did want to make
sure that we have a sub.
Subcommittee
Uh
Uh vice chair in each of the two
subcommittees.
And then we'll see what we do
with the.
Appointment the committee chairs
and also as a vice chair of the
council, so we'll we'll hold off
a little bit on that. I've
talked to several of you about
those positions.
And then finally, as a result of
that, I think that we've already
identified some
Problems with the calendar.
And we may have to relook at the
calendar.
At least uh to see if we can
make some.
Some minor changes to that to
accommodate.
The council and their schedule.
Those conflicts have been raised
recently, so I'm, I'm, I'm
hoping we can work to do that.
But other than that, I think
we're.
Did a lot of work today. I
thought it was a short agenda,
but we're here almost and uh
but yeah but but but a lot of
good and important. So, uh,
unless there's anything else.
Uh,
Entertain a motion to adjourn.
motion in a second to adjourn,
uh.
And uh
