All right. So we have a quorum.
And a little bit of an echo, but
so, um, we have an agenda before
us. Are there any amendments to
the agenda?
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, members,
we do have um a change to the
agenda. First, I want to say, I
think, well, since this is our
last meeting 3 for 3 hours so we
can have you, um, just kidding.
Um, this should be a fairly
quick.
quick meeting, I know many of
you have some uh other
committee.
And make this quick.
Um, the change that we have to
the agenda agenda is we want to
request the consent agenda be
heard prior to the financial
plan. If we can move that item
up.
Right. Any other?
Adjustments.
Mr. Chair, that is it. If not,
then I would entertain a motion
to prove the agenda.
Second.
You have a motion in a second.
To approve the agenda of uh if
not, all those in favor of
approving the agenda, please
indicate by saying I.
I was a post.
agenda is approved.
Go to public comment.
Is there anyone in the audience
today wishing to doesn't look
like there's anyone in the
audience wishing to make public
comment.
For, let's go ahead and move on
to the consent agenda, if you
could give us a little overview
of the items on the agenda.
I may, um, before I do that, do
you mind if I introduce 3 new
staff members.
Mr Chair members were happy to
introduce Mr. David Chavez. He
is our newest, uh, regional
project manager.
We also have uh Lea Perez. She
is our new planning analyst.
You'll be working with uh Mr.
John Valdez.
And then we have Mr. Mark Royon.
He is our newest assessor.
We're very excited to get these
guys, um, up and running.
Great, well, welcome.
Look forward to working with
you.
On these important issues, I
think right.
All right, Mr. Chair, members,
as it pertains to the consent
agenda, we have our December
16th SEOC meeting minutes. I'm
gonna go over the two projects
that uh the award subcommittee
put on consent. The first one is
the Springer Combo School. This
was for an award language
change. This was to increase the
square footage from 45,000
square feet to 57,300 for this
combo school that entails 109
students, um.
Or grades K through 12.
The extra square footage is a
combination of uh a few factors.
Uh, there's going to be around
800 additional square feet for 3
middle school, high school
classrooms.
approximately 962 square feet
for a special ed classroom, 153
square feet for tear, and then
there's going to be about 7
elementary classrooms that will
not exceed the remaining 150,020
square feet.
Uh, the additional 8,873 square
feet was for the renovation of
the existing gem and CTE space.
Um, we provided award
subcommittee with an analysis of
cost savings between renovating
it and um
Uh, uh, a complete, uh, rebuild.
And so, uh, with this PSFA will
monitor what will be included in
the existing gym space in order
to stay within the adequacy
standards as well as the APG.
Item number letter C for the new
Hobbs, uh, middle school. This
is for an early work package
that totals approximately $9.8
million of that 4.3 is the state
portion. Um, this is for site
work and road construction to
include utilities, uh, and with
that, Mr. Chair, I stand for.
All right.
Thank you for that uh overview.
Uh, this is, these are items on
the consent agenda that
generally we don't have
discussion on, but anyone has
any questions from committees.
Anyone
Not then all those in favor of
approving the consent agenda,
please indicate by saying I.
All those opposed
Thank you.
Uh, consent agenda is approved
and we'll move on to the
financial report.
Morning, Mr. Chair, members.
Good morning.
Fuel turn uh back or scroll back
to page 8 in your e-books. I'll
take you through the executive
summary for the financial plan.
Uh, starting with the key points
at the very top, we have awards
year to date updates. These are
reflective of lines 20 and 30 on
the sources and uses detail will
take you there momentarily. The
net changes we present to you
this meeting is 33.9 million.
Um, that number consists of a
few changes including first some
out of cycle updates, uh, as you
just heard through the consent,
the new Hobbs Middle School
P24003 is requesting an early
work package for $4.3 million of
state funding. We've also
adjusted the phase 2
construction from 29 million to
25 million to accommodate the
early work package based on our
conversations that it would
potentially reduce the outer
construction.
Next, this is just a update from
the last meeting, if you'll
recall Farmington Preschool
Academy East. This was awarded
December 16th, came and
requested a local mass
reduction, which was awarded by
council. Um, so the initial
state participation was
anticipated at $4.5 million but
we've adjusted it on our award
schedule to the true amount
including the the original 14
million and the waiver or local
match reduction. So now it's
reflected at $39.2 million
again, the waiver was $24.7
million. That was
awarded.
Next, looking at a word language
changes. Um, this is something
new that we'll be presenting the
council each meeting on the
executive summary. Uh, if you'll
recall, and it's a, it's the
last bullet point in this
section, uh, for Springer, which
was on consent, um, that is
approved, but at this time
there's no additional funding
approved, but what we wanted to
do is, uh, we wanted to capture
a way when these award language
changes come with increases in
the GSF that we're also
accounting for that in the
financial plan and what the
increased cost for that, the
Approved GSF will be for your
construction. So I'll just take
you through a few of those from
the last meeting. And then the,
the one this meeting as well.
So first, stancia Elementary
School, the phase 2 from the
award language change that was
uh given on the 1216 meeting, so
last month.
Uh, the phase 2 has been updated
from 6.7 million to 7.9 million.
This is a $1.1 million dollar
increase.
Next, Maxwell combined school,
uh, the phase two, this was also
approved at the last council
meeting. Uh, the phase two has
now been updated from 29.2
million to 32.8 million to $3.5
million dollar increase. And
then finally, again, just to
reiterate Springer, which was
approved on consent. The phase 2
on the financial plan now
reflects it was originally 25.5
million, now shows 29.9 million
of $4.4 million dollar increase.
Uh, next, Mr. Chair, members,
uh, still on the bottom of page
8. I also wanted to note some
projects that are moving from
2025 quarter 1 to 2025, quarter
2. If you'll recall, um, we have
session coming up pretty soon
here. So unfortunately, we won't
see you until April. Um, so this
is our only meeting in this
quarter, um, so the projects
that were included that are not
being awarded at this meeting,
we wanted to move out to quarter
2, the two projects on the top
of Stancia and Albuquerque, Van
Buren were included on our
December bond sale.
Um, this period still covers the
bond sale, so quarter 1 and 2
cumbers covers the December bond
sales, so we still feel
comfortable that they will come
ahead of time before the next
spon sale in June.
Uh, Mr. Chair member is now
moving on to page 9, this, this
is just a few other updates to
note on the sources and uses.
First with some SSTB notes
revisions for lines 2 and 3.
We've just uh updated the
capacity numbers based on uh
Director Leach's information she
shared with us with our new um
capacity from Board of Finance.
So we just wanted to make sure
that was accurately reflected.
Also, we've adjusted our, uh,
Next bond sale for June based on
what we currently sold in
December. So, uh, uh, once we
get to that point, I'll talk you
through it a little bit more.
And then finally we just had one
out of cycle potential waiver
increase. This is online 27.
Again, this is for Maxwell
combined, the district has
indicated that they will need a
local match reduction um in our
year for construction. So based
on the additional word language
change, we wanted to make sure
we also accommodated what the
states um participation would be
with covering that local match.
Um, so showing the number there,
we had estimated the local match
at 5.8 million. We've adjusted
it to 6.7, so about $844,000.
Now moving on to page 10, uh,
starting with the actual sources
and uses in the financial plan.
You'll know, uh, the highlighted
areas which are just the pieces
I went over in the executive
summary, and that's where these
are the changes are affecting
the financial plan.
So starting with lines 2 and 3
of the SSTB notes, again, just
we've updated the capacity in FY
26 and 27, you'll note the 6,
$606.8 million is just
reflective of what the bond sale
was in the previous column, the
144.2, that's what we sold in
December. The 6.6 is our
remaining capacity for the year,
so hopefully we'll be able to
sell it the full capacity in
June.
And then the 375.5 million again
spread across 26 and 27 is just
a reflective of our capacity for
uh now moving, Mr. Chair and
members to line 27, the out of
cycle potential waivers. Again,
we don't include um in the award
schedule, we only account for
what the actual state
participation is going to be. We
don't include waivers at this.
We try to keep it separate just
to keep an eye on it.
And as you'll know with
Farmington, once it's awarded,
we then incorporate it into the
award schedule because it was
what the state's final
participation is in that
project.
Um, so for Maxwell, the, the
amount that they have is just
reflective in FY 25 and then the
87.3, and I'll take you through,
uh,
That section and where all the
waivers exist.
Now moving on to page 11. This
is the summary of changes from
the last meeting, uh, you'll
note that the long list there,
um, so we had a few out of cycle
awards, including the Farmington
Pre-K, which the amount was
adjusted to accommodate for the
local match reduction, as well
as all the new standards
projects, so the total awards
granted at the last meeting were
around $100 million which is
great.
Next, moving to the middle of
the table, this is the POSCOC
Fund Award schedule detail, the
only item that was coming for an
actual funding request. This
meeting was Hobbs, which was
included on the consent for the
early work package.
And then finally, the financial
plan assumptions and summary at
the very bottom just shows what
the uncommitted balance changes
are um from the previous meeting
to this current.
Um, now, Mr. Chair, members,
moving on to page 12. This is
the start of the award schedule.
Um, I'd like to take you
specifically to page 13. They're
very, uh, kind of middle of that
bottom table, you'll see FY 23
award scenario scenario, those
are the highlighted items again
that are either reflected from
the preschool academy final
award, stancia is showing if you
scroll all the way to the right,
you'll see the little red border
in 2025 Q1, that's where we're
currently at in time.
Uh, that border will move for
the next meeting because we'll
be in quarter 2 the next time we
see you. Um, but the arrows, uh,
indicate the projects that were
anticipated to come in this
quarter, but unfortunately
couldn't meet it just because we
had the one meeting, so we're
definitely anticipating them for
quarter 2.
So any of the arrows will just
indicate that they've just moved
over 1 quarter.
If you continue on to page 14 at
the very top, again, you'll see
the same changes of the items
that have either been uh
adjusted uh for their out year
or again the, the award for.
Finally, Mr. Chair members, page
15. This is the square foot
variance analysis, um, the, the
key piece I wanted to note here
is in the far columns NOP and Q.
This is where all of the waivers
exist, um, they correspond to
the districts if you go to the,
the left and with the project
number of fiscal year awarded,
um, but this is how we're
accounting for if the district
has communicated to us that they
will need a partial waiver if
they will need a 100%
construction waiver and then as
well as the amounts going in OP
and Q of
How much that's going to cost
for that local share and when we
anticipated in what fiscal year
that they're going to be
requesting it.
And with that, uh, Mr. Chair,
members I stand for any
questions you have. OK.
A lot of information, Matthew,
appreciate.
Questions?
Um
I see where, for instance, on
Maxwell, you have two
adjustments in 2 different
categories. Is that uh the
preferred way to handle it
rather than.
Handling the two of the.
One was on the waiver and one
was on the on the.
Mr. Chair members, yes, uh, we
feel that that's an easier way
to just account for uh what we,
what we do anticipate for the
state's participation to be that
we would be obligated with the
state local match that's
awarded, and then just
accounting for the, the local
mass reduction separately just
to keep an eye on it, um,
because we don't want to include
it in the award schedule in the
past we've had issues kind of
like with double accounting
where we had accounted there and
in the award schedule. So we
thought keeping them uh
separated until the actual award
is done.
then the next meeting just
retroactively fixing it and
noting it was the best way of
tracking.
are no further questions, and
thank you for the report.
Move on to the agenda.
We've got
business
Item 8.
Award cycle schedule adjustment.
Mr. Chair, would you like me to
read the motion and then have
stuff
um, yes, please. OK, thank you.
So, um.
subcommittee is recommending for
council approval to not open the
fiscal year 25 Capital Outlay
Awards cycle 2nd round, which
would be from January to June
and allow PSFA to continue to
work on potential awards for the
viable applications received in
the FY 25 cycle that were not
awarded in December of 2024. So
in, in short, um, we wouldn't be
accepting new awards over the
next 6 months, but staff will
continue to uh work with the
districts that did not, were not
ready for the December 20.
4 cycle but submitted for that,
uh, during the six month period
to bring them forward, so.
And with that, um, I would hand
it over to staff to describe a
little bit more the process and
um basis for this, we had some
questions at AMS that if they
don't get addressed during the
presentation, I can share with
the council. Chair and members,
um, just as Miss Leach stated,
um, we are recommending not
reopening the vacation cycle for
this potential 2nd round in
April of last year, the, the
council, um, opted to change the
way that we've been operating
with the applications so that it
wasn't open all year long.
And with the potential to have a
first round, which we've just
completed in December and the
potential to have a 2nd round,
um, depending on uh the
financial ability to pay, we
have determined that based off
the um financial plan and the,
the work going on within the,
the agency that holding off on
the 2nd round would be
beneficial to
The staff, uh, advantages of not
opening up the second round is
that we could perform outreach
to districts that highly ranked,
uh, schools, um, in an effort to
educate and prepare the
districts for potential
application in the next round
and FY.
26, um, as well as the PSA
financial team can continue the
important work they're doing on
the bond reconciliation,
adjustments to the financial
plan and the uh financial
outlook in FY 26 and continue to
refine the financial and field
project procedures and
improvements, um, as Mitch Leach
said, there were a few.
Schools that did apply in the
last round, we were unable to
make those awards occur at
December.
Um, due to district readiness,
um, financial ability, um,
various reasons, and so we
didn't make those awards in
December, and so we are asking
to.
Be able to continue working with
those districts to try to make
them um ready for a potential
award in this, um, next 6 months
and if and when they are ready
to bring, we can bring.
Sounds like a very good
compromise in terms of not
taking new applications but
working with those that.
It didn't quite, weren't quite
ready.
Is this the list of those?
So, while we may be hearing back
from, from these uh before we
open it up. Yes, sir, if, if.
If the districts and uh PS
stations finalized and ready to
proceed, we would like I could
go over. Yeah, Mr. Chair, um,
Elise, when would the next
application cycle be then?
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Ms. Padilla,
that would be opening in
Um, July.
Of 2025.
So for the fiscal year of 206.
OK, and, um, Mr. Chair, I guess,
um, I, I, I think it makes sense
to work with who's in the queue
and I also heard you saying that
you would reach out to other.
Districts that may not have
applied, but.
are scored high and and um would
be in need. So I think that's
good. The only thing I would say
and not not doing anything for
the next 6 months.
Um
You know, it's helpful just to
get information about what's
coming. So even if you're not um
soliciting new applications, but
if there's a way to just gauge
what might be coming. I think
that's an effective um planning
tool and good for us to know.
Um, so I would just ask that, as
you notify Elis that there isn't
a new application cycle before
July. If there's a way that they
can, um, at least let staff know
if they are.
planning to kind of what what
that intent is, I think that's
that would be fine if we don't
actually do an app.
Mr. Chair and Secretary Padilla
will, will definitely
Do that kind of reporting kind
of like we did when it was an
open cycle.
Um, and, and this is important
work that can be done in the
interim, um, there's a lot of
districts that are not ready,
then they, they wouldn't be
ready in time anyway, so we can
use this time to go out and
target some of the districts
that we know have high need in
coming forward, and we'll
definitely report on that.
And Mr. Chair, last thing, um,
I, anytime we are delaying.
And the whole process, I, I have
some concerns, so I totally
understand working with what's
in the queue, but just make sure
that those that are kind of
coming behind them are
continuing to get any sort of
guidance from PSFA and so that
we don't have delay going into
the following application cycle.
Thank you. You know, it costs
more.
Um, Mr. Cha, kind of building up
the secretary's questions, um,
do we have any idea like how
many districts might have been
submitting new applications in
the 2nd round if it were open.
Uh, Mr. Chair, members Ms.
Carswell, uh, we have not
received indication from
districts planning on applying,
especially for standards-based.
Um, I do know that um,
Due to the presidential
election, districts were unable
to.
go out for bond where their geo
bonds. So, um, those that were
planning on, uh, going out for
geoon for this purpose, um, to
receive potential applications
from the PSUC. They had a
special election in September,
and that was Silver and
Bloomfield who did go through
the process. So there are not um
any districts that just passed a
bond in November and are ready
to move forward. I do know that
there's a handful of, uh,
districts that are maybe going
for a special election in March.
Um, and so even with that
timeline that is a little too
late to be making those awards
in this.
Um, Mr. Chan, what about like
systems based projects that.
May have
are smaller and um, you know,
may have some sense of urgency
associated with them.
Mr. Chair, Miss, Ms Carswell,
the systems-based applications
are uh much harder to predict.
Um, they, um, often don't have
these large planning
conversations with us prior to
applying. Um, so at this point
in time, I, I know some
districts are eventually
planning on applying, but none
of them seemed urgent, um, or,
um,
Major. So at this time, I, I'm
not aware of any that need to
come now.
OK, thank you, um, and then last
question, would the proactive
outreach to districts that are
highly ranked that you
mentioned, um, include, you
know, providing them with
assistance to increase their
readiness to apply and um
Do you expect to have, if we do
put a pause on new awards, like,
are you gonna have more time
than you would otherwise have to
do that.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Ms. Carswell,
that's an excellent question. I,
I do think, um, especially if,
if we, um, make calls
specifically to districts that
we know that are going to be in
the the top.
1020, 25, 30, um, in the next
year that, that we can start
those conversations earlier,
which means we can help them
start working on the
predicaments that districts are
often in that stall potential
applications and awards. So I do
think that that would help.
In the long run, um,
This last
Um, award cycle, it was quite
condensed into the 3 months that
we made the awards, um, happen
and so this would actually it
would buy us some some time
working with those districts to
make sure that they are actually
ready when they make that.
It also mention at this point
that, you know, there is a
process for emergency type,
we'll just keep that in mind
and.
If, if the conditions were very
good
Mr. Cha, on that, um, maybe
staff could, um, elaborate a
little bit on.
Hey, how aware the districts are
of the emergency process and
then be, um, you know, how we
constant or how an emergency is
defined, that might give some
comfort, uh, you know, we have
systems projects that come
forward that we are.
Mr. Chairman Lee.
I'll let at least talk about um
the emergency portion a little
bit about um the what qualifies
and how you get one, but
Uh, we do, we do have regional
managers and assessors out, um,
in most of the districts and if
something were to come up,
there's many people that they
can contact from PSFA site and
we can kind of illustrate that
emergency application process,
um, that's, that's how we do it
now.
Um, and at least can explain.
Um,
the requirements for the
emergency.
Mr. Chair members Miss Leach,
the emergency funding program
actually hasn't been used in, in
several years, um, I think in
part to our outreach and our
working with the districts, um,
and helping them understand the
processes, the emergency program
is different from the systems
based in that the, there needs
to be an event that occurs at a
school that, um, is a calamity
that the, the school board must
declare a state of emergency
within 24 hours.
of that event.
Um, and the
Funding is an advance that must
be paid back by the districts to
um the PSCOC fund. So it's
really, it doesn't work the same
rules as the state local match
where the state will fund a
portion, the district will fund
a portion to complete the
project. Um, these are mostly um
reserved for there was a major
issue, the district doesn't have
sufficient funding to take care
of that issue right now, the
state can come in and, and help
if it is below, I believe,
$150,000.
the PFA director can approve
that to happen immediately if it
is above that threshold, they
must get PSE for that emergency
funding, but that funding must
be paid back.
Eventually, um, we've had
several districts over the last
few years that I've dealt with
that received emergency wards
many, many years ago, and they
have not paid back those
advances and that was holding up
potential applications for new
awards. Um, so for these
reasons, we've really been
working with districts to go the
systems-based route instead. Um,
and then we can, we can help
solve um problems more, it does
require some uh predetermined,
um, planning.
Um, in order to, to do that. And
so that goes back to our, our
maintenance side of helping the
districts understand what needs
And and the other things that I,
I've experienced is that you
work with the districts to take
care of that.
The emergency portion to get as
the incident.
Full-fledged project. Mr.
Chairman, um, one last question
on that. I mean, if say for
instance, uh, staff became aware
in 2 months of a systems project
that maybe didn't meet that
emergency, which is a little
bit.
Narrowly defined, but really
shouldn't await.
Uh, the December bond sale, um,
what are, what are our options?
Do we have any options?
Unless we allow open cycle
systems.
Boards.
Members, um, I, I think that
those are the options either
wait until July to apply or open
it up to.
Mr. Chair, I mean an AMS did
talk about this a little bit,
um, but given that staff weren't
aware of, you know, systems
projects now as Miss Elise
mentioned, those are a little
bit trickier to know about, um,
I think we still felt
comfortable halting awards for
this 6 month period with since
they were not aware of any
awards. So that was kind of our
um thought process. Another
thing I'd really want to mention
is that we had a discussion at,
is we have a lot of projects,
um, that have been.
awarded that aren't moving or
not moving very quickly. And we
charge staff with over the
six-month period as well. I know
there's work and a planned, um,
policy coming forward around uh.
Project close out, but also
spend down. Uh, so we've, we've
asked staff to really as part of
that policy development, look at
what we should be doing for
projects that have been awarded
but are not moving, um, projects
that get awarded and don't move
quickly. Um, and, and give the
council some options on how we
could be maybe considering that
to ensure that once awards are
made, um, that money gets spent
and it's both, you know, it can,
it, it's not just punitive.
You know, it's not just like you
don't spend the money we're
taking the money away from you,
but it's a, you're not spending
the money, let's engage at a
greater level to see what we can
do to assist these projects and
moving forward because we do
have some backlog, I think, from
older awards that needs to be
kind of addressed. So that was
another significant talking
point um at AMS and, and request
of staff and I know it's already
underway, is looking at kind of
an A to Z policy that that can
be shared both internally, but
with the districts to lay out
kind of.
how the process should work and
some of those expectations on
Project Read readiness, but also
project movement while um
coupling that with the efforts
that staff are looking at to be
doing targeted outreach and
maybe more enhanced assistance
to certain districts that
require it. we need to impose
some threshold requirements on
existing in that area. Um, any
further questions?
Um, if not, then, uh, we have a
motion a subcommittee motion on
this.
Uh, all those in favor of the
motion, please indicate by
saying I.
Hi.
I opposed to.
Motion passes.
Also, uh, thank.
Our governor's office
representative, Mr. uh Terry for
being on, online, OK?
All right.
Let's move on then to the next
item.
The strategic plan draft.
Good morning, Mr. Chair,
members. Good morning, Mr.
Tillerson. How are you? I am
doing very well, thank you.
Happy New Year to everybody.
Hope you're all doing well. Item
5B starting on page 51 in your
e-books is the PSFA draft
strategic plan, we ran it
through the uh AMS subcommittee
for review, there is a potential
motion. I would like to, uh,
your pleasure, give an overview
if I could really quick before I
get to the motion summary. The
agency has updated the
strategic.
When working through a 5 month
collaboration uh process which
included formal surveys, focus
groups, reviewing of the
previous strategic plan to see
what we accomplished there,
engaging PSFA staff, PSCOC
members providing feedback,
guiding the next 2 to 3 years of
our organization's improvements
to better support not only
managing internal processes
through policies and procedures,
but also our external customers
and and stakeholders at the
school district level.
some of the key milestones, uh,
we started this in August of
2024. We recommended vendor with
specific timelines, surveys, and
other methods to collect data.
Reviewing previous plans and
historical data necessary to
effect change, uh, garnering
critical feedback um along the
way, leading to the draft before
you.
This draft includes an enhanced
vision and mission statement and
6 core value staff and
stakeholders felt were important
to drive collaborative agency
goals and move our business in a
brand new direction.
Um, one of the additions that we
added at the request of the AMS
chair, Miss Ashley Leach was a
statement. I think this is very
profound when it comes to long
range plans, strategic planning,
facility master plan, the
district level is to create a a
performance measure in itself,
so that we don't just shelve the
strategic plan once it's done.
We, we have to constantly
revisit this, and the, it's a
living document.
One of the things that we are
going to do as we progress with
once it's approved, is
Manage it daily.
Weekly, monthly.
With no less than quarterly
reporting to our executive team
at the PSFA.
Which we can further take to the
council and let you know that we
are making progress, or we have
stalled in particular areas to
get advice and other
recommendations so that again
this just doesn't get shelled
and it keeps moving forward to
drive the agency's
sufficiencies.
Um
With that, Mr. Chair, members, I
would stand for any questions.
Um, I'd just like to thank
everyone involved in putting the
uh update to the plans together.
I think it's important that we
go through this process and as
you say, utilize the problems,
so thank you. Absolutely we
really appreciate the feedback
that we got from the council
members in driving this and
creating what it is today, Mr.
Chair, just uh like to add, um,
I thought, I think the strategic
plan looks really good. Um, one
thing that was brought up in AMS
was um these KPIs, which I don't
know what that actually stands
for, but it's basically like a
measurement. Um, so, uh, you
know, it's sort of the most
granular level of.
strategic plan where uh PSFA
would be looking at how they
assess their performance against
their, their more uh detailed
goals. Um, I did ask at the AMS
whether.
Cause there were a lot of KPI's
listed there. It sounds like
there's still some finalization
on specific KPIs for PSFA, so we
did ask staff to come back and
provide a report on the uh
finalized specific KPIs that
they have selected, uh, to be a
part of the strategic plan and
then I think it would be good,
um, uh, as mentioned to uh have
staff come back maybe uh once
those KPAs are established, come
back in like a 6 month period or
or something that makes sense
once those KPAs are
established just to show that
they are still, you know, to
kind of ensure as, as you
mentioned that they're still
kind of going back and measuring
their performance against, um,
the strategic plans so that it
has teeth to it and meaning to
it, and it's not just sitting on
a shelf. So sometimes that's
easy for strategic plans. I'm
sure we've all had experience
with that. Um, but I think this
is a real opportunity to be kind
of doing these measurements just
like, um, you know, we have
performance measurements at the
legislature. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
And maybe now would be a good
time for the recommendation.
Yes, Mr. Chair. So, um, the MS
subcommittee recommends for
council approval of the draft of
the 2025 to 227 public school
facilities Authority strategic
plan and authorization for PSFA
to make final edits and
technical corrections prior to
posting on the agency website,
further coordinating
implementation, which I think
that uh KPIP falls within that
as well.
Good. Thank you.
Continue the discussion if we
have questions.
Not in the
Again, thank you for your work
on this and uh all those in
favor of the subcommittee
recommendation, please indicate
by saying I.
passes.
And uh we move on to the.
EFA Gross square foot
calculator.
Where's that calculator?
Good Morning again, Mr. Chair
and members, um, and happy New
Year to those I haven't seen
yet.
Although we're halfway through
the month already, my gosh.
Um, so, Mr. Chair, with me
today, I, I have a
Uh, Andrew Martinez, our bad
database manager as well as
Elise Ramos, programs manager,
um, the three of us in
coordination with a lot of other
folks at PSFA, as you know, have
been working on.
The revised adequacy standards
um for about the last 2.5 years.
Um, we, this isn't on the um
information, but I thought I'd
give you a brief update. We had
our public hearing on the 19th.
Uh, with no opposition at that
meeting, um, and so we recorded
on the 3rd of January and the
new adequacy standards were
published yesterday.
So they are, they are live and
official as. Um,
With regards to the gross square
foot calculator, and I'm so
sorry, Miss Leach. Would you
like to introduce this at all?
Thank you. Um, uh, Ryan, no, I
think, uh, staff did a great job
on this, so I will defer to you
to walk us through it, um,
briefly.
So I'm gonna walk us through
some of the key points, and I'll
turn it over to Andrew to, um,
Confuse us with some math real
quick, and it'll be good.
Um
So, the, the gross square foot
calculator was developed and
added to the adequacy planning
guide, uh, a few years back.
Um, in an effort to define the
estimated efficient functional
right size school based on
number of students.
Um, it defines the limit of
state funding and participation
on these school projects, um,
and it defines the estimated
maximum school size and gross
square feet, uh, in conjunction
with the adequacy standards,
describing a minimum school
size.
Uh, plus 30% tear.
And so, um, just as a reminder,
this council adopted the new
adequacy standards in September
of 24, um, and as I just
mentioned, we went through the
process to get those recorded.
Um, and published.
Um, the current work that we've
been working on, uh, includes a
new calculator for combination
schools. Um, we thought this was
important after seeing now a
handful of combination schools
with an award of about 45,000
square feet at those very low
populations.
Um, and we're, we're not able to
fit everything in that bag, and
so we, we thought we would
create a combination school
calculator that captures um
spaces that
Otherwise aren't being
considered when you just use the
regular calculator. And again,
Andrew will um talk about that a
little bit more in detail. I
think the more important thing
for this council to understand
is that um the changes from the
previous calculator are as
follows. It's approximately a
10% increase in area at the
elementary level, 7% increase at
middle schools and about a 5%
increase at high schools.
Um, and this tracks really well
with these um
The research that we've done,
um, and going back and looking
at other projects and kind of
seeing where these fall in line,
um, with some of the items we
heard at our public meetings,
um,
And so we feel, we feel really
confident with the calculator
where it stands. And as you'll
hear from Andrew, it's all based
on the work that we did from the
standards. So all we're doing is
we're revising the calculator to
reflect.
The new standards, the next
step, uh, in this effort is for
the adequacy planning guide to
be revised.
To mirror the adequacy standards
where they stand now, so that
all three documents are in
alignment.
Um
And we can move forward. And
with that, Mr. Chair, I'll, I'll
turn it over to Andrew.
It
Mr. Chair, members, I would like
to begin by examining the
exhibits, um, and we'll start
with the historical
modifications made to the GSF
calculator. So let's first uh
refer to exhibit A, a history of
cross square footage change.
In 2001, a net square footage
per student was established
based on data from the BIA,
which served as the basis for
determining school size.
In 2006, both the PSCOC and the
PSCOOTF, the task force assessed
the APGGSF and deemed it to be
too generous.
Following thorough analysis, the
net square footage per student
was subsequently reduced.
In 2009, the methodology for
determining school size
underwent a significant change.
Districts were instructed to
design based on total GSF rather
than individual spaces.
The shift raised additional
concerns regarding facility
size, prompting the PSFA to
engage with stakeholders and
further reduce the allowable
nest square footage.
In 2010, the PSFA developed an
online calculator that enables
users to input enrollment
figures and automatically
calculate corresponding GSFs for
school size.
In 2019, the PSCOC approved
amendments to the calcular
resulting in an increase,
increased square footages for
both the smallest and largest
potential enrollments.
Next, I would like to draw your
attention to exhibit B.
Which presents the national
statistics on special education.
According to the National Center
for Educational Statistics
during the 2223 school year, 15%
of students aged between 3 and
21 received special education
and related services under the
individuals with disabilities
education Act.
At the national level. In
contrast, New Mexico.
Reported a higher percentage at
18%.
It has been repeatedly
emphasized in the review of the
adequacy standards that the
existing calculator fails to
consider the actual space
requirements requirements
necessary to adequately support
special education students.
Particulate particularly the two
distinct categories of special
education. Type 1 and type 2.
Figure 2 exhibits the illust
illustrates the national
percentage of students
designated as having special
education needs.
It is important to emphasize the
currently implemented adequacy
planning guide regarding the
maximum numbers of students
permitted per classroom type.
Or type one classrooms, levels
A, B, and C, the maximum
capacity is set at 15 students.
Well, Type 2 classrooms level D
are limited to a maximum of 8
students.
National average estimates of
anticipated special education
populations for each school
enrollment can be utilized to
calculate the expected
proportions of type one and type
2 students within that sped
population.
This in turn allows for the
determination of the required
classroom counts to adequately
support these spent students.
Approximately 1/3 of the total
sped population is expected to
be type 2.
Who's classroom should be
allocated at a rate that is
approximately 50% of type 1
students.
This methodology employed
enables the proposed maximum GSF
calculator to yield a sped net
square footage that exceeds the
450 net square foot square feet
found in the previous
calculators.
This enhancement is a key
contributor to the increase in
the GSF square footage observed
between the proposed calculator
before you and the existing
version that is currently in
use.
It is important to note.
that the
Modifications to the adequacy
standards, particularly
concerning concerninged, have
led to the most significant
alteration in the weighted MCI
as identified in figure 4.
The recently adopted changes to
the adequacy standards will
result in a larger minimum
school footprint than previously
established.
We now turn our focus to exhibit
C, specifically charts 1 and 1A.
Chart one illustrates the trends
related to elementary schools.
The black line indicates the
trend of the current calculator
across all enrollment figures
ranged from 250 to 1600 for
elementary students.
Elementary schools.
The yellow 9, the yellow line
denotes the minimums established
by the newly adopted adequacy
standards.
The Blue line represents these
minimums along with a 30% tear
to give us a GSF.
It is important to observe the
trends depicted depicted by the
blue line.
Should we choose to implement
the minimums plus a tear.
We would then indeed construct
facilities that exceed the
current allocations. However, we
would also be funding smaller
facilities than what is
presently designated.
The revised adequacy standards
reflect the height and needs of
the districts, which have
already been increased.
Furthermore, the blue line at
its highest enrollment figures
suggest a GSF that is going to
be excessively large.
To address the discrepancies at
lower enrollment levels, the
increased GFFs at higher
enrollments and the
inconsistencies present in the
current calculator, a power
function was applied to the
calculated adequacy standards
minimum net square footage plus
that 30% tar.
This power function is
characterized by a single term
that includes a variable in this
case enrollment, as its base in
a constant as its exponent.
Consequently, a new trend line
was established that
acknowledges facilities larger
than those previously permitted
as anticipated by the updates to
the adequacy standards, while
exhibiting ending behavior that
is significantly less than the
minimum values plus the tear.
All while preserving the concave
symmetry of the current
calculator.
Chart 18 provides a comparison
between the current and proposed
calculators.
It is worth noting that the R
score valued in those figures,
displayed on the chart.
Uh, a high R2 values indicates
that the observations closely
aligned with the model's
predictions, meaning that most
data points are near the line of
best best fit. Our square values
range from 0 to 1, and in this
case, we have it at one.
The same approach was utilized
in developing tread lines for
the middle school enrollment,
which varies from 250 to 1600,
as depicted in charts 2 and 2B.
Similarly, high school
enrollment ranges from 25 to
2000, as shown in charts 3 and
3.
Chart 4 presents a comparison of
all the previously utilized
calculators against the
currently proposed calculator.
It was previously noted that the
calculated changes for
elementary schools is
approximately around 10% for
middle schools, 7% and for high
schools, 5%.
These percentage represent the
differences between the dashed
and solid lines for their
respective school categories.
Fundamentally, we will be, we
will be fundamentally be
identifying larger facilities
across all enrollment levels.
However, the most significant
growth is anticipated in areas
where there are notable
discrepancies between the
proposed calculator and the
current calculator trend lines.
A maximum change of up to about
48% is expected within the small
elementary school enrollment
populations.
Chart 5 presents a new concept,
a combined school calculator.
This tool has not been
previously available.
The combination calculator takes
into consideration the new
adequacy standards, as well as
the distinct characteristics
associated with each specific
adequacy standard in relation to
the grade range being served.
For example, adequacy standard
calculations within the
facilities assessment database
for the general classrooms are
unique.
Pre-Kinder and kindergarten
students need 50 net square foot
per student, students in grades
1 through 5 need 36 net square
foot per student, grade 6
through 8, 33 net for per
student and 9 to 12 students, 30
net square foot for students. At
present, when a district is
valuating a combine is
evaluating the combination
facility.
The value from the current
calculator is derived, is solely
based on the highest grade level
served.
This approach fails to
acknowledge the distinctiveness
of the adequacy standards
applicable to the different
grade levels.
The development of the combined
school calculator and res was
largely influenced in a manner
similar to that of the
elementary, middle, and high
schools.
The primary distinctions arise
from the incorporation of all
the relevant adequacy standards
applicable applicable to the
grade levels being served.
As well as the inclusion of a
second gym.
Uh, the dimensions which are
also dictated by the potential
grade levels of that combined
school.
A minimum floor, so uh uh a
minimum floor area of 55,000
square feet has been established
based on currently funded
combined schools.
Exhibit D illustrates the
appearance of that calculator
that will be available to
stakeholders.
Um, it's simply a password
protected Excel file designed
for stakeholders to input
potential enrollment figures,
which will subsequently generate
a corresponding GSF.
With that, I stand for
questions.
Thank you for the presentation,
come, some of it, not all of it.
But I'm sure we are council has
some questions.
Mr. Chair, thank you and thank
you guys. I'm.
Clear this took a lot of work.
Um, so kind of a big picture
question, will we still be in a
position where the adequacy
standards are.
You couldn't build a functional
school with them with these
updates.
Mr. Chair, Ms. Carswell, that's
correct. So what the adequacy
standards don't take into
account is the tear space, and
that's that 30% that we add to
every adequacy standard um
function. That's for hallways,
wall thicknesses, restrooms,
storage, that kind of thing.
So you cannot build to the
adequacy standards.
alone.
Because it doesn't take into
account those and and their
minimums and the adequacy
standards of the minimums and
the adequacy planning guide
provides.
The best practices for spatial
allocations. So again, all this
calculator does is bring us up
to speed with the current
adequacy standards, um, now we
have another 6 months to a year
of work on the adequacy planning
guide. It could very well inform
this calculator again, although
I don't think it will be as
substantial as this move and
remind us of the distinction
between the calculator and the
planning guide and kind of like
what is, what is the substance
of that work to come and.
What do we need to know about
how it affects projects. Mr.
Chair, Ms. Carswell, the, the
adequacy planning guide is the
um is the sister document to the
adequacy standards, it's the
best practice.
guide that architects and
districts use to um design a
school.
And the calculator is uh
complimentary to that adequacy
planning guide. So while we're
updating it because of the work
of the standards, it is, um,
it's closely tied with the
adequacy planning guidance.
OK, thank you.
Um, clearly a lot of work here
and uh.
I'm sure that this will help.
The district's immensely in
determining seek assistance and.
projects forward.
Mr. Chair, members, if I may,
this is also an improvement over
the previous calculators that it
eliminates a lot of the
inconsistencies between uh
enrollments. There were some
cases where an enrollment for a
lower population had a square
footage that was very much uh
mirrored um an enrollment of a
population that might have had
25, 35, 45 more students. Um, so
this, and that is depicted in
the, the distinct um uh the the
charts themselves, how
those little dips and divots
that didn't remain on a
consistent path. So that
previous model couldn't really
accurately predict what the uh
square footage should be so
using a uh a mathematical
function to kind of um eliminate
that, that inconsistencies as
indicated by that R square value
is a vast improvement over the
previous, um, and if we do have
to readjust, uh, at some of
those lower enrollments, um,
that is something that we can
look to do as well.
And, and Mr. Chair, I may point,
um, I should point out that, um,
a director Romero has asked us
to kind of track how this is
working.
Um
And so moving forward as as new
awards get made, um, or there's
a handful of projects that may
be able to come forward like
we've been doing, um, with a
little bit for a request of
additional square footage. The
nice thing is, is we have this
calculator in place if approved
today, so we're, we're gonna
take a lot of that guesswork out
and we'll be back to hopefully
more black and white decisions.
Right.
Well, uh, we have a, did we do
the motion already? I don't I
don't think we did. I'll do it
again just in case.
uh, MS subcommittee recommends
for council approval for the
updated maximum allowable gross
square foot calculator to be
used to determine school
facility size.
All those in favor of the
motion, please indicate by
saying I I.
Flow the post, motion passes.
Thank you for the
Next item is the recertification
of uh.
and this is a
The subcommittee.
Subcommittee motion or a staff
motion.
Um, Mr. Chair, I think I can
explain, um, the subcommittee
did make a recommendation on
recertification of um SSTBs,
however, staff caught, um, a
technical issue after the fact.
Um, so the subcommittee chair,
um, Mr. Cily approved um
advancing the corrected version,
which appears before you on the
agenda with potential motions in
which Matthew will explain.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members, uh, Ms.
Carswell is correct, uh, we
appreciate the opportunity to
correct the um issue before we
go on break for a little bit.
Um, the correction stems from uh
one of the items we were
certifying in 23 SB. It was for
the Farmington Local mass
production and with the waiver
that was not included in the
research in December, we were,
you know, chewing it up for this
meeting to make sure we had it
certified to move forward, but
the bond that Farmington was
originally certified on if we
had included the waiver, it
would have caused that.
we can't do.
So, um, we met together and, and
decided to decertify Farmington
from 23 SB and then fully
certify it under 23 SD.
Um, that way the whole project
for Farmington with state
participation, the local match
that was uh the local match
reduction that was also
approved, it could be tied to
one bond instead of a separating
them through multiple bonds for
one. With that, Mr. Chair
members, I'm happy to read the
subcommittee or the the the the
motion for counsel and uh go
through all of the items if
needed.
So I'll start with, again, this
was the subcommittee
recommendation for council
approval to adopt uh the
resolution notification,
certification and reconciliation
of unexpended bond proceeds as
follows. Uh, this is SSTB 17 SB
So I'll start with, again, this
was the subcommittee
recommendation for council
approval to adopt uh the
resolution notification,
certification and reconciliation
of unexpended bond proceeds as
follows. Uh, this is SSTB 17 SB1
or decertifying the net amount
of $808,326 to be used for other
PSCOC projects. I'll move
through these quick so I'm not
repeating the same pieces, but
next one is 18 SB. This is the
4th 1.
Decertifying the net amount of
$2,476,242.
Next, 18 SD, uh, item one.
decertifying the net amount of
$370,222.
Uh, next bullet point is 19 SB
0001, e-certifying the net
amount of $49,464.
19 SD 0004 decertifying
decertifying the net amount of
$872 8,720,740 dollars.
Next, 23 SB decertifying the net
amount of 29 million761,460
dollars.
And then finally, 23 SD
certifying the net amount of
$39239,511.
And with that, Mr. Chair,
members, looking at the key
points, each of the, the dollar
amounts is broken down in the,
so you don't have to go through
each of the resolutions, um, but
we have a note uh for each of
the projects that are, the
projects that are moving through
because the project close out
being decertified, as well as
the final changes uh for 23 SB
on the bottom of page 75,
showing the breakdown with um
the correction for Duanus, the
Farmington pre-K being removed
for what was certified.
And then, uh, the, the Pravista
just correcting that final
awarded amount.
And then lastly, on the page,
top of page 76, the addition of
the Farmington Preschool, the
full amount awarded at the last
meeting on 23 SB.
With that, I stand for any
questions.
Questions?
Mr. Chair, I have a question.
I'm gonna just remind the
counsel that, um, Nick Gonzalez
with the board of Finance
reviews these, um, and we do an
administrative approval. So if
he ever has any questions or he
identifies any cleanup items, he
alerts stuff of that before we
provide that approval. And I
know our, our gold standard
moving forward and we'll get to
it at some point is being able
to track these a little bit more
clearly but appreciate um
Matthew's work in identifying
the area. All right, so there
are no further comments or
questions, uh, all those in
favor of proving the.
recertifications, please
indicate by saying I.
a
Thank you, move on to uh
informational items versus the
our staffing update.
Lorenko.
Welcome.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members. Um, I'll call attention
to page 94.
Are we through the key points of
the executive summary, uh, PSFA
has historically maintained the
double digit turnover and a
vacancy rate that trend has been
reversed since the beginning of
FY 24, however, however, over
the course of the past 6 months,
between July and December 24,
there's been an increase in
vacancy rates within the agency.
The agency is budgeted for 56
FTEs for FY 25 as of December 20
December 2024, the agency is
staffed at 48, uh, which means,
uh, 85% uh staff and, and we are
progressing, filling 8 vacancies
in critical department FTEs.
PSFA was able to fill 4 critical
positions, uh, 3 of them were
introduced by Director Romero
initially and uh we all also
feel that an IT position, uh, I
wanna, I wanna remind you, uh,
that, uh, the, the head of that
department was a CIO, uh, was a
high compensate position, the
decision was made.
To change that position to IT
manager, while we don't have
one, we identified internal
talent that we are training, uh,
between the date to the rectum
HR, we have a 6 to 9-month plan
to bring the staff member to the
position of IT if the plan works
well, so we are saving some
Some money there due to this
change on on that department.
Recruitment efforts are going,
are going to feel open position
in finance CIMS training and
maintenance department.
The BSFA is still falling behind
in industry standing
compensation and not
competitive, which makes feeling
a position very challenging.
Human Reso department is using a
combination of recruitment
methods that include online
third-party sites such as
LinkedIn, Indeed and
professional associations such
as American Planning
Association. Employer referral
and also uh using heavily the
agency website.
Miss Cha members uh will ask you
to go to page 95.
The second table, uh, I'll read
the summary or summary on that
second table.
So this sample was taken uh
during 6 for 6 months. So the
total number of separation
during the past 6 months were 41
retirement, which was the
previous CIO to resignations in
um facilities and field
apartment and one termination on
a contract. The average FTEs
during the past 6 months have
been 47.6. The average Viancy
rate.
But the last 6 months is uh
17.9. With that, make sure
members I stand for any
question.
Thank you.
information.
Questions?
Um, Mr. Tara, thank you for the
update, um, do you guys have
data or analysis that supports
the idea that PFA is behind
industry and compensation.
Mrs. Carswell.
Through the recent task force
that occurred last month, we are
currently updating a complete
mission, if you will, uh, Nick
and I are working on several
factors to include looking at
the market analysis of
Critical positions in our
organization, include the
primary department of
construction management.
And we also want to take that
because we can't forget about
the fact that as we grow in the
construction management industry
in our departments.
We can't let
The other departments just stay
stagnant as well. They need to
grow as well to better
supportalities that occur within
the construction industry.
We are in currently in the
process of doing that.
Give you a time frame, a
guesstimate if I could, Mister
Chair, uh, Ms. Carswell of
within 30 days or something for
review.
Which includes a complete
analysis, market analysis, where
we've been, where we're going
and looking at the 5% uh budget.
OK, thank you, um.
I, I might suggest including um
sort of equivalent public
positions in that analysis to
like, um, you know, project
managers in the facilities
management division.
GSD stuff like that, um, and if
we can help you get some of that
data, let me know. Um, you know,
I think I'm there's been efforts
across.
Public employment in the state
to try to address these issues
and, you know, we have had
relatively significant statewide
increases. And I know you guys
have the ability to, um, you
know, go beyond that too, so,
um, so yeah, I just, you know,
just hope to see more numbers
and have additional discussion
on that, that's all. Thanks.
Uh, this chairing members saw on
what the deputy just said is, so
there's two parts of this work,
uh.
Uh
Miss Tilson is working on the
staffing models and are working
more on the conversation side,
then we're gonna bring that
together but to address your
question in terms of
non-scientific data.
How we know we are not
competitive because it's very
hard to, to, to recruit.
Sometimes we have the interviews
when I get to the offer, offer
side those offers are rejected,
so that's the unscientific way
to say that we, we are not being
competitive.
Um, understood, yeah. Um, I
think, you know, we just,
wherever this ends up to, I
would sort of expect there to be
some parody with other public
positions we have, um, so just
again, like happy to have
Ongoing discussions with you
guys and help however we can.
Thanks.
Thank you, Miss.
Again, thank you for the report.
We appreciate the, the update
and uh.
Keep working on filling those
vacancies.
We'll move on then to the
The
Oversight task force report.
Yes, Mr. Chair, members. Thank
you. I am back to wrap it up.
Um, real briefly, I'll go over
what transpired on um December
17th, which was a reschedule
from the original date of
November 7th.
So on that day, uh, we had Mr.
Simons uh Suzuki presents kind
of an update on what has
transpired as it pertains to the
Zuni lawsuit, and uh the Supreme
Court determined that because
the law at issue has changed
significantly since the district
court's order in 2020. The
question of whether those laws
are constitutional or move all
that to say is um
The district's concerns are no
longer valid because so much
legislation has um changed to
address those concerns. So the
uh Supreme Court has knocked it
back down to the district court.
Um, the districts did appeal,
uh, for them to reconsider.
And that got denied. So
currently it resides at the
district court level where the
district can then file another
motion if they decide to do so
at that time.
Um, then the next topic was the
presentation from um PSFA on the
adequacy standards, as well as
the operational budget. Um, I'm
gonna go over a couple of
concerns that were um asked or
uh the the task force had
pertaining to these topics. One
was, how is PSFA managing
districts who are playing the
game, which means, are these
districts not maintained?
maintaining their facilities in
order to stay high in the
ranking.
And PSFA's response was, um, the
fact that we have a very robust
M&O department where um Mr.
Tillotson and his team, uh,
worked very well hand in hand
with the districts to help
maintain those facilities, uh,
the second piece also is the
fact that when they come for an
award, that is a big factor on
whether or not they are
maintaining their facilities,
but also PSFA indicated that the
ranking is more based on age,
condition, and educational
delivery.
OK.
Um, the second concern
was, are we encouraging
districts to build above
adequacy. The response at that
time was, we cannot build
schools to adequacy, or the
school will be insufficient. The
solution is within the adequacy
planning guide, which includes
the gross square foot
calculator, which was presented
to you today, which bases the
size of schools on enrollment.
This will help the architects to
design sensibly, not necessarily
to adequacy.
This encumbents sensible design
to include right sizing and
sustainability.
All that to say, Mr. Chair and
members, we are ensuring that
PSFA's narrative is in alignment
with the council as well as the
task force.
Um, then I went on to present
the operating budget, which I
really thought was going to be
about a 5-minute presentation,
um, but this is where uh uh
going towards Miss Carswell's um
comments and questions.
was I did preference with my
presentation that I had taken a
kind of a conservative approach.
And over time I realized it was
actually a little too
conservative.
But the concerns were
That the task force had
initiated or was part of
legislation to include our
operating budget to be a rolling
average of 5 years versus 3. And
for us to not be requesting the
amount that we are entitled to,
probably was not a good idea. So
that they also had questions on
whether or not we were part of
the um compensation analysis
that DFA or excuse me, LFC had,
um, initiated with Deloitte.
We were not. So uh along those
lines, what we are now tasked to
do is um to continue that
analysis, the compensation
compensation analysis that
includes not only um other
states and industry standards,
but as well as comparing it to
uh state of New Mexico's
positions as well, in order to
see where we have any vacancy
savings.
As well as to see where we need
to be, um.
Uh
How can I say, um, comparative
to other agencies and other
states.
And ultimately potentially
looking to request a
supplemental.
Um, that supplemental will go
towards that initiative of
trying to get those salaries in
line with other uh agencies and
uh um industry standards, but
also we have uh some items that
we need to address such as
automating the financial piece I
had mentioned that, uh, I had
reached out to Deloitte
regarding the automating of our
finances, um, cause right now
it's currently be done on Excel
spreadsheets, and the quote
that I got was just outrageous.
So we're looking to potentially
going out for an RFP, but we
still need, um, that probably
that supplemental to assist in
that work. So uh that's kind of
what this the discussion was at
task force, and that's what
created the initiative to get
this analysis done.
Um, I'm gonna move on, Mr.
Chair, to, uh, the severance tax
bonding capacity that director
Lee gave as an update, changing
the bonding capacity from 808
million to now the 751 million.
A difference of $57 million.
Mr. uh then presented the update
on all of the new Capital Outlay
awards since the last task force
meeting.
And then the task force along
with LFC and LESC, um, talked
about the language, uh, in the
legislation, uh, which the task
force did endorse to um extend
Senate Bill 131, as well as
modify the criteria for the
local match reduction. So again,
um, the task force endorsed that
legislation, um, and I believe
Senator Souls might be the
sponsor on that legislation.
And then Mr. Stan Ros presented,
presented a joint resolution,
which proposes to amend Article
8, Section 2 of the Constitution
to increase the total annual tax
levy on real and personal
property, um, there was
extensive uh conversation
regarding this and ultimately
there are too many unknown
variables, and the task force
did not endorse, but I have some
information there for you if you
have any other questions. And
with that, Mr. Chair, members, I
stand for any questions. Thank
you.
And thank you for um.
We're working closely with the
oversight task force throughout
the year and getting to thank
you. Questions?
I think uh some of this
legislation has already been
easing up.
You know, didn't go through the.
The interim process, know that
uh.
Over the years, council itself
has not had legislative
priorities, but I think this
year this particular bill.
Have our own individual
priorities through our
associations or will be calling
on you for.
out of here early.
Again, thank you, thank you to
the staff and again, we'll be
seeing you around this, this.
House.
several weeks.
I will entertain a motion to
adjourn. OK.
We have motion in a second, uh,
there will be no objection, they
meeting is adjourn.
Thank you again, Mr. Cherry for
being on line.
You too.
