West Billingsley.
Thank you.
Fernando Martinez, Mark
Thompson,
Here
Brent Van Dyke.
Thank you, Julie Maitland.
OK, thank you. We have a quorum.
Thank you, Yasmin. The next
order of business is approval of
the gender. We do have two
potential additions, uh.
The community of Mescalero would
like to be added to the end of
today's and Bloomfield would be
like to be added to um.
The end of tomorrow's session.
And so
Yeah, I hear a motion to approve
the agenda as amended.
I have a second.
All those in favor?
I proposed.
You know.
Agenda is approved, um, approval
of the minutes.
From the August 7th, 2024
meeting.
Anybody have any comments,
suggestions, edits, I have a
motion.
So move, Mr. Chair. Is there a
second?
All those in favor?
Hi.
All those opposed.
Motion passes.
OK. Report of the nominating
committee member Martinez?
You might need to turn on your
mic.
Let me just start over then.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
committee members, the report
from the Water Trust board
nominating committee.
At the August 7th Water Trust
board meeting a nominating
committee, um.
Comprised of members, Joe
Esparzon, AJ Fort, Priscilla
Lucero, on McGinn, and Marquita
Russell were appointed to no
nominate a member of the Water
Trust board to serve as chair.
Which became vacant upon the
retirement of state engineer
Mike Hammond.
The committee conferred and
recommends that state engineer
designate.
Elizabeth Anderson be elected
chair of the Water Trust Board
for a term expiring June 30,
202.
Thank you for the report. Um,
Do I have emotion?
Or is there a discussion?
OK.
Uh, I believe this calls for a
roll call vote, Jasmine.
Yes.
Yes, uh, chair Sloan.
Yes.
Vice Chair Nichols. Yes.
Liz Anderson.
Joy Sarzan.
Albert Chang. Yes.
Stephen Deal.
Priscilla Lucero.
Jason John
West Billingsley.
Fernando Martinez. Yes.
Mark Thompson. Yes.
Brent Van Dyke.
Thank you.
Congratulations.
And I understand your first
order of business is to have me
continue.
Excellent. Thank you.
I think that brings us to the
bulk of the day's agenda item
recommendations of the 2025
Water Project fund waiver.
Angela, do you want to walk us
through the rest of the day?
So I bring before you the waiver
recommendations on the 2025
cycle.
The process began with the or
the 2025 application cycle
actually provides the projects
are evaluated in the fall, which
we are now in, and they look at
the health and safety factors,
those that are recommended to
the legislator for authorization
are then invited to complete the
second phase, which is the
readiness application. The next
board meeting, this board will
determine who are on that
legislative authorization list.
Uh, for the waivers that we're
talking about, the two primary
ones is we have the preliminary
expenditure target that ensures
that applicants timely expand
outstanding project funds,
specifically in section 2.1 is
the recommendation to the
legislator and basically it
requires that any um active
project that an applicant has
from 2023 and older have to meet
a preliminary target.
Uh, applicants, and that
preliminary target date was
September 16th, which is the
date that they were supposed to
or that they submitted their
project application.
Those that were unable to meet
that target by the uh September
16th we're instructed to include
a waiver within their
application, and this is what we
bring before you. Um, all the
applicants from the notice of
intent were notified before they
submitted their application of
this deadline.
In addition to that preliminary
target expenditure, um, as part
of the requirements in order to
submit an application to the
water trust board is applicants
are required to submit
appropriate planning documents.
And just to make sure that they
have the best practices for
project planning and
implementation. The only thing
is, unless you are coming to the
water trust board for planning,
you would need to have some type
of planning documentation.
Uh, right now, the amount of
funds anticipated for this cycle
is about 125.1 million, the cap
for this year is 18.7 million
per um entity.
For the 2025 cycle, I'm bringing
before you 5 applicants that are
requesting waiver for their
planning documentation and 14
waivers for the preliminary
expenditure target.
So with that, Mr. Chair, I will
start with the planning waivers.
If you'd like, I can go over all
the planning waivers or unless
the board would like to vote on
them individually. What is the
I'd suggest going through them
all, but.
Somebody has a different
Uh
Go through them all and then we
can ask questions and then vote.
Very well. So we'll start with
um Village of Des Moines.
Uh, and again, the 1st 5 are
gonna be for the planning.
The village has their drafts,
um, PER they have submitted it
within their agreement. They are
right now pending review from
the Drinking Water Bureau and
the village anticipates the
final approval of by November of
2024, staff recommends approval
on this planning waiver.
The next one I bring before you
is Librook Mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association, uh, they
are also have a, they have a
20017 PER that it goes beyond
the required five-year timeline,
the phase one is currently in
construction. The proposed
project will look at phase two.
So that's what they're coming in
for. The association's engineer
provided updated costs to the
phase two and per the water
trust board policy.
PR's older than 2 years must be
accompanied by updated cost
estimates.
Finance or the MFA staff
recommends approval of this
waiver request for Lybrook.
The next one I bring before you
is Rio and Blu Mutual domestic
Water Consumers Association, um,
similar to Des Moines, they also
have a draft PER that was
completed in August 2024. It is
also pending uh Drinking Water
Bureau approval. The association
anticipates final approval by
November 2024, staff recommends
approval of this planning
document.
The next one we have is Rosedale
Mutual domestic Water Consumers
Association, the Association's
proposed project is for the
design and replacement of meters
throughout the system.
Right now their engineer has
provided a current project cost
estimate as part of its design
analysis report, which is in
place of a full PER which is
allowed per water trust board
policy.
The staff recommends approval on
the waiver request for Rosedale.
In the final bowl um planning
grant that we have is the Mutual
domestic Water Consumers
Association, uh, with them, they
have a draft PER was completed
in July 2024. This is also
pandeen drinking water uh bureau
approval, the engineer has
provided in addition to their
draft, PER has provided a
current cost estimate.
The association similar to the
others, uh, anticipate final
approval by November of 2024,
staff recommends approval for
the waiver request. And with
that, I stand for any questions
on 6.1 and 6.5 for the planning
documentation requirements.
Are there any questions?
No questions. Good. All right.
Do we have a motion?
That's moving approval of the
village of Des Moines, Lybrook,
Riobudo, Rosedale, and Calley,
um planning document waivers.
Mm
Um, I don't think we need a roll
call, so all those in favor?
Uh.
Post
I believe that was an eye for uh
yes.
Motion passes.
So the next ones we bring before
you.
are for the preliminary target.
Um, again,
These are for
Applicants who have uh projects
that have not been certified
complete still have balances
still on our books from 2023 and
older. If you will recall the um
staff does not look at any of
these projects that were awarded
in 2024 because we'd like to
give them at least a year to get
the project started before they
um can actually start using the
funds. So with that, we start
with the first one, Albuquerque
Berlio, uh.
County water utility Authority
on their water conservation
application. Um, they have a
preliminary target and you're
going to see a majority of these
are going to have the
preliminary target of 70%.
We have a couple that we are,
that are state projects that
have a preliminary target of
35%.
So the authority has an
outstanding 2021 project, a 2022
and a 2023. They combined
awarded amount is 18, a little
over 18.5 million. The combined
balance is a little over 16.2,
so they're about 12% expended.
Two of the projects, the 2021
and the 2022 are currently in
construction with the 3rd going
out to bid by actually have
already gone out to bid in
construction beginning in late
October.
The authority is anticipates
substantial completion of all
three projects by May of next
year.
Staff recommends approval of the
rewrite of the waiver request
for Albuquerque Berlio.
The next one I have is Town of
Bernelio on the water storage
applicant.
Um, the town has an outstanding
2022 project.
That was awarded a 1.9 million.
The current balance is a little
bit 1.8, so they're about 1%
expended if this board will
recall the town came to this
board and asked for a scope
change and was awarded a scope
change, um, as well as a time
extension. The town anticipates
the design completion by the
ending of September and
construction beginning in
November with the project
completion at the ending of May
2025. Staff recommends.
Approval of the preliminary
target for the town of Bernelio.
The next one we have is Eastern
New Mexico Water Utility
Authority. This is one of the
two state sponsored projects,
the authority has an outstanding
2022 and 2023 awards, the
combine combined total or a
little over 25 million, um,
right now they, or excuse me, 28
million right now they're about
25 million is the balance. There
are about 12% expended. The 2022
project is currently in
construction with funding
sources.
Not only from the water trust
board, but federal funding as
well, drinking water and the um.
What is it Bureau of
Reclamation. The authority
anticipates expanding the 2022
funds by June of next year, the
2023 project was awarded the
construction contract um is
anticipated to be um or was was
contracted on April. In April,
the um like the 2022 award. This
project also has federal funds
attached to it. The authority
anticipates full expenditure of
the 2023.
My next December.
Staff recommends approval of
this waiver request.
The next one we have is the EMW
2 EMWT Regional Water
Association on their phase one
Macintosh, uh, the association
has an outstanding 2022 award,
of $491,050 they still have the
full remaining balance, the
association was unable to begin
design because they were just
trying to get the water rights.
The water rights are now
resolved in the design has
begun, they estimate to complete
their design by.
March of next year. Staff
recommends approval for this
waiver.
The city of Gallup is the 2nd
water, or excuse me, state
sponsored project.
Um, the city has an outstanding
2021 award and 2023 award, uh, a
total amount of a little over
18.5 million, their balance is
13.5, so they're about 27%
expended. They're close to that
35%.
The 2021 project is estimated to
be completed by the ending of
January the 2023 project, went
out to bed, and with anticipated
construction beginning in
January. The city anticipates
substantial completion of the
2023 by midsummer.
Staff recommends approval for
the City of Gallup's flavor.
The next one we have is Alamos
County. They have two
applications in the hopper. Um,
they have an outstanding 2022
and 2023 awards combined total
of 8.6 million, their current
balance is 6.6, about 23%
expended. The 20202 award is
complete, and right now they're
waiting on the final list, uh,
punch list and final
disbursement request, the 2023
went out to bed in mid-September
with anticipated
War for construction in October.
They anticipate weather
permitting to have this
completed by early 2026. Staff
recommends approval for the Los
Alavos County.
The next one I bring before you
is Luna County.
Um, they have an outstanding
2022 and 2023 awards, about 4.6
million um right now they're
about 4.4 uh is the extended
balance, they're at 3% expended
the 2022 project was delayed due
to securing easements from uh
New Mexico Department of
Transportation permits. It has
gone out to bid and anticipation
of construction beginning
November 1st, the overall
project funded from different
Funding sources will be
completed within the 2 years of
the required timeline, the
county anticipates full
expenditure of the water trust
funds by February 2025.
The 2023 project is currently in
construction and is anticipated
to be substantially completed by
fall of 2025. Staff recommends
approval for Luna County. The
next I bring before you is
middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District. Um, they have an
outstanding 2022 and 2023
awards, a little over 14.2
million with the balance of
8.2%, they're about 42% expended
the 2022 project is in
construction with anticipated
completion.
By early January, the 2023 and
anticipates exceeding that 70%
by June of next year. Staff
recommends approval for Mid Rio
Grande Conservancy District.
The next one I bring before you
is Pinasco Mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association. They have
an outstanding 2023 award.
Uh with remaining balance of
about 4%, the design project was
delayed due to inadequate
underground utility markings.
The markings have been resolved
and the surveying has begun.
Staff recommends approval for
Penasco.
The next one is Pendari's Mutual
domestic Water Consumers
Association, the Association has
a 2023 award.
Uh, with remaining balance of
482,000, about 4% expended. The
project was delayed due to new
board members on the completion
of the association's asset
management plans, so they have a
whole new board and they're
trying to get or the design
right now is underway.
Staff recommends approval for
Pinari's mutual domestic water
Consumers Association.
Next one we bring before you is
Reel Lucial Mutual domestic
Water Consumers Association.
They have an outstanding 2023
award 12825 was awarded an
expended balance of 22, less
than 1% expanded. The project is
a continuation of their 2021
project, which is the
replacement of the water lines,
uh, due to a continued long lead
time for their brass components
or the connections as well as
subsurface in any
DOT permitting, the project has
been delayed. The project is
currently moving forward. We
they anticipate completion by
March of 2025, the Africa
recommends approval for Rio
Lucio.
Vil Riodoso has 4
applications in the 2025 cycle,
they have an outstanding 2023
award of 918, they do have the
full balance remaining, and
Although the project has was
awarded the contractor was
unable to begin work due to the
monsoon season, and then because
of the recent fires and flooding
had a severe impact. The village
had made a construction work,
unfortunately very challenging.
The work will start after the
monsoon season, the village
anticipates drawing down
beginning this month.
African men's approval for the
village of Riodoso.
The next one we have is story
Project Water Utility or users
association, the association has
an outstanding 2023 award is
13.9 million, they have the full
balance remaining, the
association was unable to secure
funds due to having to complete
several years of audits to meet
the state audit requirement, the
design of the project has been
awarded with anticipated
completion due by July of 2025,
the association estimates
construction.
Beginning in September of next
year, staff recommends approval
for story Project Water users
association.
And last but certainly not
least, I bring before you the
city of Truth or Consequences.
The city has an outstanding 2021
award of 750,000. There are
about 63% expended. The project
was delayed due to constraints
with property ownership and
utility conflicts.
The city anticipate anticipates
meeting the 70% threshold at the
ending of this much of this
month, excuse me, and the
completion of the project by
December of this year, Staff
recommends approval of the
waiver request for City of Truth
or Consequences.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I
bring before you from 6.6 to
6.19, the planning or excuse me,
the preliminary target waivers
with the recommendations is
outlined.
Thank you.
Are there any questions?
Mr. Chair and Angela, we talked
about these a little bit in our
um committee and talked about
the fact that once construction
starts these projects and funds
move pretty quickly, um, one of
the other things I had asked you
was kind of the time frame. This
isn't the end all, they do come
back and if you wouldn't mind
sharing that, I think it'd be
helpful. Yes, certainly.
So it's a, so this preliminary
target is the first.
I guess you say obstacle.
So all of these
There's a preliminary target.
The majority of them, you'll
see, have that 70%. The next
time, um, these will come before
if they don't meet the next
target, which is the project
review or project continuation
on target, that expenditure
target increases. So those that
are at 70% when they submit
their readiness, excuse me,
yeah, when they submit the
readiness application in
January, that goes up to 95%.
So they have to show that they
have um moved or expanded to
close to that, that um
Closer to that set 99 95%. So
similar, whoever is on, wherever
this um board decides on the
legislative authorization list.
Staff will reach out to those
that are on that list to say,
OK, your next target is uh this
deadline and this is the
expenditure target. So what um
member Eparson was basically
learning to his project review
committee, we talked about, OK,
if this board moves these
forward, what would
be the next target or that they
could that they would need to
meet, and that would be the next
target. It is the project group
continuation target, which would
allow um this board to decide
whether the fund or these
entities can um be eligible for
funding. The preliminary target
allows these applications to
move forward for legislative
authorization, which means that
they are eligible for funding.
The project continuation target
this board will determine
whether that
Those applications can move
forward for funding
consideration.
Thank you.
Anybody else?
Mm
Uh, yes, Chairman.
I, I, I think more of a
rhetorical statement or concern
relating to making sure we get
the money spent.
Which has been a big issue over
the past couple of years.
Um, and I'm not sure, um, member
Billingsley recalls that I
Um, and I'm not sure, um, member
Billingsley recalls that
question that I felt we funded
the same project twice.
And that was the tohajli
project.
TIF and Water Trust board.
And I don't know if this is
having an impact on getting
those funds spent.
Or not?
And, and rhetorical from the
standpoint of how do we as a
water trust board.
And cross tipboard too as well.
Execute our responsibility as
fiduciaries to make sure that
those funds get spent.
When we have two different
Bureaucracies here I guess for
lack of a better word.
How do we check each others and
how do we go out there and make
sure that these things are
getting done. I still have that
same concern.
Um, the, the project's getting
built and I support it, so don't
misunderstand my statements
there. I'm just wondering if
it's impacting getting the money
spent.
And implementing the true scope
of work.
And if, if I may, um,
We
This boy or the board who has
been here quite a bit, has seen
the increase in funding that we
have avail available in the
water trust board. Um, and
typically staff will say, you
know, you have too much on the
books, we would recommend that
you spend the money.
And come back.
When, you know, when the the
next year, um, and we talked
about this at the project review
committee as well because we
have so much, well, 125 million
right now we don't know what we
found in the last couple of
years, and if you'll, if this
board will recall, we came in
August for a 2nd iteration. Um,
we don't know who's gonna be on
that list right now, all of the
applications are being rated and
ranked.
Um, we don't know what this
board is going to decide on that
list, and on that list, we don't
know who's actually gonna submit
a readiness application and
those who submit the readiness
application. We don't know if
they're gonna meet a project
continuation or if they're gonna
meet any regulatory compliance.
So even though we have a a a
huge um pool of applicants that
submitted their applications. We
have more, you know, we have
more requests than we do have
available funding, but right now
we don't know what it's gonna
look like in the spring. So I
think that's why staff makes the
recommendation, not that none of
these, not that any of these
projects are not worthy to move
forward, but you're gonna see
because of the amount of funding
that we do have in the water
trust board.
And um we, the unknowns that we
don't know who's actually gonna
move forward to the readiness
application and what our pool
will be at the ending of, you
know, April when this board
decides the funding
recommendations, that's kind of
how staff went to make sure that
everybody had the opportunity to
meet whatever compliances or
obstacles that are in the next,
um.
Pro
I think it's also important to
recognize that we're, we've come
through a pretty tough period
where we had a lot of backlog
with supply chain and just
interacting in general and so I
think
You know, my read on this is
that we're catching up on a lot
of stuff and it's starting to
clear the backlog, and I'm
hopeful that future years.
So we had to have a motion to
approve the waivers for 6.6
through 6.19 as presented. Mr.
All those in favor?
Hi.
Proposed.
Noted for the record. Thank you.
That brings us to item number 7,
the 2025 water project fund
application present. Thank you,
Mr. Chair. So what I'm gonna be
doing is, um, just as a reminder
to the audience, we get that
started. Um.
And, and as a reminder or
refresher from the board, uh,
this is an opportunity for the
applicants to present their
projects. We had 84 applicants
um apply. We have I think 50.
50s, uh, um, actually are going
to be presenting. We let
everybody know that this is an
opportunity. It is not a
requirement. It has whether you
um present or not, it has no
bearing on the rating and
ranking of your application.
This is again just an
opportunity for them to present
to the board and for the board
to ask questions. Um, we give
the each presenter, uh 3 minutes
to present their project when
you come up, when you're called
up, make sure that you
Uh, identify yourselves for the
record, and then after the 3
minutes, uh, the board can ask
any questions if they, um, so
desire.
So with that, Mr. Chair, we will
start with Camado Lake Water
Association.
And I'm a timer.
Hello, uh, Chairman Sloan and
members of the Water Trust
board. Thank you. My name is
Agatha King, and I'm the system
administrator and uh vice
president of the board of Tomato
Lake Water Association, and we
are requesting additional
infrastructure that is aging out
and is in many cases, failing,
and so what I just wanted to
emphasize in our request here is
that not only are we requesting
for, we have two well
Currently and um 2 water tanks,
then 2007 is a 60,000 gallon
tank. The other tank that we
have is a fiberglass 1992. It
has since been repaired twice
and when our um uh compliance
officer came for review this
year, he said, I think she might
have a little life, but it is
very questionable, so we did
place that tank back online this
year during the summer and
during the summer months, we
have an increase in
number of residents that come
and stay throughout the summer.
We also live in the middle of
the Gla, the Apache, and the
Tibola National Forest and so we
really feel like we are a
resource to the national uh
Forest Service to be able to
support, uh, there's a major
fire.
Um, so with all of that said,
uh, that storage tank really we
would like to either replace it
with a 20.
In addition to that are 292.
The second, well was also placed
in 2007. We uh lost the first
well last year and thank
goodness we had some
infrastructure funding from
Capitol Outlay, we were able to
replace the pump and the motor
in that well, and then the
second well popped one of its
pipes, the one that was placed
in 2007 at the very inlet of the
pump just two weeks ago.
And uh in addition to that, we
also lost our booster station,
uh, almost 2 station and it
literally took us long to be
able to get that completely
replaced.
So what we're requesting at this
point in time and the documents
that you received are
specifically asking for planning
and design for um construction
and placement of a new well, and
then we will follow up with that
to be able to get the planning
and design and construct the new
water tank.
So, uh, you know, it, it's for
us these small mutual domestics
trying to identify which is the
best funding way to go has been
very difficult just trying to
navigate through all of those
resources and uh we don't have
the capacity of the year I have
about 80. Any questions? Thank
you.
You have any questions?
OK. Thank you. OK, thank you.
And next we have is Village of
Cloudcroft.
Mm
Good morning everybody. Uh,
eastern New Mexico economic, um,
we are here today to assist with
vital uh
System improvements for our
water storage facility, but
mountain and dear resource for
us, our pair, um, as, um, and we
have had facility components are
in are are severely
deteriorating.
Um, we utilize 97% of our water
every single day. So any amount
that we are storing is
quite um Cloudcroft.
Serves approximately
800 on any given weekend we have
between 3000 and 5000 visitors
that are also um making demands
on that water system.
Our public works department has
highlighted that this is a very
important project that we do not
have um outside funding
allocated for and as such, uh,
we are here today to request
that the water trust board helps
us to protect the 1.4 million
gallons that we are so
desperately storing, um, and
with that, I'll,
Much. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Any questions?
So, good morning. Just a quick
question. So does that mean that
you're in non-compliance based
on your sanitary survey just
because I'm looking at the
pictures and I'm looking at the
corrosion.
And I'm just saying like how
long can.
That hold up so I'm assuming,
you know, what's the time frame
for that and, and when I look at
something like that, I'm, I'm
sure that's probably embedded
somewhere in your.
Sanitary survey. The reason that
we're the urgency behind our
request today is that we are,
it's more preventative, um, to
make sure that we stay in
compliance and that these uh
these components are able to
serve.
Yeah, I'm seeing your tank
inspection report was done in
2021 and there hasn't been one
I think, um, Mr. Chair and
members of the board, I think
just kind of what I'm seeing in
my, in my region is just and
this is something that they're
researching now is just with
climate change, right, that.
That the the um the geographic,
you know, some of the, the
contaminants in the water are
changing. I think they're doing
more testing on that.
I know I'm seeing it in my
region, so just seeing that
things that we thought were
gonna last a certain life or
aren't lasting as long as they
typically do, so that's just
kind of one of my concerns.
So
Um, we just have to be more,
more cautious of that and be
aware of that.
The life of that might not be as
we in this this project is an
effort to extend the life of the
existing infrastructure that is
there um so that we don't have
to come back and ask for an even
larger.
Thank you.
Anyone else? You have a great
day.
The next one we have is Middle
Rio Grande Conservancy District.
Good morning, uh, members of the
board. My name is um Jason
Kosuga, and with me I have Mr.
Casey-ish, um, I am the CEO and
the chief engineer for the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, and Mr. Is is our
conservation program manager on
the project before you today is
what we're calling the feeder 3
booster station. Um, so the
material provided is actually an
executive summary from the
preliminary preliminary
engineering report we had
completed by Bohan in Houston,
um helping us look at
alternatives for being able to
provide a
reliable water supply for
surface irrigation. One of the
challenges that we see um in the
Middle Valley in every county,
but what we're experiencing in
Valencia County right now is
urbanization. Um, that
urbanization is happening um
just downstream of our
historical diversions, but we're
still having to move water.
Further south to our urban
areas, and so the point of this
project is to be able to be able
to divert water, move it closer,
move it down south um using our
facilities closest to the river
and then divert this water using
a pump station that will benefit
um uh several 1000 acres south
of what we call feeder 3. So we
completed a preliminary um
engineering report um in a
fashion so that we could apply
for federal grant money. Um, we
did that, we applied for a Water
Smart grant through the Bureau
of Reclamation. Uh, we received,
um.
Or we have received 2 $2.5
million from the federal
government for this project as
well. And um now we're on funds
from the Water Trust board to
leverage with um when you look
at the project, it's uh
currently we have about 2300
active acres with the benefited
area is close to 4000, and ag
and really that the difference
is due to the ability to
reliably deliver um and move
water uh so far south from the
Berlin, um, or sorry, from the
uh Isla diver
Dam that far south and move it
through the urban area.
That is the summary of our
project and the needs and
benefits.
Any questions?
The next we bring for you is the
Acuma puevo.
Good morning.
My name is Chris Ami. I'm the
executive director for the
utility authority at the Pueblo
of Acuma.
Um,
So
All things A and uh start with
the catastrophic failure that we
had. Some of you may have, may
or may not be aware that uh the
water system failed and in the
fall of 2022, leaving the this
still sits on the back of the
minds of every community member
that's out there and they rely
on us to to fix that system and
move it forward.
We have a number of projects
that are going on right now, but
one of the critical components
of that of the of our
Old puzzle that we're trying to
put together is this water
storage tank that sits atop
skyline.
Uh, it was installed in 1974, so
it is aged, it was inspected in
2006 at deficiencies then, uh,
it was again, uh, and this is
all in the application. It was
again inspected in 2010 where
Nothing got gotten better. It
still had deficiencies and in uh
2018, we received a deficiency
report from the EPA and it's
still in in poor condition.
What, what you're seeing here is
some of the infrastructure
that's gonna be put in place,
um, as we build towards this
tank, the storage tank, of
course, is a critical component,
as it provides a kind of a
hydrology pressure system that
levels out with all the tanks on
the reservation we currently
have 41 is not in uh being.
Used yet. It's uh brand new,
it's illustrated on one of those
maps. Um, we also have a brand
new water well system that we
just put in place um to to
provide water to the storage
facility and we have literally
10 miles of projects, um, of, of
straight line service to those
tanks and those will be um.
This particular tank though,
however, as you can see the
corrosion on it is, is um fairly
significant.
And it needs to be replaced.
It's tough to, to maintenance
this tank unless we take it
offline. So the project is to
put it, uh, a permanent storage
tank of 2,000,000 gallon tank
there, drain this tank and do a
complete inspection and
overhaul.
We just completed that type of
operation at one of our other
tanks. It was a 300,000 gallon
tank because a couple of years
to get through it, but we're,
we're familiar with what, what
worked and what didn't work with
that reha with your, with your
assistants be able to uh move
forward with this rehab on this
tank as well as in include
another 200,000 gallons of
storage. This feeds one of our
major residential areas, uh, and
within a 5 square mile, almost
all of it is um a tribal
membership but um.
Uh, it's, it serves we have
future growth planned in that
area, um, so we're well on our
way to, to fixing and repairing
the system.
And uh with your help we.
Thank you. Any questions? Thank
you very much.
The next step is eastern New
Mexico Water Utility Authority.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
board members, thank you for the
opportunity to be here this
morning and present this
application to you. I'm Mike
Morris, I'm chairman of Eastern
Mexico Wire Utility Authority,
our administrator is Mr. Ortega
and.
Support services officer
Jacqueline Bowens is here. Uh,
thank you for your support for
our critically necessary project
over the years, as you know,
we're the entity that is
constructing the pipeline that
will convey by the state to our
member communities to address
water scarcity as we deal with
and face the decline in the
level this year's application,
the the 2025.
Trust board application as a
request for 18,700,000.
610,000, the scope of work and
we provided in the application
and map for you if you're
looking at that map, you would
look to the far left for these
um these components which are in
the scope uh construction of the
raw water one and and raw water
2 phases of the um
Pipeline alignment as well as
the intake pump station Cap Rock
booster pump station and Caprock
storage tanks, uh, the rawwater
one alignment is approximately
30 miles.
And uh the raw water too is
about 5 miles of 42 inch
diameter pipe and includes a
rock excavation, blasting and
vaults.
The pump station includes 5
vertical turbine pumps, piping,
uh, equipment and facilities and
the site, um, surface and
drainage improvements. The pump
station at the Cap Rock includes
also 5 vertical pumps, as well
as um
Equipment and facilities as in
sight and surface drainage
improvements on top of the cap
rockets necessary for the system
to have storage tanks, and there
will be 2 storage tanks
approximately 2 miles north of
the Cap Rock.
With the capacity that is the,
the scope of the work as you can
see how we are making great but
with this round of funding, if a
Thank you. Any questions?
One question, Mr. Chair. Mayor,
how many people will this
project serve when it's
complete?
Uh
Nichols um.
I believe with the population
estimates that we've 1000.
Um
I would say that I, I.
Survey or project completed by
UNM indicates population area
and so, and as the mayor of
Clover.
And and thank you for that
report. Do you, have you
acquired all the easements for
all the pipeline or are you
still in the process of doing
that is still in the process of,
of completing them, um, Mr.
Ortega, about what percentage
would you say about 80% complete
on easy.
All right. Thank you. Thank you.
The next we have for you is the
village of Logan.
Good morning. My name is Rodney
Paris. I'm the village
administrator for the village of
Logan and with me I have Arvine
with on this project.
So, um, like,
Last year I was only able to
appear virtually and it's very
nice to see everybody in person
this time, so I, it's great to
be here.
Um, the village of Logan serves,
we have, we have about 1,085
connections in the village of
Logan, but our recreational
capacity there. There's 1,085,
but sometimes we jump to around
30,000 people in in a given
week.
During the summer, so it makes
our, our water system very
interesting.
Um, but we're here today to talk
about the Canadian river
crossing project.
The village of Logan also
supplies water to the the
village of San Juan, which is 22
miles away. We are the um, as
well as portions of
unincorporated Quy County, known
as Ute Lake Ranch and the 12
Shores community.
Um, San Ho has has about an
additional.
200 residents as well.
Um,
The Canadian river crossing
actually is a 50 year old
pipeline, uh, at least 50 years
old, that actually goes
underneath the Canadian River
feeds up the other side, and
that's what feeds everything on
that side of the lake.
Uh, or the south side of the
lake, there's no good well
that's that's been found so
that's one of the key components
with this. If something was to
happen, uh, under theneath the
river where that crossing is
now, it be dis disastrous not
only to our residents, but
particularly to those
communities like San Juan and
and those portions of Quy
County, um, moving forward with
this project are preliminary
engineering report is complete.
Um, we're fully prepared for our
5% local match and our debt debt
service and we've actually the
draft RFP for the design and
build is actually posted
yesterday in the paper for the
first time, so we're we're well
prepared to move forward with
this project and with that I'll
turn it over to Irvine for a
little, little more detail is
bisected or dissected.
the Canadian River and a good
portion of the system is
hydraulically floated. Pipeline
Critical
I just want to
I think we got a long day ahead
of us, so
the information is here. I'm
sorry about that. Um, are there
questions?
Mm.
Thank you. Thank you.
The next is Rosedale Mutra
Domestic Water Consumers
Association.
Good morning, chair, members of
the board. Thank you. Uh, my
name is Jody Garcia with Sauter
Miller and Associates. Um, Ser
Miller does, um, work throughout
the state for um
Rural communities primarily, uh,
mutual domestic boards that are
volunteers, um, it is good to
see you all in person, but it
does make it harder for the
communities to be here. Um, and
so, uh, the Rosedale Mutual
domestic Water Consumers
Association has asked for me to
present on their behalf.
Uh, the project that they're
requesting is for design and
construction of water meter
replacement project with leak
detection software for all of
their 1110 connections.
Um, they don't have any existing
funding.
Um, and they have excessive
water loss. They have 25 to 35
that dates back to 2014. The
idea being that uh these meters
will allow them to pinpoint the
locations of those and to
prioritize the rest of their um
their their future improvements.
So,
I have a lot of presentations to
give to you today. I'm gonna
keep them short, but I stand for
any questions that you have.
Thank you. Any questions?
The next one we have is Librom
domestic Water Consumers
Association.
Thank you board.
Um, Jody Garcia, Sara Miller,
um, the project before you is
for $500,000 in design funds.
Um, Odie Chapman, I'm the, I'm
the board president. Sorry, I
didn't know who Jody was and I
was told we'd be here.
We've got a team of project
managers that work throughout
the state in several offices and
so it's an effort to try to make
this as, as little impact as
possible on on these, on these
communities bottom line we, we
try to.
resources
Chapman, sorry about that. It's
OK.
Um,
We're, we're here to ask for on
top of the 68 6. I haven't.
Quite gut, how many or how many
gallons is going out, which
creates a problem just hard to
Hm.
Water conservation.
Is a state engineer. I really
appreciate. Uh, we have one
more. Go ahead.
Mr. Garcia. Oh yes, just a quick
question, so.
Did I hear you say is that, that
you're wanting to regionalize is
that my understanding is what
you were alluding to. Yes, we're
we're trying to get there. That,
that was something that again
was the good old boys.
Uh, we've, we've come a long
ways, um, and with the
cutterlateral coming into us, I
don't know how soon that's gonna
be in grass because it's, it's,
it's hard for a small and
volunteers.
Totally get it. I totally get
you.
So are you just one of the ones
that wants to regeneralize or is
there others? No, um, that's,
uh, we have two chapter houses
that are in our, in our area.
The next one we have is the City
of Farming. Hey, good morning.
My name is Rochelle Brown. I am
the water resource special. I'm
gonna be presenting the Lapata
Highway.
Um, it is replacing 9800 BBC.
We are
Um, majority of the residents
are within the low to moderate
income.
So this is um one of our
regional projects.
In the last 4 years, 25% of our
reported water conservation has
been a.
Um
I'm here today because the next
um.
Um,
The reason the project is so
expensive is because we have
known cultural seismic.
So one of the um method request
um recommended was doing pipe
bursting, so that increased it
and
We're requesting a grant also
because the cap.
The CIP budget ranges from 5 and
this project is estimated, so if
we don't receive projects that
were planned that year or
projects that may arise um to
further, you know, we're gonna
push them down the road, so if
we wanted to do this project, so
what we're here we were posing.
OK.
Thank you.
Next we have is Pena Blanca
Mutual domestic Water Consumers
Association.
Morning members of the board.
The president of the Pena Blanca
Water and Sanitation Dis when
he's got clinics all day, so.
They've asked me to present on
their behalf.
Um, the request before you is
for $2.5 million in um waterline
construction.
Um,
The water lines were designed,
uh, based on money that was
previously secured through
water.
Um, the design is essentially
complete. We, we, um, have to
apply for permits from the DO
can't do that until construction
money is secured so that we can.
Tell them what the construction
schedule for those permits will
be, they've gone through
preliminary review, but the
design is completed.
And this uh this money will go
to
will essentially be able to go
to bid as soon as the money is
available.
Anybody?
Next we have is the City of
Truth or Consequences.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, ladies
and gentlemen.
My name is Mayor Hessler from
Seater The Consequences, and I'm
here today representing not only
the city of truth or
consequences. Let's see your
accounting and the village of
Williamsburg for this very
important project.
In 2020, uh, we had 3 to 5 inch
rain event that, uh, topped over
the Cantrell Dam, which affects
those communities and in our
county. Uh, this has resulted
in, in, uh, some pretty
catastrophic damage to our
facilities and we want to uh
Make repairs and initially we
thought we're going to repair
the dam. However, we ran into
some utility infrastructure
issues as well as uh property
ownership issues. And so the
second plan was to develop a
detention pond or a detention
facility, which I think is
actually a better deal in that
uh the uh the Cantrell Dam only
uh was able to impound 6.7 acre
feet of water, uh, when it was
over.
Stopped and the detention
facility itself will hold 27
acre feet of water. So we've
almost, we'll almost quadruple
our capacity to be able to help
that. And when this when this uh
facility is done, it will uh it
will impact in
And uh and help out the Sierra
County who has infrastructure in
the form of the lines, the
Albert lines Center and uh and
the Fairbairns, um, the village
of Williamsburg which had
significant property uh in front
of this dam and obviously um the
ses or consequences has a lot of
facilities in there, so that's
the reason that we have to go
through this project and we
appreciate your support. I have
with me today are Rs, uh.
Department manager Buster Smith,
and he's gonna be in charge of
the maintenance of the dam, and
I thought I would bring him here
and introduce you folks to him.
And with that, I'll stand for
any questions. Thank you. No, I
guess not. Thank you. Thank you,
folks.
That
The next we have is Albuquerque
Ber Bernelio County Water
Utility Authority?
Mr. Chairman, Vice Chair.
Members of the board.
Uh, my name is David Laughlin.
I'm the vision manager for
Centralized Engineering for the
Water Authority, and I have with
me our chief financial officer,
Marta Ortiz, uh, and we're here
asking for $14 million for
construction of
Narsic treatment facility would
be phase one.
At our Santa Barbara reservoir
site.
Um,
Several years ago when uh the
federal drinking water
standards, reduce the arsenic
limit to 10 PPB, uh, the water
authorities.
Uh, fleet of viable wells went
from over 10/100 wells to 60
wells, um, and so these stranded
assets, those, those higher
arsenic wells are certainly
viable and important to us as we
look at um growth in our
community, um, and by installing
arsenic treatment facilities at
an existing reservoir site, we
can take advantage of existing
wells, existing well collector
piping, um, we can treat that
water and then subsequently
utilize it within our water
treatment system.
And so that's what we're asking
for. We've identified, we've
evaluated um our stranded
assets. We identified identified
priorities within our system.
And the uh phase one Santa
Barbara, Wellfield is our first
priority, followed very closely
And where we're at in terms of
the project, um, we've completed
a preliminary engineering report
that allowed us to identify the
treatment technology at each of
these facilities. Um, the goal
will be for phase, the phase one
design to to basically be able
to be utilized for the phase two
design, um, so we can hopefully.
Cut and paste to some degree,
um, and take advantage of, of
what we learn in the design of
these two designs.
Uh, we're in 30% design right
now for the Santa Barbara
facility, uh, and we'll be ready
to May June of next year.
Thank you.
Thank you. The next we have is
Village of Des Moines.
Good morning. Thank you.
OK.
Uh, the village of Des Moines is
requesting design funds for what
is essentially replacement of
most of their system. They've
got waterline leaks, they've got
issues with to drill another
well and replace it.
The tank is in good shape,
luckily.
Um, they do need, um, controls
for their wells. uh they
currently operations.
How many people are serviced the
test question. Oh, and this is
the one
that I don't have that
information on. I'm sorry 102
connections.
Yeah.
If you, if, uh, I, I can find
that information sorry. Yeah.
0, 102.
Oh,
you have people that thank you.
Anybody else?
The next one we have is uh
Pinasco Micci de miss. We're
fortunate to have a board member
here with board.
7
Just like to add to that, uh, so
the water trust board did fund
the due to cost escalations as
well as, sorry, water transport
fund also funded um
The majority of the construction
funds. They also secured some
federal funding through HUD.
And um.
And this
is going to be able for several
years.
Um, they are also working with
Yeah
So when you, when you
regionalize, are you expecting
to dissolve a couple of those.
I mean to domestics or how are
you gonna?
Are you gonna do that or do you
know at this point?
Um.
And uh it sounds.
Oh.
We meet and We're doing a great
job, Mr. Rita. Thank you.
Follow-up question, do you have
an estimate on the Rio Lucio
because you have 224 now in
Penasco.
We're all excited about your
regionalization project.
I mean, it's, it's really taking
advantage of some of them that
came out for
for so.
Regionalization.
Hm
I've been on the board. It was
crazy for.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Thank you.
The next one we have is Rio
Lucille Mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association.
So this association is just down
the valley, um.
Like, like the other uh
communities in the area that the
volunteers on the board are few
and far between, right? And so I
believe that the that the long
term plan for Rio Lucio, as most
of you know, the, the challenges
to that regionalization are very
rarely engineering problems,
right? They're usually uh
personality issues, um, those
folks have.
Grown up together and uh they
all know each other very well
and so, but, uh Penasco's
leadership and the folks in the
neighboring communities, um,
are, are all, they've all,
they're all of an open mind more
than I've seen in the area, so.
Um, this project for Rio Lucio
is for uh about $1000 for um.
Construction of a new well
project. The well uh design was
funded previously by Water Trust
board and is about to get
underway. Um, we were funded
the the
Funding came late in the cycle
and so we haven't yet started,
but it is uh.
We have all of the background
information from other work that
we've done with Rio Lucio, and
so that we expected that. Oh.
All right. Thank you.
The next one we have is Vari's
Village Mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association.
So the Panda Village mutual
domestic is before you today
with a request amount for
$2000 for design and
construction of waterline
replacement between Forest
Drive.
Um, east to their timberline
tank.
Um, this is the 2nd construction
phase of this project, um, the
first phase was for $700 funded
previously by Water Trust board
and the design of that is well
underway.
Um, this
Phase, the 2nd phase essentially
represents the remaining
priorities for the.
Uh
For the association that will
complete the replacement of
their system that will serve all
of the homes that were remaining
after the big they lost a lot of
customers and homes in that far,
but this, this um project will
essentially um
Replace the rest, the remainder
of their water system that will
serve those remaining homes.
Does FEMA have a role in this in
terms of.
They are pursuing FEMA funds um
through the, uh, both the state
and the federal, um, the
federal, um,
Uh, settlement
The uh
There is this, we are working so
the federal uh um
Resolution to that fire is slow
moving and and and very
complicated. They've hired a
consultant to help them through
that process. It isn't us, but
we are working closely with them
to ensure that we're not
duplicating any any efforts. Um,
their hope is to um leverage
those funds from FEMA again for
the entire amount that it's
gonna take to build it or just
for a match.
I'm sorry. Is the request is the
request for the entire amount
that it's going to take to build
out or just for matching funds?
So this is the uh request for
the entire amount for the water
system.
Um, they have their, their, um,
settlement through FEMA includes
quite a few. They've got
roadways, they've got drainage
issues, they've got other issues
throughout the community that
are gonna be uh corrected with
the FEMA.
That's it.
Uh, the next one we have is
Cofax Oil and Water Conservation
District.
Good morning, everybody. I'm
Andy Yates, uh, supervisor at
the Cofax. Um.
Thank you all for doing this,
being a board member of a small
community board that can be
overwhelming for us,
responsibility and the money
that you're dealing with on a
yearly basis, so I certainly
appreciate that.
We are coming in.
Um, with the Philmont Scout
ranch and asking for $800,000 to
do some restorative.
Thinning treatments.
Essentially filmmont has about
140,000 they've identified
60,000 acres.
They need some type of um
Fire preventative, um.
Treatments applied in in in this
case we're looking at a certain
area that's 24,000, it's high
altitude and it's dry,
coniferous, you know, forestry
land.
So
With that said, it's a
multi-stage process. We've had a
little bit of help in the past,
um, Senator Heinrich after he
got us some congressional money
to do some thinning.
And so did the environment and
natural resources that's been
utilized for about 700 acres.
We're asking to treat about 300
acres.
Into and just we'll continue to
do that until we reach that
24,000 mile limit.
But go, and that should be, if,
if we could just do nonstop,
it'd be between 5.
This is important to us because
if you look at
The number of steps it takes to
put water into the tap. We're
somewhere around 2.
And I say with the watershed
somewhere around 2 if you
believe in cloud seeding, maybe
we're number 3, I don't know,
but.
At the very basis.
We want to put the water on the
ground and conserve it.
We want to make sure that the
watershed does what it's
supposed to do, which is absorb
it.
And slowly leak it down to the
the tributaries that will get it
down into our store.
With all the things that go on
during, uh, you know, the, the
youth Park bar was 36,000 acres
and it was a very hot fire, so
that means that the ground was
somewhat crystallized.
Um, so the, you know, the.
vegetative growth is slowed.
The runoff that we should be
collecting and storing.
Um, let's just sent down the
hill as fast as it'll go.
And then when it does get to
those tributaries, it brings the
silt, it brings the.
The excess nitrogens in the ash
and a lot of that, if you can
slow it down enough in, in the
canals and conveyances, you
can't treat it in these smaller
communities. They're not so
that's our project that we're
going for.
Any questions, Mr. Chair, thank
you. Is this listed also as a
priority project in the Colfax
County Community Wildfire
Protection Plan. I should have
mentioned that. Yes, it is,
yeah, it's, you know, it would
take I think 30 minutes to read
through that application.
Straight in front of you, but
it's definitely in there.
So in your budget, you have
federal dollars, which is the
one.
Right, almost 1.8 million. Is
that the funding that comes from
the Department of Energy?
Or is that energy and minerals
department? Yeah, and I should
state that that's.
We've previously utilized that.
So when we look at, are we ready
to do it? Are we, are we shovel
ready or, or giant chainsaw
already. Yes, we are, because
that's the money that we've
already been given and already
utilized in that 700.
Thank you. Thank you.
The next two applications are
gonna be from Saint Louis
Cavason mutual domestic Water
Consumers Association.
Thank you members of the board.
You're almost done with me for
today.
So, San Luis has 2 projects
before you. One is for a
$500,000 for design of
approximately 126,000 linear
feet of transmission and
distribution waterline.
And a new 500 that will extend
water to customers that are
currently the second project is
for design and construction of
wellhead improvements, um,
essentially the
The association has uh has
worked for years and years to
find a good water source. They
have found a water source and
they're looking to make sure
that it stays productive for
them because it does serve all
of the, all of the homes in the
area.
But that I'll stand for any
questions.
It brings us to Cle Mutual
domestic Water Consumers
Association.
Um, the, the request for CA for
$500,000 in design funds to
design uh replacement water
line, a new storage tank and a
new supply well and a booster
station improvements.
Um, the existing tank is on
tribal property that they no
longer the well is on private
proper continued ability to pull
water for the community, um, Cla
is kind of tucked behind the uh
Cochiti Pueblo there near and so
they also serve some or the
tribal homes that are near the.
Can you clarify for me that
So their existing well is
located on what pro on that
private? Coach Cochiti Pueblo
property. OK, so do they do, I'm
sorry, the well is located on
private property. And so it's
part of this to relocate the
world to.
Pochery. No, it'll be a new well
on on property that's owned by
the association,
association and so and they have
that ownership already.
Yes, ma'am.
Thank you.
get some help with this one.
The next we have is Rio and Blom
domestic Water Consumers
Association.
Uh, good morning. My name is
Maria Chilton. I'm here to
represent Rio and Bto Mutual
domestic, which is um east of
Dixon and we regionalized we we
were Montecito and Canoncito
mutual domestics we regionalized
about 15 years ago.
And I'm happy to say we don't
have any emergencies right now,
but I really want to prevent
emergencies. Uh, we have a
recent uh PER with Sauter
Miller.
Who Jody is with.
Um,
We have been advised we to dig a
new well because everything is
just, just barely fine right
now. Um, if one of our wells
goes down, we will be in
trouble. We service 63
households, um, we have
neighbors to the west of us, at
least 12 people who, 4 of them
have been hoping, hoping, hoping
to connect with us, but our main
line doesn't go that far, so,
um,
We don't have any funding yet.
We are looking for 499.
1000 or uh um design.
which would,
we're hoping to have a new well,
a new, a replacement of our
44,000 gallon storage tank,
which is a bolted tank and it's
showing signs of where, we don't
want that to go down.
And hoping to extend our
service.
There might be things I've
missed. Do you have any
questions for me?
Great. Thank you.
Do you have anything to add? Did
I miss anything? No, I think
that's good. We're gonna
increase the size of the
existing distribution as part of
that replacement.
Right, OK.
Thank.
The next two present
presentations are from Los
Alamos County.
James Martinez, um, Los Amos
County senior engineer, um, we
have two applications. The first
is um.
For a new water line replacement
or a waterline replacement 1
fourteen-inch transmission, um,
this transmission line we
actually get.
Water from one of our main
producing wells named the
Ottaway Wild 4.
Um, we convey water up to our
storage tank and it provides
water across across the town
site.
Um,
Last year we had um.
A failure on on this line.
And it seems that when
We have kind of these failures
we kind of stress test the
system when we find deficiencies
in our system, so in doing so,
we found that a number of
operating valves, gate valves,
um, were nonfunctional, um.
And then we've all, it also shed
some light on the severity of
this waterline was to uh
have a
Another failure or more
catastrophic, we could cut off
water to um a good amount of
residents and also um
Down at the bottom we have our
wastewater treatment facility
and the school's admin buildings
and Los Amos County, um.
Build Crews building as well,
so.
Um, within that area we had
about 50.
My hydrants as well, so that
section we were offline.
With 50 hydrants in in that time
of repair.
Um,
So with this funding, we would.
Improve this sectional line.
Also to note that this portion
of waterline is about 75 years
old.
So it is in.
It's showing signs that we need
a point. Um, another interesting
fact is that.
Or this waterline is located,
it's actually within a trench
that was um dug within a the
tough.
So
In the winter months, our crews
salt the roads heavily and
ordered to keep.
The snow um from icing over.
And
The salt that they apply on the
roads, it just exacerbates the
the corrosion, the water stays
within the trench and um as you
could see from the photos above
with the rusting and the
corrosion and the piping.
It is, it is a we're looking for
for assistance. So again, we
very much greatly appreciate the
funding that we've um received.
The last, I don't know, several
years that I've been with the
county and, and um we're able to
do a lot with with these funds.
Um,
Thank you. And the next time for
questions for this.
The next one is um our suddenly
phoneso waterline. This is
another water line replacement,
and this one is about 63 years
old.
On the, it's on the north end of
Los Amos County. This water
line, it's actually been showing
signs in.
The last probably 3 years that
I've been working with the
county. We've had some um
failures in that section. Um,
again, we've recently painted um
one of our elevated water tanks
that was another, on the other
Mesa.
And in doing so, it kind of
stressed the system finding,
finding these delinquencies, um,
in our system, not only the
water line, but PRVs, water, 8
valves that were inoperable. The
other thing to know this section
of line it's actually a
bottleneck. We've replaced
portions of waterline within.
Some of the communities and
upsized.
Um,
Their capacity, um, but this,
this short section here, it's,
um, I guess not so short, it's
about.
Near 1 mile long, um.
It actually, it's actually uh
undersized, so running our water
model, we find that um.
We could increase this would
provide more water, um, capacity
downstream, and in doing so, um,
We're actually looking.
Two new developments that are
coming in, um, due to the
housing shortage, um, these will
probably be a higher density,
um.
Developments that will go
vertical and it'll probably
increase our capacity of water
usage, and, and um gas usage by
like between 33 and 50% is what
we anticipate. So, um,
Replacement of this water line
and and increasing the size
would.
Um, extremely helpful.
Um, our infrastructure for this
project and thank you guys
again. Uh-huh.
Go ahead.
So, yes, um,
We have some PRVs.
We anticipate that they'll
probably provide some
cost, um.
For the improvements on on these
portions, um.
The other thing right now we
have a um.
A study going on or the sewer
lines, we have some vertical
drops that um are in need of um
replacement. So those, the
developments will be providing
some
Assistance and costs for
replacement.
Other questions?
OK. Thank you.
The next one up is the City of
Gallup.
Morning, Mr. Chair, board
members. Um, I'm Frank Cetti,
the new city manager in Gallup,
um, 5 weeks and learning every
day about water. Uh, we're here
to talk about the Gallupreach
2712, which is part of the
Navajo Gallup water.
Supply line.
Um, brought Mr. Dipali from Mark
Dipali from DePaulli Engineering
to get into the technical such.
But really looking at increasing
our capacity within the
conservation of, of reaching
Our different region areas,
smaller communities, and and
increasing our capacity and.
Um,
We're relying on groundwater
now?
And, and looking at adding
surface water capacity to to
meet our needs into the future.
So Mr. Dipali is more technical.
I'm learning. I'm learning.
Angela, do you have the map of
the Naval Gallup project. So
just, just give me a quick
summary point and this.
And as you go, go to the next.
This particular project reached
2712. I need to keep going on.
Um, and now Gallop is really
unique, um, and all, and that
our request this year is uh for
9.7.
And the state is already most of
the
The state
And today the city is in the
same same situation.
Um, Although the project has
been delayed, we have a
contractual obligation to
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
The next we have is from Cibula
County.
Good morning.
Morning. My name is Chris Day
with Wilson and Company. I'm
here representing Subula County.
Um,
We're asking for 500,000 to
complete the drainage design on
Caberro Road 7 and 8 within
Caberro, New Mexico.
Um,
Currently, um, they have
substantial erosion at the box
culvert in Cerro and then also.
Adjacent to the road, um.
County Road 7, and so.
Um, these improvements design
improvements will help to
stabilize the roadway and keep
um access in the Kiberro.
Um,
Functional.
With that, I stand for any
questions.
Questions?
Thank you.
The next one we have is from
Luna County.
Good morning, Cherry Stone,
members of the board. I think
it's still morning, so I'll say
good morning. Um, I'm here, my
name is David Bailey. I'm the
current road director for Lona
County, all the way in Deming,
and I'm here to discuss the Yuma
Maverick of flood prevention
project.
We are currently working with
Cobb Finley on a plan design
request for 450,000 to
Hopefully correct some of the
recurrent flooding in the areas
just west of the Florina
mountains.
It involves Sunshine Road,
Maverick, Tapia, and Burros.
Um,
As opposed to what you heard
earlier from Pycroft, where
they're at the top of the hill
where the water starts and they
try to keep it.
And our region is the opposite.
We're the bottom of the hill.
And when it runs from the healer
and the mean brace through our
draws all the way crossing the
county and into Mexico.
So
For the last 4 years that I've
been on board, I've tried to
attack different parts of the
county in areas where I can
correct.
Uh, when we do get water in that
area,
On average, you can get 3 to 4
inches of water in a 24 hour
period, so it's pretty quick,
it's flash flooding.
And as you can see in the
pictures before you.
That's a normal event.
When the waters do come, that's
what we see.
It affects 3 different
subdivisions in the area which
is about 200 to 30 homes in the
in the immediate path of the
water, not to mention how far it
rolls. In addition to the
residents that are landlocked
and unable to receive basic
services and emergency services.
There's also issues to commerce
where the farmers and ranchers
in the area don't have access to
their reasoning in what we call
the gap.
So the project is a planned
design.
To
Have flood mitigation projects
to hopefully correct the
recurrent flooding.
And alternative one is to do
nothing, which isn't feasible,
why I wouldn't be here today.
Uh, so alternatives 2 or 3 would
be either 2, the study will be
to decide if there's diversion
channels to be created around
East Tapia and East Bur or to
correct, uh, I'm sorry,
construct burns on the same
areas as well as storm.
structures and storm drain
pipes.
By doing so, we hope to correct
the water in this area, which is
another section of the county
I'm trying to correct these
problems.
And um
Provide access to the residents.
And for that I see a pretty
quick questions.
Sloan, I'm curious, do the
railroads ever contribute to any
of this as a partnership at all?
For the railroads? Yes, I
noticed you mentioned freight
deliveries and so I'm just
curious since they're impacted
by this flooding, are they ever
part of the match or do they
ever contribute? In this
instance, the freight is
trucking um we have a truck
route which comes from Highway
11 from Columbus down the
Sunshine Road to a connecting
road called McCann, and that
heads north to the chili
processing plants and and on to
I-10. That's more of a trucking
freight as well as the uh the
ranchers.
Anyone else? Thank you.
Thank you.
The next we have is for EMWT
Regional Water Association.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman,
members of the board, my name is
Bobby Ortiz. I am the chairman
of EMWT Regional Water
Association. Um, we are a
regional water association
association obviously comprised
of a stania, Moriarty, Willard
in Torrance County. Uh, we all
came together some years ago,
um, probably close to 1718 years
ago and decided that we better
band together and try and fix
some more water problems in the
basin, um, due to the fact that
we are closed bases in there, it
makes it a little bit more
difficult um to get the recharge
that we, we typically get our,
our water tables are dropping
pretty quickly.
Um, so we identified um
Macintosh, which is an
unincorporated community within
Torrance County. Um, it's a
disadvantaged community. The
water wells are just failing
left and right just due to the
water table dropping uh quite a
bit. Uh, we were awarded
$491,000 from the Water Trust
board in 23 to, to perform the
design on phase one of the
project, Torrance County is is
one of our members. They've
kicked in another $981,000 to
design the
Phase 2 component of the project
along with the choir water
rights and easements. Um, so
we're moving ahead with that at
this point in time. Um, we are
here today to ask for $14
million for the construction of
a storage along with
approximately 1 mile of
transmission and then
distribution um within the
community, um, and, uh, once
again, Torrance County has
provided they've pretty much
doubled the match from the
fiscal year 23 appropriation,
um.
Did I forget anything, Mr. Dons?
This is Donzil worth ending with
Bohan in Houston.
I think that's, that's pretty
good, as I said, we're uh when
originally when the request was
made in FY 23, the award we
requested was for design design
funds which are being utilized
to forward suggestion that once
we get the funding underway and
we did meet Friday with the
district.
That's all we have.
OK. Any questions?
I guess I'll just ask one. Your
meeting was fine and that the
water rights are, the water
rights, we actually did a
preliminary uh study in order to
even renegotiate with them to
agreement with the, I guess
that's it. Thank you. Thank you
all.
Uh, the next one we have is
Story Project Water Association.
Right
Good morning, uh, Water Trust
board, uh, pleasure to be here
before you today as Michael
Quintana is the chairman of the
story, the story Project Water
Association. He's not able to be
here this morning. I talked with
him last night at 10 o'clock. He
was in the tractor for the 3rd
day and all night in the tractor
trying to get hay in, but he
asked me to.
Pass along
This project and as this project
was also awarded in FY 23, the,
the design funds and, and
construction funds for the phase
one project were awarded at that
point that was if you're not
from the project, the story uh
project is Story Lake Water
impoundment and the reservoir
approximately 22 miles that
feeds not only the story water
users, but it ultimately feeds
the Brantley and McAllister
lakes that are the the federal
and state water, fish and
wildlife, uh, services, refuges
in the state.
And that that the reservoir, the
irrigation ditch Asseki is
incredibly leaky from their owns
this project is largely to
replace that disk part of the
reservoir that's being used uh
at story process story project
is, it was heavily reli on in
the recent wildfires in the area
Hermit's peak and those fires,
it's in the disaster relief area
in ordering that as well.
And that uh so that the funding
is to move that forward. The
phase one is to get the first
portion done the money before
you request today of the $18
million is to complete the phase
two and hopefully maybe all of
it or if not, we'll do that for
phase 3. They will provide a
huge water conservation increase
in that area because of the
leakage we have and make
thatsustainable sustainability.
It, it's probably the most
significant project in that area
that has made it possible to
move it to this point and Thank
you questions?
Thank you.
Pleasure. Thank you. I just want
to say that we, we had a lot of
years and it makes our job a lot
easier and pleasure. Thanks,
ours too. I think we have one
more, right? Yes, Mr. Chair, the
last one we have is Miss Cleo
Pucci.
Right
Um, good morning. Um, I'd like
to say thank you for giving me
the opportunity to speak to you
guys. It's my first time coming
to this board.
Um, I like to say, I apologize I
didn't have my presentation
ready.
No excuses, my fault, but I do
appreciate giving me the
opportunity to um to speak to
you guys. It's important to the
tribe to kind of give our
perspective of how important
this project.
is to us
So that way, um, we can request
the funding.
So one of the things I like to
go.
Oh, I'm sorry. My name is
Christopher Little. I'm the
public's work director for Mal
Apache Tribe.
Um, one of the things that we
want to talk about is um I
requesting a new well for for
Mescalero his state well number
one. This well is part of a
bigger picture of what we're
doing in Mesqui right now. We
are currently, currently under
construction of some other
projects that are going on in
this Corizo water system.
We, we, we're currently having a
project going on. It's called
Dere a Water System. We're
currently replacing um replacing
and upgrading water lines,
tanks, well, tanks and PRVs, but
like I said, this is part of the
bigger picture and, and we
didn't have enough funding to
finish off the project to do the
well, so we're really looking at
trying to finish this project.
We had um several deficiencies
from EPA within this water
system. Doll was one of them,
and
So we're moving forward and
trying to see if we can get
funding to fix those
deficiencies.
The funding that we're
requesting is $2,000,000 to do
construction, as I stated
before, this is a part of a
bigger project that we're doing,
so we are.
Ready for readiness is our
deepest done, our designs done,
all our environmentals and
everything is completed, so.
If we're able to get the funding
from water trust board, we're
ready to go put this to bid
immediately. So before I brought
this project or any projects to
any type of boards, I want to
make sure that we're 100% ready
and moving forward, we do have
um
Matching funds for this well,
the matching funds is coming
from IHS, so they're going to
match $855,000 so.
We got a total of 2.9 million to
build as well, so, like I said,
um, we're really, really
Wanting to see if we can get
this, this funding for this well
because this well services about
200 to 350 tribal members, not
in, not including like our.
Our daycares, our libraries,
and, and different little um
businesses that we have on the
reservation in that area. So
this, this well is one of our
wells that services.
3 communities within this water
system, Palmer, Pena, Carrizo,
um, we had dinner, we have
scattered communities without
the reservations that have like
trailers that we have on the
reservations that have
individual homes.
Oh, I'm sorry. I'm sorry, but um
like I said, um, we really
appreciate the opportunity and
we hope we do get the funding.
And like I said, if we do get
the funding, I'm always willing
to bring anybody down to the
reservation to see what we've
done with the funding. Thank
you.
Thank you. Question.
No questions. Great. All right.
Thank you.
And with that, Mr. Chair, that
concludes with
But, um, recess, I guess we'll
recess this board until tomorrow
morning at
And
one.
Conflict, I guess, tomorrow
there's a cabinet meeting at 10
a.m. He's going to.
Chair in the morning.
We'll figure it out. Excellent.
And with that, that we are resa.
Thank
