Um
item is to call the meeting to
order. The second item is to
approve the agenda.
Um, do we have a
Oh, a roll call. Sorry, yeah.
Mm
Right, Cherry Anderson.
Present.
Nichols.
Remember Sloane.
Remember Alpers?
Remember Garcia?
Present
Remember Chang
Remember Deal
Here
Remember Lucero
Remember McGinn
here
Remember Russell
Here
Remember Thompson?
President
Remember Van Dyke?
Here
We have a quorum. Oh, remember
Billingsley. I'm so sorry. Yeah.
All right, thank you.
Um, next item on the agenda is
approval of the agenda. Do we
have any proposed changes to the
agenda?
Now
So moved
second.
Second
All in favor.
I
I
Uh, all against
Um, next item on the agenda is
approval of the minutes. Do we
have any, any edits to the
minute.
No, OK, do you have a motion
delay.
Um
Do we have a motion to approve
the minutes?
removed.
2.
So I can.
All in favor.
Hi
Hi
Passes, um.
4th item on the agenda is the
Madam Chair, in the meantime, I
just wanted to mention that a
member Lucero had contacted us
So what we bring before you
today is actually um
July, we brought our last
meeting um in process, um, and
the the there was changes that
were done in the 2024
legislative session specifically
in House Bill 211 that
implemented changes to the
current statute under the Water
Project Finance Act.
Uh, these changes clarified the
board rules between the water
trusts board and the NMFA board,
and they defined current uh
processes and procedures. It
also included an eligible
projects in the form of
wastewater projects to the water
project fund and some of the
some of these changes did
require that the uh rules
initiation to amend those rules.
Also, one thing mentioned to
this to the policy committee or
to.
Initially to the um policy
committee is that in the 2021
legislative session, House Bill
200 also amended the Act that
required rule changing, and that
was with regards to the
interstate stream commission,
House Bill 200 on their New
Mexico unit fund, basically do
water planning and so for the
upcoming 2026 cycle.
The water transportation funding
cycle, the policy will make
recommendations to the water
trust board to incorporate the
to initiate the rule-making
process,
and so legal counsel has created
a preliminary um making schedule
with the current water transport
meeting, we are hoping to pass
it either in April, on April 2nd
or the April 20.
22nd, uh, next year meeting
again, the draft schedule in a
red line proposed rules are
attached within this policy.
The, again, the resolution is
also attached to to initiate the
rulemaking process. The policy
committee has reviewed this
request and concurs with staff's
recommendation and staff
recommends to move forward on
the initiate the rulemaking
process I pass water trust board
rule amendments at Madam Chair,
I will.
The red line was provided in at
the beginning to the policy
committee in July, what is
changed is we did include the
unit fund that we had not, um,
we had forgotten to include on
the ranking on it, um.
Madam Chair, I don't have any
questions. I just wanted to
mention a few things. One is the
only changes that are in the
draft in the red line of our
rules are things that came out
of either House Bill 200 from 3
years ago, our house built 211
from this past session.
There are no other changes that
are being requested. We have,
um, it the the the law.
Verified some um
responsibilities between the
Water Trust board and the NMFA,
but the I had already put in for
put forth. I want to mention
that and the other is that by
approving this today, we then
don't have to meet again until
our regularly scheduled meeting
at the end of, um,
March
Right, Angela? April.
April, April 2nd, uh that's
April 2nd, right, so end of
March, beginning of April. So
that would allow us to just move
on without having to try to
convene um in the middle of the
legislative session. So our
direction, the direction the
staff was to put everything in
front of us today so that we
don't have to try to meet again,
um, until we know.
OK, um, are there any questions?
So do we have a motion for
approval?
Still moved.
And uh we had,
we had.
All right, thank you.
Um, or just.
We don't miss. We don't man. All
in favor.
I. I.
All against
passes, thank you, thank you,
ma'am. The 2nd item on our
agenda.
Is, um, for the 5th out of my I
attempt and sorry is the water
trusts for technical.
kind of
presenting on that.
Can you hear me? Yeah.
Good morning, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, board members of the Water
Trust board this morning, I will
present the recommended policies
for the Water Trust Board
technical Assistance Program. I
will try to be very succinct,
but ensure I highlight some of
the technical issues or
technical items of the policies.
These policies will govern the
TAP program for both water and
wastewater, and I think it's
important that we stress that
this assistance program does
support water and wastewater
systems.
Um
Little amendments contained in
House Bill 211 passed in the
2024 regular legislative session
authorizing the New Mexico
Finance Authority to use water
project funds to hire a
contractors to provide financial
and administrative capacity
development and direct technical
assistance to water and
wastewater systems.
In New Mexico finance staff will
administer and execute the TAP
program. The TAP program will
make accessible on-call services
to support the facilitation of
regionalization and the
completion of preliminary
project planning documents for
individual water and wastewater
systems.
On page 2 under policies, the
tap effort uh will.
Drastically reduced the
administrative burden of water
and wastewater systems in
regards to compliance with state
procurement code, contract
oversight, and the need to
provide matching funds for loans
and or grants.
The main objective of the
program is to enable water and
wastewater systems throughout
the state to support uh through
support of on-call services to
become more cost efficient,
effective, while making
necessary improvements to water
and wastewater infrastructure.
You still hearing me OK?
OK.
The New Mexico Finance Authority
will issue a request for
proposal for the on-call
services and higher external
contractors for entities that
have the capacity to support the
requirements of the regional
water systems, resiliency Act,
or need of support of the
completion of preliminary
planning documents.
The New Mexico Finance Authority
will operate the tap as a pilot
program and will accept letters
of interest from January 15,
2025 through March 15, 2025.
Small systems planning process,
New Mexico Finance Authority
will solicit LOIs from small
systems, seeking assistance and
again in completion of their
eligible planning documents.
Applicant systems must
demonstrate that they do not
have sufficient funding to
produce the planning documents
without the assistance of the
TAP program.
Mexico Finance Authority will
assign a planning document
drafter to the project, which
NMFA will oversee and manage the
assigned contractors, developed
the scopes of work and
deliverables and timeline and
established timelines.
And once the timelines and the
milestones have been met, uh,
New Mexico Finance Authority
will ensure payment to the
contractors.
Eligible planning documents are
on page 3 of the policies.
Regionalization process
interested agencies must be in
compliance with the regional
water system's resiliency Act,
you can see in a in Appendix A,
it's um short version of the
act. It's on page 5 and 6 of the
policies.
In Mexico Finance Authority will
assign a project team that could
include attorneys, accountants,
community facilitators.
Project managers, engineers.
Technical and hydraulic
services, geospatial mapping,
web developers, IT business
developments.
The main essence of this this
tap programs is really
fundamentally to assist those
small systems that do not
necessarily have the capacity.
To again to be in compliance,
uh, and really, really looking
to get.
Efficient and effective in
accomplishing their
infrastructure projects, but
that I'm available for any
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Quintana. Do, do
we have any questions? Madam
Chair, I would just note that
with the combination of the
local government planning fund,
the assistance that's available
here through the technical
assistance program and even the
New Mexico unit Fund, there's a
potential to have a planning
document, uh, grant, done with
the planning document done on
the behalf of communities across
the state, um, depending on
where you are, you may have
access to one fund and not the
other, but I just know that it's
really um uh much easier now for
a system to get a full
planned uh.
Project so that they can get
applications that will actually
fund what they need to get
funded and that they'll have the
best solution in front of them,
and that certainly didn't exist
many years ago. There was one
option available to them, they
planned a project.
I think it's just substantial
and we should take note of, of
that achievement.
Madam Sheriff, I just made a
last comment here is, and I'm
sure um board member Billingsley
will attest to this. My days of
local government division as
director at DFA I can attest to
the fact that a lot of these
small local governments as well
as counties, tribes, and even in
this case, small mutual domestic
water systems and wastewater
systems really struggle.
To get a project initiated and
completed, so I think this is
gonna be a game changer I'm
looking forward to the success
of the program.
I think I have two questions.
One is this sort of
The lone component to this, is
it a grant, is it? I mean, I
know you're NMA the entity on
the hook for any of the cost.
Madam Chair and member Sloane,
no, there won't be any, it's not
a loan, it's not a grant, it's
uh accessibility the on-call
services, so we will monitor, we
will manage the contracts and
basically the entities will be
the recipients of the services.
So it's, it's really a win-win
for both agencies.
And so will this then become a
requirement of every project in
all of this stuff in advance
because a lot of the projects
we've got and we want to go fix
our pipeline to do the
compliance and all that kind of
stuff. Yeah, madam chair, uh,
board member Sloane, I think
it's probably a precursor,
right? This is uh, as I
mentioned, a pilot programs, so
there's a lot of uncertainty,
but I think the ultimate
objective again is really to
develop and enhance a system.
That works collectively by
maximizing the existing
networks. There's a lot of folks
out there that are already doing
this type of work. It's just,
uh, I've often suggested to the
legislature that New Mexico
doesn't lack for initiatives, we
just lack for a collaborative
initiatives, and here's an
opportunity for us to
collaborate and optimize and
maximize all of the resources
that are out there and so I
think this is probably a
starting point for us to really
enhance that system.
And Madam Chair, if I could just
comment since 2015, the Water
Trust Board has required that
applications uh include an
appropriate planning document,
and so for many, they came to
the local government planning
fund at the NMFA, but if you're
a very small system, just
getting that planning document
done, getting a procurement
completed, um, you know,
overseeing the contractors,
staying engaged with the
contractor, those things took up
to 3 years. We saw some of them
take 4 years. Um, so
This allows us to come in and
get that planning document done
on behalf of those very small
systems so that they can access
funding like the Water Trust
board much sooner in the
process. They're not waiting 3
to 4 years to be able to submit
an application and at the heart
of all of our applications is
the, the information contained
in that planning document. So
this just gets them um uh.
Access to the funding much
sooner um without
Having to use all of their
energy on just the PER cuz
getting the actual.
Project completed is where
they're gonna need to save some
of their energy, so.
We just saw that the smallest
systems, even with free money,
the process they had to go
through was uh
Really insurmountable in some
instant.
Madam chair, just one quick
question. Um, any idea about the
demand that you'll see for this
program and how you know that
will align with the,
the contrad Board member
Nichols, that's an excellent
question. So again, as I alluded
to earlier, you know, the
uncertainty, but just my years
of experience and anybody that's
worked in these type of projects
as well as yourself. Recog that
there's uh several in Asian
entities that are, you know,
chomping at the bit to go ahead
and have these services.
made available to him, and I
think once the program is stood
up and um the net is cast wide,
so entities are familiar with
the with the services. I think
we're gonna have a pretty good
demand and I think the volume
will continually increase and
ultimately, uh, you know, we're
striving to ensure that we are
enhancing that network in the
system, a statewide system that
really works collaboratively
together, so I think it's may
start off a little slow, but I
think it's definitely going to
ramp up.
Mount I paid, I hate that I keep
doing this, but I'm so excited
about this initiative. Our hope
here is that the buying power of
multiple contracts will get more
contractors to the table, um,
and we'll be able to pay them
for uh deliverables and
milestones that are achieved,
and the local government
planning fund and other sources,
you actually have to complete
the document before you get
paid. So again, if it's taking
you 3 to 4 years to get a
document completed before you're
able to get paid. That's gonna
take a ton of folks out of.
the process.
And so our hope here is that
we'll be able to guarantee a
certain amount of work, start to
plan around that, get more
resources to the table and get,
you know, those done.
We'll get them completed faster.
So we think it's a win-win from
that perspective. It'll help the
capacity at the smallest of
systems, but then also help
build capacity at the contractor
level because they'll be assured
of some level of uh of work and
that's really ultimately um what
they need is to be paid timely
for the.
Thank you, I agree with all of
this, I think place I'm excited
to see how the the pilot goes,
and I think it's a good way to
stand up a program just to test
the waters and see what works
like formalize it so um I I
think that getting these dollar
projects that are hard for small
versus sports, and so having
this resource available at this
to get their planning document
place like point out, I think
it's really gonna help.
Um, projects, we would know that
the one thing that we, you know,
after meeting with the policy
committee, policy committee made
some excellent recommendations
and so we've incorporated those
to kind of delineate the small
system planning from the
regional regionalization
facilitation, so they're,
they're two separate entities
they're two separate sections in
the policy, but in both
instances, getting to remember
Nicholls's question, if we don't
have enough contractors to meet
demand, we will prioritize based
on the radius, so that the the
folks that are
the greatest number of people
within their communities would
get access to the funding first.
So that just we would note that
that was the only way we felt we
could try to put some priority
to it if there is in.
That is a new element that we
did not that that came as a
result.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, uh, if I
can respectfully request just to
that point if a solicit your
guys' assistance in getting the
word out, you know,
unfortunately, uh, board
memberro is not here, but we're
definitely looking at the
councils of government to be a
key stakeholder and partner in
this effort, so, you know, we
all have our own networks and
I'm sure you guys have a
tremendous amount of network out
there. So if you can help us get
the education that the RFP is
coming so that we can maximize
our contractors and then
obviously maximize.
the participants and so forth
would be greatly appreciated.
Thank you. Ma'am, sure.
Um, so what's not initially
being mentioned and the thing
that I'd struggle as an engineer
with the environment department.
Um, is
That when they get SAP money,
they do their contracts, and
then they're expected to manage
their projects, especially
planning documents.
Um, and engineers will miss
deadlines and most communities
don't seem to want to hold their
engineers accountable, even
though I try to explain to them
that the engineer works for you,
you need to get what you need.
Um, I hope that
This project or this uh
technical assistance.
will provide
The oversight necessary to get
these things done in a more
timely manner than they usually
get done, and that has some
impact on
How long projects end up taking,
so
Um
Yeah, I think it's a really
great idea. um, I'm glad NFA is
doing this, um.
So
That's all I want to say.
Thanks, Madam, I apologize. I'm
not sure who's talking. I can't
see him. Steve, um, excellent
points and I just, uh, here's a
plug for an opportunity for a
plug for my newly created
position in a, you know, um,
through the board and the New
Mexico finance board as well as
the CEO Russell's vision,
recognizing that um that is a
key factor is having the project
oversight and having somebody
insure that all the key
stakeholders come to the table
and we monitor.
the projects to ensure they are
on time, they're on budget, and
we help mitigate any issues and
any concerns that they may have,
so I think it's an excellent
opportunity for me to not only
oversee this program but also
kind of function in my dual role
here and provide project
oversight. I can tell you that
the systems that we are
incorporating at the Finance
Authority to do that or working
well. We're meeting weekly with
the engineers, with the
contractors, with the owners,
with all the key partners and
we're collectively working.
to strive to successfully
complete these projects on time
and on budget.
Man, I'm sure it's this time
when it's really great to have a
kernel on staff.
I agree we all feel very lucky
to have you there. Thank you.
And Russell, I think, um, just
wrapping it all up, there's so
many great benefits to this
program and I'm really excited
to see where it goes, um, and.
look forward to to hearing back
about the successes that we
have, we're gonna get a lot of
projects kicked off quickly with
this program.
Um
Are there any other comments or
questions, so do we have a
motion?
So moved
In a second.
Nichols
I.
Nobody Animus again, great,
thank you. Thank you and happy
holidays to you.
Very much.
Um, our next item on the agenda
is the new Mex 100.
pilot cycle.
Under heat.
Sure
members of the board
Um, this item is in New Mexico
unit fund pilot cycle policy, as
you mentioned, um, we have a
recommendation here uh for the
water transport to approve that
policy that will allow us to
move forward with the pilot
cycle application based on the
interstate stream commission's
timeline for funding from the
New Mexico Unit Fund by way of
background, and I know most of
you are aware of House Bill 200,
uh, passed in the 2021
legislative session, but it made
some changes to the water
project Finance Act.
And directs the Water Trust
board to evaluate water
projects, water utilization
projects, and that includes
their environmental impacts, um,
projects proposed within the
Southwest water planning region
of the state and then for the
water trusts board to in turn
recommend uh projects to the
Interstate stream Commission for
funding from the New Mexico Unit
Fund, of course, the ISC has a
final decision making authority
in terms of which projects to
fund in that southwest region,
and I should mention that's
Katherine Grant Hidalgo and Luna
counties.
Um, it certainly has taken a
while to get to this point, um,
but we're excited to be before
you today, uh, to try to move
this process forward, um, at its
meeting on September 24th of
this year, the ISC uh approved
their own 2024 New Mexico unit
fund pilot cycle policy, and
that really provides a
framework, uh, as staff to the
Water Trust board and the Water
Trust board, uh, and guidance to
potential applicants, um, for
funding from the New Mexico Unit
fund to in turn create our own
policies that will
Allow us to open that pilot
application, um.
The ISC policy, it outlines
eligible entities, eligible
projects, uh, this pilot cycle
is really focused on planning
and design components for those
water utilization projects uh in
the Southwest region. So in, in
creating the water trust board
policy, which we've included
here. Uh, we've simply adopted
the language um from the ISC
policy related to those eligible
entities and projects it also.
Uh, excuse me, defines a project
roles uh and process roles for
the Water Trust Board NMFA staff
and the ISC. We've included a
minimum application requirements
in our policy, um, they're
listed in the water trust board
policy there consistent and
taken from the ISC funding
guidelines that they adopted in
September.
Um, and so to mention for this
pilot cycle, um, staff on behalf
of the Water Trust board would
open an application it would be
an online application. Uh, we
intend to do that by the end of
the month to meet the ISC's
timeline, uh, but we'd be
evaluating submitted
applications against this
criteria that I'll mention here
in a minute. Again, the criteria
is contained in the ISC policy.
Uh, we did add Project Urgency
and and we did talk about that
at the policy committee that
Project Urgency would be a
valuable additional cri.
to add, um, as part of this
pilot cycle application, um,
you'll see from the memo,
there's 7 criteria.
of the first being contribution
to regionalization goals, 0 to
20 points, contribution to
system resiliency, 0 to 20
points, contribution to water
security, 0 to 20 points and
then contribution to economic
health of the local community, 0
to 10 points and the ability to
protect and enhance or maintain
cultural lifeways or resources
that would be 0 to 10 points,
uh, level of local community
engagement and participation, 0
to 10 points in the course
project urgency that was added
by the committee at 0 to 10.
Um, we did have a good debate at
the policy committee, good
discussion, we talked about the
points, what would be
appropriate um and so these
recommendations do come from the
poli policy committee with
staff's recommendation. Um, we
do recommend approval of the
pilot cycle policy to open this
application, as I mentioned, we
will, we have an application in
development, we showed a
prototype to the policy
committee, not included here
because we don't want folks to
grab that and start filling it
out, um.
But uh we've included uh ISC's
policy document water trust
boards, and then that timeline
from the ISC, uh, which kind of,
um,
gets us going and then also uh
we, again, this is a pilot cycle
policy, so we will learn a lot.
I understand there's, you know,
um, other things we'll learn
about environmental, um.
Sort of considerations with
these projects uh that we might
need to look at closer uh for
future policy discussions and
when this program really opens
up, um.
But with that, madam chair, um,
staff does recommend approval of
the water trust board policy,
uh, that the timeline of the
implementation of the New Mexico
unit fund funding process, um,
and again recommend approval and
stand for any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Van der Hyde.
Um, do we
Ma I'm sure, if I could just to
comment a little more on what
Michael alluded to in terms of
environmental impacts. One of
the difficult things about the
House Bill 200 language is that
it gives the duty to the water
trusts board to to evaluate
projects including their
environmental impacts without
really describing what that
means. Um, so we expect to learn
a lot from this, uh, initial
pilot phase understand the kinds
of projects that are going to go
forward and then the more
appropriate or most appropriate
level of environment
evaluation of environmental
impacts, um, for the planning
process, I think, if you are
looking to get a project
designed, um, the requirement
here is at the bottom of page 30
and top of page 31, if you're
looking for actual engineering
design, you have to have
completed a PER or technical
memoranda that considers
environmental impacts and uh
environmental compliance, and it
must describe mitigated or
ameliorated effects.
Um, so that's already included
in the planning process. We'll
learn from there then what's the
standard for environmental uh
review should be. I think the
only other place it might come
in to play is on any monitoring
projects under this, under the
ISC's policy and its
incorporated here.
Um, anyone that's taking on a
planning project or a design
project and also get funding for
monitoring, and so I think we
need to um understand kind of
the impacts of the monitoring
and whether there's
environmental impacts related to
that.
Um, I don't anticipate that
there would be enough, but many,
but we certainly need to
understand what that that looks
like, so just wanted to mention
that this is the start of a
conversation on environmental
impacts, we are going to learn a
lot in the process and in the
meantime, we do have at the
finance Authority, we have two
environmental review consultants
on staff or another program that
we operate, that we'll be able
to utilize some of their um
Their assistance, their
technical knowledge, and we'll
start to put forth some ideas
about what an appropriate level
of review will look like as we
start to see these projects move
in. So I expect in the spring,
as we see these first projects
come through, we'll have a um
And acomcompanying
recommendation for what.
Construction projects should
have in place uh before we're
able to really evaluate. So just
wanted to follow on Michael's
comments. It's a big
conversation and we know very
little at this point.
Thank you.
Thank you, Director Russell. Um.
And
I would just say, um, I'm very
thankful for the the water
transport and a pilot, so we're
gonna learn a lot from it, um,
it's a.
Program that's going through my
agency and also and in the
audience here we have our and
staff.
calling
Um
I would say that this is a
really exciting that this pilot
we're gonna learn a lot from
this pilot.
Um, and it's gonna be a quick
quick duration pilot as well. So
I would encourage their
applications, I think we're
gonna learn through that process
and it's a great place that they
can be positioned for the 20.
It
Director, thank you so much,
Madam Chair and members of the
board. I just want to thank, um,
water trusts board for the
collaboration under HB 200.
We're really excited to get this
process moving. We agree there's
lots to learn through this pilot
cycle. Um, it is excellent to
have the expertise of NMFA and
the Water Trust board helping us
shape um how to get this funding
on the ground. I think as you
all know, there's over $100
million currently in the New
Mexico unit fund and we're
anxious to make that available
uh to communities in southwest.
New Mexico for water utilization
projects and happy to answer any
questions, just really
appreciate the collaboration.
Thank you so much.
Do you have any other questions?
Adam Chair, thank you. I just
have a quick question, um.
When it comes to auto
compliance, um, it's auto
compliance gonna be taken into
factor when it comes to this
uniform.
Uh, thank you for that, that
question, Madam Chair and
Wesley, um, our legal analysis
is that that may not be
necessary under the federal
constraints of Arizona Water
Settlements Act. That said, we
would very much like to
coordinate with you all in terms
of ensuring that you know all
all the projects that get
funded, um, result in successful
outcomes, including, you know,
the potential to look at audit
issues.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. And
the reason why I asked is
because I think when it comes to
audits and some of the political
subdivisions that you don't
typically oversee like mutual
domestics, um we'll, we need to
make sure that we have um a way
to share that information and
data with you if you do need
that. That was why I was. That
would be very much welcome.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Director Wesley
Wright and.
Billingsley. Are there any other
questions?
And uh we'll go ahead and move
to vote on this. I would, I
would actually propose that
since this is a pilot program
and um we're still fine tuning
some of these things that we
make this a conditional, um,
approval with the potential for
fine tuning of language.
Um, within, um, but just make
that.
Madam, sure, I would make that
motion.
OK.
And
Second
All in favor.
I,
I.
Need a guest?
No, passes me unanimously. Thank
you very much and.
And um, I think our final.
Let's see here, we have our
next.
Did I just read it off you.
She's like, oh, you're welcome
to do that.
We will be having a party for
you at the staff will reach out
um finalize the rules and
policies as well before the next
trust board meeting on March
25th, the project Review
Committee will meet and this is
to go over to make
recommendations to the board on
April 2nd on any waiver 5
applications and we're looking
basically at policy and
regulatory compliance issues and
those are the waivers that are
going to be brought forward on
April 17th project review
committee again will, will, um,
meet.
And they will bring forward on
April 22nd to the Water Trust
board, the recommendations, so
we anticipate on April 20 the
awards for the 2025 Funding
recommendations.
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
make one comment, just wanted to
to share with the committee
members that the municipal
league presented to the revenue
stabilization Tax Policy
Committee yesterday and one of
the the priorities we shared
was, um, looking at the, the
