Mr. Chair, members, no, there's
not.
So. Bye.
I.
Charles Sully.
Raul Bciaga, Ashley Leach.
Antonio Ortiz. Here.
Mariana Padilla.
Stewart Ingham.
When Prea ornament?
Here
Martin Romero.
Here.
So in.
We have a one.
Thank you.
Mm
Well, uh, move on the agenda
then to correspondence. Is there
any correspondence that could
come before us, there's no
correspondence at this time.
Right.
And we'll move on to uh Roman
numeral 2 public comment. Is
there anyone in the audience
wishing to make public comment
at this time?
Anyone in the audience.
Wishing to make public comment.
If not, then we'll move on to
the financial plan.
Yes um
turning it over to Mr. Schimmel.
I want to introduce our new CFO,
Ms. Melissa Ortega.
Hello?
It's been a long time since I've
been team with August of 2014.
So I'm grateful to be here. I'm
excited about this new position.
Um, I've been training the
finance team, um, for the last
about 2 years, um, and
supporting them and I deserve
and I love PSFA, the work that
we do here, so I'm very excited.
Thank you.
Thank you. Welcome to the team
and congratulations on your
appointment. I started with PSFP
in August of 20. Around a while.
I think Mr. Burciago was here.
It's so was I.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Right. I'll go ahead and defer
to Mr. Schimmel.
Good morning, uh, Mr. Chair
members.
Sorry. Um.
Starting on page 8 in your uh
PSCOC ebook, I'd like to walk
through the um financial plans
starting with the executive
summary. Um, what I'd like to do
is go through the executive
summary key points and then
afterwards I will go through
each of the subsequent pages and
kind of explain um in detail,
just going through the the
changes as so you can see them
as they're reflected.
So starting with key points at
the top of the awards year to
date updates, um, the table
shown below is reflective of the
changes for line 36 on page 9.
This is the, the following page
for the sources and uses detail.
Uh, the net change that we have
for this meeting is $200. It's a
decrease in the fund.
And I'll explain why through the
projects that are being
requested at this meeting.
So first we have a few out of
cycle updates, um, starting with
S22009. This is for Tula Rosa
Intermediate School. This is an
additional construction funding
request of 340,000.
Um, next we have S22001 for
ratone Longfellow. This is an
award language change. Um,
currently at this meeting,
they're going to be asking for
$2.7 million. This is converting
a systems project to a standards
project.
Um, also the out-ear
construction was updated, uh,
from 42 million to 36 million
after, and this is the state
match only. Uh, this was after
working uh with Fi just to, to
get the numbers for out here
just to make sure that they were
accurate, um, based on the
change.
Next, we have P21001 for ZUNI
combined. This is teacher
housing in an early work package
request. Uh, the request for
this meeting is $11.9 million.
Um, there's a net change of 0
for this project as we reduce
the out-y estimated construction
funding from 95.4 million to
83.4.
And then finally we have P22001
for Gadston Middle School. This
is a construction funding
request of $477 million.
Um, Next, just a couple
additional notes and changes,
not highlighted with a table
with S22001 for raton
Longfellow, uh, on page 14,
which I'll, um, direct you to in
a minute or I'll walk you
through in a minute. Um.
Uh, we have a potential, uh,
local maps adjustment request uh
for future out-year funding, um.
Previously we had accounted for
this request as potentially
being 510 million, but after
working again with Fields, we
determine that it's closer to 44
million, so this is just a $7
million decrease. Uh, so the
changes for this is also
reflected uh on the following
page, which we'll walk through
um on page 9, on line 35.
Uh, so moving on to page 9, in
your e-books, this is the
sources and uses detail. Um, so,
you know, if you, uh,
Lines to highlight would be
lines 2 and 3, this is the SSTB
notes uh that we work with the
board of Finance to determine
these numbers for um bond sales.
Um, next starting on line 8 to
about
lying 33, everything detailed
here is appropriations that come
from the fund um through
legislation or uh other methods,
um, following those lines as
lines 34, 35, and 36. Uh, line
34 is the estimated cost of
pre-applic applications at this
time, um, you'll see that the
balance is zero, we just
recently opened the award cycle
for this fiscal year. um, so.
Ramos and programs is betting
those and we will be releasing
those uh later.
Next on line 35, this is the out
of cycle potential waivers. Um,
this is reflective of the
changes that we'll see on
Page 14 in your ebooks, um, and
this is just a way for us to uh
track the projects as far as the
original estimated construction
funding as well as potential
out-year funding, um.
And the potential uh local match
reduction that they would be
requesting. So we just want to
make sure we account for that in
the fund.
And the finally line 36 um is
our awards year to date, uh, for
the project schedule. Um, so
these are, as we talked about at
the out of cycle updates. These
are where these items are
reflected and again, I'll, I'll
walk you through those
momentarily.
All right, moving on, uh, I'm
sorry, I, I'm Mr. Car numbers,
um, if you have any questions,
please feel free to, to
interrupt as I'm going through.
I know this is a lot of
information.
Um, so next, um, Mr. Chair
members, uh, moving on to page
10, this is the PSCOC uh
financial plan summary of
changes, um, so what you'll see
here on the top half of the
pages, these are projects that
previously um came for the last
meeting for awards, so it's just
a nice summary to see what what
the actions that were taken, the
amounts.
Uh, for the previous meeting,
and then the the following
items, the PSCOC fund Project
and award schedule detail
modification shows uh the items
that are coming for potential
award. This meeting as well as
the difference of what we
accounted for in the previous
financial plan versus what the
actual current request is and
then the difference.
Um, lastly on this page, um,
towards the bottom half, you'll
see kind of a purple table with
the uncommitted balance. This
just reflects the final numbers
that are shown on the previous
page line 9 on line 38, um, just
as, uh, it has changed, uh.
Uh, month over month. So you'll
see what the previous month was
versus this month, so you'll see
the difference of 9.4, so that
includes the $20 that we
accounted for for the overall
out of cycle updates as well as
the um potential uh local match
reduction for ratone uh later on
in the project.
Next, on page 11, this is the
award schedule detail, so this
is where we track all of the
projects that have um come for
and received potential awards or
are coming for an award this
meeting if the project has not
received an award, we usually
track it on the pre-applic
applications until it's ready to
come for award, um, just because
there may be things that we're
working with the district on
their funding or other items
like that.
So the items that are coming for
this meeting, if you turn your
attention to page 12, what
you'll see in the red um
column kind of highlighted there
for 2024 quarter 3. you'll see 4
highlights. These are reflective
of the items that are actually
coming for the award, uh,
potential award this meeting.
Highlighted yellow.
Um, so you'll see, starting at
the top for the FY21, uh, the
very first project P21001 ZUNI.
If you go all the way to the
right for that red column,
you'll see the $11.9 million as
well as the potential outy and
green as we've not awarded it
yet.
Um, and then moving to the, the
next table, FY 22, uh, and then
we have P 22001 for Gadston.
Again, the request for the um
construction funding of $47
million and then towards the
middle and bottom of the table,
you will also see S22001 for
Rone Longfellow.
Um, for their request as well as
the estimate out your
construction in 2025, quarter 2.
And finally, S22009 Tula Rosa
for the $340,000 request.
And finally moving on from the
award schedule, I just wanted to
also briefly talk about uh the
page 14, this is the cost per
square foot variance analysis
for out your funding. So the
projects shown here uh correlate
to the award schedule. These are
projects that are potentially
going to be coming for um out
here construction, so we have
them tracked by the quarter and
time frame estimated on the
award schedule this tracks what
our original estimate was for
the projects and columns.
F and then the updated state
match as we work with Field in
the district to vet the numbers
on column I.
And then finally on columns O P
and Q, you will see um these are
potential local match reductions
that we are estimating um while
working with the district, so we
wanted to make sure they do
count on the uncommitted
balance, um, just so we don't
have any surprises coming
forward.
And with that, um, Mr. Chair
members, I stand for any
questions. Apologize, it's a
lot.
Thank you, Mr. Schul. Um,
questions from council members.
Any questions?
There are no questions then. uh,
thank you for the report.
And we'll move on the agenda.
Thank you.
We have the next item on the
consent agenda is only the
minutes, so.
I would entertain a motion to
approve the minutes of our June
12th meeting.
So moved
2.
OK.
Emotion in a second to improve
the
Minutes of our June 12th
meeting, all in favor, please
indicate by saying aye.
I
Thank you, Ms. Padilla. We heard
you.
And good morning.
Follows the post.
Minutes pass.
And uh
We'll move on to our
Out of cycle awards, uh, item on
the agenda and I'll turn it over
to our awards subcommittee
chair.
Mr. Chair, if I may, um,
Tularosa is not quite here.
Uh, would it be OK if we move
that?
I down on the agenda, and, and
moved on to the next one.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good morning. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, so, uh, we only have
4 items to go over today, and we
thought as an award subcommittee
that it would actually be very
helpful to bring them all to the
full council to talk about, not
because we don't recommend them,
it's just an opportunity uh for
the full council to learn or
they're very each of them is
interesting in their own
respect, um, and so, uh, well,
we also agree and appreciate and
um and like the consensus.
Agenda is, this is a good short
opportunity for um us to review
each of the awards.
Um, so I'll start with Raton.
Um, our awards subcommittee um
does recommend.
For the council to approve, to
convert their current
systems-based award to a
standards-based award for public
schools.
Longfellow Elementary School.
To include a design phase
funding for the consolidation of
the district into a single
combined facility campus, uh,
essentially.
Taking what was an elementary
school space and instead
creating a brand new school that
would encompass all of the
schools or all of the students
for the district. Uh, this is
824 students grades pre-K
through 12, 120,000 gross square
feet or just around there
totaling $6055,862 a state match
of $20,725,000 138 dollars.
45% in a local local match of
$30330,724 or 55%.
Upon completion of the design
phase where, the dis district
may return to to the PSCOC for
out of cycle construction phase
funding that, uh, right.
Turn it over to you. Thank you.
Um.
Mr. Chair,
Miss ornament, I'll hand it over
to Mr. Fickland.
Mr. Chair, members, sorry, my
voice is so loud. Um,
I don't have any further
comments, but I would like to
introduce the school district
and if they could come up now,
Superintendent Christy Medina
and Nick Kaine with Stevele.
He's their financial advisor and
with that members will stand for
any questions.
Mm
Welcome Superintendent. How are
you? Good. How are you? Good.
Thank you this morning?
We'd like to be able to answer
any questions that you may have.
And uh
OK.
Um,
I know if we have any questions,
but you might want to tell us
just a little bit about your
project and I would, uh, how it
got to this point. Sure, so, as
Ms um.
And and most of you.
Failing from 5 buildings into um
we're finding.
But we're finding that our
building process that it would.
Benefit the district more.
To consolidate all our grades
and a bit about our um progress
in our bonding capacity. Uh,
this is the first time that our
community has supported it
fully.
Uh, to bond with 72% of.
Thank you, Nick.
Thank you, Superintendent Medina
and good morning, Mr. Chair and
members of the board. Uh, my
name is Nick and I work at Steel
Public Finance. We serve as a
school district's municipal bond
advisor.
The district received voter
authorization of $8 million and
we've broken that bond sale into
two different issuances. The
first one was completed earlier
this summer for $3.75 million.
Our plan is to issue the second
half of that in early spring,
probably March next year.
For the remaining amount of $4.2
million the first phase of them
is meant to go towards the
planning and design phase as
well as any next bond sale, and
then the remaining half would be
used for their share of the
local match to help fund the
construction of the project.
Um, I do want to point out this
first bond sale is doubling the
school district's middle levy,
like the superintendent pointed
out, this is the first time
they've received widespread
voter support in the previous
mail levy.
1080, um, so it is gonna be
maxing out the district's
capacity to help fund the
project as well and they're
doing everything and and that's
why they've come to the
committee today to ask for
support on the.
I know you've been working on
this project for quite some
time.
Uh,
In consolidation of your school
sites, so thank you for that
work and uh
Uh, for being here today.
Questions from the council?
You know.
Um, yeah, I just, uh, was
reading about you would like to
retain the existing gym and that
kind of in my mind would dictate
where the new campus would be
and and kind of um push you into
that one. I, I just was
wondering if you could talk a
little bit more about how you
wanna.
Um,
States that project that you
already have that one building
there. I'm not familiar with
your site, but I would love to
hear what your plans are.
Scheduling that. Yes.
Um.
Jim has been um.
Kind of the heart of our
community where everyone
Our new facility through.
Our spot to next to our gym on
our high our current high school
campus to the south of. So, so
there's enough room to do that
without any kind of demolition
or staging of uh classrooms and
stuff like that.
Mr. Chair members, I'd like to
add to that um in the process of
the design, we will um do some
studies on the, uh, the gym to
see if it's even a viable option
to keep it as well.
Thank you. Other questions? No.
OK.
Well, uh,
A no additional questions.
Again, thank you for working so
hard on this project. I know
it's, it's been quite some time
since you decided to
consolidate, and that was a
difficult decision, as I recall
locally as well.
We have a motion, a subcommittee
motion on the floor?
Uh, so all those in favor of
approving the recommendation,
please indicate by saying I.
I
All those opposed?
Motion passes and
congratulations. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thank you for
being here.
We'll move on then uh to uh 3.
Madam, ma'am.
Subcommittee chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
OK, this is also um interesting,
important, um, we want to
support ZUNY. They have come
before the council before uh the
wards subcommittee does
recommend for the council to
approve to amend their current
standards-based award for ZUNY
public schools for the Twin
Buttes High School, Zuni High
School, ZUNY Middle School,
grade levels 6 to 12 to include
construction phase funding.
Uh, the teacher housing and site
work for the school and early
work package, the demolition of
an existing field, um, and a
state match of funding of
110,9951,786
Upon completion of the design
phase, the district, of course,
may return to the PSCOC for out
of cycle construction phase
funding. We do have an addition
to this, um, um, or some
important language for the uh um
motion and that is that it's
contingent on approval from the
public education department if
they are using their impact aid
operational dollars, which when
it was presented to the ward
subcommittee. It looked like
they were, so we might have a
few questions about that, um,
um.
We both um staff and thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, members, I'd like to
introduce Mr. Martin Romine with
that will stand for any
questions.
Mhm.
Morning, Mr. Murra.
Good morning.
Thank you for having us with you
this morning. I understand there
are some questions or there
might be some questions about
funding.
For this project.
Uh,
Mr. Chair, with your permission,
indulgence. I would just like to
share a brief recap of uh recent
changes in the impact aid.
And how it's handled in the
state of New Mexico to help you
understand, I think, better
where this funding will come
from.
In September of 2019, the
districts of Central
Consolidated, Gallup and Z SUNY
requested a hearing with the US
Department of Education Impact
Aid Office.
To review the state's
equalization formula, we didn't
feel that it truly uh equalized
funding in the state of New
Mexico. We made our arguments on
April 15th of 2020, the US
Department of Education
published a ruling and they
ruled in favor of the districts
and against the state and the
state's formula was ruled as
disequalized and the state was
not allowed to continue to take
Credit for Impact Aid.
The governor appealed that
ruling.
And an administrative law judge
and it took, I believe, almost a
year for that decision.
ruled in favor or agreed with
the US Department of Education.
So the state was not allowed to
take credit for impact aid for
the 2019-2020 school year.
In the decision from the impact
the administrative law judge
that was noted that the state
was 3 days late in submitting
their application for the 2021
school year, so they were not
able to take credit for Impact
aid for that school year.
I mean the 2021.
Regular legislative session.
House Bill 6 was
P and signed by the governor.
And the state no longer is
taking credit for Impact Aid.
In that House bill, there are 3
sections that I would like to
reference today.
The first section is section 3G.
A dis school district or charter
school operating budget and
educational plan shall
prioritize federal revenue for
purchases relating to the Indian
Education Act for capital
expenditures authorized by the
public school Capital A Act.
The public school capital
Improvements Act or the Public
School Buildings Act.
So
While I recognize and will
remind the the council in case
you did not know.
Impact aid is a direct
appropriation to the school
districts by the federal
government. It does not flow
through the state. It is not a
reimbursable uh fund reimbursed
through the state. Districts
create and submit the
application and the money is
given straight to them deposited
in their bank account.
As a result,
Impact a just as Title 6, Title
VII, Johnson O'Malley, the
expenditures, the we can use
those funds for are governed by
the federal government and not
by the state government.
Secondly, I would like to read
section F.
Of House Bill 6.
In addition to the requirements
of subsection E of this section
of school district or charter
school that receives federal or
local revenue shall include in
its educational plan and
narrative explaining how the
school district or charter
school will use the federal or
local revenue to improve
outcomes for students or to
improve the condition of a
school building. I know one of
the concerns of the council, at
least that I've heard, is that
we have not sought and received.
Authorization from PED to use
this use these funds for
construction.
Or I'm not sure exactly what
department of PED approves our
educational plan, but I'm sure
it is approved by PED. Finally,
I would like to read section H.
If a local score school board or
governing board was charter
school fails to submit an
operating budget pursuant to the
section, the department shall
prepare the operating budget for
the school district.
Every year since I've been a
director of finance for SUNY
Public School District. Our
budget has always been approved
by PED including each year.
Since we received 100% of our
impact aid.
Which means to me that we have
met.
The requirements to submit to
PED.
A budget using the new fund
which is 15,100 for construction
for construction.
Federal impact aid money will be
used for that construction. I
don't know once the budgets are
approved by PED what the process
is for allowing or letting other
people know that it has been
approved.
But I would assume
That once the idea is uh
approves the budget, using these
funds for construction that they
would in turn notify the
secretary that it that that use
of those funds has been
approved.
And in the statute.
Regarding use of these funds for
construction, it says that the
secretary is to notify LFC.
So
By my understanding, we have
submitted the budget and had it
approved by PED PED would have
the responsibility to notify the
secretary that those
expenditures have been approved.
And the city would be incumbent
on the secretary at that time
to, to let LFC know that they
have approved our use of these
impact aid funds for
construction.
I may be incorrect on that, Mr.
Ortiz would be better suited to
address that than I would, but
As I read the, the House Bill 6,
know how the budget system
flows, at least on the district
level, it would seem to me that
we have met our responsibility
to
Budget, the federal impact aid
funds or construction consistent
with House Bill 6, consistent
with federal regulations and
also consistent with the
Statute requiring us to
requiring that the uh secretary
notify LFC that use of those
funds for construction has been
approved.
With that, I will stand for any
of the questions that the
council might have.
Thank you, Mr. Omine for
Um, reviewing those.
Facts and dates and actions that
have been taken.
On impact aid over, over the
last several years.
I know it's been
Uh, it's been interesting
watching the process and getting
that money back into the
districts directly.
So I think the, the question
was, that was posed as I
understand it, was that we're
just wanting to make sure that
These weren't operational funds,
uh, being used for construction
as we would ask any district,
uh, but, uh.
You might want to elaborate a
little bit on that.
Sure, um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I think what, what was, um,
important for the awards
subcommittee and I think a good
opportunity for all of us to
learn in all of this process
actually was um.
That when the staff brought the
application um and the form for
us to approve.
It listed.
Impact aid operational.
And that poses an interesting
thing for us because um as um,
Article 8 says in chapter 22 on
public school finance, any
district who's submitting um
port capital outlay with
operational dollars must obtain
permission through the public
education department. So there
was a confusion there between
those two.
Mr. Ja, maybe I can offer some
clarification on that.
When
House Bill 6 was written, and
when the money started to flow
back to the districts in order
for districts to
Properly track the expenditures
in those funds, a new fund had
to be created.
And as I and some other business
managers visited with Doctor
Reiner Martins, who is, who's in
charge of the uh.
Chart of accounts for the state
of New Mexico.
We try to decide where we wanted
to put that money and what we
wanted to call it.
We talked about putting it in
the 10,000 series where
operational funds are handled
under fund 11,000. We talked
about putting into the 25,000
series, which are all of the
federal direct grants. We
settled on in the 10,000s
decided 15, 100 for impact aid.
15 200 for local revenue and
forest reserve.
Then we talked about the
description, what would we call
this fund?
Knowing that there is a lot of
turnover in business manager
positions throughout the state.
We wanted to make it, make it be
something that, that they would
know what was supposed to go in
there. When we put the word
operational in there, it was the
intent for them to know that
those impact aid dollars that
could be used for operational
expenditures, the 75% that was
returned to the districts or
what are supposed to go in
there.
There are no state funds in
that, in that, uh, in that fund,
they are strictly federal impact
aid dollars.
And understanding that, I think
the council can understand that
it's not the same as you spend
11,000 operational funds. It's
Federal money intended
To replace payment in lieu of
taxes or replace Avalor on taxes
with the districts cannot rate.
I hope that answers the
question. Yes, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Wayne, thank you very much. Uh,
I, I on further question. Thank
you. Do you have any comment,
mister?
is
Uh, Mr. Chair, members of the
council. No, I mean, I, I.
So, Mr. Romayne uh makes some
good points. So in statute
basically it says if a school
districts bonded to a practical
capacity, and they still need
money to complete a project. It
can use operational, but if
they're not bonded to practical
passion you want to do that,
then they need to request
permission from the secretary,
which the secretary submits a
letter to the LFC notifying them
that what we do is we'll review
it to make sure that if they're
they're moving money from their
operational to capital outlay
that there's not essential.
Um,
But I think statue hasn't caught
up with, with the changes that
Mr. Romine has stated earlier,
uh, now with the, the state not
taking credit, so these are
actually federal funds like you
said that are in my
interpretation or my opinion,
but you know, we can certainly
look at it is I think the state
was looking at general fund
dollars and so I'm not,
I'm not sure if PD needs to take
a look at it, um, looking at,
uh, right before the meeting
today I took a look at what
they've submitted on their
approved budget.
Even if they did submit
something to PED, it would
probably, it would get approved.
I mean they have some healthy
cash balances right now in their
operational and then in the
specific fund itself, they um uh
they have.
Currently like 25.9% budgeted in
18.7% in cash so I guess it's,
it would be a distant decision
the council is or maybe statute
maybe needs to be amended to uh
be clear that
Is it only we're looking at
general fund dollars or we look
at the whole budget, but again,
as Mr. Murroma said, we don't
have control.
Um, we can certainly take a look
at their Eta plan because they
have to have a plan that's part
of their budget. We can take a
look at that plan to just make
sure that that uh indeed was
included in this project. That's
all I have anyone has any
questions. Thank you, thank you
for your comments.
any additional questions, Mr.
Sly.
I think that
The point of the conversation
that the word subcommittee had
was that
The district has
So much money that's available
for its main function of
operations.
That it wants to be able to use
it for capital outlay and we
would like certification from
PED that they're basically
adequately funded for operations
that they can divert a sizable
portion of money for something
that's not even a regular school
building.
Mr. Chair.
Lee
The uh funds that are earmarked
for this project.
I have never been intended for
the daily operation of the
school district.
When
Those 3 school districts back in
2019.
Approached the legislature about
having the credit returned to
the districts.
Many
Questions were asked about how
those funds would be used.
And it, and
There were many members that
wanted to
Make sure that they were used
for construction.
That has been the toll intent of
SUNY Public schools.
You use the 75% credit was
returned to the districts for
construction.
None of it has ever been
intended for or budgeted for the
daily operations of the school
district, we, uh,
we are
Have been for the past 3 years,
maintaining the 25% of impact
aid dollars that before went
into uh but the district was
able to keep control of, we have
been putting that back into the
operational fund so that portion
of the money is, is available to
run the district so the amount
that we are putting in 15 100 is
strictly the credit that has
been returned to the district
that in the past.
would have been for construction
if the state had not taken
credit.
And we've never been in part of
the part of the operating
budget, the operating budget
itself has not changed.
Since the credit was returned,
the credit has just been able to
be uh
Building in in a construction
account.
So Mr. Chairman, um, Mr.
Romaine, would you agree that
you're operating budget is
sufficient to handle your
operations, and you didn't need
to divert even though you had
the flexibility.
To divert some of this impact
data to operations.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Lee, yes, I would
agree that, that our, our
operation budget has been
sufficient. We have actually
been able to build cash balance
over the couple of years, a
couple of past years, we have
not had to move money from this
construction account to the
operational account to fund any,
any, uh, the district
operations.
Mr. Chairman, that's just what
I'd like PED to certify.
The the LFC and that we all
agree that they're operating
budgets sufficient and.
This isn't allowable use of
their impact aid funding for
Construction.
OK
Thank you and I, and that is the
way the motion reads currently,
so.
Yeah
Sure, can I make one more
comment about this project.
Uh, a number of years ago, we
turned some properties over to
the state. We moved uh our
central office and one high
school into an old elementary
school.
And we turned the central office
and elementary school, high
school, over to the tribe.
Unfortunately, when we turned
that tweet to over to the tribe,
we found ourselves very short of
housing. We've had a number of
uh employees, single employees
that had to double up in units.
So we are looking forward to
being able to get this project
funded so we can get
Additional housing to relieve
some of the burden on some of
those employees. Thank you.
Great.
Mhm
Well, I just more more of a
comment than um I noticed that
the um
are appropriation is limited to
the 550,000 per unit.
Uh, for the teacher's housing.
Which um
For me, it's very large figure
for a single that's not even
enough to finish what you have
here in the district is gonna
have to use their money too.
To finish those, um, my comment
is that, that seems
Excessive.
And I would just point that out,
and that does seem like that
there's that's an excessive cost
for teachers.
In my, in my estimation. The
second thing that I wanted to
ask about is it on the uh
Um,
On the uh base bid 3 where it
says for associated with
academics.
Um,
The
Earthwork and exterior
improvements.
And I just wondered how those
are.
I can kind of understand the
communications and data, but
the, the other three. Mr. Chair,
Mringham, I'm, could you clarify
the question? Are you, are you
questioning? I'm looking at the,
the bid from James.
And the uh EPW 2 base bid 3.
It has 3 items there.
Earthwork exterior improvements
in site utilities under
associated with academics and
I'm just I, I, I'm clueless,
sorry, I don't understand how
those got. Mr. Chair, Mr. Ego.
Uh,
We are trying as best we can to
have these units.
Match what we currently have in
place, so it looks like a, a
consistent neighborhood. So the
items in, in that bid lot are
things that that we, if we have
funding, we will accept but are
not necessary, for example, the
current units have block facing
on them.
And it can be very expensive.
If we want to do that, that's a
bid lot, that's an option we
could select, but it's not
something that's part of the
original package. It was
something that the district
would have to select if we felt
like that's something that we
wanted to, to do in addition,
there's a, a change in the age
of the metal for the roofs.
Mhm.
You do. Yes sir,
Mr. Sli. Thank you. Just a
couple of follow-up questions on
that. So,
Just to be clear, so we're
looking at just where the
housing units alone, 9.9
million.
9 duplexes.
Lee,
you are correct.
OK
And
Did you look at the option of
manufactured housing. I know you
said you wanted it to match the,
the other neighborhood. When was
the rest of the neighborhood
built?
Sher McGeehan, director Soli, as
a district, yes, we did, as a
matter of fact, I was at the
NEMSL conference this past week.
HomeSpot had a booth there. I
visited with them.
The one issue we have with that.
We currently have in our
district.
Our oldest teachertridge was
built in 1965.
Alongside of that teacher we
currently have 5 manufactured
homes.
I, I had the person that is in
charge of renting out those
units, come to my office the
other day, and she said, I don't
understand why people don't want
to live in those. I said, what
do you mean?
What are, what are you talking
about? She said, well, we have a
family.
Lives in a two bedroom apartment
in the old Teridge.
And I showed him
One of those and she refers to
him as double whites.
Showed him the double whites.
And they looked at him and they
said, no, we'll just stay where
we are.
This the sense is that the
people that live in the
manufactured housing
manufactured housing units.
Get this, get to be in.
The second, they get the 2nd
choice of where to live.
Uh, the people at HomeSpot
encouraged me to go to the
Carston factory and look at it
and see what they have.
I have not done that. I haven't
had time yet, but yes, we have
considered that.
And at this point, because,
well, the issues we've had with
manufactured housing in the in
the past or
The cost of heat, the cost to
cool.
Especially
The difficulty of keeping them
leveled because of the type of
soil we have. It's constantly
moving, constantly shifting.
Causes those manufactured homes
to, to shift and move. They have
to be releveled. They have to be
repaired. They are more
expensive to, to maintain.
We have looked at it, but we
have not.
Seriously considered it just
because of the experience we've
had with manufactured housing in
the district so far.
Would
Encourage you to um
Look at some of the newer units.
I would agree with you even 2025
years ago.
Kind of the products that were
being produced then are very
different than what are being
produced now. You'll need to put
these on us out there.
Um, but I mean you can get 2 by
not a mobile home anymore, it's
really manufactured housing and
bringing down the cost of it.
Like
You know, doing prefab.
Um, but, you know, there's a
huge opportunity cost that
you're experiencing with the
decision for.
You know, 9 units at over $1000
a unit could
I maybe 18 units and really take
care of.
You know, your teacher workforce
needs as a potential option if
you can drive down.
The unit cost. So that's
something you just consider in
the future.
Um,
that, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
it.
Thank you, thank you for your
comments.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr.
Romayne, it would be helpful for
the council if you share, um,
I'm assuming that you've um had
communication with the tribe
about all of this and have had
consultation, checked in with
them. I don't know if um around
the construction and the plan
for all of this, would you share
that?
Sure
Is it moisture?
I know direct works.
Um,
we have had, we have had
conversations with the tribe
regarding the overall project.
We have had conversations with
them about the teacher housing,
not specifically answering the
questions that you're asking,
uh,
We have had, as I say, we have
had manufactured homes in the
district in the past.
The tribe
Refers permanent type housing.
And my, as I, as I've researched
manufactured housing.
And
The lifespan of manufactured
housing.
I see 30 to 50 years is what is
what I've been reading.
I know how renders.
Re
Rental properties.
We right now are trying to get
units.
That people just moved out to
ready for new teachers, they
don't have any place holes in
walls.
It's expensive, they're
expensive to maintain and my
My concern and my
Not concerned.
Might feel feeling is this.
Regardless of how good
manufactured housing is no
matter to me.
I'm glad that it is that the
quality has increased and it is
better.
I still do not.
Only believe that it is up to
the same standards as site built
homes.
We are building schools to last.
Hopefully a minimum of 50 years.
It would be my contention that
we should build housing units.
That are built to last at least
as long.
As the schools.
The oldest teachers we have was
built in 1965. It has outlasted
the school that it was built to
serve. The school has been
turned over to the tribe and my
understanding is rather than
remodel it, they have now
decided to demolish it.
Housing units built in 1965, are
still in good shape, being used
and people are happy to live in
them.
I would prefer
To see side-built homes that are
going to last at least as long
as the school buildings that uh
we're putting them up to serve.
Thank you. Additional questions?
It
Superintendent, so I guess my
question would be the.
Existing teacher housing, have
there been soil issues on those
existing structures as well, or
just the manufactured housing.
Units that are there Mr. Romero,
those units were built before I
went to work for the district.
And when I went to work there,
There were issues.
The issue was the issue was
precipitated by the fact that
they had not created any
drainage.
So we about, I want to say 10
years ago, we hired a contractor
to come in and
But the cement sidewalks all
around, put, put gutters on,
build retention ponds and create
drainage that should have been
there in the beginning. Since we
did that, there have not been
any more issues.
Mm
Uh, just one more question. So
I'm the Terich housing, so I
know the infrastructure and
housing costs are together,
correct?
Yeah, or they broken up there,
they, they're broken up.
Yeah
Mr. Chair, Mr. Geha, um, so the
bed lots, if you look at um.
The bed lots, you see the
tetridges is base bid for $14
million in the site utility is
the 5.5 million.
On bed.
The subcommittee, I thought that
was together, but it's broken
up, so just broken up. Yeah, OK.
All right. Um.
Well, I, uh, get to kind of some
of the comments and Mr. Solis is
on, you know, the manufactured
housing side of it, you know, I
would agree, you know, you know,
homes that were built back in
the 80s, 90s, but, you know, I'm
definitely not a manufacturer
housing expert, but I definitely
know that, you know, some of
those code requirements, you
know, have changed, you know, as
far as placement, you know,
what's required and all that, so
I think uh maybe moving forward,
you know, something that should,
you know, maybe be considered
and.
And, you know, these are
comparable to modular homes, you
know, the construction of, you
know, these homes has changed,
you know, significantly, you
know, they're really, really
well built and, and I know I've
mentioned this before also is
that you know we need to look at
other options of off-site
construction homes that are
being manufactured in New Mexico
as well also where it's kind of
like Legos where homes are, you
know, placed and by the time
it's all said and done, you
know, that rendering that's uh
actually
In here when it's all said and
done, you know, these homes
actually look like what's here
and these homes are actually
placed on actual foundations.
They don't even have axles, so I
would just encourage, you know,
moving forward that we look at,
you know, maybe other options
that are out there, so that's
all I have.
J and member Romero, I
appreciate your comments and I
will take those back to the uh
to the committee. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, we, we do encourage
districts when they're looking
at the options um now that this
council is approved the use of
manufactured housing, we do
encourage all the districts to.
To look at that option.
No
Another question,
one last thing I just want to
clarify.
Yeah
The bid that you're approving is
for 14 million for the
Teetridges.
Or the um
9 duplexes, and then another 5.6
million for the
utilities for the the
Teacher housing.
So
When you said the 9 million is
what the
What the state is going to take
as part of their
Um,
There portion, the actual cost
of the
Units is 14.
$14 million.
So they're significantly more
than the $550,000 per unit.
And I, I just gotta say one.
Comment for me.
Um,
Drywall is drywall, you're
talking about building homes on
site or on.
It isn't gonna make a bit of
difference. You're talking
about.
Um, renters being rough on
housing, they're gonna be rough
on housing, no matter whether
it's a $1 million house or a
$200,000 house.
I just feel like this is an
excessive cost for these
teachers. I'm just remembering,
I will not, I will not disagree
about the cost.
I think it's uh
It's exorbitant
But construction costs in rural
areas of the state of New
Mexico.
are considerably higher than
they are in urban areas, but I,
I agree that the cost is, is
very high.
OK.
And ready to uh
To move forward on this, so.
Uh, we have a
Good discussion.
I think uh
A lot of good information being
exchanged here.
And uh,
We have a subcommittee motion
with the contingency on that.
Uh.
So, all those in favor of the
motion, please indicate by
saying ay.
Hi. All those opposed?
Motion passes. Good luck.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Roy.
Yes, the church like to make a
comment that uh I know there's a
uh
It's pending PD approval, so
I'll work, uh, I'll work with
this minding his staff to get an
expedited review of it.
Thank you with his nose of the
project.
Thank you, we appreciate that.
Uh, the next item is, uh,
Gets him
Middle school.
The
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, so,
uh, here the awards subcommittee
recommends for council approval
to amend 2122 standards based
award to Gadsden Independent
School District, Ganston Middle
School will include construction
phase funding, totaling 6707217,
$113 with a state match of
$47051,979 70%, and a local
match of 20016.
$65,134 or 30%.
Uh, this is a replacement
facility with a design
enrollment of 1,005 students,
grade 6 through 8, up to the
maximum allowable gross square
footage, uh.
You'll see there it's about 100
and um 11,000 g square feet.
This is also
Contingent on the public
education department's
certification and bonding
capacity information, which I
believe they have actually moved
forward to receive, but.
Thank you.
This chair members, um, I'd like
to take this and to uh introduce
uh CFO Luden Martinez.
Miss Jessica Cadina associate
superintendent, and Miss Nancy
Vella, director of construction.
And with that, we will stand for
any questions the council may
have.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair members also with him
is
Mike Ortiz, the regional
manager, forgets. Thank you.
Welcome.
Thank you. Good morning Mr. that
long distance up here.
Thank you very much for Gadston
appreciates the opportunity and
the recommendation as um stated
before by Miss Ornament, uh, the
project is a large project.
We're really excited to take on.
It's a full replacement of a a
school that's outlived it's uh
it's uh life expectancy of over
50 years, it's probably 57, if
I'm correct.
Um, and it will, uh, house our
6th or 8th graders and that for
that feeder pattern.
Um, and we're just, uh, very
excited to.
To uh
Hopefully get on with it. We've
relocated our 7th and 8th
graders this year, um, to two
different schools so that we can
completely demolish and start
from scratch and not have to
phase anything in, so I, I stand
for questions.
Questions?
Um
Council members.
Mr. Savi.
Thank you for coming today. Mhm.
Can you uh remind the council
what your
Your portion of the cost of this
project will be in the source of
the revenue that you're going to
plan to use.
Of course, I will defer to Miss
Nancy Bella, our director of
construction, and Ms. Martinez,
our CFO.
It's
Um
Mr. Chair.
OK, so, um, we do have a
funding.
Uh, set aside for this project,
uh, we have approximately.
12.
$1 million set from our
operational fund to help um
cover the cost of this
construction, the rest of it is
from our geobbond, I think I'm
sorry, I didn't bring my
glasses.
Nancy, she doesn't need to
cheaters.
Sure members, um.
Right now our 30% participation
is at 22.1 million um and then
we have an ababaricuis a 9 9.5
million with a total of the I
guess the participation at 3.
The local participation of
almost 32 million with 12 of
that coming out of your
operational fund.
Yes, sir. What was your um
Cash balance from the end of 24
that you're gonna carry over.
It's about $66 million. And
you've already been certified by
PED to be able to use your
operational fund.
And you're not bonded to
capacity. You've used all of
your bonding authority.
Yes, I yes.
We just, we just have different
information in our packet.
You know, Mr. Ortiz.
Um, Mr. Chair, Mr. Lee, I could
take a look real quick.
So since you're able to use 12
million from your operational
fund and your fund balance
operational cash balances have
increased to 66 million.
Would you agree that you're
Operating money
That you have for your
operational fund is sufficient
to meet your
Day to day educational. Yes.
Mr. Jere, Mr. Sli the as of
December 31st, they were bonded
at So enough money to basically
use an operating budget to
subsidize not needing to go back
out for additional binding
capacity, and this has been a
district that historically has
maxed out and not been able to.
It's not a property rich
district.
Um, I just think that says a lot
about the finances of where
we're at.
With um
Funding for educational services
in the state.
Thank you for coming up.
Appreciate it. Yes, OK. Thank
you.
You are, you are not a plaintiff
district in Yazi Martinez, but
you are a focus district, is
that correct?
Right.
Thank you.
And you
I'm sorry
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is
actually a question for PSFA.
On, um,
Pages 64 and 65 charts, 1 and 2.
If you could explain the
The difference between those and
why.
You went with the lower
projection.
To
Excuse me.
Mr. Chair, Mr. Percia, give me
just a second here. You said.
Page 64 and 65, you're talking
the enrollment projections.
Correct.
Mr. Chairman, could I ask for
So Mr. Chair,
what Mr. Valdez was mentioning
is that the, the projections are
um going towards the lower
projection uh.
Master plan feels more
comfortable with the lower
projection.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Additional questions.
Not then, uh.
Uh, we take action on the
subcommittee motion. All those
in favor, please indicate by
saying aye.
I
All those opposed
Motion passes and thank you.
You can move on with your
project.
We had um.
First item
In this section was fortu Rosa
or tua Rosa here.
Mr. Chair members, they are not,
um, I did communicate via text
and uh due to other engagements
and uh school getting ready to
start they're quite busy and
couldn't make it.
I would like to introduce the
regional manager Mike Ortiz.
He's here.
OK, we have a motion.
Me too.
OK, Mr. Chair, award
subcommittee recommends for
council approval to go ahead and
amend the 2122 systems-based
award to Tularosa Municipal
Schools. Uh, this is for Tula
Rosa Intermediate school to
include additional construction
phase funding, totaling
$508,000.
Uh, state match of $340,000
local match of 167, um.
There are 67% and 33%
respectively for the replacement
of HVAC units at their exist
existing facilities to the
maximum allowableable gross
square footage of 3.
this is an opportunity to bring
forward to the full council a
systems-based award, um, um,
that we had to go back and uh
provide additional funding for
sort of demonstrate the increase
of cost for HAC alone.
Great. Thank you.
Anything you'd like to add?
Mr. Chair members, I'd also like
to add uh not only the um
Significant cost increases that
we've seen, but also equipment
availability we're seeing long
league times on a lot of our
mechanical equipment all the way
up to 72 weeks. We kind of see
it come down now, but those
combination with the, with the
rising costs, all those
attributed to needing some extra
funds to cover the, the project
holy.
Great.
And Mr. Chair, I may point out
this was an award before we
started seeing those significant
cost increases. So this is one
of those projects that.
Uh, was awarded under.
If you will, the good old days
and now we're in the, the new
times.
OK.
Are there any questions from
council members on the project.
If not, then all those in favor
of approving this project,
please indicate by saying I, I.
All those opposed?
Motion passes.
Thank you.
Thank you and uh we'll move on
then to other business
recertification of
Uh, SSTBs.
We have a motion from the
Award subcommittee as well.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Award
subcommittee recommends for
council approval for adoption of
the resolution, notification
certification, and
reconciliation of unexpended
bond proceeds, um, SSTTB 24 SB
0001 and the amount of 10317
$903 to be used for PSCO.
Thank you.
Anything you wanna add on this?
Mr. Chair, members, not my
because we
Started a new methodology of uh
doing the bond sales in a way
that forecasts based on your
awards schedule.
And when these out of that there
wasn't a big amount we had
already did a great job of
estimating what was coming
forward, so that's the reason
for.
The leeche isn't here, but I'm
sure she you've worked with her
on this.
Right.
Any other questions?
Not all those in favor of the
Recertification, please indicate
by saying I
I.
It was a push.
Thank you.
All those opposed?
Motion passes.
And
We're on to our next meeting.
August 13th.
We had
Mr. Chair and members, yes, that
is our next meeting.
I had uh
I think it's on the schedule,
so, again, thank you.
And unless there's any other
business to come before us
today?
I'd like to thank
The Council for
Uh, taking time to, to meet with
us and uh
Bruciaga's time is uh slowly
counting down, so.
Will you be with us at our next
meeting? I'll be here.
and uh and thank you all and
thank you all in the audience
for being here and thank staff
for all the work that they've
done in preparation as well.
Thank you. I'll entertain a
motion to adjourn.
I
a motion in a second.
All those in favor, please
indicate by saying ay.
And uh
Opposed
Meeting is adjourned.
Sure
end of August.
Is that?
Yeah.
Yeah.
