Yeah.
Yeah.
Great.
Thank you. Excuse me.
I apologize.
Um
Thank you for conduct. I've got
you now and my apologies.
And yes, member kind of you're
in the right meeting.
Um
Next step is approval of the
agenda. Hopefully, everybody's
had a chance to review that and
to prove
So moved
Second favorite.
I
Who was that?
Second
You.
All those in favor.
Right?
To be opposed.
Mr T, I I'd like to abstain from
that since I was
Thank you, sir. All right.
So not all right Next on the
agenda. Open Meetings Act
resolution. Is that
Hernandez had it first.
Uh, all those in favor.
Mr Oman gets the pleasure
Can you hear me? Now? There we
go.
Thank you, Mr Chairman, So just
to reiterate House Bill 195,
which added the Housing
Development Fund and made a
couple of minor changes to the
opportunity revolving fund. Um,
those that law does not become
effective until May 15th and so
we'll have two new members that
will join us on May 15th And
then Mr Hernandez, Uh, the
executive director of the
Mortgage Finance Authority, will
officially become a board
member. At that point, um
And substituting for them now
the state auditor, But he is
here today as a mem as a guest
and again because we're gonna be
de develop, Um, talking about
housing rules. We very much
appreciate his participation
today. Um, so I would just note
for instance, on that last one.
You had two seconds. We'll be
officially capturing Mr dot as
the second for that one. Just so
that we're all clear about that,
so I wanted to make sure that it
was clear that these are about
to become effective. A lot of
what you'll be talking about
today will become effective May
But because we have such a short
window to really implement some
of these things, we're trying to
get a head start. So, um, uh on
May 15th you'll be a newborn
name. You'll have a new
composition so that all of this
is a little bit ahead of, uh may
15th but
Just wanted to get that for the
record. Thank you for the
clarification. Marquita.
I guess you're just here in
spirit is he
But we appreciate it.
Um
All right. Any any questions
from the members?
Mister Mr Chair? Uh, no. No
questions. But Mr Opperman just
to clarify the edit. The
typographical error was that on
page 17.
Section 4.2, a
Mr Chairman as a as a
So, uh, Mr Opperman on, uh
Section uh or article uh, three
section, uh, wondering what the,
uh if there's a definition for,
uh
The below market housing.
Mr Chairman.
Well, then I'll happily answer
it. Mr. Chairman, he was asking
about section 3.16, which is the
statutory definition for
workforce development housing.
the rules that are before you
today as a for to begin
initiation does not define below
market that can be done during
policy, but it does define
middle income workers.
Um and again if you'd like to
add definitions that today, but
it does not define that.
Thank you.
Beginning at page 15. I should
say extra 3.8.
Affordable housing.
The the drafters. The
legislators that drafted the leg
by using that
Abortion that currently exists.
Mr Chairman for that particular
section that again is statutory
language. So while we did not
have for workforce housing any,
um uh
Sort of easily definable terms
because that was intended to be
done by rule in the affordable
housing section. That's for
infrastructure that's being
created by for affordable
housing projects, largely those
that will be done by the
mortgage finance authority, so
it is explicit, therefore
affordable housing and was
intended to be tied back to
federal definitions. Another
definition 17 the members, the
two members
People. Mr Chairman, I know that
the governor's office has been
busy vetting candidates and
doing background checks. Um, it
is anticipated that they will be
seated by the time we have our
next board meeting, which I
believe is the 23rd. And so
we'll expect to have those
members at that meeting.
Um
Next in Article eight.
Regards to the the two terms
behind that.
So, Mr Chairman that shows up
in, um and that's the next item.
I don't wish to hurry you but
All right. There's references
earlier on too, but
Uh, I was just curious.
Mr Chairman, So the purposes of
the bylaws is Dan mentioned. We
tried to take statutory
language. Um And so that's what
you see reflected throughout the
one place where we begin to
define the statutory language is
in the proposed rules that we're
looking at for the Housing
Development Fund and the changes
to the Enterprise revolving
fund.
All those in favor.
Committee member, Mr Chairman. I
am and because we don't yet have
our two new members. It's the
recommendation of staff that you
hold off on the executive
committee. It seems like you
should have a full board before
you make a decision about who
sits on the executive committee.
Um, but we do have
recommendations for how to, uh
to, um, see the commercial
Development Committee and the
Housing Development Committee.
Um, again, there are two members
that are being added by the
governor's office with explicit,
uh, subject matter expertise in
housing as well as Mr Hernan.
So my my recommendation are
those three new members that
become effective on May 15th sit
on the Housing development
committee and they would be
joined, Um by Treasurer Montoya.
Um member Lucero.
Uh, Secretary Propst.
And you, Mr Chairman, and I
think it's
My recommendation is that you
continue to chair that committee
as you did the Project Review
committee.
Um, and for commercial
development Currently, that's
chaired. Uh, that's really what
is the current policy committee
and that's currently chaired by
secretary uh or acting Secretary
Roper. Mr Collins here, and, uh,
we recommend, uh, that Brian
Condit. Jennifer Garcia
Kozlowski secretary Dut, Dominic
Garcia, Victor Mendoza, and we
do have one vacancy from the
legislative appointments and
that is expected to have a such
subject matter Expertise.
In commercial development, so
that would be our recommendation
is that we put half of the board
on one committee and the other
half on the other committee. And
so that last legislative
We make any progress? One
missing spot, Mr Chairman. We
had two vacancies and we've made
great progress. Thanks to Mr
Garcia. Your member. Garcia has
been at it. I understand they
are vetting them. Um, but
there's been some turnover and I
think that may be holding up
some of the
Right?
Mr Chairman that does require a
vote.
Uh um, all the rule making
Who's doing that, Mr Chairman?
That will be me. Um,
I live for the rules. Um, Mr
Chairman. So, as we've been
alluding to as part of the
bylaws and the Legislature
passed, and Governor Lujan
Grisham signed House Bill 195,
which made changes to the
opportunity Enterprise
broadening it, um, to include a
housing development fund and to
make some changes, Uh, some
recommended changes to the, um,
opportunity Enterprise revolving
fund. Um pursuant.
To, uh, rule we now need to
catch. We need to catch those
rules up. So we have currently a
set of rules that were
promulgated for the Opportunity
Enterprise Revolving fund. We're
proposing that we amend those
rules to include the changes to
the op opportunity. Uh, that the
law, Uh
Provides for, um and then to
also amend it to include the new
housing development fund, so
we'll have one rule that governs
your activities on both funds
Rather than have two separate
rules. We think that'll be
administratively much easier to
do.
Um, And so that's really what
you have before you today, Um
For those that were not paying
very close attention to house
Bill 195. It did a couple of
things it um The changes that
were made were some that some
that were recommended by this
board, Um, back in January, and
that was to primarily, um, to
Opportunity Enterprise Project
as a project that is, uh,
primarily occupied by non ail so
before it was not clear whether
it could be a tenant, um, where
the tenant could be a either
fully occupied by the
Be fully owned by the, UM,
building owner or whether or not
they could be affiliated. It was
not clear so it could be owner
occupied. Uh, we made the
recommendation in to the
Legislature that they changed
that so that it's primarily non
owner occupied. So at least 51%
not so you'll see that in this
change and then the Housing
development fund, the
Legislature did a couple of
things. They made some, uh,
general, um, generally accepted
all of our changes. All of our
recommended, um, one was that in
the
Actual loan fund. There had been
a recommendation that we have a
three years of, um before
principle starts as the next
sort of mirrored what we do with
the opportunity revolving fund
the Legislature chose chose to
keep that out. So the sponsors
Um uh
Submitted a bill that did not
have that definition in place,
which means largely that the
finance Authority rules on the
terms of the loan will be it'll
be left to the finance
authority. So that's one change.
Um the other is it allows for
the housing development loans to
go out to 40 years, and that's
really to comport with some
existing housing programs at the
federal level were similar. And
so that is a change that from
the recommendations that we made
Um, And so those were the two
big changes. There was also a a
direction brand new area to, um,
that the board's rules
Um, must provide that We
prioritize projects that are in
a political subdivisions that
are implementing zoning reforms
and that support housing
development projects. So the
rules before you, um, attempt to
put some definitions in there,
so that when you go to develop
policies you have some anchor in
in the rule section for how
you'll make those
determinations.
So those are the big things that
we tried to capture because the
existing rule had a definition
of fund and that meant the
opportunity Enterprise revolving
fund Now that we have two we've
had to be. We've had to break
them out. So you're seeing a lot
of red line changes, largely
because fund now gets broken up
into two separate funds, and
their titles are used in
totality, so you'll see a lot of
red line That really isn't very,
um, uh, there's a huge change
there, but it's a lot of ink. It
does do one other thing, which
I really want to highlight,
which is those definitions and
you'll see them on page 32 of
the board book. Um, the two
definitions that we we were just
talking about a minute ago.
about what middle income means.
And I think this is the one
place where we really need to
have some conversation at this
board level. Um, we have made a
recommendation to the policy
committee that that be. Um uh
Average median income as
determined at the county level
between 100 and 50% and 300% of
median family income.
Um, I wanna note that IN some
instances that may mean that the
middle income starts.
Um higher than where the
affordable income level stops so
there may be a gap and
unintended gap as a result of
putting a floor in there are
goal for identifying a floor was
to make sure that it was clear
to all parties that we were not
going to be overlapping with the
programs of the Mortgage Finance
authority, and we were clear
during the session that our goal
was to be adjacent to and
support their funding but not
duplicate their funding so that
may have an unintended gap one
way that we can address that is
to say.
It could be the lower of 100 and
50%, or the upper income of
affordable housing asset at the
local level. So that is a po,
uh, potential for how we address
that, But I wanted to note that
the proposal there
Does have an unintended gap,
potentially
Um and then the higher end of
300% again. That's it was a
starting place for us to, um
Get public comment to get the
comment from this board. We
looked at two. There's not
really a good place.
That's where we started.
Um, And then the second level
was relative to zoning reforms
because there is no definition
in statute. But you are, uh um,
expected to prioritize projects
based on that, um, staffs put
in, uh policies, procedures and
regulations implemented by
political subdivisions intended
to decrease the conducting
affordable and workforce
housing, including expedited
permitting high density, zoning
and other criteria as determined
by the policies of the board.
So again, we wanted to give some
sense as to what that meant. But
allow for you to, um uh, give
better definition in your
policies and as part of your
priority, And with that, Mr
Chairman, I would recommend we
start with those conversations
before I go through the red line
because I think those those are
the areas really that that jump
out the rest of them,
So, Mister chairman again. We're
picking up the direction given
by the Legislature on where to
prioritize. I think you can
define some of that. I mean, you
obviously be defining some of
that by policy. Um, it's
intended to be a prioritization
and not an absolute. So where is
the potential for us to have
carved out, But the goal here
was to incentivize change at the
local level to make this sort of
housing, um, easier to construct
and less costly to construct,
And we think that that might you
know, the that incentive was
Um by the Legislature.
Yeah,
In place to restrict it, Mr
Chairman, particularly, I think
with rural counties, um so
obviously if it's Buro County,
and they don't have those that
might be one thing entirely
different staffs. And you know
the kind of I I think it's very
possible, particularly with the
housing that you may end up
having two different sets of
criteria based on rule
definitions.
High density, for instance,
Yeah, There's uh, Mister Chair
I. I did have a comment and
maybe a question on the middle
income.
Uh, maybe, uh, my comment is,
uh, III. I do like, uh, Mrs
Russell's, uh, suggestion of the
150 or less. Um, so that would
be my comment in support of that
suggestion. Uh, I did have a
question. Uh, you know the 1
5300 makes sense to me
generally, but I did have a
question of whether that's
static or dynamic meaning.
Is that based on 2024? Does that
adjust every year or how or how?
How frequently do we a
Mr Chairman. My expectation is
it would adjust as that Caught
up. I think in census data, so
it would it would adjust so it
just dynamic Whenever data is
available, there might be two
different questions here. The
three of them are
No, no, no I. I think she, uh,
Mr Chairman, I think I think she
understood my question. It
really It really was. Are we
setting it based on 2024, and
then it's static or or? Or does
it? Does it adjust based on you
know, whatever is new. I'm I'm
curious why the staff?
Um, Mister Chairman, the when we
first started the rules we
weren't thinking about, um, the
unintended gap of the upper
limit of where affordable
housing is. We really were very
purposefully trying to
demonstrate that we were not,
um, trying to overlap with the
mortgage finance authority. And
then it was, um, it was brought
to our attention that that could
in fact, provide a number of
gaps where people that are
trying to get workforce housing
in place for lower on the lower
end of that income.
Um, so that would have that
would provide some like it was
an oversight on staff's part to
not have that baked into the
definition. To start with. This
came up in our policy.
That that's when we really got
this.
I I on the table.
Just
Week.
Mr Chairman. The other thing
that the rules provide is again
some definition of how you'll
end up prioritizing the housing
development projects. Um and so
we have. We used similar
language as we did for the
opportunity Enterprise, which
was that we'd use criteria that,
uh,
Demonstrates local support and
need creates or expands,
attainable housing units in the
state, and that's intended to
incorporate both affordable
housing. Um, are located in
political subdivisions at the
zoning.
And demonstrate other means of
financing proposed by housing
development. That is also, uh,
provided for in statue, so those
last two items are pickups from
house. Bill 195. The first two
are the ones that, um, are
suddenly want to change or add
them.
Mr Chairman, when one other
thing at
That our policy committee the
other thing we talked about was
that, uh, we moved it from 250
to 300.
And, um
I believe there's here on the
table.
It just gives a dollar amount.
So you get a few exactly how
much that
300% is. This is
100 and 50% chart by county
And so sort of, you know, so
300% for a family of four would
be double
You know, middle income.
Generally 200,000 a year. Not
that
Not that bad. The only one that
gets a little strange is what
the album Where the mediums that
Yeah.
So anyway.
I. I ask, um, bring the
schedule. I thought it might
help to see numbers.
Appreciate that mentioned
earlier. The law does not take
effect. But if we wait until the
law becomes effective because of
the way in which uh uh, for the
public to know about the the
actual rule.
Based on that if we wait a
couple more than a month, so if
we're able to take, um, action
today on the resolution that's
ahead of you will be in a
position to actually have the
rules. I think finalized by the
very end of July, we
application. Um it again. We We
have a little bit of a time to
open the applications. We know
that the Legislature
appropriated 100 and $25 million
and we
Something else, Mr. Chairman.
The, um that I think would be
actually find it found in the
Finance Authority rules because
they would be terms of the loan,
so we'll have to have very
explicit provisions within our
loan agreement about the the
requirements that this board is
placing, Um, on the approvals in
the actual financing documents
themselves, so we'll make
certain that those are covered
in our rules. What you'll want
to do is to define in your
policies. What you want us to
provide in our rules so you'll
Your policies will give notice
to the public about what you
anticipate seeing from the
financing and our loan rules
will pick up that and in terms
of providing, um, absolute
guidelines.
Is what you mister chairman as
part of our policy making. I
believe we're going to have to
come up with, um what Our
expectation is for how long
these income? Uh, limitations
will be in place. I think that
that is part of
What would be expected and so we
have a lot of work ahead of us
for the pool for the with that
before we named you, But, um,
there. There's a lot of work
ahead of us, and I wanna make
sure that we've given ourselves
a lot of time. Um our
expectation on existing schedule
is that by
Uh, late June early July. We
have very good, like, um,
because we'll need to be there
after so the policies have to be
finalized. I hope by June 20th,
which is when we currently are
scheduled. We believe to have on
Help clarify all of that.
Mr Chairman. I believe that's
correct. What will help you do
is provide, um, a basis for the
policies that are coming up with
because you'll you're telling
the public how you're going to
prioritize them. You are giving
some definitions, which are
currently not found in the
statute on middle and that can
be, um, I think defined a little
more clearly, even in policy, so
that can live a little more that
can that is from members of the
board. Mr. Chairman, I would
just note one more thing, which
is that as part of the
rulemaking process, the public
has an opportunity to weigh in
and so we will be providing
The public comment back to you
and proposing a final, um, set
of rules after we've heard from
the public as you may recall in
the opportunity Enterprise, we
incorporated a significant
amount of public comment in
those rules. Um, and we also had
as part of their hearing they
had the A draft of the policies
in front of them as well. And we
we took a We took both sets of
comments into play when
Direct
From which is a real estate
development company, though. Um,
we are really excited about the
opportunity Enterprise Fund. Um,
kind of changing the the
mission the mission so that it
also incorporates multifamily
housing. This is needed. Um one
thing I'd like you to consider
when you're going through your
rule making process are those
income limits in the M FA
statute? I is. He used to be my
boss. So I, uh he's a great boss
and M FA.
Great work, So I think, um, the
finance authority is right to
not want to overlap that being
said the, um initiating statute
of M. FA does go up to those
higher limits but in practice
for rental housing development,
they really go to about 80% AM.
In terms of what there are FPs
are doing and all of their
programs so I had just ask that
you consider to go down to 80%
AM for rental. If you look in
other states what they usually
defined as missing middle
housing for rental is between
8100 and 50% of
So, uh, some states call it
workforce housing. Some states
call it missing middle housing,
But usually what the funding
does is 80 between 150. I'm not
telling you to limit it anymore.
I know you guys are trying to
not, um, fully limit this, but I
think it would be helpful to
explicitly go down to 80% of AMI
As long as it does not, um
Clash with what M FA is.
I. I do have a just A follow up
question was was the the The
lesser was was, uh, you know,
the the suggestion of from staff
of the lesser does that
Et cetera.
Mr Chairman, I believe it. Uh,
the the fixed spot that was
recommended by the Finance
Authority staff would not
incorporate that because the
mortgage finance limits are
different from what's set at the
local level. So we might have
to, um
Uh, tear that even further to
say.
Um
Mortgage Finance Authority upper
limits.
The lesser of those three
things. So incorporate that if
that's the will of the board, we
certainly could get language
that captured the three
The three pronged test in the
comment.
Thank you, gentlemen. Um and
Marquita. Um, my name is Miles
Conway, Uh, northern New Mexico
Builders Association. Um, we're
certainly really are we
represent, of course.
The contractors in northern New
Mexico, predominantly the
smaller groups and so appreciate
your work. We're excited about
this as an opportunity to allow
All builders and developers
great and small to participate
in solving this housing crisis.
I just want to encourage as the
process moves forward. This
concept of a of a two tier
scoring matrix for the For,
like really larger and urban
applicants, And then maybe even
the smaller builders or the, uh,
rural applicants. Maybe there
are different scoring matrixes.
It could be developed as the
process moves forward to give
everyone a kind of a fair shake
at partition, and then
The possibility, uh, for the
fund to provide a a smaller
builder advocate.
In inside the, uh, apparatus so
that those smaller builders that
are struggling to understand how
they map the fund. Uh
Let's go back to that, Um
Mister chairman. I think our
goal is to not step over the
boundaries and degree, so I
think that
Suggestion. Yeah. Yeah. So you,
um Miss Russell, if you could
help me with what my what My
amendment is I would appreciate
that. Yeah, Mr. Chairman, I
believe you'd say that the that
we would initiate the, um uh,
rule making by adopting the
resolution, Um, but that we
would, uh, change the definition
for middle income to be the
lesser of a three pronged test,
and that would be 100 and 50%
the upper limits of affordable
housing, as defined by the
county or local
At the local area or
Um, as defined by the mortgage
finance Authority language.
Um, drafted by by our council,
but I think that's the concept
and of a work.
Sounds clear as mud. Great, so
I'd I'd move. I'd move her. Her
commentary
there. Can I
get a second in it? Oh, we
actually already had a second.
uh, just
Thank you. Everybody, um, on to
Mr Chairman. I believe the
approval included the adoption
of the resolution with the
change to the draft language
with to include the three prong
test.
Good afternoon. Um sorry. I knew
I was loud but I didn't realize
I was that loud.
Good afternoon. Uh, Mr Chairman
and, uh, board members and so
the next item that you will see
is the ranking of round two of
the applications that we
received.
Um from the time frame of decent
end of December, uh, to the
middle of March. Uh, those, uh,
projects that were received also
took in consideration if they
because of the changes of the
law if they were, um
Um, uh, owner occupied versus
non owner occupied, Uh, type of
project.
In addition to that, during that
time frame, uh in a staff
Uh, conducted several Web
Webinars, uh, met with a
different stakeholders.
And also, um, uh, presented at
different, uh, functions to, uh,
spread the word about the this
up coming around.
And so with that, Mr Chair, I. I
just wanted to do that quick
introduction to give a sense of
the work. The staff did, uh,
prior to the round
Members of the board. My name is
Brian Duboff. I'm pleased to be
here with you today to present
the opportunity Enterprise. Uh,
revolving fund. I'm gonna, uh,
give a a similar report as I
did, uh, at the committee
meeting first, a little
background on the program. Uh,
the O F was the loan program
that provides financing
projects.
The goal to attract businesses
allow exempt
The application process consists
of two scored based on specific
NIUs determination are
automatic. And then after that
is the loan application. Uh,
project ended, uh by the OE
Review board are then invited to
The OEF economic impact
policies, prioritize job
creation and projects in rural
frontier areas of New Mexico.
Changes were made since round
one, giving additional Burl and
frontier locations.
Uh And so the current scoring
breakdown uh by uh,
Category points.
Job creation. Uh, application
need and readiness. Excuse me.
Uh, project look, 30 points.
The review and scoring this
round. Uh, is comprised our
process includes an initial
complete and accurate review by
N FA staff.
Training for the review team and
a facilitated scoring, uh,
review reconciliation meeting.
Round one into round two.
Round one did not conclude with
any loans directly being made.
However, two projects were
diverted to other NM FA
products. Uh, that better suit
Uh Mesa del Sol was put into the
P PR F program and is in process
currently.
Ex Novo Brewing was put into the
pool and has been awarded 5
$90,000.
Therefore all opportunity
Enterprise.
Funds are now available in round
two and then the OE Round one
update chart below, UH, shows
the status for all seven pro,
Uh, project applications.
Before I continue. Are there any
questions about round one, so
some observations for round two
include the but for test is now
an unscored first step to help
applicants determine eligibility
and in avoid nation process.
Points were added to the rural
and frontier scores.
Clarifying the owner occupied
policy has also helped to ensure
that eligible applic
The future business occupant
questions continue to be
inherently difficult for
speculative de develop. NM FA
received 38 inquiries and 12
completed applications.
Representing five new urban
Three rural
Nine applicants were unable to
demonstrate a funding gap.
In 11 words.
Total funding being requested in
round two.
Our recommendation. Uh or that
the three options being
presented to the board today,
um, includes three options.
Uh, however, staff is
recommending option C.
Where the top six projects are
invited to which will start the
NMF briefly. The options before
you today are option a uses
scoring data as it was exactly
input into, and there is one
application that scored 60 plus
points.
Abies developments. LLC is a
warehouse project that is
requesting, uh, $12.2 million
option B. We have analyzed the
scoring done by the joint NM FA.
Some data points were determined
to be outliers. In other words,
extreme values that differ from
most other data points caused by
incomplete scores. Technical
issues simple mistakes. These
issues were discussed with the
reviewers and all agreed that it
would be fair to not include
them in the calculations.
These adjusted average scores
produced a total of 360 plus
point.
Applications representing both
rural and urban finally option
C.
The third option before you
today is to include a second
tier.
Of scores going down to 50
points.
Chart below shows how this would
look using the adjusted scores
from option B.
Resulting in a total of six
recommended projects
representing three counties and
four target industries.
Option C maximizes the number of
qualified applications that move
forward.
In the process, which then
increases
Using adjusted averages barely
eliminates outlier scores
reduces standard deviations and
including the second tier of
scores doubles the number of
potential loans to be made. The
options were presented to the
Project Review Committee on
April 24th.
The committee unanimously
approved option C.
This is the recommendation
option being put forward for
your approval today.
Uh, I'm gonna just continue, uh,
telling you what else is in the
book?
Uh And then we'll uh uh, So the
rest of your book includes the
opportunity Enterprise board
summary report.
Uh, which is designed to give
you a brief overview of the, uh,
12 projects.
The chart is sorted according to
the adjusted average score.
The information includes
Project name.
Applicant type.
Project summary.
Location information.
NMEDD targeted industry info.
Financing amount requested.
Adjusted average score totals.
Category average score of the
four categories that I mentioned
earlier project location,
community impact.
Job creation. The next chart OEP
much more in depth look at each
of the 17 areas that are scored
within the four categories. I
just covered. Just bear with me,
Um
Community support environmental
impact redevelopment
construction, jobs, training and
apprenticeships. Jedi justice,
Equity divers soundness.
Estimated additional funding
project readiness.
Qualified business development
and then the next seven
Uh, are all specifically related
to future business Occupant that
point that, um, future business
occupant or FBO job creation.
Training and apprenticeship.
Jedi target industry project
Location. Economic diversity,
high wage job creation.
Individual scores as well as
team averages can be seen for
each area.
The rose in light gray.
Uh, the the latest are the
outliers that have not been used
to calculate the averages.
Finally we have the Opportunity
Enterprise Pleat project
applications as submitted,
excluding the attachments.
Mr Chairman I. I like options. I
think the others would
Would leave. I've seen these
scoring and sometimes people
keying the stuff in the
applicants don't understand the
question.
And they'll put in stuff so
Um
I think this is a good
recommendation. I support it.
You know, I? I would, too. But
I, I do have it. Maybe just a
couple of questions. Um, one is
Can you just Maybe give
Uh, give a sense of what it
means to go down 50 points And
then um
And then second is after this,
like
What's the next process? Right?
I know
So the addition of the, uh the
extra or lowering of the just
allows us to be a little bit
more flexible with projects that
didn't score? Uh, quite as
Is sort of minimally misty point
minimum, So it's a high bar. Um
and we've now, uh, tried to be a
little bit more flexible.
However, in the end, it still
has to get through still be a
good improve that it's a good
project that can
So, Mr Chairman in In essence,
you just expanding the universe
Questions chairman. One more
question. Um
Let me ask a question if
If you go through these six
And some of them fall out.
Would it be possible to
Make it so that you can go on
down the list.
Mr Chairman, I think at that
point, um we know that there are
additional projects that are
looking for this funding. You
know the application ready to
go, but there are others out
there that have heard about it
that have been putting their
applications together. Our
recommendation would be that we
open this application up again
relatively soon and get another
round of projects in we'd like
to meet with the now commercial
development of the inherently
difficult language on that
future benefit occupant, and I
think that's why it's the scores
are a little bit lower.
Um, because if you are a true
spec, uh, project it's very
hard. You know, if you're just a
warm shell, it's very hard to
determine how that shell might
be used. Um, it's great if you
know that you're developing
retail space or something like
that. But for large
developments, it's much harder
to to get points in that area.
So we'd like to go through that.
and just make sure that the
Commercial development Committee
is comfortable A with the way
that we're scoring them or B.
Maybe we figure out a better way
to determine impact.
Um, and then open that back up
for some, uh, review. Um, and
the other thing I would mention
is that the statute is worded.
Kind of. Oddly, there's one
section of our statute that
provides that information. All
information related to the
project application.
And then it has confidential
language or for the information
for the financing, So we have
separated out into two different
applications. Um, the project
information versus the financial
information. We think we now can
just combine them, so it's a one
step process. Um, but we would
have different sections so that
we could clearly identify which
part is public and which part
is, uh, not subject to I PR and
that would I think, actually.
Encourage more applicants. So
while there are a lot of good
projects here if we were to
amend the process and
potentially refine our FBO as we
call it score, we may get more
projects in and so it would be
my recommendation that you allow
us the opportunity to work with
the Commercial development
Committee to do those
refinements. Um, it's a new
process. You know, 60 points is
where we started, but that may
not be the right score. There's
a lot of things that we still
have to kind of iterate. So
Up. Approve? Uh, appreciate that
opportunity rather than just go
to the next ones on the list
because we only have the 120
million overall.
And I think I think we're trying
to accomplish the same thing
which is to keep it going. I'd
I'd hate for some deals to fall
out. And then we're like, Oh,
now we need to start this
process over the time. Just
wanted to keep moving through
the scoring and variance in
scores, or is it
In weeks. Maybe we can keep it
going.
Great, Thanks.
So move mister
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you.
Um, and we just missed the cut.
and you mentioned about people
falling out, so we just missed
the cut.
So I was a little confused by
and I understand opening it up
so you can have more.
And for us, does it make sense
to us? So do you guys make a
program?
Um, does it make sense for us to
reapply Because it sounds like
you're opening up again. We
scored relatively. What? What?
We're we're a
We just what? We've tried to do
the ephra something that's
different, and by the way, your
application is currently there
that so you don't have to
rein. Um, no, Mr Chairman. I
don't and I. I would just note
that the Finance Authority has
other programs coming on board
that may also be able to help.
So you, uh, recommendation to
contact staff. Um, I think is a
really good one so that we can
try to get projects to a good
source of financing for their
ultimate goal. Um, as you saw
with the first
And we were able to take two of
those projects and get them
funding that better suited their
needs, and our hope would be
that we'd be able to do that
with other clients as well.
OK, sorry to make this thing
work,
John Brooks.
Thank you guys, any other public
comment?
Next meeting third, two o'clock
here in the board members. I
strongly encourage you to
And you welcome that'll be your
first official.
Thank you,
Mr Chairman at that meeting, we
hope to go through some policy
ideas on both programs so that
we can get, um, get those
applications back and open
again. So there's a little bit
of work to be done with both
committees. There'll also be a
nominating committee because, of
course, the chairmanship, the
vice chair and the secretary.
The terms are all due, uh, up at
the end of June, so there'll be
a nominating committee set so
that you can elect uh officers
or reelect officers, Um
Uh, probably in the June
meeting, but we anticipate
several meetings between now and
mid July so that we can hit our
our targets for opening an
application in
Um, uh, August.
Sounds good. Um, that brings us
Running that Mr Chairman. There
are two members that are
legislatively appointed or
they're appointed by the
Legislative Council. I have, um,
alerted the Legislative Council
staff that there are two terms
that are up on June 30th. And so
they know that and I think
they're working on that. In the
meantime, the board members S
serve until they are replaced.
So, um, you'll be hearing I
think likely you'll hear that
you're being replaced. If if
that happens, um that's what you
would hear.
If you're not hearing anything,
they have not yet replaced you
or they'll reappoint you. Um,
but those are
There are two members, um
Yes, there are. There are two
members up. But at the end of
this June the end of 20.
Math out loud 26 and then two
members at 28. So they were two
years, four
Brian was at you saying no.
