Member Garcia.
Present.
Remember Hernandez, president
Remember Bishop present.
And member Martinez.
Mr Chair. We do have a quorum
this afternoon.
Great. Thank you, Cherise.
Of the agenda. I'm assuming that
our board members have had a
time to absorb it and review it
in fine detail.
Nice literary piece of work. It
is any comments or questions.
Would be approved.
Thank you, Sam, Second.
Um member Koslowski.
Yes, ma'am.
I just had a change.
OK?
Um, I apologize. It is, um
My my job has changed. And so in
last month, the main the minutes
are we doing? We're not doing
the minute. Sorry. We're just
doing the agenda.
Just doing the agenda.
I apologize, OK?
All right, so we have motion. We
have a second and the comments
or further discussion on that
before we
Take AC None.
I was in favor.
I
He posed
welcome, Mr Duan.
No problem.
Right?
No, you're fine.
Approval of the board minutes.
Any comments on the board
minutes.
Last session.
Kozlowski has one change.
Yes, ma'am.
Um, it has that I'm with
downtown Las Cruces partnership.
Um, as my as, um, My job has
changed. I'm now with the Boys
and Girls Club of Las Cruces.
OK?
Thank you. Member Kosloski
chair with that change a motion
to approve.
Minutes.
Thank you
all those in favor.
Hi.
He opposed.
Ocean carries.
Appointment of the nominating
committee for the election of
officers.
If we had any discussion,
Marquita people that are
interested or any thoughts on
that.
Mr Chairman in terms of a
nominating
Sorry. I wanna make sure you
Uh, the one that's interested.
Typically, it's people that
don't wanna serve they volunteer
first, um
Just would note that for the
record, uh, that's how it got
done. I put my evil hat on and
choose who I want. Yes.
Uh, any members interested?
Right?
Remember, you said, Would you
like to come in late? You kind
of get Vol and told sometimes
by being the last one. Yes, I
did. Thank you for your ability
and interest in volunteering for
that role.
Uh, Izzy. How about yourself?
Yes, sir. Definitely if I be
interested in participating
Alright.
Wade. Being one of the newest
members. Would you be
interested?
Um
Sure. Yeah, Why not? Sounds like
I just got B told as well
Yeah.
Instead, a Crick in my cook.
That's right.
Alright, So I think we've got
three members that have quote
volunteered.
Um, any discussion from any of
the members?
See none. Can I get a motion to
approve those three members?
So move.
Thank you.
Give me a second.
I'll second all those in favor.
Hi. Any pos.
All right. Congratulations,
guys.
Right?
Application round two request to
reconsider Marquita. I'm
assuming you're handling that,
Mr Chairman. Yes. This is an
informational item. We wanted
to, uh, notify the board that we
received a formal request to,
um, reconsider the board's
action last month. Um, they
would, uh from rag arm
Development Corporation. They
did speak in public comment. Um,
and they've asked that we
reconsider it. They thought that
there was some criteria that may
have been
Some part of their application
that may have been
misunderstood, and therefore the
criteria misapplied. Um so this
action will go back to the, um
um, the the evaluators, and then
we'll make a formal recommend
that we wanted to notify you
that officially round two is
still open. Um, otherwise the
other six applications have all
been. Applicants have all been
given access to the financial
application and our proceeding
they have till the end of May.
If, in fact, um at the beginning
of
June. You make a decision to,
uh, prioritize that then we'll
give similar access to Ray Garm
as well.
Right?
Thank you so much.
Um
Any members have any comments or
questions on that at all right?
We went along.
Program development Update.
Who's handling that Mr Chairman,
I'll handle the first part of
the rules. Um, this is really
most of the agenda today is
about level settings because at,
um there's a lot of activity
that needs to occur in order for
us trying to open an application
by August, Um, rulemaking, as we
talked about last time is a very
precise art that there are
timelines for the register and
timelines for public hearings
and things like that. The action
you took last month to initiate
formal rulemaking. Um, allows
for us to, um
Gate.
Have officially, uh promulgated
rules by July, 31st.
At this meeting last month. We
had a lot of conversation about
one particular part of the
rules, and it was the definition
of middle income middle income
is a critical piece of the
definition for workforce
housing.
And so, um, there we started
with a staff recommendation of
100 and 50% of area. Median
income. Um, it was between the
meetings that we became aware
that there was some gaps as a
result, unintended gaps.
As a result of that, um sort of
hard and fast, bright line of
100 and 50%. And so at the
meeting, we made a
recommendation to modify that
definition.
After public comment it was yet
another recommendation. So that
would be basically a three prong
test for determining middle to
actually draft the final
definition. It became a little
tortured, and so we we try to.
really, um artfully.
Uh, re craft that definition to
capture the spirit of what the
board was trying to achieve,
which was to not overlap with
the funding made available by
the Mortgage Finance Authority
and to not have too large of a
gap or any gap between a local
jurisdictions ability to set the
income limit at their, um, based
on their, um, ordinance.
Um, So that's where we That's
what we tried to hit. So I
wanted to just highlight where
we ended up. Um and again. This
is for purposes of public
comment if in fact public hate
and make recommendations on the
final rule based on public
comment, um which could be any
certainly any member of this
board as well.
If this doesn't work we do have
Um, with that on page
10, you'll see that, uh, middle
income workers means families
with incomes that fall between
the lesser of a local
jurisdictions. Upper limit for
housing assistance by relevant
housing type.
Or by the New Mexico Mortgage
Finance Authority, upper limit
for housing development
assistance and 300%. So the
floor we we still think we
believe we hit that three prong
test. We dropped out 100 and
50% because, in fact, in some
instances, it I mean it's on
because the the more relevant
points the point at which
they'll go up to, um, where
there are affordable housing and
the local jurisdiction, So we
think we captured the spirit of
of ensuring that, um, the public
knows that we're not over.
Slapping our fun to
consideration the discretion
given, so that's where we ended
up and that's what it
Um, question. How are you going
to
Provide guidance on that to the
public That's thinking about
submitting. I mean, how
obviously you know people wanna
know.
Could I potentially qualify
before I start doing something?
What are you gonna are You gonna
relay that Mr Chairman? I think
the best way to do this is to
define it in policy and to have
attachments that can be updated
based on any, uh, changes made
at the mortgage finance
authority, So the policies are,
um, are allowed to breathe and
and live and so they can be
changed by the board. But if we
adjusted, you know, attached it
as relevant housing type.
Describe what that is, and then
put as a you know, ex
Um M FA S current, Um
Upper limitations. I think that
gives the public whether or not
their project will qualify, and
then we'll have to just point
them to where they would find
that one.
That would be our
recommendation. I think that's a
good answer. And I'm glad I
didn't catch you flat footed on
that. Izzy. What do you think of
that?
Mr Chairman. Thank you for the
opportunity. I think it's a good
way to do it. I do have a follow
up question to that in a little
bit. Uh, go ahead.
Is this, Uh, Miss Russell,
restricted to just those local
governments that have an
affordable housing plan and
ordinance.
Or would it apply to us cause
not every local jurisdiction as
one of those in place.
So, Mr Chairman again, I think
we'd fall back to our policies
which will be upcoming. So, um,
we were anticipating our are are
out of the box recommendation
would be that which was set by
the act plan.
Um, that would be our first
recommendation if the Housing
committee and ultimately the
board decide we staffs open to
whatever decisions the board
makes. Um I would note that one
of the companion pieces this
past session, the companion
piece to house Bill 195 was
Senate Bill 216.
Which, among other things, um
gave the Finance authority
broader use of the local
government planning fund. We are
in the process of amending the
rules to comport with Senate
Bill 216. And it would allow us
to make grants. Um, the first
time I would consider that is
July 2nd and third. Um, but that
is on, um, early on so that we
can get as many housing
development Uh, Affordable
Housing Act plans. I. I do have
one more question, Mr Chairman.
Thank you with the
Uh,
With regard to the definition of
middle income and the way that,
uh, it's currently and there is
does that apply to
Infrastructure as well or just
the building of the housing or
to both.
Mr Chairman. It's a great
question. So, um, again the
affordable fund can fund a, uh,
infrastructure for affordable
housing housing the definition
for middle income.
Um in is is a component so
affordable housing my
expectation. We did not define
it in rule. My expectation is we
would pick up definitions that M
FA uses. We anticipate that the
kinds of projects that would
need projects already going
before the mortgage finance
authority, so we want to align
those as much as we can in
policy again if Mortgage finance
authority has any changes to
their program, we certainly
would like the policies to keep
up with any That's our purpose
for putting it in.
Um, but but it would be part of.
Thank you, Miss Russell.
Thank you.
Mr. Chair, Miss Russell. Um so
to clarify it, so the
infrastructure provisions are
only for, um, affordable
housing. Not for workforce
housing, Mr. Chair. I think I
gave you a misinformation or a
led you to astray. Um, a for in
the affordable housing arena.
This fund can only be used for
infrastructure for workforce
housing.
It does. Yes. Thank you very
much.
Any other questions for me.
So, Mister Chairman, I would
note that we do have two public
hearings that have been
scheduled, Um, June 22, Our
chief legal officer will be the
presiding officer. Um and then
we will incorporate public
comment and bring it back
through the two relevant
committees because both the
Housing Development Committee
and the opera the Commercial
Development Committee, um, may
have comments, uh, from that
public hearing since both
sections of that rule were
amended, so we will be bringing
back to you through each of
those committees.
Sorry, the July meeting. They're
all getting confused now, Uh,
the July meeting of, uh,
finalizing the rule forward to
that.
And the other questions or
comments move on.
I agree. I tried this last
month.
Yeah.
What's that? Um, I are we on the
housing program? I just wanted
to make sure 6.1. Yes, OK.
Update on the
Review board.
Um, Mr Chairman. Thank you. So
this is sort of again by way of
level setting. Um, there has
been two meetings. There have
been two
Committee and then our goal
there is to provide both
committees their relevant
policies. Um, uh, to be then
presented ultimately to June
meeting so that before the
public comment, there's some
expectation of how these
projects will be prioritized and
selected. A lot of the rule is
dependent on kind of definitions
of policy. And so we don't want
the public to be in a position
of having to comment on the rule
without having any clear under
to look like so our goal today
is to
Both this board in advance of
each of those meetings. Um and
for the public that's listening
because there's a lot of
interest on what this board is
doing relative to these two
funds. Um, we wanted to kind of
highlight where we were and what
we expected the focus of the
policy either changes in the
instance of the commercial
development fund, or, um,
housing. What looking at that
will try to put in some
criteria.
So wanted to just talk to you a
little bit. You know the the
goal of the the prioritization
policies In addition to the
people know how to apply and
what we treated
Um, is to, uh, set expectations
for how you'll
Measure the impact of any
particular project.
The commercial development, but
it was a little easier because
you know you have things like
job creation that you can take
into consideration.
As was noted sometime in public
comment last year. And you know
just the realities of our state.
We'll have both housing. Uh, the
Housing development fund can
fund affordable housing.
Infrastructure.
And Workforce development
housing, which, as we said,
includes both infrastructure and
vertical construction.
Now how much money you wanna put
into each of those.
Is something that the board is
gonna have to make whether you
have two separate sets of
policies for those is something
will be making a recommendation
on our two different sets of
criteria.
Um, you'll also have the
differences that come from, Um,
uh, rental.
Um, facilities versus or mixed
use, versus um
Single family.
For sale housing. There will be
some differences there.
Um, and you'll have some
differences in rural New Mexico
versus urban New Mexico. So all
of those points are things that
we're going to try to capture so
that we have sort of a level
playing field for purposes of
your decision making like when
you try to decide what has
what's gonna have greater impact
or what's gonna have a A better
return on the, uh, impact
dollars, So those are trickier
with housing as a result of just
those nuances right there, the
two different kinds of projects
the difference between rural and
urban and then ultimate or
Of the different kind of housing
type, so
Wanna just give the board some
heads up, particularly the
Housing development Committee
that we are struggling at the
staff level to put that
together. We're thinking about
it quite a bit. Um, and it's
it's a It's a difficult
decision, and I know that
members of the public all have
some, you know those that have
been paying close attention all
have a lot of opinions on this
and we're we're happy to hear
all of them. We're we're getting
educated by the comments
provided by the public.
Um, so those are some basic
Criteria points that we're gonna
have to go through. There are
more, though, in terms of the
ways in which you want to use
these dollars is the goal to
incentivize new developers into
the community so that we have
more people building homes. Is
it to, uh, you wanna give more
support to local develop their,
uh, their communities and their
capacity. We know they're
dedicated to New Mexico. They
live here. Um, is that the goal
of the fund those things we have
to consider
