I see him on.
I
Can you hear us, remember
Collins?
He's not.
OK, member Collins is present.
Remember Anaya
Remember Anaya?
As
Remember Collins again?
I'm present. Thank you.
Remember Chancey?
Remember Hernandez.
Present?
Remember Garcia.
Remember Garcia? She's muted.
We have a quorum here.
Thank you.
Right.
Uh,
I'm sure the members have had a
chance to review the agenda.
Listers changes.
I'd like to request
Motion
Thank you, Mr. Doucette.
Second, Mr. T.
Mr. Trujillo.
All those in favor?
Right.
I.
Right.
Bye. Uh.
Any first?
Right
Right. Approval of the minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Duet.
You get a second.
Remember Hernandez 2?
Thank you, Izzy.
All those in favor.
All right.
I
They opposed
Motion carries
onto the good stuff. Mr.
Opperman, are you leading the
first part of this?
Mr. Chairman, I am with
Marquita. So the next item
before you is a review and
consultation of the amended and
restated rules governing the
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund.
What, what you have before you
on your agenda are two sets of
rules. The first one is going to
be broken up into what was
already existing in statue with
the Opportunity Enterprise Fund.
As you remember, this past
legislative session, the Act was
amended, the name was changed,
and all of the housing
components were added. The
second item that you'll have
after this one are the rules
that relate to housing that we
went over at the housing
Development Committee. So this
uh set of rules are the amended
and restated rules pertaining to
the uh uh enterprise the uh the
microphone.
The capital is muted so we can't
hear anything.
There we go. It's gonna start
going into my.
Thank you, Mr. Collins.
All right.
You'll start that over, Dave?
Yeah, to, to repeat, this is,
this is the first set of rules
that are being reviewed and
consulted on with this board for
the opportunity enterprise
revolving fund. This was the
original.
Mm
I'm gonna come up with some
totally new material.
be relevant.
Mm
We
Can you hear me?
Can you hear me, Sam?
Sam, can you hear me?
Yes,
yeah, I can, I can hear you
great. All right, Mem Collins,
please quit putting me on mute.
I don't have the power.
Uh, we'll start over. This, this
first item is the uh amended and
restated rules pertaining to the
enterprise Development Fund.
This was a set of rules that
this board adopted, as you
remember, the rules were are the
statute was amended this passed
legislative session to add in
the housing component.
What you'll have after these
rules are a new set of rules
that we broke out to cover the
housing, um, and cover the
different committees that will
go. So I'm gonna go through uh
this set of rules is, is rather
straightforward. The um
introduction to section one on
the purpose makes updates uh to,
to essentially show that the,
the act was amended. There's
some uniform, you'll see some
red lines in there that are, um,
you know, purely technical in
nature because the name.
Changing the name of the
statute.
And the two changes, one of the
two changes that took place was
uh the opportunity Enterprise
Fund, which is applicable to
this set of rules and the
housing Development Fund, which
will come in the next
presentation.
So section 2 is the definition
section. Those are updated
appropriately to capture, uh,
for instance, subsection D, the,
the correct.
Excuse me, the correct committee
title. We now have the two the
changes in our committee
structure for the uh for the
commercial development committee
uh for this particular and um
section I, a change to the
definition of enterprise
development project that was a
statutory change we just picked
up the change.
And, uh, in there.
We added some additional uh
clarity in the various
definitions that you see in the
red line, again, uh really
conforming changes to make sure
that everyone borrowers and
applicants understand that what
these rules are tied to.
Section 3, actually there are no
changes from the rules that are
already in place, so there were
no amendments in Section 3.
Section 4, we updated the loan
review section to capture
appropriate committee and board
processes really where you see
the changes are in subsection A,
uh, where the applications will
be reviewed by the what is now
the new commercial Development
Committee, those projects will
then get recommended to this
board and then this board then
recommends those projects over
to the finance authority for the
financing component once the
projects are approved. So that
is again just a um
Make sure that the processes
are, are correct.
There are no other changes in
sections 5 through 10, so this
set of rules uh really, really
not much there other than to
make sure we captured a few of
the technical changes that were
captured in statute and with
that we would stand for any
questions and these will be
presented.
For consideration and approval
by the New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight Committee on
Monday, and then if approved by
those uh by that committee then
uh they will come to the finance
authority board at the end of
the month for final approval.
And.
And I'm a.
Blessing. Just hm.
And the NMFA board have they
seen this draft at this point?
Great.
Mr.
Mr. Chairman, yes, so the
processes that our board reviews
it so that they are comfortable
with what we are seeking your
consultation on, um, and then
we'll take it to a stance at our
oversight committee and then
lastly, our board will do a
final blessing um of that. So
the oversight committees
scheduled here next week. We
expect these amended rules to be
in place by our August 29th
meeting.
Right.
Thank you Marquita.
Uh, any questions or comments
from the members of the board?
Being none.
And I get a motion to approve.
And this is an informational
item only, yeah, and so we will,
uh, if you have any recommended
changes or anything you would
like to to be added, please let
Marqui or I know we'll
incorporate them and run those
through the oversight committee
and through the finance. Thank
you. I think we're good.
OK.
Under the next housing
development committee. The next
item is the set of rules for the
housing development revolving
fund which was added in the
recent legislation.
The rules that we put together.
Uh, in some, in some respects
mimic exactly what you just saw
the rules that were in place and
what we did is I stripped out
anything that had to do with the
enterprise assistance on the
commercial side and added in the
provisions for housing that we
went over at the, at the
committee level.
The other day. So again, I will
walk you through um
this set of rules, section one,
the purpose again conforming
changes to show that the housing
components were added uh into
the statute for housing
development assistance and work
for workforce development
housing projects and affordable
housing.
Infrastructure projects.
We added in a combination in the
definitions. What we did is we
added in the statutory changes
that were made and incorporated.
We also took
This board's, uh,
And Mac rules, the
administrative code rules that
we went through that lengthy
process in the public hearings,
we incorporated some of the
definitions of, uh, to make sure
that we had uh similarities and
things were lined up.
In that respect, so you'll see
the affordable housing
infrastructure project
definitions. Uh, I do believe
I'm gonna make a change in
section C of Section 2C, uh,
there's a a sentence that got
stripped out at the end of the
Affordable housing
infrastructure project
definition and statute. It'll
end with lower moderate income
residents that will align that
with statutes so there's to
avoid any confusion.
The other editions and the
definitions are subsection K N
O.
R R is from the
And Macros, uh, where it was
defined for the middle income
workers.
Uh, and then again on the
workforce development
definitions, again, to make sure
that we have consistencies
across.
Statutes and the rules.
When we get to section 3, that's
the guide for applicants. So
what will be required uh for
complete applications. Uh, it's
a very similar process to the
rules that were
that are already in place and
essentially
align with
With the uh
Enterprise assistance.
Section 4 outlines the approval
process.
Uh, for the housing project
proposals, the prioritization,
the commitment, so again, the
applications will be reviewed by
the Housing Development
Committee. They will then move
on to this board, and then on to
the NMFA board for financing
approval if, if, if approved.
There is
Again, similar provisions across
the applications uh on, on the,
uh, for both, for both programs.
Section 5 outlines the loan
terms.
Um,
We're gonna strip
A year, OK.
Um, on the loan term, so loans
can't exceed $15 million.
Uh, the terms won't exceed 40
years.
You will see in section I.
Yeah, on section I we've
accounted for uh to include deed
restrictions in our loan
agreements. Those are yet to be
determined, but, but we will
require is that those deed
restrictions will be in place
for the life of the loan or at a
minimum for 10 years.
We'll keep, make sure that those
are uh put in place.
And then the
OK.
And then OK.
I was, yeah, OK, so Jay, the,
the loans will have limits on
the developer fees.
Uh, those will
What we'll do is we'll develop
those uh in policy which are
going to be presented to you. So
the rules will refer to the
policy. The policy will give us
some flexibility should we need
to make some changes. So this is
the higher level component and
similar to K on the restrictions
on the use of the proceeds for
developer land purchases, and
those will be covered in policy.
Excuse me.
Section Section 6 and 7, rather,
rather boilerplate consistent
with the other rules, closing
and disbursements of funds um on
forms that we, that we develop
as we go forward.
Section 8
Uh, is the reporting and
monitoring provisions?
Uh, those will begin December
1st, 2024, and then each
December 1st there after the the
report will be required. That's,
that's required by law.
Section 9 administrative fees,
uh, interest earnings on the
fund will, will cover, uh, we're
not asking for application fees
at this time.
I'm not sure we ever will, but
we're not at this time. And uh
but it does give us the
permission should and the law
gives us permission should the
finance authority wish to, we
may impose those fees. So this
is a broad, kind of a broad
sweeping provision.
And lastly, section 10 again,
consistent with all the other
with the other rules.
The rules can't be amended or uh
they can be amended or repealed,
but we do have to go through and
get approval from the uh New
Mexico Finance Authority
oversight.
Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee, again, this is
informational only these will go
before the oversight committee
next, next week.
Uh, any other questions,
comments, please direct them to
Myself, Marquita, John, happy to
incorporate those.
Thank you, Mr. Apperman. Are
there any questions for me?
For
Mr. Chairman, I have a quick
question. Yes.
Mr. Chairman Dan, how often will
the housing, uh, fund loan
policies be reviewed and revised
for any updates, like how
periodic will those be reviewed?
The policies, Mr. Chairman, will
be reviewed as market conditions
or, you know, conditions
warrant. Um, we expect that we
will revisit them for sure after
the first round, as we will with
the opportunity enterprise
boards, uh, policies. We want to
make sure that they're meeting
the needs that are out there.
Um, we have been receiving some
feedback.
And John will walk you through
the draft policies as they
currently stand and where we're
hearing some feedback, um, so
they're the, the policies
themselves will be probably in
final shape for the finance
authority board's meeting at the
end of the month, uh, for its
adoption so that we can open
those uh applications up at the
beginning of September, um, but
I guess just as as as needed,
yes, as warranted. Mr. Chairman,
thank you for that.
Thank you, Ms. Hugh.
Any other comments or questions
from members of the board?
Mr. Chairman, I'd know just a
couple of things. One is that
this has a a heart maximum of
$150. So if at any point this
board wants to make loans
greater than $15 million. The
finance authority will have to
amend its rules because we don't
have, we won't have any ability
to make a loan larger than 15
million after these are adopted,
so that would require an
amendment to the policy to the
rules, should you all decide
that that's the direction you
want to go and I just wanted to
make sure that that was clear
cause there's been
Some discussion about the
appropriate size of loans, um,
and I wanted to zero you in on
that particular factor. Thank
you for noting that.
Um,
Mr. Chairman, this is Dominic.
Yes, sir.
Just, just on that point, uh,
why are we limiting ourselves to
15?
Oh, that was disgusting uh
committee meetings and the
feeling was that there was going
to be
Um
Large amount of demand for this
and just as a note of caution to
make sure there was
Funds to distribute and more
projects could be built with it.
Uh, that can be changed as we
get more money in the future
years is the thought that if I
recall from the committee
meetings. Mr. Chairman, from our
perspective, it really lines it
up to be gap financing as
opposed to full financing of a
project. So we, you know, we, we
found when we did $17.5 million
for the commercial enterprise.
Those are gonna be smaller
projects generally speaking, to
start with, and we had a lot of
full funding applications Our
hope here was to ensure that we
were just being that
a little bit.
Um, to get the project over the,
uh, hurdle.
Mr. Chairman Marquita, would it
make sense to add language that
says 15 million or larger amount
at the OERB board's discretion?
Mr. Chairman, these rules are
the finance authority rules.
Um, so I'm not sure that we
could be governed by another
board's action, um, and so what,
what you'd like us to do is to
have that provision, we would
simply note that this needs to
be a larger amount, um, and, you
know, take it to 200 million or
whatever you think the maximum
loan size would be, but
But I don't think we can make it
at the discretion of another
board. That's, that is
absolutely correct, Mr.
Chairman. That's, it is just not
how, that's just not how the
board's working in cooperation
with each other.
OK.
Just a thought. Thank you, Mr.
Collins.
Any other comments or questions
from members of the board?
Right,
Ben.
Thank you for the presentation.
Mr. Brooks, looks like you're
up.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and
All right. Good afternoon, Mr.
Chairman and board members, um,
what you see before you on a
page, um.
33 is the policies that will
govern our loan structuring, um,
um.
Loan structuring for the housing
program. Are these policies are
um based off of some of the
things that Dan has gone over in
the rules and, and, and staff
then took the rules and added a
little bit more meat on on these
uh particular uh policies.
The, the policies itself um are
for your guys' uh information
and and feedback and we would
love to get all feedback on
these particular policies in
order to ensure we have the
program that, uh, that we could
start off with that, uh, folks
will um be um using and also I
feel that it uh works for their
um development projects. As of
right now, we have started
receiving um comments on the
policies and all.
Adress them as we go through uh
the different um the different
sections within the policies
itself.
The starting on page 34, um, is
the actual policies itself and
it goes into the purpose of the
policies and then uh we will
implement it.
The definitions on page 35 are
the definitions that are aligned
with the definitions that that
are in the rules that Dan had
just um covered and as we, um,
as there are changes to the
rules and the definition of the
rules, we will also make those
uh changes in the definitions
and the policies that you see.
In the on page 36 and 37 uh at
the bottom of 37, we start
getting into loan structure and
parameters.
And this is where we have
received some of the comments in
regards to this particular
program. Some of the comments
that we, I'll, I'll address the,
the parameters first and now
I'll circle back to the
comments and the
First thing we need in terms of
loan structuring, say a review
of a market study that market
study um in, in some of the, the
idols that are necessary for the
market study or the same items
that are used for the housing in
New Mexico or or mortgage
Finance Authority, um, and, and
the, and those policies align
with that what they have on
their website.
Number 2, loan amounts again,
it it mirrors the rules so the
policy says we cannot have more
than $15 million.
The use of proceeds in item C
outlines how we would uh uh
structure loans for the uh the
proceeds that are receiving uh
for different projects, we have
uh proceeds for affordable
housing infrastructure projects,
and then also proceeds for
workforce development and
workforce um development
infrastructure project.
Uh,
item D gets into the limitation,
um, on fees to developers, um,
as you can see, we put more
detail into the what um
developers can charge for their
particular project based on what
you saw in the rules.
Item E, uh, the maximum loan
terms, uh, we looked at uh 3
years for construction and then
20 years um as maximum terms.
Uh, we are going to evaluate
that those particular terms
based on comments we have
received.
And
On page 39, uh, interest rates,
uh, the interest rate is based
off of 60% of the Wall Street
Journal Prime, um, and, uh, and
with the floor of 3.5%, that is
similar to what we do in the
commercial program, so we'll
evaluate that and also the debt
service coverage requirement of
135 and we, we, we received
comments on that particular item
as well.
And the loan value requirements
is up to 80% loan to value
Originally, we started at 70%
and now we have moved it to 80%
and I think we are getting some
comments on that.
Equity requirement, 10%.
And we are also requiring
personal and corporate
guarantees and item K and then
credit history, uh, we would
like to have the right to be
able to pull credit history um
for uh uh those developers that
are um going to uh proceed with
funding in this program.
And then, uh, page 40, uh
section 3 monitoring and
reporting. These are the
requirements that we are um are
going to stand by in terms of a
recording back to various
committees, some of the things
that are also are in this
section or items that we will
need to ensure that the project
is moving forward and also
meeting some of their, the
timelines that are outlined um
in their development plan when
we receive that information.
And so Mr. Chairman and board
members, but I'd like to add to
this conversation, there's some
things that we, we, we need to
add to the policies. Number one,
the restrictions, um, we need
to, uh, of the restrictions in
the structural policies, so we
will add that particular
section.
Number 2, loan terms. Some of
the comments that we received
are um should we do interest
only loans for the life of the
uh loan or uh or have a deferral
of interest rates.
Um,
The second comment we received
is, uh, extending the loan terms
to 40 years instead of 20 years.
And then the 3rd item was uh
interest rate discussion, uh,
one of the comments we received
that the interest rate it seems
Even though it's below uh what
we consider market is still kind
of high for some of the the
projects and that are out there
and, and this would make this um
program a lot more attractive if
we lower the rate.
So, Mr. Chairman and board
members.
Those uh
That is the loan structure and
policies, and I stand for
questions at this time. Other
questions or comments from the
members?
Mr. Chairman, if I could just
make a couple of notes. So
unlike the last one, there's no
formal consultation required,
but because you all know so much
about housing, um, more than the
finance authorities, you know,
experience based. We want to
make certain we get your on the
ground experience uh put into
our policies as much as
possible. So it's entirely
possible that we will ask the
housing development committee to
meet again as we go to finalize
these things for the board's
review of finance authority
Board's review.
Um, because again, we, we're
receiving comments as we go.
This is an opportunity for us to
let the public know what we are
contemplating. We've been trying
to be as transparent about that
as possible, um, but there are,
they're coming in relatively
fast. So, uh, I just wanted to
put the board on notice that we
might be asking for your
experience again and expertise
uh at a housing development
meeting.
Um, and I wanted to make sure
you, again, zeroed in on a
couple of things. The developer
fees, and John mentioned that we
have them. I just want to
highlight those for those that
are listening and not watching.
Um, we have a limit of 12% on
total project costs and no more
than 5% of any acquisition
costs.
So acquisition, if you're just
purchasing something that
developer fee is lower. Um, we
have a provision that it's going
to be dispersed throughout
Project life cycle and that um
so that we're, it's
Uh, it's meeting the uh matching
the pace of the project
development so that they're not
getting too much in advance, um,
and then the reimbursement of
developer fees, um.
And the land acquisition are
things that we're really
focusing on. So if someone is
asking to be reimbursed for
prior purchases, but at the
point at which
At which point will we actually
do that reimbursement. So those
are things that we're currently
contemplating, um.
And that's what we that that's a
section.
The little 3, developer
reimbursement and developer fees
at the sole discretion of the
NMFA. So we're still putting
some meat on that area.
I think that was really all I
wanted to make sure we hit.
OK.
I'm
I'm curious
Where the comments are coming
from with respect to this is
Maybe not as below market as we
thought.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and, um, board
members.
One of the comments that we
received was from a nonprofit
housing group in Las Cruces, and
they felt that our interest rate
was a lot higher and they
thought that it wasn't
attractive enough to to use if,
if our rates were
Yeah.
Um
As as as as we got it outlined
in this particular policy.
Interesting. I'm only aware of
one that I can think of, one
fund that's
Probably better than this.
Mr. Chairman, 60% of prime is
amazing. That, that is a
fantastic rate and anybody that
thinks that that rate is too
high, it's
It's not active in the same
market as the rest of us, so
just my comment.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, I, I agree
with Mr. Collins, you know,
just, it, it appears that the,
the project is just not viable
if, if, if you can't have
You're not gonna get better
rates just about anywhere,
bottom line, yeah, this is, this
is, this is close to charity
rates.
I agree. I think that's my
assessment as well.
I'm just curious.
Mr. descent, I'm curious how
many comments total do we
receive?
So, Mr. Chairman, we're not
required to go out for public
for public comment, um, and, and
what's been happening is we've
been doing a similar process
with our board, which is
Putting out for their
information, um, you know, the
structuring policies and where
they are. So we've been
receiving ad hoc comments as
they're coming in, um, and I'd
say I, I've received a handful,
and John's probably received a
handful. Yeah. That's correct,
Mr. Chair, remember you said,
I've received a a handful of
comments, um, and
They they're all somewhat
similar, but um I think, I think
for the most part we're, I think
we're on target with these
particular policies.
We have one comment that's been
received where they uh developer
is asking for no interest
payments during the construction
period, and it's not clear to us
whether they want a capitalized
interest.
And not simply, you know,
whether or not the interest is
accruing was left unsaid, um,
but they are wishing to not pay
uh interest during the
construction period.
I wish for a lot of things also,
but
I haven't received everything I
wished for.
That that's what Santa Claus is
for.
He stopped coming to my house.
Hm
And, any other comments?
Or questions from members of the
board.
Right.
Mr. Chairman, I will make one
final comment on the interest
rate thing. You know, Prime is
8.5 right now, so 60% of Prime
is 5.1, and I think it's general
consensus that that crime rate
is gonna drop over the next few
months.
So we'll likely see that thing
go down to the floor, um.
He here soon.
So, um,
I think we stick with the rate
we've got, so.
I'm of the same opinion. Thank
you, Mr. Collins.
Right.
Hm
That's something we have to vote
on? Is it just Mr. Chairman,
that was information only.
Again, we're using this
opportunity to um put some
sunlight in on into our process
so that uh folks know where we
are, it's reducing a little bit
of anxiety and giving um an
opportunity for them to provide
some positive feedback.
Right.
Thank you, Ms. Russell.
All right.
Demonstration of the online
application, Mr. Johnson.
Mhm.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman,
playing along online. I put a
link to the demo application in.
Zoom chat, uh, members that are
present there is link in your
tablets.
Live to the application as well.
I'm happy to do a demonstration
today. I thought I'd just start
off with a high level summary,
uh, we can go through it in
granular detail or um just take
questions. Um, this is the, the
honor that I get, which is to
work with my team and all the
other staff at the finance
authority to take all these
lovely
Statutory requirements and rules
and policies and wrap them all
together into an online
application experience.
It helps the client and the
staff.
Uh, effectively and accurately
process application.
Um
You
Yeah, why don't you?
You'll see my screen now.
OK, so, um, just some key
features to talk about with the
application, we did work to
design this is one application,
but to be clear, the application
process does happen in two
steps. This program still does
require this uh eligibility
determination based on the
insufficiency or lack of other
capital in the project and
demonstrating that with the
first portion of the application
uh does have essentially a
narrative uh process for the
applicant to tell.
us about that capital stack.
A little bit about the project.
Um, and the delta between what
they have and what they need and
answer a few questions and that
takes place in that section.
Once they finish that section,
Folks will submit the
application, uh, our staff will
uh turn around a response of
opening up the full application
within 24 hours.
Um, and once the full
application is open, uh, we have
an experience that uh.
For all of the policy, I'm
sorry, all of the.
OERB prioritization policy
questions first, and then
secondly, all of the financing
questions, second.
Um, the application is logic
driven, meaning that there is
built-in logic that helps for
Only relevant questions to be
asked in the event of certain
answers, so a good one here is
The answer to this question
about urban and rural.
Changes the criteria of which
they answer the following
question below, that happens
throughout the application is
necessary.
Uh, the application that folks
will use is securely hosted on
our portal.
Um, the application will allow
for the applicants to provide uh
as much supporting evidence and
documentation they have. One of
the things that we do is allow
them essentially tell us about
that evidence throughout the
application and then at the end,
a custom request for those.
Attachments will be
But not ask
Um, you'll see throughout, uh,
specifically in the
prioritization project portion
of the application that it's
extremely closely aligned to the
way the policy follows, so that
folks can use the policy while
side by side to the application
to understand why we're asking
the questions that
Asking and the points. Um, and
as I mentioned, if you scroll
halfway down, you'll find where
uh section that I we we deemed
information necessary for
underwriting takes place.
And that's essentially just to
Show the next section that
allows for folks to answer
questions specific to the loan.
Start here
Uh
Throughout the users will be
able to save and return so you
don't have to schedule 3 hours
to fill out this application, or
at least not in one.
One stop
Um, hopefully it won't take that
much time anyhow.
Uh, and then lastly, the way
that it's structured and the
system is structured, uh, the
applicants will be able to, or
I'm sorry, the NMFA will be able
to capture the data in a way
that allows for us to both
comply with the transparency and
public disclosure of the project
information and evaluation while
also protecting anything else
that's been deemed confidential
by the act.
Yeah.
That, Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to
take any questions. Thank you.
Any questions from members of
the board.
He did an incredible job. I've
been working on something
similar at TST and the detail
and everything. A great job to
you and your team. Thank you.
So Mr. Chairman, again, I wanted
to highlight that we'll be
asking the same kinds of
questions um for the commercial
development projects, so it's
the same format as as Adam has
mentioned. We are asking, as
we're required at the end to
determine that there was
insufficient funds to complete
the project. I want to highlight
for anyone that's listening,
that does not mean that the that
this fund is the lender of last
resort.
Um, we believe this is a gap
financing project of program and
that there's opportunities for
us to supplant maybe even equity
and attract developers into the
state that may not otherwise.
Um, with their development here.
So,
I want to just make sure that
that sort of insufficiency of
funds does not equate to lender
of last resort because that is
definitely not the program
that's before you either in our
policies or in your policies.
Want to make sure you got that.
Also, there's a section of the
uh application that deals solely
with the project. That's the
part that we call and rule the
project application pursuant to
statute that's available to the
public.
And then lastly, there's the uh
ele elements that are there for
underwriting. That's as we call
them in the rule, the financial
application, um, and pursuant to
the statute, there are the
confidential portions of that
are accepted from IPRA. So there
are, while it's in one form, we
still have delineated sections
that allow us to protect
confidential information, market
information in particular, um,
and allow for the public
disclosure as as contemplated by
the status.
So 3 sections, one application,
and ultimately, uh, should be
one experience that is much
easier for the developer
applicant, uh, to fill out. So,
and both, both programs will
mirror each other in that
regard.
Thank you, Ms. Russell.
Um, one of the questions that I
have with respect to there was
one section of the
infrastructure that we were
talking about.
It had kind of a difficult
definition of the most we could
do depending on.
Uh, mortgage finance authority
limits. It did we have an
explanation or something that
kind of guided people in that?
area
Um, Mr. Chairman, you're
referring specifically to
Uh
My, my general answer to that
question is the
The portal itself is
Highly populated with resources,
definitions to I'm sorry to
frequently ask questions to the
definitions is provided in all
of these underlying documents.
Perhaps I could get with you
offline and get super clear and
make sure that we identify the
link.
Yeah, that was one that I in
prior meetings, I thought that's
gonna be something that kind of
trips people up and they can't
figure it out, so.
Just
Any other comments or questions
from the members of the board.
I, I think, uh,
I would reiterate
Me do sets
Um that uh you guys have done a
fantastic job.
And gearing this and getting it
up and going fairly quickly.
Mr. Chairman, they're really
good. It's a great team.
Mm
Not something you can do at
home.
I'll try this out. That's right.
All right.
Timelines.
Mr. Rook. Yes, Mr. Chairman and
board members, so this is the
one actual item that you have on
the, the agenda today.
And this is the recommendation
to open up the opportunity
enterprise housing development
project application, um, and the
timeline for uh this current
opening round that we're
proposing and also future
rounds.
So as, as you all may recall in
July 2024, uh, the opportunity,
um, this board.
Um, approved it the evaluation
or prioritization policies that
elaborates on the requirements
that how an applicant would
receive points um for, um, um,
for their projects as they are
reviewed through a housing
committee uh review process.
The application that Adam
presented today is the
application that we would use
for the upcoming round.
That the policies allow for a
maximum of 100 points and I, and
I believe there's a minimum of
60 points to uh be able to be
ranked and to move forward to
the application process.
So what staff is recommending is
that we open up the um first
round of the housing um program
on September 4th and making $30
million available, um, and we
would close that around on
September 16th, or I'm sorry,
October 16th. That would be a
very short timeline.
And so, um, in this, after this
first round, we, what we would
do is staff would evaluate um
our the application, our
policies to make sure that
everything aligns with the, the
current um uh environment and
the housing area, and if, and if
we need to make any uh changes
to the policies or changes to
the application, we will be able
to do that.
In the 2nd round would be open
from January 8th to February,
January 8th of 2025 and February
12 of 2025.
And then we would do the same um
evaluation and then the next one
would open in around 3 April
30th of 2025 through May 28th,
2025.
Now I would like to point out
that the, the two rounds
following the first round, we
would not have a limit of $300
we would then, uh, open up the
program to its full capacity at
that point in time if projects
uh were able to come forward and
use those particular funds, um,
staff is gonna just um do a
statewide outreach during this
time frame to uh promote the
program and, and have
conversations uh through either.
ar or uh meetings and also um
try to um um
Get the, get the word out about
this program and also our other
program.
So with that, staff recommends
approval, uh, the housing
development project application
and the opening timelines as
proposed, and I stand for
questions.
Thank you, Mr. Brett.
Do I have any questions or
comments from members of the
board?
Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to
again reiterate one thing which
is that there are.
For each program, the commercial
development program we'll call
it in the housing development
program. There are two separate
sets of policies, um, the O's
policies and the finance
authority's policies and
different sets of rules. So
we'll do a similar process as
John mentioned, once we get the
first round of housing
applications, in particular in
will both help the committee
look at its policies and we'll
look at our own policies
internally. So there will be two
different
Sets of policies that are being
reviewed in the interim between
that first round and that 2nd
round. That's why there's a
fairly long period in between
there, just wanted to highlight
that, um, and again, for both
the commercial development and
the housing development we're
looking at a 6-week application
period for the first one, a
5-week application period for
the second one, and we
anticipate again the four week
application period for the 3rd 1
should funding be available? So,
uh, because at that point we
expect that there will be fewer
such as fewer issues, people
will understand the program
better. So we just wanted to
make sure that we had enough on
the front end built into the
unanticipated events and so
that's
Once you approve this, if you
approve this particular
schedule, we'll get it on the
website, so people know in
advance when the next
application period is, um, and
they can predict then, you know,
how to move forward with their
project development.
Thank you, Ms. Russell.
Any questions or comments from
the members of the board?
Thank you, Mr. Doucette.
Second, Mr. Chair.
Mr.
All those in favor?
All right. Bye. Bye.
Any opposed?
theories
Well done.
Except this public comment.
You have any members of the
public that have questions or
comments?
bring to our attention.
No.
Um, I have one question, and
that is uh how the prior rounds
are doing, do we have applicants
that have made it through the
process on the commercial side?
Mr. Chairman, I believe we have
2 projects that are coming forth
to our credit committee in
August.
Um, that, so they've completed
underwriting and are heading to
our credit committee uh next
Tuesday.
Mr. Chairman, on that point, uh,
Ms. Russell, if you don't mind,
maybe can we just get like a
simple, you know, kind of table
of just a status of where where
you.
You know, right, we're we're
just starting out, but like if
we can have like a just a a
table that has a status for
each.
You know, for, for housing and
for, for commercial and just
where, where everything's at in
each um stage and, and, and then
eventually how much we've, how
much money we've sent out the
door.
Mr. Chairman, we're happy to
provide that. That's a great
idea.
Thank you.
Great suggestion.
Any other public comments or
member comments?
Seeing no.
Next board meeting.
DVD
Yes, Mr. Chairman, so we will be
scheduling one after the first
application round closes, um,
and we'll just, we're, we're
having to kind of um uh find the
right date relative to all the
other boards that we oversee, so
we're honing in on that as we
speak. Um, so we'll, we'll be
back to you very shortly with a
proposed schedule for the rest
of what we expect to be the rest
of the year, um, for evaluation
projects, evaluating the
projects that are, that have
come in as well as the policy
review, uh, processes, so that
should be out to you very
shortly.
Literally is TBD. I should tell
my wife to hold off on.
The trip to somewhere with the
beach.
I don't think I would.
With that, unless there's any
other questions or comments, uh,
I will take a motion to adjourn.
All right, thank you, Mr.
Doucet and Mr. Trujillo, all
those in favor?
Right. Any pains?
Any opposed?
Carries. Thank you everybody.
