Or member Silva.
Member Condit.
Remember Collins.
Remember real.
Member Lucero.
Yeah.
Member Garcia.
Remember Hernandez.
President via Zoom
Member Bishop.
And member Martinez.
Present via Zoom.
Mr Chair. We do have a quorum
this afternoon.
Right?
I'm assuming that members have
had a chance to look at the
agenda.
And motion to approve the
agenda.
So
Second
Thank you.
All those in favor. Bye bye.
And the board minutes.
Not quite a novel.
Can you not hear me?
I don't know.
Mm.
Hopefully, that's better. Oh, I
can hear myself That's not good.
All right, uh, board minutes.
I hope everybody's had a chance
to review it.
Not quite the
Li literary masterpiece that
we'd hoped for, but
Mr Chair and moved to approve
the May 23rd 2024 board
meetings.
Thank you. Member member
Koslowski second.
Thank you, member Koloski.
All those in favor.
I
The opposed
Great moving right along
election of the minutes.
That would be who's who's
representing the nominating
committee.
Sorry, Mr Chairman. I believe I
was, um to report out from the
nominating committee. Um, the
nominating committee, which you
appointed at the May 23rd board
included members Hernandez, Duce
and Bishop. Um, and they were to
present a slate of officers for
the positions of chair vice
chair and Secretary for the
Opportunity Enterprise and
Housing Development Review
Board. The committee met and
recommends the following slate
of officers for chair. The
committee recommend
Re election of Joe, Far for vice
chair of the committee
recommends the election of
Nicole Martinez and for
Secretary Um, which includes
designee, Uh Sam Collins, the
committee recommends the
Re-election of Mark Roper.
Great.
Thank you. Um, I. I guess the
nominating committee since I
kind of volunteer them. It's
kind of volto me back.
You get what you reap or you
reap what you sow or whatever
the statement is, um
Do you have any commentary from
any of the members on that?
Sleep.
Hearing none.
Can I get a motion to approve?
Remember, Cos lose your proof.
All right, Mr. Chair, I second
OK?
I was in favor.
I I
any post?
OK, moving right along.
Round two application
reconsideration, I would assume
that's you. Mar Marquita. Mr.
Chairman. I'll turn it over to
my colleagues to the left of me
Great.
Mr Brooks.
Um
This chairman and of of board
members. I'm gonna turn it over
to, uh, Brian, who is going to
handle it? So we we have a, um,
a
The US Olympic, uh, relay team
going
Uh, Mr Chairman, members of the
board. Um the item before you is
the result of the request from
McDermott Group LLC Rag Arm
Development Company to re
evaluate and rescore their
second round application.
A little background. The
Opportunity Enterprise Review
Board approved
Prioritization of round two
applications, with six projects
moving forward to the second
phase financing application.
The six recommended projects
were given until May 31st to
complete the financing
application underwriting is
currently underway.
McDermott Group Rag Arm
Development Company requested
reconsideration of their
application within the allowed
time frame and in accordance
with the OEB rules.
They provide the clarification
on their own ownership structure
and attested to meeting the
requirements of a non owner
occupied project.
The re evaluation and Resco of
RD CS application resulted in a
new score of 55.33 meeting, the
staff recommended threshold of
50 plus points.
The table in your memo shows the
average project points given by
the reviewers with the original
score for R DC being
43.75 and the Resc number being
55.33.
Our recommendation based on the
revaluation conducted by the
ranking team on May 28.
Staff recommends granting
McDermott Group LLC Ragworm
development company access to
the opportunity Enterprise
Financing application. I stand
for any questions, Mr Chairman,
I think for the record, I note
that again. The policy currently
requires a vote of six point
score of 60 or below. So this
is, uh, in effect a policy
waiver, which was also in place
for the last, Um,
recommendation, so it's in
keeping with the recommendation
staff made on May 20 on May 2nd.
Um, but it it is, in fact, still
a technical policy waiver. I
just wanted to make that known
for the record.
And you guys feel comfortable
with the Resco.
Yeah, we had AAA long meeting. I
went through the, uh, the
application completely. We got
100% participation from all the
rankers. Uh so we had, uh, six
full
Scores, uh and the average uh
Represents that.
Right?
Any questions or comments from
the members.
Well.
I recommend approval.
Thank you, Mr Collins.
Mr. Chair, Mrs Member Luo. I
moved to approve.
Thank you, member of the
C.
All right, we'll take. We'll
take me Lucero is the is the
motion and member Collins as the
second
Uh
oh. Great.
Welcome McKenzie.
Um
All those in favor.
Any pos.
Great.
Moving right along.
Proposed application cycle.
Who's handling that?
Mr Chairman, I will start this.
Um this item. It's an
information item, particularly
for the newer members of the
board. Um
Of this particular, um,
application process will be in
place for both the commercial
development Fund as well as the
Housing Development Fund. Um,
and there's a little bit of
change from the prior way in
which we, um solicited
application, So I just want to
make this note that we'll be
doing it differently for the
opportunity Enterprise Fund and
then and then we'll, um
We'll also use the same process
for the housing.
Um, so I just wanted a little
bit of background that the
opportunity the act the
opportunity Enterprise, Uh, and
Housing Development Act provides
that there are two different
kinds of applications that are
to be solicited one by the
opportunity Enterprise Board.
Um, and that's the project
application and the other by the
New Mexico Finance Authority,
and that's the financing
application. The reason they're
separated. Is that the house
The, UM, project application is
available to the public.
So the information provided
there is available to the public
and from the onset. We were on
We were a little uncomfortable
having certain pieces of
financial information appear in
those projects because, of
course, we don't want our
clients to be at a disadvantage
by allowing someone access to
proprietary information. Um and
and, you know, market
information that they wouldn't
otherwise have unless they asked
through Ipra for a copy of that
application.
So we were. We were very clear
to separate the two and had in
fact, this review process in
between the House, the project
application and the financing
application. Um, the financing
application pursuant to the act
is has proprietary and
confidential information. Um,
uh, accepted from IR. So it is.
It is separate, and apart from
it, Um, So what we've done is
two separate processes that
hasn't worked very well. So in
you know, the experience
We've had through two rounds is
that it's very difficult to keep
the attention of the clients
through the entire 1st and 2nd
application process. So what we
are recommending is that we
still have two separate
applications, but that they
happen virtually at the same
time, so an applicant will
complete their project
application. If it is complete,
They immediately granted access
to the financing application,
and that allows one application
process from a client
perspective. It allows us a lot
more complete.
Information from the beginning.
Uh so that we can, you know, not
just trust but verify that we'll
actually that the projections
and the financial feasibility
work out as they say they do in
the narrative, so we'll be able
to, you know, verify that that
information holds through, um
And for pub purposes of you
know, I PR and inspection of
public records will still be
able to keep confidential
information confidential, so I
wanted to just go through that
process. It is a change. We
think it's going to have a
positive impact on our clients
and that they'll only have to
apply once there is a
disadvantage in that they'll
have to complete twice the
application if they don't
otherwise meet 60 points that
will you know that That's just a
a risk that they'll run as a
result of the new process?
Um our rules currently provide
for this, so there is no change
to the process from a rule
perspective. Um, we'll note from
the beginning that, uh, on this
top of this page that the
Finance Authority certainly for
the housing program and the
Economic Development Department
and the NM FA for the Commercial
Development program are
responsible for outreach. What
we're proposing, Um and it's
it's clear in the housing
policy. That's before you and
will be made clear. I think, as
we make those recommend
For the commercial development
program is that we actually
promulgate a schedule of
applications at least two or
three out in advance so that
clients have an opportunity to
plan and not be caught unawares,
uh, that there's an application
process coming, so we would like
in the July meeting to put forth
a schedule of applications for
both a commercial development
program and the housing
development program and that we
can then work on a more formal
outreach process to make sure
that we're reaching all the
relevant parties.
Both of those programs. Um then
the applications will open
again. It'll be both a project
application and a financing
application to separate ones
happening virtually at the same
time if those are complete
And that will include, in one
instance a market study. Um then
they'll go through to the staff
evaluation committees. There's a
little bit of difference for the
two different programs. The
I'll just call it the commercial
development program has an
application review team that's
comprised of economic
development and NM FA.
And currently, the housing only
has an M FA staff.
So the the application teams
will vary depending on the
program. But if they're once
they're complete, and they're
evaluated, that'll go to their
respective committees. Um and
then, ultimately to the to the
board for consideration. It is
likely that the information that
will come forward
Were those complete information
will be available for the ones
are being recommended, and
they'll probably be just a list
or a summary of applications for
those that are not being
recommended so that you don't
have too many volumes of
information ahead of you, Um
you'll be making a
recommendation from that point
over to the NM FA board and then
that's where we will. Um uh, if
if it's a no. Their application
stops. If it's a Yes then we'll
start our underwriting process
immediately and not have to go
through a separate application
process. We have an internal
Review. We have a board
committee process and then a
full board approval before
they're granted conditional
approval. Um and then we go
through a due diligence, Uh,
final due diligence and closing.
So that's really all I really
wanted to share it. It impacts
the first part of the
application. There's no part
after you've made your
recommendation. There's really
no difference at the NM FA
perspective, except that a se a
separate application isn't
required. At that time. It'll
happen up front.
So, Mister chairman. We're
certainly happy to answer any
questions.
Great.
I've got some questions, but
I'll open up to the
Other board members. First,
Anybody has questions.
Mr Chairman.
Go ahead. No, you go ahead.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. A
question if I may.
Absolutely.
Uh, just, uh, Miss Russell on
the first part of the flow
chart. Uh, on that
Other than
I'm sorry, Mr Chairman on the
first part of the flow chart.
Miss Russell. Uh, it indicates
that the the application is not
complete. Then it goes back to,
uh, the second, uh, item in the
flow chart there during the
application process. Do they
have a opportunity to correct
any deficiencies in the
application or inserting the
additional or do they have to
wait till the next funding round
to submit an application? So, Mr
Chairman, That's an excellent
question. If they submitted
early, and we find that there's
a
Efficiency.
We can give them a complete, you
know, breakdown of what they're
missing. Um, if it's a minor,
uh, piece of information that's
missing after the application
period closes, We'll accept it,
but we obviously wouldn't
accept. For instance, a market
study, which is a required
document from the beginning that
would not be allowed to be
submitted after the close of the
period. So it it is gonna be
whether it's a major item or in
what we just call a minor
additional information needed to
complete our understanding of
the project.
Thank you, Mr Chairman Russell.
Thank you. Somebody else had a
question.
Mr Chairman, M Russell is
McKenzie. Um it sounds like what
you're trying to accomplish is
to run these in parallel, which
is awesome. Um, time is money.
What? Uh, how much time based on
the first round of commercial
applications that you guys have
experienced? How much time do
you feel? This process? Change?
um will will yield for future
applications.
Mr Chairman, Um, we're expecting
a 45 day application period and
again once we have final input
from, uh, on the rules and the
policies, we'll be able to
narrow that down a little if
there's more time needed, um,
but 45 days, we think, at least
initially is a good application
timeline. Financial information
may be trickier to get
submitted. Um, but and then
another, uh, 4 to 6 weeks to get
the application through the
process into the opportunity
Review board. I think
But
McKenzie is asking is actually
my question, too. And that is
how long does it take to average
applicant? Do you think to fill
out all the information on the
application process? Mr
Chairman, I would expect if they
actually have their market
feasibility study. Um, we
wouldn't It wouldn't take more
than a you know a day or two.
Those are not complicated
applications if you have the
information
If you don't have the
information, it takes a little
longer, So we wanna give enough
time for people who don't know
about the application of the
immediate outset to be able to
complete a a enough time to
complete an application. Um, and
again, it's gonna be dependent
ultimately on the rules that are
finalized and the policies
McKenzie does that. Answer your
question.
My question was really more
about the change and the benefit
that it will yield. Um it sounds
like maybe this first go around
as the things have been getting
worked out. Maybe there may have
been some delays and kind of a
process is running in cereal
instead of in parallel, and I
was just curious. If if, um Miss
Russell and staff thought that
this might save 2030 days in the
overall application process, Mr
Chairman, we can tell you for
certain it will. It will, um,
save at least six weeks.
OK?
I don't know if you could hear
that, Mr Bishop. But six weeks,
that's that's that's great.
That's awesome.
Any other questions from board
members.
Right?
Thank you for that update.
Next year.
Housing development
prioritization policy.
Mr Chairman, I think we're on
the commercial first. Are we
still OK?
Skipped one
Commercial development.
Prioritization policy.
All right? Uh, Mr Chairman and
board members, which you see
before you is a memo that, um
The T one of these off
But
You're done.
OK?
Um, Mr Chairman and board
members, which you see before
you is A, um, a memo that
outlines some of the, uh, policy
updates that we have made in
regards to the, uh, commercial
side of the prioritization
policies. And in October 2023
the, um, the the bored, reviewed
and approved it, uh, the
commercialization policies,
which governs the prioritization
of projects this this, um
The October 23 policies were
used for the 1st and 2nd rounds
of the application process.
Uh, the initial program design,
um, led, um to both.
Owner occupied in non owner
occupied development projects
and therefore the prioritization
for rounds one and two reflected
their regional house. Uh um,
Hospital seven legislation from
the 2022 session. It features,
uh, such categories as job
creation. Future business
occupancy, uh, defining frontier
locations throughout the state
of New Mexico and also in
included, uh
Such as, UM
Uh, items that included from the
public comment period. Uh,
scoring for Jedi training, an
apprenticeship and and and other
items like that.
As we review the policies and
review the the applications that
were coming in. We found that
there was issues, um, in trying
to meet some of those those
scores and and therefore we had,
um, projects that didn't meet
the the threshold.
Also, um in the 2024
legislation, House, Bill 195
went back and redefined the
project. Speci, uh, projects
that, um, we're gonna be, uh,
finance more specifically non
owner occupied development
projects. So round three and
these prioritization policies
will be updated or have been
updated or will be updated
with with the idea of a couple
Things number one. The
elimination of future business
occupants, because as a true,
uh, spec development Um um,
project you often You don't know
who the future business occupant
is gonna be in, Uh, that's gonna
occupy the development.
Also, um, the frontier
locations Uh uh, was, um,
deleted as a result be, uh, the
information was not consistent
with the, uh and
These data, and so therefore we,
um expanded it and and and gave
a better definition of rule
versus urban
Also there was a removal of such
items as
Uh and more defined, uh, ways we
we We define, uh
Training and apprenticeship.
Also, we removed a Jedi and
then um, and removed job
creation as um, respect to, um
Um
The the the being able to, uh,
identify the jobs that are gonna
be involved in a spec
development. Um
Project. So what you see on
page uh, 14 as a table that
outlines some of the things that
we're proposing as a result of
uh, the change of legislation
and also what's gonna move
forward. Um and
Move forward with the Round
three. There's an addition to,
um definitions of unrelated, uh,
opportunity, enterprise partner.
And in addition, uh, the
definition of unrelated
percentage of occupancy. And so
we define that a little better.
Uh, In these current policies,
we define it at 30%. And that
was based on looking at, um the
SB a definition of what is owner
occupied and taking that
Um, 60% number that they use and
divided by two and then also
given, um some op opportunity
for a, uh, a developer to have
their own small space in the
project, uh, and then also given
space for spec development, so
Then the location of developer
we gave preference to New
Mexico, Um based developers over
out of state or national
developers.
Um
Number two the community impact
and support.
Uh, we removed the redevelopment
from environmental impacts and
score it separately.
The size of a building is put
into an inventory into
community. So therefore we are
looking at the size of a
building as a respect to the
community that it's going into
as a respect to job creation. So
the larger the space therefore,
the thought would be more job
creation would be, um, um, would
take place as, um
A larger building versus a
smaller building it it there's a
less job creation.
Also and the potential of having
workforce growth as um because
of training and opportunities.
So, uh, in some areas they are
community colleges will and
develop new programs as a result
of a new business coming into a
community. Uh, that's an example
of, uh, For example, in our, uh
uh, movie industry where, uh,
three different community
colleges added in a special
programs as a result of the
movie industry.
And then lastly, um,
redevelopment, uh, that could be
used as a revitalization of a
community through eliminating a
bright, a blight and unused
um, properties, uh, that became
a drain on a community. So those
are some of the changes that
we've made in community impact
and support.
Number three project location
and building type.
If evaluates the types of
businesses that are moving in to
the community and then also we
removed, uh, a frontier areas
that out of that space, because,
uh, we could not find a true and
definition of frontier areas and
also, uh, the the information we
were able to find was
inconsistent. Uh, some, uh, some
information and websites have
frontier data that was outdated,
such as, um, uh, information
back to 2000.
And and we just cannot, um, get
a true definition of what that
was and then working with the,
uh, economic development
department. Um, we we were able
to come up with a true
definition of what, um, rule.
Uh yes.
And then, lastly on application
need and readiness.
Um, we looked at financial
soundness. Financial soundness
has been removed because the NM
FA credit and lending department
will make that determination
when they do the underwriting
and therefore, um, that aspect
of the, um, ranking, uh, was
difficult for the rankers to to
come up with with with financial
soundness. And so we decided we
should leave that with the
finance Authority. Uh, lending
and credit department and not
score that.
At at the ranking process.
Additional points was given to,
uh, leveraging private capital
with public funds so more um,
private capital, um, in a
project as a, um and twinned up
with public funds. We we thought
that that was, uh, that was
essential in terms of, uh, and
development projects and giving
more. Um, uh, private capital
into the market and into this
space will
Uh, benefit, uh, project and
expand the use of pro of public
funds.
And next project readiness also
given additional points with
higher, uh, level definition for
high readiness projects, So we,
um what we did is expand. What?
What we would consider high
readiness projects, um, adding
in, uh, things such as a, um
Permitting, uh, the proper
permitting, um different types
of documents such as site
control, um, and making sure
that uh, projects has site
control And then, um
And I. I can't think of the
other point in zoning. Yes,
zoning.
And then lastly, uh, project uh,
the inclusion of the proper
zoning gets to the readiness so
that that was an additional
information. Um, I will turn it
over to Brian to go over. Uh,
any additional items I know we
have, uh, attached to both a
clean version and a rare version
of the of the document.
Thank you, JB. Um, Mr Chairman,
members of board. I'm going to
just briefly go over the
scoring, Uh,
In those categories that were
just presented, Um the total
maximum score, uh, remains at
100. That's the way it has been,
um different scores of baked
into this. So the the first, uh,
section is location of developer
That's the in state or out of
state. Uh, choice. That's five
points.
Uh, community impact is 35
points.
Um with community support, uh,
receiving 10 points.
Environmental impact, receiving
five points.
Total square footage.
10 points.
Apprenticeship programs, five
points.
And redevelopment five points.
The next category is location
and building type.
That's 25 project location.
Being either urban or rural. Uh,
Is a maximum of 10 rural five
points for urban
Total investment.
Is it? Uh, a maximum of 10
points with five points for
urban 10 points for rural
Business type.
That would be the type of
structure that's being proposed,
Um, that would be either retail
office, uh, retail at two
points.
Commercial, uh or office three
points.
Light manufacturing four points.
Heavy manufacturing or
industrial five points a total
of five points.
The next category is applicant
need and readiness is 25 points.
Uh, includes qualified
development team five points.
Leveraging of private capital
project readiness, 10 points
And then the last category is
Project designation.
It includes target industry.
Those are the NMEDD, uh,
statewide industries five
points.
Economic diversification five
points.
Any board members have questions
on the scoring system.
Mister chairman, if I could just
make a couple of additional
comments, Um I think one of the
things you'll note, the biggest
one of the biggest changes from
the prior criteria to this
criteria is the elimination of
jobs specifically, um, because
we had construction jobs in
there and then we had sort of
the more permanent jobs if you
will, um and we've substituted
in lieu of the size of the
facility. Um, and the, uh, total
size of the investment as a
proxy for both the construction
jobs and then
Combination with the kind of
industry uh, for the permanent
jobs to be completed. We thought
that was the fairest way to get
to those that actually had a
sense of who was gonna be in
their office or in their
facility versus those that had
no idea because you obviously
have to be zoned for something.
Your your, Uh, market analysis
will have to have some sort of,
um, underlying assumption, So
that's what we did, Uh, in order
to try to, uh, balance the
difference between those that
kind of knew who was going to be
in their facility versus those
that did not
So that the proxy for employment
comes from those two items. Um
And I think that's really Oh,
and then, um, additional points
for private capital was the
proxy for financial feasibility.
Um, so that's that was the other
place in which we made some
adjustments. Uh, was it easier
way to score that and much more
transparent? I think that would
be the way I'd phrase that.
OK?
I'm curious as to the scoring of
retail versus office versus
Manufacturing. Uh,
Probably the more job creating
of the of the bunch would be
office. But yet that's a three
in large industrial is five.
Explain that one
May I take a first shot? Mr
Chairman, we were looking
ultimately at a total jobs,
including indirect jobs that are
created as a result of the
project. Um, more manufacturing
jobs.
They create a higher spin off
than retail or office. And so
that's really what that the
basis of that
Any other questions for any of
the board members.
I would also note Mr Chairman,
the next step for these policies
Should you approve them for
posting, Um, it would be that
they would go out for public
comment, so your approval today
is to put them out for public
comment. And in the final form
that you're, um authorizing them
to go for public comment that
comment will be received and
then brought back to you, along
with the comment from the rules.
Um, that's scheduled to be held
on the 20th and 21st. So, uh,
there is one more time to look
at this to absorb it and then
also to incorporate the
feedback.
From stakeholders.
Great. Thank you.
Any other comments or questions
from the board members. Mr
Bishop has his hand up.
Bishop.
Mr Chairman, Miss Russell will
any of the existing projects
that haven't met that threshold
of 50 points? Be resor.
Under this new paradigm,
assuming it it gets approved, as
um, as currently presented after
public comment.
Um, Mister Chairman member, Uh,
Bishop in order. Well, any
project that, uh, comes forward
in the third round with, uh,
being, uh, using this
particular, uh, scoring policy,
So any project that does not go
through the full ranking? Uh, I
mean through through the whole
lending and credit underwriting
process, um, and if they decide
to resubmit, then they would
have to go through this process.
Thank you, Mr Brooks.
Answer your question, Mr Bishop.
Yes, it does. It's it's gonna be
an election of the applicant,
not not an automatic re score to
see if any of those projects
that are close, um
Satisfied. The 50 point
requirement Now is is my
understanding.
Uh, Mr Chairman, I just
I would like to clarify that
that 50 point exemption was for
round two.
Uh, and that the 60 point will
continue, Um, moving forward as
A rule is a policy policy. Um
and they
In the event that it's necessary
to ask for a waiver again. That
would happen in future rounds
and forward so that 50 point
Exemption.
Is just around.
To at this moment in time.
Yeah, that was a waiver just for
the understood.
Any other questions or comments.
Right?
We need to make a motion on that
one.
I believe we do.
We move it be approved as
presented
Remember Koslowski second
Thank you.
All those in favor.
Right, I. I
And pose.
Motion passes.
Housing prioritization policy.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. So when
we last met, we went through
some general questions as to the
what the policies should
contain. Um and we got about
halfway through. I think we hit
about half of the targets, uh,
intended, it Turns out it was a
much more difficult set of
questions than than I frankly
understood. Um
Last time that we met, we looked
at whether or not uh, we should
have housing set asides or the
specific criteria for one type
of housing over another type of
housing, whether we should have
geographic diversity,
Ultimately, uh, these policies
are predicated on the goal of
producing as much housing as
quickly as possible. The the
focus on the deficit of housing
stock was really the goal of
this
Of the policies, so I just
wanted to say from the outset
that that is, um uh, an implicit
goal or explicit goal. Um, of
the policies. Um
Uh, let me see where I wanna
take this. There's there's a lot
here, Mister Chairman, um very
there. These policies are
predicated or based on the same
kind of scoring system that we
saw with the opportunity
Enterprise revolving fund the
commercial development side we
have. Additionally, the
community needed an alignment,
which is 35 points. Fun
deficiency. Um, which is 30
points, applicant need and
readiness for 15 and support of
land use practices, which is
required by
Statute 20 points. The 20 points
is not required by statute, but
that we have
Some priority to applicants that
are in communities that have
adopted these best practices.
reforms. Um, the policies also
provide that there's going to be
some concentration limits
different from the ones that are
in the, um, the commercial
development program, so the
current policies here again,
they'll go out for public review
and comment is that a project
may not receive more than $20
million of OE housing
development funding, um, that
the total outstanding loans
Any county may not exceed 50% of
the funds and that at least 30%
of the funds be dedicated to
projects in rural communities.
So these these concentration
limits are very different than
the ones we just saw in the
opportunity of revolving fund
that commercial development side
so I wanted to highlight the
differences. The formats very
similar. Some of the basic
criteria in terms of the
categories are very similar. But
in fact the the rest of it is
Different.
Let me just go to the actual
policy itself and spend a little
bit of time going through them.
Um
I think again. The explicit um,
goal is to catalyze below market
rate housing production across
the state to increase the supply
of attainable housing for new
Mexicans.
Um
I would note that we have some
definitions here that are new.
They did not include They're
not. They don't come from the
statute. They're not included in
the rule, so I wanna highlight
some of those affordable housing
projects I think is implied, but
it's explicit here that it's
residential housing, primarily
for persons or households of low
or modern income is defined in a
local housing plan or by
programs managed by the Mortgage
Finance Authority.
The application, as we just
discussed includes the explicit
uh
Uh, reference to both a project
application as well as a
financing application. Um, I'm
sorry that there's a typo on
section D. That should be a
definition for attainable
housing. Um, and we just put put
that in for convenience so that
we don't have to stay affordable
and middle income or moderate,
Uh, workforce housing so
attainable housing means
affordable housing or workforce
development housing, and it's
just a way to capture either
kind of project within this, um
A policy.
Um
The next page.
Um, the Housing development
committee is noted in here
because it does go through the
process that the committee that
was established by bylaws.
Housing development and partner
comes from the act. Market study
is, uh, we define that because
it does show up in a couple of
places and is a required
document. Um, I want to know,
uh, call out that the market
study must be dated within the
last six months and meet the
parameters established by the
Mortgage Finance authority
again. We want to align these as
much as possible. Many of the
applicants will be applicants
that are looking for
infrastructure for affordable
Housing projects, and they may
have just gone through the M FA
process are about to go through
the M FA process, So we want to
align those as much as possible
so that we don't have
differences in what they are
required to submit for one
application versus another. So M
FA S some of M FA S. Um, uh,
current processes or program
guidelines are referenced
throughout or sprinkled
throughout. Um and they've done
an excellent job. They've got a
great checklist and some good
guidelines in
For what a market study should
include.
Um, we reference M FA
throughout, so that's um now
defined middle income workers
comes from the rule that we
discussed last board. The last
two board meetings. Um
Rule. I love this one means an
area not considered urban. Um
And then, of course, urban is
defined in a minute. We have an
explicit, uh, definition of S
control. That is not out of, um,
either the act or the rule. So
that is new and and and here for
purposes of the policy, and that
is like control means one of the
following a fully executed
purchase, contract or purchase
option. A written governmental
commitment to transfer or convey
the property to the applicant.
Um and or a fully executed lease
that terminates no sooner than
five years after the loan
matures and or five years after
the income restriction
compliance period, and, uh, data
has passed, and I'll note that
the compliance period is not
referenced in this policy,
either that will be taken up in
the New Mexico finance
authorities, uh, loan policies
because there will be elements
that are, um tied to deed
restrictions and other things.
Um and
For the newer members. I'll
remind you that the finance
Authority is responsible for
developing its own rules and
policies, but they are we are
required to consult with the
Opportunity Enterprise board in
the development of those, so our
housing rules and our housing
policies will go through the
Housing development Committee
and ultimately to this full
board for its consultation.
We have a definition of total,
uh, development costs at the
bottom of page 45 Page two of
the policies, Um and I would
note that it, uh
It. It's the total project cost,
which include, um any cost.
Involved in acquiring
constructing, rehabilitating and
financing, Uh, housing
development projects It
excludes for this purpose. Any
developer fees? Um or any costs
associated construction costs
associated with affordable
housing, market rate housing or
commercial space, Since those
are not elements that we can
finance with this fund, um, we
have added for purposes of sort
of equity, Uh, concept of
universal design. Um, which is a
design
To create spaces, features and
products to maximize the number
of people who can independently
live in that space, regardless
of size, stature, age or
physical ability.
Um, Urban, as we talked about
earlier is a continuously built
up area with a population of
60,000 or more 60,000 tracks
with our, uh, with the statute
for the opportunity enterprise,
and it may include one or more
municipalities or C census
Designated places. Um
The workforce development
housing comes from AC T, as does
the Workforce Development
housing project. Those are all
referenced in that the act.
Um, The things are that are
highlight in Section three. Is
that again The goal is to
incentivize and support the
efficient production of
attainable housing, including
homes offered for sale and
rental units through flexible
loan in low interest loans.
Uh, we capture in this section,
the fact that we will be
promulgating a schedule, uh, for
the O P applications, both the
commercial and housing again and
that will post that schedule on
our website. We'll be able to
conduct a more, um
Formal outreach to our
stakeholders with that with a
plan in place, um, and potential
applicants before opening each
one. So we know when they're
gonna open. We know when we can
schedule that application
training or any other. Um, uh,
outreach training.
Um our application forms will be
hosted on one of the NM FA
sites. Um and we do have, uh, we
utilize a
Uh,
The application on no sales
Sales force. Thank you. We've
gone through a lot of, uh,
platforms, Mr Chairman and for
purposes of the housing
development study, uh, how the
housing program we are going to
be requiring that market study
we talked about earlier.
The housing, um, actual
criteria. The evaluation
criteria looks at leveraging as
efficiently as possible. Um, the
funding so that we can build the
houses make them available, uh
to new Mexicans, and then move
on. Return that money to the
fund build more houses make them
available to Mexicans Return
that money to the fund, so
community need and alignment.
Um, I'll I'll go to the actual
points here in a minute. I'll
just hit some of the highlights
here. Um, we are looking for
being able to know that we
To be filling the demand that
exists within a community.
Um
We are implicitly prioritizing
some mixed use by allowing, uh,
some of the proximity to
amenities. Um, so if they are
going to be in urban areas, we
are supporting mixed use
development there.
Universal designs We talked
about earlier. It was the only
way we could, um, really move in
some equity into this.
Other than for affordable and
workforce. Housing. Uh, we've
Allowed for additional points in
rural communities and given
additional points for new Mexico
developers very similar, uh to
the conversation for the
commercial side fund deficiency
really talks about leverage.
I'll note here that no, uh,
project requesting more than 35%
of its total project costs will
not be awarded points, so it
really is about filling the gaps
that exist and not trying to
take over where private dollars
are available.
Uh, the fund to request per
dwelling unit just to look at
efficiency. Um, duration of
assistance, the shorter the
duration of the loan and the
faster that loan amortizes. The
more points it gets.
Project readiness and need very
similar to before, uh to the
commercial side. We're looking
at financial soundness, the
qualified development team and
project readiness and then
ultimately some supportive land
use.
Um, Mr Chairman. The last parts
go through the process, which we
described in a prior item, so I
won't go through that again.
This is a 60 point, uh,
threshold to be placed on that
priority list, uh, to go over to
the F Finance Authority. Um, I
will note one thing here, which
is that?
Um, this is an EM FA Staff
Review team and I will call out
um
From this point forward in the
middle of that paragraph and
3.3 that the
Housing Development Committee
may consider the recommendation
of outside parties that's
consistent with the rule, but I
wanted to make sure that you
knew that you had someone other
than NM FA that you could call
on if you wanted additional
information from a reviewer.
Perspective, um
That you could, uh, recommend to
the board, reduce scopes of
projects or reduced funding
amounts to be considered as part
of that priority.
Um, and that such reductions of
the scope or funding would be
noted in the committee's
recommendation.
And that, um
That we the OE board may accept
all or a portion of the
recommendations made by the, um
The board committee.
So wanted to make that
Clear that is not called out in
our, um
Commercial development programs,
and it was important to the UM,
Housing development Committee
that they have the flexibility
to potentially reduce some of
the sizes of applications to be
considered.
Um And then again, I went
through the concentrations
earlier, but I It's worth
highlighting, Um, Housing
development assistance, which
are just limited to loans. Um,
would be no more than $20
million per project.
The total outstanding loan in
any county may total loans in
any one county may not exceed
50% of the capital.
Um at least 30% of the fund must
be dedicated to projects in
rural communities. And I didn't
know this earlier, but I should
highlight it now that housing
development partners, including
any person with an ownership
interest in the housing
development partner, since many
of these are special purpose
entities may only participate in
one project application per
application round.
So we don't want a a single
developer with three separate
special purpose entities and
maybe different partners,
submitting three different
applications. They'll need to
choose the application that
makes them that makes the most
sense to them at that time.
Um, And then you'll this looks
very similar to the last, but
I'll I'll highlight a couple of
things that are different will
be looking. Uh, for need that 10
points for need will come from
the market study and our
assessment as to whether or not
the market, the the proposed
project will fill the demand
that's noted in that market
study.
Um, again. B movies, five
points.
Uh, we have something called a
location, convenience, so urban
projects. Uh, the project must
be created. Um or sorry they'll
get points if they, uh create or
are located, uh, within
proximity to amenities,
including public transportation,
and it's either a half mile walk
to three amenities or a one mile
walk to six amenities, one of
which must be a food store. So
this is about walk of the
project, particularly in urban
areas. Um, rural areas they must
Create amenities or be located
within a five mile drive to
amens or located within a 30
mile drive to employment
centers. So we're trying to make
certain they are as close to
where people are going to have
jobs or where they'll be able
to, um go grocery, shopping or
other things.
Um, we are providing points,
five points for infill
development. It's the basically
the same definition as you saw
in the prior, um
Policies again. We're gonna be
recommending that local
preference local preference of
additional five points go to,
um, projects developed and
contracted by New Mexico
businesses.
And then the universal design is
an additional five points. So
that's what makes up to 35
points for community need and
alignment.
Fund deficiencies really just
gets to numbers.
Um, the projects that are
Really looking for just small
gaps. We'll get addition. We'll
get more points. So if it's 10%
or less that they're requesting
of the total capital stack
there, it's 15 points if it's
greater than 10%, but less than
25% 10 points, and if it's
greater than 25%, or less than
35 5
Uh, the funds requested for
dwelling units, um $25,000, or
less per dwelling unit. They get
10 points greater than 25. But
less than 50. They would get six
points and greater than 50. But
less than 100,003 points if the
cost per dwelling unit is more
than 100,000, they'll get no
points.
And the duration of assistance.
So we're looking at how quickly
that loan is advertising. Um,
not necessarily the term. Um,
but if it amortizes fully in
seven years or less, we have
five points. And if it's more
than that, then there are zero
points. So it does give a lot of
points to those that are have a
project life cycle. That's you
know, about a five year project
Life cycle, 5 to 7.
Financial soundness, Um, high
potential for success based on
financial feasibility, five
points. Qualified development
team, which includes the product
project donor or the developer,
general contractor, architect,
management and or sales team. We
want to look at the entire team
here, um, they can get up to
five points there and then
project readiness again dealing
with site control.
Uh, this is the one that's the
most unusual, Mister chairman
and I think the hardest for
staff to have made
recommendations on which because
the community may be in
unincorporated rural areas. Uh,
that might not have, um, you
know.
A large built out zoning
offices. Um, it's there'll be no
specific stated, uh, local
Reforms in place or land use
practices in place. Um, but the
pol the the statute does direct
that We give preference to those
that have those in place, so
there's 20 different, uh, 20
points that are available so up
to 20% of the total funding 5%
for land use approvals, and we
have found a list of best
practices for land use
approvals, and they'll be given
one point if they meet any of
the the the ones that are listed
there. I think there are eight
listed
Um, So let's give a point each
for those that they meet up to a
total of five points.
Um
For fear of the allowance for
varied housing types here.
They'd get five points that they
met any of the three criteria
here. Accessory dwelling units
by right, um, the allowance for
two unit or multi unit
structures in all residential
zones, um, without any special
review or public hearing.
And then Lastly, um, the pre
approved additional dwelling
unit permit drawings. Um
With samples being provided by
the local government. They meet
any of those three. Then they
get the five points.
Um, And then the last two go
back to that first model, which
is that they get a point if they
if the community has any of the
following in place.
Um, and foreign incentives.
There are a number of different
incentives there.
I won't go through them, Um
But up to five points for any of
the six that are listed.
And zoning has many options, but
they can get up to five points.
Um, so I think that there are
10 or so of those options. So,
Mr Chairman, those are the
proposed policies. The Housing
Development Committee met and
reviewed them made many
recommendations. There are still
elements of these that don't
list all the things that we're
going to encounter with this
program. Um, for instance, it
does not deal with how we will,
um, treat donated projects, uh,
donated property, um, from
communities. How that will be,
uh, characterized. So I do see
us needing to probably Mod.
These policies as we try to get
our hands around that, um
And
The additional difficulty will
be how we gauge for that Last 20
points, whether or not the
project is answered correctly,
um so it's finance Authority
staff is still getting its hands
around how we will, um, gauge
that last part.
And I think that's Mister
Chairman. Really? All I will say
about, uh, the policies that are
before you again. Our goal here
would be for you to improve them
for posting with the with the
change. Certainly UN attainable
housing and any other Any other
adjustments you wanna make put
them out for public review and
comment. It will not be a
substantial amount of time that
folks have. I want to note that
the rules are anticipated to be
done by July, 31st. Our goal
would be to have the policies.
Did before that, so that we can
work on the application and open
it as soon as practical after
those rules are finalized, so
we're looking for a July 11th
approval ultimately of the
policies.
By this board.
So with that, I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Any questions from members of
the board.
Mister Bishop has his hand up.
Mr Bishop.
Mr Chairman, uh, M Russell.
Thank you. That was an awesome
review of these, Um
One question I had, which I
don't know if I just didn't
catch it during our committee
meeting and and discussion about
this topic with regard to the
time frame of repayment.
Um, you mentioned both the term
and the amortization having
preferential treatment for seven
years. Um, I think the nature of
this financing, especially if we
want it to be paid back quickly,
in many cases is gonna be
interest. Only, um, in in a lot
of cases with, uh, you know, I
think the goal, uh, is to get
that money back as quickly as
possible. So it can be
redeployed. Um, my thought is
maybe it's either or
amortization or payback.
Term, not, um, advertising only
does that make sense.
Mr Chairman, I that that does
make sense. I'm happy to add
that in if that's the board's
wish, I would need to know how
long that interest only period
would go. Obviously, interest
only isn't gonna return a great
deal for us to turn around the
capital for other projects, so
it'll tie it up for most of the
period that it's out. I don't I
don't have a preference as to
what that is. But if there's a
place that you'd like to start
happy to include that for
The policies as they go out for
public review and comment. Mr
Chairman, Mr Russell, I don't
necessarily know that we need to
get into the weeds about
interest only provisions. I
think we'll leave that to to you
guys on the finance side. Mine
was really more about if the
money is back, whether it's a
huge balloon payment or a longer
amortization schedule as long as
the money is back, and it's
built into the loan term, does
it really matter whether it's
coming back in small increments
or whether it's back in by the
time we expect it to come back?
That's that's really more. My.
My thing is either either
amortization or loan term. Uh,
not necessarily both, OK?
Curious about other members of
the board. What your preference
or thoughts are on that,
Mr. Chairman. I
I would just use long term or
maturity.
And not
Get into the amortization.
I think that accomplishes the
goal. And then you can be
interest only or you can be
advertising, but it's it's the
term or the maturity that we're
trying to manage, right.
When the money is due back.
So
That's what I'd recommend.
Happy to make that adjustment.
Mister Chairman.
Any other.
Comments from the members.
Like to hear from more members
is
An issue that seems to be, uh
Somewhat.
Thought provoking and content.
Mr Chairman, Just one comment
for me.
Yes.
I just wanna thank the staff and
commend the staff for putting
this together as quickly as they
they did and then take into
account all of the, uh uh,
comments if you will, from the
housing Committee. Uh, it'll be
interesting to see the, uh, the
feedback that we get in the
public comments with this. Uh
but, uh, thanks. Thank the staff
for putting this together as
quickly as it did, and as
thoroughly as they put it
together.
Thank you, Izzy.
Um
So, Mister Bishop, you've you've
raised an issue that that, um
I'm not hearing any real.
Bush from anybody too hard in
either direction.
Um, I want to clarify that I, I
think
You know when you when you're
referring to term you're
referring to
More of, uh, not the
amortization period. But, uh,
the the term of the loan or a
call or whatever you wanna say.
Um, is that correct?
That's correct. I I'm not sure
which member provided the follow
up comment, but I I think term
or maturity is far more
important than the specifics of
either advertising it interest
Only those those will come
through. It's it's really more.
When will the fund be made
whole? And when? When can we
expect that money back so that
we can
Recycle it out for the maximum
benefit.
OK?
And Miss Russell, I think what
do you have? Some suggested
language.
Mr Chairman. I think what we
would do is go back to, um
Just term and and as mister Um
Collins has mentioned and be
silent as to the amortization.
Whether it's a blue payment,
partially advertising whatever
it is, so I'd go back to term
for purpose again for public
comment. I think that's fine.
Um, I believe that I had, uh,
that, mister.
I remember, Bishop got it
correct that there wasn't either
or and then in my clean up I, I
cleaned it up and took out the
the um, term portion and
amortizing.
Um and focus solely on the
amortization, so he didn't miss
it. Um, I think it changed from
as I was trying to clean that
section up based on our
conversation.
I went the wrong direction.
In reviewing these policies with
respect to single family
housing, um
Maybe Izzy can answer Does this
Appear that it might work.
Mr Chairman, Uh, you know, it's
uh, it's hard to say I. I think
it's definitely a good start
here. Uh, you know, we'll
probably have some public
comment, uh, from, uh, the M FA
perspective on, uh
Some of the, uh
The definitions. Uh, that will
give some feedback on after we
chew on it a little bit. But I,
I think overall, this is moving
in the right direction. And, uh,
we do tend to see, uh on single
family development side. I think
the seven year terms uh,
normally, the lines of credit
that will provide are for
shorter term than that, So I
think this gives sufficient room
for, uh, for that amortization
there or for the term, if you
will, Uh so we see it as a
Something that could, uh, be
very beneficial. Thank you,
Hernandez.
Mr Werw. I see you're here. Any
thoughts from you?
Great.
Thank you, sir.
Well, I I I'm a little concerned
with a short review period by
the public, but I know that we
will do the same thing we've
done on the, uh, on the
Commercial side and that is we
will adjust as we move forward.
Uh, our flexibility is key to
making sure that this works
right? So
Um, that said
Subject to the changes we've
already talked about.
Um
Unless there are any other
comments or concerns of the
members.
I'd suggest we get a motion to
approve.
So moved
Who was that Bishop?
Members. Member Bishop. Great
Thank you, sir. Second.
Thank you.
Uh, all those in favor.
II. I
He posted
Right motion passes.
Public comment.
Do we have any members of the
public online chairman? I don't
necessarily see any but
They raise their hands if they
would like to make public
comment.
I am mostly seeing
Staff and finance.
Right. There's a couple of
members from the public, but I
don't see their hand raising
great.
We? We shall move on next
meetings coming.
Commercial Development Committee
meeting on July 2nd at 9 a.m. to
1030 via Zoom.
And we have an upcoming Housing
Development Committee meeting
from July on July 2nd.
From 1030 to noon. We assume
And the upcoming
Opportunity Enterprise and
Housing Development Review Board
full meeting July 11th from 2 to
330.
Here again in room 307, which
seems like the, uh, technology
works a little better in this
room.
I like this room better
just saying
Don't seem to have a TE. I can
definitely hear everybody better
in this room. Awesome.
All right with that, Uh, we'll
take a motion to adjourn.
So move.
Thank you. This is Trevor. My
second. Thank you.
All those in favor.
I
I. I
Right?
We're all done. Thank you,
