Yeah.
that's.
Yeah.
So.
Test, test, test.
I do need to do that's actually
one of my, I don't know what
what password is, but um I'll
I'll,
he's going back.
He's a great guy, you know, he,
he delivered on humans would say
he's,
I meant it on. 00.
Any teams on the,
yeah, somebody's got.
Excuse me, I'm sorry. Is that
the.
OK
One of these um.
Yeah.
the sound.
This test.
We're ready.
Can the members on Zoom hear us?
Yes. Oh, thank you. All right,
who's been having some fun? OK,
thank you all.
Mhm
You know,
And then we turn them off. Thank
you.
Um,
Thanks for bearing with us this
morning and your flexibility in
moving rooms, so it appears that
all of our technology is working
here, so members online we can
both see and they can hear us,
which was the issue. We have a
couple of board members online
this morning that will um finish
our core amount. We also have a
number of public participants,
so we wanted to make sure that
they were included.
First item on the agenda this
morning is the call to order and
roll call.
Good morning, everyone, uh,
members of the board.
Uh, thank you for your patience
this morning. I'm new to MFA, so
I think this might have been uh
initiation.
So, um,
Che Keith.
Thank you.
Vice Chair Swazzo.
Thank you.
Wayne Pros.
This is Mark Cosrejo in his
place as his designee.
Thank you.
AJ 40.
Alison Nichols as his designee.
Thank you.
Teresa Constantinides.
Joy Esparzan.
Thank you.
James Kenny
Uh, Kelsey Raider here is his
designee.
Rob Black
Sam volunteers his designee.
Thank you.
Ronald Lovato.
Melanie Kinderling.
Uh, Ben Shelton here for Energy
Minerals is her designee. Thank
you. And member Burke?
President
Thank you so much. We have a
quorum.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda is the
approval of the agenda. Do I
hear a motion?
Recording in progress.
Madam Chair.s made and seconded.
Is there any discussion?
All in favor say aye.
All oppose same sign on this.
Motion carries. So I'll note on
the agenda today our last item
of business is a closed session.
to consider our, our audit
findings for the year.
Um, when we go into closed
session, we will, the board will
remain in the room. We will ask
members of the audience to go
out into the hall during that
time and members participating
audience members participating
online, um, will also be
disconnected from the Zoom at
that point.
After we're done with the
executive session, we'll come
back in and everyone is welcome
to join us again and call the
meeting back to order. We've got
some very small items like
adjournment and announcement of
the next meeting when we come
back. So you're welcome to stay
with us until the end of the
meeting or to leave before our
executives.
We're a little bit behind in
starting this morning, so we'll
move as fast as we can, but we
have a packed agenda this
morning, um.
Finalizing our housing policies
and rules that we've had a lot
of public interest in as well as
a number of economic development
projects on the agenda.
With that next on the agenda is
a report from our CEO.
Sorry, I forgot the minutes.
That's how I'm moving fast
Do I hear emotion? So 2nd.
Motion to approve and second to
approve that board minutes. Is
there any discussion?
If not, all in favor of
approving the minute, say aye.
If not, all in favor of
approving the minute, say I.
I.
Oh
I oppose same sign.
Motion carries.
No report, our CEO Mark.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the board again, thank you
all for your patience. Um,
you'll probably note today that
we have a new board of
administration team in place,
Yaz or Yasmine Haldeman, um, who
has come to us most recently, I
think from the city of Santa Fe,
but also from the city of Fort
Collins, so a lot of good
experience. and Erica Falance
over in the corner there, who
was most recently uh with
legislative council services, a
note that when we offered her
the job I was sitting at an
oversight committee meeting and
she was staffing it, so it's a
little, I felt bad, but they
You've got a great hire there.
So we're really excited to have
them, you see that they're quite
confident, um, and I note today
that we'll have an overview of
our information technology team
and operations innovation team
merger, so I won't get into too
much of that, but you'll get to
meet members of that uh group
today.
Um, and then lastly you have
today before you, um, a request
for us to, um, uh, offer our
employees the opportunity to
participate in a 457B plan part
of our retirement program. Um,
this is sort of a pass-through
event we'll be able to sponsor
it but not have to contribute to
it, so from the finance
authorities, it's just an
administrative function for us.
Um, so that'll be before you
today.
Um, legislative update update as
I mentioned, um, most recently
was in Sakura with Erica and
several of our staff members,
um, some really good
presentations. We have two
remaining uh meetings 1 October
9th, and uh the last one in
November and the primary um
target of those two is um
proposed legislation in the last
of the items that the oversight
committee has to statutorily um
He reports on. So those will be
relatively perfunctory, although
there's a couple of, I think,
um, folks would like to
Proposed some concepts about how
to use NMFA been a little
unclear yet, but we'll have more
to report in October.
Um and then lastly, we are uh
expecting an invitation to the
legislative Finance Committee in
October and we have received one
to the economic uh and rural
Development Policy Committee.
Um, opportunity, uh, enterprise
update. We have opened our
application. It opened on time.
Um, it was an entire, it was an
entire agency effort, very big
lift to get two new programs,
largely because we had to
rewrite the way we did our
commercial development program,
the two large programs of an
operational in, in a short
period of time, really
appreciate all of the work of
the operations innovation team,
um, and again to John Brooks,
uh, Brian Dub, Alicia.
Sanchez, Teresa Miller, Ron
Cruz, Rick Herman, Brian Decker,
Lynn Toby, Dan Opperman, and
Charlotte. Late.
So those groups, those folks
really pitched in to get that
thing up and going and you'll be
hearing more about that as we,
as we move on.
Um, as the chair mentioned, we
are finalizing our housing
development, uh, loan rules. We,
uh, those were on the agenda
last month, um, but there was an
administrative mix up and we had
the wrong set of rules in there.
Um, there have been virtually no
changes since you saw them
initially back in.
July
Um, so they are fairly
straightforward and they're here
for your final consideration.
And last month we did approve
the policies for that same
program, the loan policies, um,
and we received a lot of public
input moving up to the point at
which we filed those policies
and then it continued after we
approved them, and there are
some substantial um
Unanticipated impacts from some
of our structuring policies that
we thought warranted an
additional review, so we're
bringing forth um immediately
some uh changes to the
structuring policies so that
before we actually begin
underwriting um and finalizing
the applications that there will
be newly updated and very
workable uh structuring
policies. So that's before you.
Um, couple of other things,
local government planning fund,
we approved those rules back in
June. We have the policies now
that will accompany those
updated rules, primarily to do a
couple of things. One is to um
provide for a sliding scale for
some of our planning documents
and to incorporate the new
planning documents that were
included as part of House Bill
2.
And I don't remember which one
it was anymore. Uh, one of the
pieces of legislation that uh
changed that program. There were
so many, um, so that is before
you today, uh, Michael will be
telling you mostly about those,
um, and then lastly, our venture
capital program, we're bringing
two items this month from the
investment committee, uh, from
on venture capital. One is a
recommendation to modify the
investment policy we've been
talking to you for a while about
target allocations, particularly
as it relates to um.
New uh New Mexico businesses or
investments we make in funds
that won't fully commit to all
the funds going to New Mexico
businesses. So that's, we've
been wrestling internally for a
number of reasons, and we have
a, I think, a very good proposal
to bring forward to you today.
Um, and then a report from our,
from Maquita Investment Group,
who's our venture capital
investment consultant. We had
been um looking into potentially
structuring a program or a fund.
To um target investments in
early stage businesses and
commercializing research from
our laboratories and our higher
education institutions. So we
have a very good uh report here.
Um, ultimately we're not going
to be making that recommendation
that we um establish that fund,
but we thought that the research
was incredibly helpful for
understanding some of the
landscape capital, the the.
The landscape of New Mexico in
terms of um
Early stage businesses and tech.
Um, so we'll have that before
you today as well and with that,
Madam Chair, unless there are
questions, I think I will end my
report there.
Thank you. Any questions?
If not, we'll move on to the
next item of business which is
the overview of the new
Department of Information
Systems and Innovation.
Excuse me.
You haven't had enough
Technology goes this morning.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the board here today
to discuss our recent merger of
this powerhouse of the team.
Um,
and these two guys that get to
pretend that.
You know what we're doing.
Um,
We, by and large got together
because we've been working
diligently on a couple of very
large projects.
One of which began as document
retention.
And quickly morphed into
something much larger.
Another that has become known as
the integrated business
applications.
Um, all to say both of those
projects as our network engineer
has rightly educated all of us,
all come down to data
governance.
As large as those projects are,
um, they all do come down to
data governance. We're gonna
touch on.
Projects today, um, and I passed
it over to my colleague Paul to
also share about.
Uh, uh, meta board members, uh
members of the board. I, I just
like to say that the combining
of the two teams made the most
sense. Uh, when you have a, a
group that does innovation, uh,
you, there's, there's risk
wrapped up in that as a
technology person, the thing we
fight against is risk.
So it really, you know, the, the
melting of the minds where you
have all this great innovation
and somebody in, and both teams
hold each other accountable, so
as a result, uh, the Department
of Information Systems and
Innovation was proposed for our
CEO and our uh deputy director.
And uh our next slide uh talks
about our mission statement
pretty much explains itself, uh,
and what, what it really talks
to is that we have to really
focus on the clientele, internal
clientele.
An external clientele and built
systems that support both of
those groups at a very, very
high level.
Our vision statement is to
integrate all these systems
together, really look at it
efficiently and effectively and
build a framework where people
can do their work at a very,
very high level, and we always
talk about uh organizational
excellence. We are managing our
resources and we want to put
together, I, I, people talk
about cutting edge technologies.
I love them, but when you say
cutting edge, it seems somebody,
somebody has, has to bleed a
little bit. So, you know, we see
that kind of tongue in cheek,
but, but we
Approach it with a lot of
research and a lot of fidelity
as we move forward and we work
with our teams.
A little bit about the team on
the next slide, um, as you can
see, we're largely organized in
the same fashion.
Um, our focus is there on the
bottom box, um, demonstrate a
bit of our
Subject matter expertise.
Uh, I call out that automation
is not.
Me to one side, we both work in
automation just depends on the
system.
Uh, one of the things that's
different about what we're
anchored by as a team in the
middle that helps with our
coordination and process
improvement.
Um, and that's with two of our
most recent uh members that have
joined Nicoica and GB uh they
help us, uh, refine the work,
uh, make sure it's organized,
make sure that we follow high
standards to ensure that it's
developed well, that it's tested
well.
And deployed in organized.
Did you have them stand so we
can actually put some names and
faces together, Nicolia and GB I
think you met a couple of months
ago, but Nicola is announced her
joining us last month, but um
now you actually get to see a
face that name. So thank you.
So we're excited because um in
this format, you know, we've
always worked well together, but
in this format we work very
closely together coordinating
and communicating often.
Understanding what we're working
on.
Barely our tendencies, our
independencies, um, and it's a
very exciting group that
Particularly, particularly on.
Oh, sure, I'd be happy.
I was fast.
Uh, Tyler Smina
Matt Nicoica, this is Mily
Gupta.
And George Elam.
Anthony Silva
John Edler.
Brenda Garcia
We, we have Anthony hiding in
the in the corner there.
And mortal,
I don't know if they have
another member of the uh
information services team.
Uh, Marlowe, and he's, uh, he
wasn't able to make it.
Uh, the next slide, uh, really
talks about data governance and
uh when I first came to uh NMFA
we talked about this almost
since day one, the person who
really hammered it home for us
was our network engineer Ton
Endler, who just stood up, and
as we started putting these uh
all these projects together,
everything, the whole framework
is based on data governance.
Data is our most uh precious,
uh, uh.
Uh, our output, our most
precious output, and we need to
protect it at a very high level,
so we have to have governance
wrapped around it. So wrapped
into the data governments is a
network security classification
of data, we work with uh Brian
Otero.
Quite a bit on that, uh,
productivity uh and the
applications and, and the
business application.
As well.
And
Along the lines of the business
applications and the, the term
you're gonna hear more and more
about the integrated business
applications project. Uh, the
concept here is to use uh one or
two of the very, very powerful
relational databases to build
what would be the equivalent of
an ERP or an.
That particular terminology is
not as useful to us as is.
Concept of the applications
being integrated, so really what
we're talking about is a
platform or two platforms that
can handle all of the uh
Interaction with our clients.
So that would be from the
customer relationship management
angle.
Through the application
origination cycle through all of
the work that you all see
monthly from the rest of the
great.
NMFA on the transactions into
the servicing the all of the
additional administrative
efforts to go into.
Disbursements, everything that
goes into that life cycle until
That loan or grand.
Um, it would also include, um,
the
The systems that handle our
accounting that handle our
payroll and also
human.
These are all things that we
have.
OK.
needs to
A lot of extra work.
lot of need for additional.
That's the, that's the major
project and a little bit more.
The next slide speaks to our
objectives. We have 5 core
objectives that we work on as a
team. Uh, we, we haven't been
able to, actually this is my
first board presentation I've
done audit committee
presentation, so.
Uh, but when we speak to audit
committee, we talk primarily
about security.
And how it's wrapped around
everything uh that we do on a
daily basis, and, and we look at
the new innovations that help us
with security, but also the
threats wrapped around security,
for example, art artificial
intelligence is something that
everybody's talking about. We do
the deepest research we can. We
come up against it, we find the
tools that'll put us in a place
that's highly protected and so
our strength and we strengthen
security measures daily.
Uh, the next is, uh, optimizing
business integrations a little
bit of what uh what Adam uh
talked about and what he's
We'll talk about uh a little bit
further.
Uh, we want to improve our IT
infrastructure. We got to make
sure that the systems that our
teams work on are up to date,
they're secure, they work at a
very high level that when people
come into work, they turn it on
and it just.
Like turning on the light
switch.
It just happens.
Uh, enhancing user support, we,
we tend to be every once in a
while we get wrapped up in all
these projects that we talk
about every day. We want to see
how we better balance that, and
that's one of our goals, better
balance set so our face to face
with the people that are using
our systems in those offices
around IT and be more sensitive
to what their needs are in a
daily basis.
To help them uh get the best
experience possible, and then
both of us all the time we
monitor our performance. We have
to report out and we go through
audits in the system from
everybody from our, our cyber
insurance people uh to regular
internal audits that wrap
themselves around it.
OK, so I, we, we have some
milestones that we wanted to
talk about. These come from our,
our IT uh
A roadmap, the road map that we
put together again, talking
about cybersecurity and the risk
and compliance that we have to
do to make sure that that
happens. So we have some
timetables, disaster recovery
plan we're working on. We hope
to be finished with that in
December of this year,
resiliency, um, if something
were to happen to any of us or
any of our systems, how do we
continue to do business and
that's a really big deal and,
and our CEO Marquita is very,
very tied into the fact that
We need succession plans and
things like that. We could
business has.
Um, we were working with a
framework we talked about with
the audit committee. There's
some international frameworks.
We use the CIS framework Center
for Internet Security, and that
helps hold us accountable to how
we meet these goals. So we're
implementing that framework and
we have a goal to reach that by,
what is it?
Sorry, 6 of 25 and then a
business uh continuity planning
in, in order for us to better
serve our community internally,
we need to know how people do
business. We know IT. We know
data.
But I need to know how our legal
team does business and what they
use. So I have to have an
understanding of that, so that
if something were to happen
there, I have systems that can
continue the business of
something.
And
Uh, our second is our, uh,
productivity infrastructure. So
it's really moving more things
up to the cloud right now we've
been using these file folders or
these electronic file folders,
moving things to the cloud makes
us more safe and secure, and it
makes the flow of work even
better as we begin that
transition. So that's a big
project for us that we're
working on right now. Um,
Microsoft 365 is our, our
poison. We drank it and we're
gonna stay with it, and we're
gonna
do it really well.
Microsoft 365 changes every 30
seconds, it seems. So we need to
be on top of it. We need to know
it and we need to help our
clientele know how to use that.
And then finally, we want to
complete implementation on the
document.
Retention policy that's very big
for us. Again, our data is our
most precious output, so we want
to make sure that we, we have it
in a place that's safe and
secure, people can get to it
when they need it and how they.
And then I'll let uh my
colleague here talk about the
last bullet point.
Oh
So Madam Chair board members, as
I mentioned, the integrated
business applications project.
Uh, we've had many robust
internal discussions about this
project getting going, um.
We
Iterated around the document
that I produced back in the
first half of the year.
Uh, and then have that vetted by
an external consultant.
The results of that, uh,
basically said that these
options are viable once you
learn a lot more about what
these options are, but the, the
concepts were.
We viable to move forward with
and so we engaged in initiating
an RFQ uh to request folks to
take us through a process that
we refer to as um you can call
it planning, you like to call it
Sprint er during sprinter, uh,
the, the, the, the weight of the
work is that um we will have
assistance in gathering all of
our requirements.
riding out the the major user
stories looking at the major
must have functionality, not the
nice to have functionality but
the must have functionally, um,
getting all that.
Documented in a format that then
can be put forth in front of
many vendors.
Uh, to do what would be
described as a scripted demo
because lots of software
companies and software
engineers, um, have no problem
trying to show you all of the
bells and whistles and you buy
it and OK, what do we do now?
Um, uh, in this format we find
out exactly what it does for us.
Hm.
that meets the requirements that
have been defined.
We are working on that project
right now. We are hoping to be
able to make a recommendation to
our project steering committee
which
Internal steering committee to
move forward with that and with
one of the goals being the high
level deliverables you see on
the slide deck but also to be
able to have a solid
understanding of the budget
implications.
Uh, to come back for uh the
usual and customary me budget
adjustment and discuss the
possibility.
Starting the work.
And
That, that concludes our
presentation, excited.
Board members
Thank you for your presentation
this morning.
Any questions from board
members?
Any questions from our online
board members.
Um, just a quick question about
Budget and what we had
originally anticipated in the
budget this year, so how we
anticipated in this year's
budget starting any of this
work?
Madam Chair, what we anticipated
was the planning process that I
described in the.
OK.
This is good that we may be able
to start the work earlier. Thank
you for all your work on this,
really important. Um, a final
question just around AI so
her bring it up in passing is a
risk, um, but also some
opportunities on the end,
especially when on the other
end, especially when we talk
about streamlining processes.
Um, will we be looking at those
suite of new tools that are kind
of coming online and seeing if
there are tools there that can
help us streamline our work as
well.
Absolutely. We, we look at
there's a new article about AI
every day for digging deep into
that we're looking at the safety
and security because right now
some of those tools as they
begin to develop these products
for you, we don't necessarily
know where that data goes.
So that's our key fear factor
for that, but uh we see AI is
becoming a great tool for us,
for example, the attacks that
are beginning, we're beginning
to see against our network, our
AI generated.
And I believe the best way to
fight AI is with AI.
So we're looking at firewalls
and things that are wrapped in
and, and really what it is is uh
being able to go back and
research the way people do
business.
So for example, they'll look
back at our emails and they'll
find out the way that you happen
to write emails.
And, and the ways that you do it
and the patterns that you've
derived from that. So if
something different comes from
you, there's a red flag that
says, it just doesn't look like
Cathy's email.
Please take a look at this. So
those are the kind of things
that we research on, on a
continual basis we decided if
we're going to come at AI we're
gonna come at it from the
security standpoint because I am
an IT guy, so that's what we're
looking with AI, but as far as
productivity, I, I can't even
begin to imagine what it would
do for NMFA move forward.
Yeah, Madam Chair, there's also
opportunity to use AI to help us
with our uh data transformation.
You can use actually use AI.
scan all sources of your
structured and unstructured
data.
Then find the patterns where you
can. Thank you, and thanks for
your work on this. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda, a review of
the strategic plan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Lynn is
unable to join us today. She's
on a well-earned vacation, um,
and so I'll just go through the
organizational objectives uh
that we are proposing for the
strategic plan. I'd note that
we're asking for a review only
today that we'd come forth next
month with a final approval and
with that final approval, we'll
have a complete plan. Um, so you
have seen all the individual
parts that have led up to today
you have approved and ratified
all of those parts. The last
piece are the objectives to help
us move.
Towards those uh bigger goals
that we approved uh two months
ago.
Um, so you'll have aspects of
our um of our plan in here
today. We're
Giving you some glimpse as to
what that will look like, our
mission again to uh New Mexico's
partner in building economic
prosperity. We have our values
of integrity, client focus,
professionalism, and great place
to work. We have our 4
competencies, which are to
create access to low-cost
capital or infrastructure and
economic development.
To attract investor capital to
New Mexico to respond to
challenges with dedicated
solutions focused board and uh
and staff and agile effective
systems and provide trusted
stewardship and effective
oversight of programs and funds.
That has all been approved,
that's all in place.
Last two months ago, uh, you
approved the recommendations
from staff that are major goals
are to advance community and
economic development, to
strengthen New Mexico's
infrastructure to
Remote healthy communities, to
maximize community impact by
leveraging strategic
partnerships and to optimize
organizational effectiveness and
efficiency.
And so what you have before you
is a mockup of what we hope that
cross uh rock.
Crosswalk would look like, um,
with our goals for um advancing
community and economic
development, uh, the first
objective would be to
effectively deploy the funds
from the state's small business
credit Initiative. We selected
that because the federal
government has put a time frame
around which uh that money can
be used. It's also got some very
clear um into the structure of
the federal program are clear
objectives of getting money
into.
communities and to leverage
private capital. So we thought
that that just in and of itself
really hit the target of
advancing community and economic
development. Um, the second
objective, uh, would be to
obtain future funding for our
behavioral health capital fund,
primary care capital fund, and
childcare revolving fund.
Um, one of those submetrics that
will be um establishing a work
plan around will be determining
how much capital we need in
order to serve existing markets
and what we would hope to be a 2
to 3 year path. Um, our goal
here is to not look for annual
funding because we think that
that's like unlikely, but while
there's a large amount of state
dollars in play to see if we can
get some one-time appropriations
to help um further the
objectives of our partners by
funding projects.
Within those three funds.
So those are the two goals we've
outlined for community and
economic development. Uh, the
second for strengthening New
Mexico's infrastructure and
promoting healthy communities.
Um, the first goal was to
improve water systems through
regionalization of water systems
and technical assistance that
ties back directly to our work
with the Water Trust board to um
uh sort of captain
a team of technical assistance
providers that are able to um
facilitate regionalization and
to help the smallest of systems.
They're planning done
effectively. That's that plan
and the other is to meet the
need for capital infrastructure.
Clearly here we need more data,
um, so that's gonna be one
that's probably later on, but
one of the subelements for that
will be to understand what the
needs of new capital needs of
New Mexico are and where we have
overlap. We have some anecdotal
data, um, but we don't have any
really clear data by which we
can have metrics assigned.
So that is uh one that would,
you know, it's a, it's a big
target, but as we start to
develop the submetrics for it um
in 3 years we think we'll be in
a place to have very clear
objectives.
Um, number 3 is to maximize
community impact by leveraging
strategic partnerships. We have
identified 3 objectives to meet
that goal, uh, complete a metric
study of enFAse impacts and
partner impacts to inform our
future objectives. Again, trying
to get to
You know, what target should we
be hitting? We don't have that
data now, um, but we know that
they're there and so we would
like to identify those and um
really focusing on those that
most help our partners reach
their goals.
Um, the second is to establish a
system of determining needs and
priorities of strategic
partners. Again, that's that
it's a very um similar concept,
which is what are they looking
to achieve and how can we help
them?
Um, and then lastly, assist
strategic partners in meeting
their goals. So they're all very
similar, but just slightly
different enough that we think
we have metrics that can uh
support individually those three
things.
Um, and then lastly,
You know, um, picking up where
uh my colleagues just left off,
optimize organizational
effectiveness and efficiency.
Um, the first objective over the
next 3 years is to implement the
integrated business application.
The second objective is to
maintain and improve financial
reporting standards, um,
including implementing a risk
rating system.
The third is to maximize our use
of technology.
4th is to improve data
collection and reporting.
And then lastly, the 5th is to
implement and document the data
management project. So those are
all very similar concepts, um,
but with we think uh underlying
them there could be um
Different metrics to support
those objectives.
We have identified preliminarily
some um impact category keys,
which are drinking water,
economic development, housing,
um, efficiency and quality.
Health community facilities and
safety.
So those are, um, this is again
before you for draft, we're
happy to be.
Me and Linn absentia uh are
happy to answer questions and
we'd be looking for an approval,
as I said, next month.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I think.
Good morning, manager. Members
of the committee, uh, real
quickly, this is just asking for
your approval for us to offer a
4457 benefit to the employees is
this is uh of no cost to an MFA
other than of course the time
that we would spend.
Uh, staffing it and, you know,
reporting on it, etc.
Um, this is a benefit, um, it's
pretty standard, uh, it's
offered, uh, commonly across,
uh.
New Mexico, as well as across
the country.
Uh, we had it at um the city of
Santa Fe, for example.
Anyway, so we're, we're
requesting um authorization to
do that by putting in front of
you this resolution that we
asked you to uh to approve. We
can do this.
um
Madam.
And I'm sure I'd make that
motion.
Motion is me.
The discussion
If not, all those in favor say
aye?
Hi.
All those opposed same sign?
Motion carries.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Congratulations. Thanks.
Next on the agenda, approval of
the revised local government
planning fund project management
policies.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the board.
Michael Vonderhey, managing
director of Public programs.
Uh, staff brings it for you this
morning, um, revised policies
for the local government
planning fund. Uh, you may
recall, uh, the board approved
amended rules for the local
government planning fund back in
June and uh as required our
oversight committee also
approved those amended and
restated rules in July. So the
policies are really meant to act
as a supplement uh to those
rules, they did include expanded
uses of the program, uh, 3 new
planning documents, affordable
Housing Act plans,
archaeological.
Clearances, flood inundation
maps were added as eligible
plans, also for the rules, um,
we increased the maximum uh
grant amount from $50,000 to
$100,000 but we did retain a 24
month $100,000 cap per entity,
um, on that, that does help us
safeguard the program to make
sure that as many different
communities can access this
grant program, um, as we move
forward.
Uh, it was Senate Bill 216 in
the 2024 regular legislative
session that um added the
expanded uses of the fund. Um,
again, we did get those rules
approved over the summer.
Um,
And of course, uh, we've added
some local match waivers to the
program as well. Uh, the base
planning grant criteria doesn't
really change in terms of the
framework. We're still looking
at MHI of the community in
comparison to the state average
we're still looking at water
rates or wastewater rates that a
community has in comparison to
the state average. So those base
planning grant uh determinations
don't change, but as Marquita
mentioned, we did add a sliding
scale, um, we understand that
not every planning documents
going to cost 1,000,000.
Do, um, there's levels of
complexity based on the size of
the system, the population
served by a proposed planning
document. So, um, I think you'll
see in the charts, uh, in the
memo, um, that we would be
looking at connections, search
for a utility-based planning
documents we'd be looking at
population served by a planning
grant qualified entity for those
non uh utilities based um
planning grant documents. You'll
see awards anywhere from $60,000
for the smaller plans to 75,000
to
100, which is kind of reserved
for those larger local
governments, Affordable Housing
Act plans a complex plan. Um,
you'll see, uh, the, the
non-utilities base is also
60,000. Uh, it would be the
minimum 75,000, 100,000 max uh
staff really did do quite a bit
of research looking back over
the last 5 years of the program
to see what types of documents
we funded, who are the entities
that we funded, but also we
looked forward, uh, whereas the
program going? Um, you just
heard about the water.
Trust board and technical
assistance, um, and maybe moving
some of those smaller planning
documents, preliminary
engineering reports, asset
management plans over to that
technical assistance program,
uh, whereas this program will
move forward with some larger
plans for local governments,
etc. that uh really um weren't
able to participate in the
program, uh, to the level that
we'd like to going forward.
Um,
And, and, you know, and sort of
looking at that, we found that
$75,000 was about, that's where
the majority of new planning
documents would come in just to
give you a little sense of that.
Um, again, these are a
supplement to the rules that
were previously approved, uh,
Marquita also mentioned the, the
guidance documents, we've done a
strike through that in the, in
the red line, um, rather than
have our board uh dictate, um,
what our approved guidance
documents will work with our
reviewing agencies, um, if there
are regulations, state
regulations will work with those
reviewing agencies like the
state engineer's office to make
sure that the planning documents
are in accordance with current
regulations and current
documents.
Uh, these policies were last
amended in 2014. Things get
stale. Uh, we want to move in a
different direction and allow
some flexibility there. Um, so
with that, Madam Chair, um,
staff does recommend approval of
the revised local government
planning fund policies to
supplement the approved rules,
and I'm happy to stand for
questions.
Thank you so much for your
overview today. Any questions or
comments from board members?
Madam Chair, one quick question.
Madam Chair, Michael, thank you
for this. This is great. Just a
quick question if a project does
come before NMFA and they're
within one of the population
thresholds, do they have the
ability to qualify for more
funding if they need more than
75,000, like will there be a
waiver for that or are they all
maxed out at what these
thresholds are listed in the
document? Thank you, Madam
Chair. I remember Trujillo. We
would like to impose that
maximum award based on that
sliding scale. Of course, the
board can waive that requirement
if there's additional.
dollars in the fund or if
there's a critical need for
something like that. So there is
an ability to waive that
requirement, but we'd like to
start uh with that sliding
scale, um, and just working at
maximum grant awards in that
fashion.
Thank you for that. Thank you.
Quick question about capacity.
So how many projects do we think
we'll be able to
The
Thank you, Madam Chair. Right
now we have about 33 million or
so of unobligated funds in, in
the program. So the, the idea
here is to expand the use of the
fund but not necessarily create
um a planning grant uh
conglomerate here at the Finance
Authority. Um, so, um,
Like I said, we'll, we'll be
able to waive things as, as
needed. Um, we have certainly
some pent up demand for the
affordable housing and the other
new plans that people have been
asking us about. So we will get
right to changing our
application, but we're gonna
have to see in terms of the
volume, how many plans case by
case, where do they come in in
terms of what the maximum brand
award is, um, and then, as you
know, uh, the program does
receive appropriations annually
from the PPRF program, so we'll
be kind of looking at that and
just
Seeing, uh, we want to make sure
we can accommodate these new
plans without just a full-blown
expansion of the program.
And Madam Chair, if I could just
add one thing which is
eliminating the template
documents that I think provides
for a little more capacity. The
template document for our most
frequently used um plan which is
uh a preliminary engineering
report is under the former
policies set to a USDA standard,
which in many instances is far
larger than any small system
needs. So if they're doing a
relatively straightforward
project. That thing is twice as
big as it needs to be and so
Um, by taking away the template,
we can have appropriately sized
documents for the project at
hand and that will, that will
increase the capacity because
they simply won't cost as much.
Great. Thank you for that. So my
last question is about.
When will we have
Policies is finalized and be
ready to and
Process finalized, so we'll be
ready to accept applications.
Certainly. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Should the board approve
the revised policies today. We
will get right on finalizing,
creating clean copies of the
rules and policies, posting on
the website, we've got the
infrastructure conference coming
up the end of October, we'd be
able to report out what the
changes are and all these new
plans and, and sort of market
the uh program that way, but
we'd worked quickly in October
uh to change our application
and, and I expect you, you will
see uh planning grant documents
coming forward either the new
newer do.
and or these increased awards
coming forward here in the next
month, the next 1 to 3 months.
Great, good news. Thank you for
that.
Any other questions from board
members?
Madam Chair, um, one item.
I make sure I'm not miss missing
something here. You have
reliance on outside expertise is
one of your edits.
Um,
There's a lot of agencies you
consult with to get to.
Um
The clearances that you need,
you have an archaeological
clearances in here, but I don't
see that the permit.
Cultural affairs, which is where
the archaeological studies
office lives.
Something.
I think it's probably just a
drafting I have no doubt in
practice you're doing.
For the sake of consistency you
may want to think about it.
Certainly, thank you, Madam
Chair and member Shelton. Yeah,
we, we've included, um,
Those, uh, as part of what, what
is in compliance with state
rules and regulations, the
archaeological clearance. So we
haven't necessarily called out
of the state engineer's office
or cultural affairs, but we know
that we'll be working with those
entities and they'll be
overseeing the review of those
planning documents to make sure
that the intent of the planning
is, is moving a project along in
the right direction. So whereas
we haven't called out all the
different uh entities there and,
and I, I guess it is a miss on
the cultural affairs department,
but uh we will
be working with them on those
archaeological clearances.
Man, we're happy to add it in
and with that addition.
Madam, Madam Chair, we just got
yelled at for omitting cultural
affairs over nerd on something,
so they're paying attention.
I'm serious. Sote recommends
that we add a cultural affairs
to the reliance on outside
expertise. Will do.
Thank you, remember.
Uh, any further questions?
If not, do I hear a motion on
this as amended? You have that
motion as amended.
Do I hear a second?
Second
Motion is made and seconded any
discussion.
If not all those in favor say
aye.
Right.
All those opposed same sign?
Motion carries. Thank you. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. This
is the rules that were supposed
to be before you last month that
got tabled and moved to to this
month.
These are the rules for the
housing component of the
opportunity enterprise and
Housing Development Act with the
amendments that were put in
place during the last
legislative session. So last
month you did the commercial
development rules and the
policies. You did do the housing
policies. These are the rules
for the housing, so you will not
see a red line document before
you. They're a brand new set of
rules. They do mimic.
Pretty closely the other set of
rules that were approved last
month. You've seen this before
in the initial review, they were
then sent over to the uh um.
Opportunity Enterprise boards
for their consultation. They
didn't have any comments. We
presented it to the oversight
committee. They didn't have any
comments, so the rules that are
before you are nearly identical
with the exception of some, some
small editing cleanups.
But I will go through them, uh,
sections 1 and 2, really again,
uh, specific to the act,
specific to housing. So we added
in definitions for middle income
workers, affordable housing. We
work with our partners at the
housing authority to ensure that
we have those definitions that
line up. They also coincide and
work well with the opportunity
Enterprise board's rules that
they adopted a couple of months
ago.
Section 3 sets forth the
application criteria, what's
required for an application to
be considered complete.
Section 4 is the review process,
which goes from the internal
NMFA process uh to the
opportunity Enterprise Board.
They're the ones that prioritize
projects. Those projects then
come to the finance authority
similar to a lot of our other
programs like Water Trust Board
and Collonius, um, the
applicants that then meet that
criteria are able to move
forward.
Section 5 is what outlines the
the loan terms. There's a $15
million dollar limitation can
exceed 40 years. We did put in a
requirement for deed
restrictions to be in place
during the repayment term with a
minimum of 10 years, so, uh,
well, those will be in place.
Requires loans that are secured
on real property to have a
mortgage, similar, uh, a similar
documentation instrument to be
filed. So,
Again, prudent lending practices
that we practice across all of
our other programs will continue
to follow suit here in this
program.
Section 6 is how we close and
disperse funds uh based on
certification from the
applicants working with council
will make sure that all of their
underlying certifications are in
place before we can move
forward.
Section 7 is the requirements
that uh we we put this in all of
our agreements to make sure that
our legal remedies are in place
to protect the interests of the
finance authority.
Section
Uh, 8 is monitoring and
reporting, reports are due by
December 1st of 2024 and then
each succeeding December 1st
thereafter.
Section 9 allows us to collect
reasonable fees. At this point,
we are not imposing any fees in
the program in section 10 allows
the rules to be repealed by the
finance authority and if we want
to amend them uh on a storyboard
and the oversight committee must
do that. So again, these rules
have not changed since the last
time you saw them. They've been
approved by the uh recommended
by the Opportunity Enterprise
Board and approved by the
oversight committee, and they
are here for your approval today
and I would stand for any
questions.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members?
And these rules that we've seen
since July.
Sometimes
no questions, madam, uh, Gerard.
Motion has been made to approve.
Do I hear a second?
OK, Madam Chair. Motion is made
and seconded. Any discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
But we're not done with housing.
The next we're um we're
considering
uh the housing development,
revolving loan management
policies.
Good morning, Madam Chair, board
members, which you see before
you is the umpose changes to the
housing development revolving
fund uh policies, um, as I would
like to refer to as the housing
loan structure policies.
The policies are, are designed
to help staff to um um structure
loans through that housing
development program whether the
opportunity enterprise program.
The policies don't differentiate
between the affordable workforce
housing infrastructure or multi
family rental and homeownership
projects or nonprofit developer
or for-profit.
The policies that that are in
question and the changes that
were made are are or changes
based on comments that we
received as Marquita outlined in
her CEO uh update this morning.
And some of the cages are, if we
go to page 71 under the bone
structuring policies and the the
parameters.
Most of the comments were being
made and under section D, the
limitation of fees paid to
developers.
Uh, in those particular, uh, in
that particular section, there
are a couple of things that we
uh change. Number one on a
developer fees for affordable
housing infrastructure projects,
um, the fees have been adjusted
to um
Up to 15% on the total project
cost.
Also, the projects will um have
a up to 15% on infrastructure
construction and development
type of projects. There's a, we
had originally 12% now it's up
to 15%. And then for acquisition
projects instead of limit of up
to 5%.
developer fees will uh be
dispersed in 3 different um
disbursement amount, uh, 3 at at
at the time of closing for all
construction loans and then a
third through the partial of the
project or midway point of the
project, the 3rd at 90% so that
gives the developers some
incentives to uh keep the
project on time and also to be
able to um
And uh
and some of the fees that are
paid to developers divide them
to get that
the the project on, on.
Also, uh, the developer fees
will be made by MFA so when we
uh paid developers, we will
evaluate that like any other.
That section on item E on
maximum returns, um.
Uh, the biggest changes that are
made, number one, on the, the
terms we instead of the minimum
a term fee maximum term being at
20 years the maximum term is
gonna be 30 years.
So we stroke strike out the
language for 20 years. In
addition to affordable housing
infrastructure projects
utilizing HUD or FDA or any
other type of federal
assistance, uh, the terms will
go up to 40 years instead of 30
years. So uh it, it is uh more
uh favorable, flexible terms for
uh.
In addition, a debt service
coverage, uh, the death search
coverage requirement is reduced
down from 1.35 to 1.15.
So that is
For flexibility again, and then
it returns of interest rates,
uh, the interest rates for
affordable infrastructure
projects will be mapped to a
federal project. As, as you all
may recall, affordable housing
infrastructure projects, um,
only time we would be involved
if there's federal um
Housing
Or federal programs that's
involved and so.
Mate that interest rate will
give um
Better terms
From our program.
Also
And match the federal rate so it
gives it.
But we understand.
From comments that we heard that
Projects can't be done without
the federal level.
And then
they finally on item Day on page
73 equity requirement, um,
What we have heard from a lot of
developers is that um a federal
uh developer fees can be
deducted and and reduced if they
showed the proper documentation
and that seems to be something
that is.
And throughout the uh
The industry in terms of
affordable housing, so when if
they show uh that they could
document the developer fees are
being reduced to allow for
affordable housing project to be
uh a part of, you know, like a
light tech project, for example,
it shows that we can count that
as an equity requirement.
And then the rest of the, the
The changes that are made are
uh.
nearly cosmetic changes and so
with that I chair and board
members of staff.
Thank you. Questions from board
members. These policies, Madam
chair, if I could just make one
more comment which is um what we
were trying to do is to both
align the policies with the
federal dollars that might be
being used on some of these
affordable housing
infrastructure projects of most
of the changes you see there
really are to conform the
policies to the existing
programs better. They were, we
were close, just not there. um,
uh, the developer fees, as John
mentioned, instead of paying out
developer fees over the life.
For the construction to allow
for some of the upfront costs to
be paid out by allowing for up
to 1/3 of the developer fees at
the time that we closed the
loans because there's a lot of
work that goes into getting a
construction loan done for the
next 3 to be over progress
payments during the construction
period, and then last they
earned the last bit of their
construct their developer fee at
the point at which the project
is successful, though it
compensates them on the front
end for some of the work, and it
doesn't pay out fully until the
project.
itself is successful with that
90% absorption rate. Um, so that
was a that was a key change for
us to balance the risk a little
better and to not, um, you know,
put our developers in a position
where they can't.
Um, really effectively oversee
the projects because it is
costly to get to the point of
construction. Want to make that
point, that was a really loud
and clear to allow up to 15% and
to match whatever the
development cost is on the
affordable housing, those were
loud and clear, um, and then
lastly, um, to reduce the
minimum debt service coverage
from 1.35 to 1.15.
Uh, we were looking at it from a
perspective of, of loans, um,
and what we were told later on
was what we're going to end up
doing is driving up
inadvertently the cost of
housing because the coverage
requirement is only gonna come
from either the rental or the
sale of the homes. And so we
took it down to the 1.15 which
is the HUD requirement, and we
will just go from there. So we
had again put in some nice
safeguards for our loans and had
a uh
Anticipated impact of driving up
the cost of housing, which of
course was not the goal at all.
So I just wanted to mention the
comments we received, um, as we
said last time, they were
received up until our deadline
to distribute the books, and
then thereafter. So I appreciate
all of the stakeholders um input
into this, and I, I think we are
as close as we're gonna get
until we've got at least a set
of um applications in front of
us, so you may not hear again
until the beginning of the year.
Thank you.
Questions from board members on
these revised policies. And I'm
sure I just have a comment.
Like to say well done. It's it's
been a long time coming and uh.
Like a, a new horizon.
So, uh, forward to it.
There are no other questions,
uh, Madam Chair, I'd be honored
to, uh,
move to.
We have a motion for approval.
Of the policies, do I hear a
second?
2nd. 2nd by member Collins, any
discussion.
hearing none, all those in
favor?
I.
Bye.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you. Thank
you.
On the agenda is our public.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, the
public lending Committee met on
Wednesday, September 18th, and
we did have a quorum staff
presented 3 PPRF applications,
um, and one request from
Sandoval County to allow for
early payoff of its loan, and we
recommended all 4 of those items
to the board for approval and
they appear on today's regular
agenda.
And staff also presented an
update on the change of revenue
pledge on a loan approved by
NMFA in July to the city of
Truth or Consequences. The loan
was approved with the pledge of
state share GRT and it'll be
switching to municipal local
option GRT, the coverage on the
new pledge is estimated at 3.96,
which is well above the required
1.25 times uh and the revenue
risk remains unchanged, and that
was an additional item, and that
concludes the report. Thank you.
Thank you. Any questions for the
public lending?
If not, we've got 4 projects on
the agenda today for
consideration.
OK.
Good morning.
Let me,
that's, yeah, that's better if
you get closer.
Yes, thank you clarify, can, uh,
those participating online here.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the New Mexico Finance
Authority Board. I do have some
guests here today. I have Mr.
Wayne Johnson, who is Sandoval
County's manager, and then I
have uh Mr. Rob Burpo, who is
the financial advisor for
Sandoval County as well. So, as
noted, what we have before you
today is a PPRF loan and we're
asking to amend the call date
for an early payoff. It is PPRF
loan 5126.
And what the county has um
shared with the finance
authority over multiple years,
is that they have a facility in
Cuba, New Mexico.
And uh initially they did have a
lease where the facility did
house both federal and county
at-risk youth.
And then in January 2023, the
lease was terminated.
And we did bring um to the board
an update. Fast forward to where
we are today. They're having
issues leasing the facility, so
the county, and I'll ask them to
speak and Mr. Burpo as well to
talk about the need to go ahead
and amend the call day and pay
this loan off uh earlier than
the maturity date which is uh
2040. And with that, Madam Chair
staff does recommend approval.
We stand for questions and
comments.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, if you'd like me to
give you a little bit more. I
thought I'd wait for questions,
but we, we can go ahead and just
kind of give you a quick
overview. Um, this originally
was a loan that the
Um, it was kind of a mess to
begin with and the finance
authority helped us out of that
mess and I wasn't there at the
time, but Mr. Burpo uh came in
and had to clean this up about
14 years ago or so, uh, in the
finance authority helped us in
this. So this is one of those
modes that we're, we're not real
thrilled about being on our
books for a lot of different
reasons, um, but one of the, the
reasons is that it's it.
No longer is leasable property
in the area. And my kids, which
was our original tenant at the
location was then unable to
staff.
The uh project out of Cuba or
anywhere. They, they really did
struggle for about a year before
they terminated the lease. That
left us with a property that we
could no longer lease, we have
it listed. It's been listed for
over a year and a half and we've
gotten exactly 0 bytes on, on
that lease, and we've talked to
the state, we thought CYFD might
be uh a very good tenant for
that location and for that, that
property. But in the final
analysis, um, it's, it's just
not leasable at this.
time cause it'll be very
difficult to staff.
In the meantime, uh, Cuba, uh,
our Cuba meal site, which is
located in the village of Cuba
in their municipal building
needs a lot of work.
And we have a full commercial
kitchen and the capability of
turning this site into at least
partially into a meal site.
We were also able to renegotiate
a built extension with Intel
Corporation, where we were able
to come up with um a $9 million
pilt deal over over 10 years and
we had them front load this with
about $2000 to help pay off this
loan with the intent of paying
off this loan, uh or defusing it
one way or the other. And we're
very thrilled that uh the
finance authority has determined
that they would support an early
payoff.
That's where we are. It will be
used and we think it'll be used
to a public benefit that's
greater than even what it was
before.
OK, thank you for the background
and explanation.
she
Any questions from board
members?
Madam Chair, first of all,
welcome Madam Johnson and uh
There are no questions I would
uh move for approval.
Uh
Motion um to proof has been made
with a second.
Any discussion from board
members on this project.
Adam Chair and good morning,
Wayne and Ron. I just want to
thank you for being innovative
and creative to find solutions
for this. I know it's been
challenging, so.
Thank you.
Any other discussion?
If not, all those in favor of
the motion, say aye.
I, I.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you.
Mhm.
There's.
No, not afraid to go.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and board members. I do have an
online guest, uh, finance
director, Ms. Evelyn Huff in the
city of Alamogordo at the board
had as as any questions prior to
the presentation.
Excuse me.
Uh, what has been presenting is
an infrastructure improvement
loan for the city of Alamo
Gordo. This is a tax-exempt loan
for 28,070,000, 30 year fully
advertised uh loan. The pledges
the pledge revenue is net
systems revenue, and the
coverage is 2.19 times the above
required 1.3 times.
The city of Alamogoro owns a
water and wastewater utility
system that provides an
essential service to
approximately 13,000 water
counts and 12,000 wastewater
accounts. There's a huge need
for an infrastructure utility
improvements and replacement so
the city is implementing a
multi-year capital improvement
plan.
The PBRF proceeds will be used
to finance the first phase of
the project for the city's
estimated multi-year capital
improvement program for the
utilities infrastructure repairs
and replacements for the water
and wastewater.
The city seeked outside advisors
and consultants for utility rate
study in a 40-year uh water
development plan. The utility
identified capital needs of
approximately 160 million to
fund the multi-year capital
improvement program, so the city
adopted the rate study that
increased rates starting in July
of 2024.
The increase will lead to more
profitable system and improve um
that service coverage.
So the city is requesting the
loan be structured as follows,
including a waiver for
semiannual payments versus
monthly payments. The semiannual
payment request consists and
mirrors the existing parameters,
and structure of the city's
current PPRF loans pledged to
Net Rev and net
systems revenue, um, the system,
the city has requested a spring
reserve in lieu of traditional
funded debt service reserve fund
which has allowed by the PPRF
loan management policies.
Policy allows the clients to
have demonstrated the ability to
meet their prior debt
obligations and shows stable
historical financial um
operations. In addition, the
city has an equivalent A3 rating
and uh on its net systems
revenue by Moody's on bond
issues in 2022, based on the
equivalent A3 rating, the city
will be required to cash fund a
debt service reserve over a
two-year period if the loan
coverage does fall below the 2
times coverage that is required.
The city is requesting a waiver
and making annual principal
payments in semi-annual
interest, uh, loan payments in
lieu of monthly loan payments.
And the PPRF loan management
policies may allow semiannual
payments based on the equivalent
A3 rating to the PPRF loans that
maintains an executed automatic
clearing housing, also knows
ACH.
The strengths include the
project is addressing a
much-needed community resource
and public safety and health by
improving utility
infrastructure, the weaknesses
the city has submitted the
fiscal year 2023, uh, has not
submitted their 20 tweet 23
audit of the city's email, their
audit exit conference is
scheduled for tomorrow, so
they'll be sending that out
directly after that meeting.
Um, last completed audit was in
2022. It was unmodified. Uh,
there were 3 number of
fightings, no repeated material
weaknesses or significant
deficiencies. This is the first
time this project has appeared
before the NMFA board. That does
recommend approval and I'll
stand for any questions at this
time.
Thank you for the overview, and
I'm assuming that must have is
joining us online.
Yes.
Um, we, I'd love to thank you
and welcome.
If you have any comments that
you'd like to add to this, we're
to hear those?
Madam Commissioner or Madam
chairwoman commissioners, I just
appreciate you guys very much
for um hearing our request. Uh,
we are moving forward with our
audit and plan to have it
submitted um by the end of next
week.
Now that we have uh all of our
findings and uh all the
financial statements then.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
On this project?
OK
Madam Chair,
if I could before on page um.
85.
Yeah.
Chose to be a drop in revenues
from
22 to 23.
From 11 million to 8.8 million.
I was just curious to
See why
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
remember Collins, I don't have
my credit analysis or analyst
with me at this time, I can get
back to you with that question.
I would have to take a, a, a, a
deeper look into that to
properly address your question.
I apologize for that.
I would ask Miss
I would ask M
I would ask Miss
Miss H if she could answer that
question for us.
Yes, um, I can speak to that um
we did have a major correction
um our hospital had installed a
meter upside down, um, and had
incurred a very, very large
bill, um, and so once we uh
realized what the issue was, um,
we did make a major correction
on that and then also we saw
incredibly increased usage
during uh the post-COVID period,
which ran
fiscal year 2022 and then we
felt that going into that next
fiscal year, we saw a um
decrease in the usage as we saw
more people go to work, um, so
we be decrease in the revenue
corresponded with the decrease
in the actual usage that we saw
and that was something that we
brought into consideration when
we brought our rate consultant
in restudy the rates. So we did
take the fluctuation into
consideration.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Any other questions from board
members on this project?
If not, I think we had a motion.
me.
The motion for approval, but
it's OK with never call.
Good.
OK
Yeah, and I'll second that.
Motion is made in a
seconded to approve this
project.
Is there any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye. Right,
right.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you. And thank you, Ms. H,
for joining us today.
Good morning, ma'am. Chair,
members of the board of
directors, Ron Cruz, managing
director of lending, and I'll be
presenting the following project
on behalf of our lending team.
Uh, so the Gal McKinley School
District has applied to the PPRF
or financing a project within
the district. Loan amount is for
$2000 and they will receive 10%
in disadvantaged funding based
on their MHI.
Alone will carry a ten-year term
and an interest rate of 1.97.
So the district did receive
voter approval for this
transaction in November of 2021.
The proceeds will be used for
projects mostly related to
health and safety, including
replacement of uh fire pumps.
Our panels, smoke sensors, and
smoke in uh I'm sorry, school
intercoms.
These projects are further
detailed on page 92 of your
board book.
The Major tax equal 23.59 of the
assessed valuation which
reflects low concentration risk
to the tax base, and we do have
our statutory guarantee from DFA
to the district default.
The 2023 audit was unmodified.
It had 0 findings.
This is the first time this
project appears before this
board and staff does recommend
approval with that all set.
Thank you. Any questions from
board members on this one?
If not, do I hear a motion to
approve?
Mhm.
Motion has been made. Is there a
second?
Motion is made and seconded. Is
there any discussion on the
motion?
If not all those in favor say
aye. I.
Although opposed same sign?
Motion carries.
Morning, Madam Chair and board
members. Um, so what you see
here in front of you is I'm
gonna be on page 106 there in
your board material. This is
gonna be for La in the school
district. You'll see that
they're the home of the Tigers,
and what we have for you here
today is a PRF 2024 general
obligation bond loan request.
So in November of 2023, this
particular district did receive
voter approval and it was for
$24 million and that voter
approval is valid for a period
of about 4 years.
And so Lana School District has
a loan request for us today and
it's for $600. It is for a
12-year term.
And it does have a 3.53% net
interest cost.
As you look into the project
description, you'll see the loan
proceeds will be used for
projects that are consistent
with the district's 2023 through
2028 facility master plan, which
include but are not limited to
to the following projects.
First one is the construction to
replace Ann Parish Elementary.
The second one stucco, one of
the buildings at Bosky Farms
Elementary, Sundance Elementary
roof repair, and then concrete
furniture and flooring for all
school sites, and of course,
cost of issuance. This project
is vital to the district's
education mission and providing
for the good quality of
education for the students that
they serve.
As you look at the strengths,
you'll see strengths do include
that the major taxpayers equals
7.65% of the total sex
valuation, which reflects a low
concentration of the tax base.
And also the second strength
that you see here is that 31% of
the loan proceeds will be paid
in the first year.
As you look at the weaknesses,
you'll see that there's none to
report.
As you look at the audit, you'll
see the fiscal year 2023 audit
was unmodified. It did have one
finding, but that one finding
does not impact this project or
this financing request
whatsoever.
This is the first time that this
project has appeared before the
board. Staff does recommend
approval, and I'm happy to stand
for any questions you may have.
Thank you for the overview. Any
questions from board members?
Not do I hear a motion to
approve?
You do mature.
Motion is made during her 2nd.
OK,
madam made and seconded any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
I, I.
Although supposed same sign.
Motion carries.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda, um,
An update from member Collins on
the economic development.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, the economic
Development Committee met on
September 17th.
We um recommended for approval 3
loan transactions of 2810
Carston.
Um, alone participation.
Um,
Also one through OERB with the
film Yard LLC.
A new markets tax credit deal um
with Garrett Development, to
build a suit manufacturing
facility for great technology,
um, we are also recommending
approvals to the venture capital
investment policy.
And uh we uh listened to a
review of uh.
The um
Program monitoring.
ones
I
Thank you. Any questions?
Remember Collins?
If not, our first item of
business on economic development
is the Carston LLC.
So, Madam Chair and board
members, what we have here is a
smart money participation
application from an organization
that's called 2810 Carton LLC.
They are located in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, and I am on page 117
there in your board material.
Before I begin my presentation,
I'd like to introduce you to the
CEO and vice president of 2810
CarsonelC and also Giltmore LLC.
Their names are Paula Silverman
and Adam Silverman.
They will introduce themselves
and speak on 2810 Carson LLC as
well as the project description
and what the loan funds will be
used for when they're completed
completed with their particular
part of the presentation, then
they'll hand it back over to me
so I can go over the loan
details and financing um details
as well. So that might I'll go
ahead and hand this over to Paul
and Adam.
Great. Thank you, Ryan. Um, my
name is Paul Silverman. Um, I'm
one of 3 silvermans, um, Adam
and David.
Sitting in the back and uh we're
Gilmore and we thought that you
might like to see the people
that you're actually entrusting
your money or our money.
Uh, with, and we also wanted to
let you have a little more
connection to how that money is
gonna be used. And that money is
gonna be used part of it, um, to
provide manufacturing space for
a product that is a New Mexico
true product, um, it was
actually uh invented at UNM. um,
and it existed, it came out of a
startup, uh, in 2012.
Um, they spent all their money,
but they came up with a great
product and I was an original
investor in that in uh entity
and uh the board asked me to
help them out of
The problem that they had, and
so I agreed to take it over.
I've invested about $1.5 million
in it so far. Um, we're getting
ready to pump about another
$1 million of, of our money,
$1000 of your money.
Sure, yeah, thanks, we didn't
want to bribe you guys, but we
brought samples.
And uh we're gonna employ uh
probably about within the next 2
or 3 years, 20 people uh in the
manufacture of this. I just came
back from Bentonville, Arkansas
yesterday, pitching um Walmart.
I wasn't successful this time,
but I never quit. Um, so you
also you, you'll see you soon
see it there, but uh we're in
about 1600 stores.
um
the US, um, and we're doing
great business on Amazon.
Um, our sales in 2024 will be up
270% over 2023 and we expect a
similar increase in sales, um.
Uh, in, in 2025.
So, um, that's a hand spray, um,
all you have to do is put, it's
a mist, if you'll put a couple
of pumps on your hands and uh
it'll, it'll tell you what to do
from there once you do that.
Good, good, good, good, good. I,
I'm, I'm a citrus peppermint
guy, but uh,
yeah, please, please give your
other folks, um, uh, so, so
thank you all. I'm Adam
Silverman. Um, not to get Ryan
in trouble, but Paul was so
excited to share his be clean.
He wanted to go over that first.
Uh, the property we're buying at
201,810 Carston is a little over
54,000 square feet. It's located
right at I-25 just um
Near the new Sunport extension
near the airport in Albuquerque.
The building was a former FDA
approved tortilla factory uh
that fell on some hard times,
went into bankruptcy, a group
out of Chicago purchased the
property and then said, we don't
want to own anything in New
Mexico and we came into the
picture, uh, all Ado or I'm
Adam, excuse me, I got excited.
Paul, myself and my brother are
the sponsors on this deal, uh,
and Blean is a key tenant, uh,
because it's personally near and
dear to my primo here. Uh,
they're taking about 60,000
square.
of the property. Uh, the other
portion of the property is uh
38,700 square feet we're going
to lease to a group called Happy
Accidents, and I don't know how
many of y'all remember, but I
was here in front of you all
last year for a new market tax
credit in downtown.
Thank you so much. We are open.
Uh, that was the X Nobo Project
at 7th and Central. It's a
fabulous development and with
your health board that project
really is going to change our
downtown. So thank you for that.
Uh, now on to the other fun one,
Happy Accidents. Happy Accidents
is a uh extremely unique uh
experience in Albuquerque. Uh,
it is run by two people, Kate
Gerwin and her partner Blaze
Montana.
Yes, that's his real name. Uh,
we, we're, uh, providing them
with 38,000 square feet in the
building to create a um
packaging and distillery
operation. They have purchased
uh a one of 2 in the world, uh,
distillation equipment that
distills at low temperature, uh,
the increases the flavor
profiles of their alcohol. Um,
I don't know who drinks and who
does it, but uh just so you all
know, uh, the, the spirits
business is actually in an
interesting place right now that
the growth mode is in what they
call ready to drink cocktails or
TDs, uh, Kate and her partners
will be bringing in a canning
line in the future. It will be
canning RTDs for their spirits,
and they'll be not only selling
them here in New Mexico but
across our region and hopefully
nationally over the next 10
years. Uh, this facility is
ideal for them and be clean
because of those FDA.
requirements. The billing is one
of the only 30 ft clear
warehouses in Albuquerque. Um,
so we're really excited about
the facility and the opportunity
to purchase it. Uh, there is a
small uh space about 9800 square
feet uh that we are still
seeking a tenant for. However,
we do believe that with a sub 4%
vacancy market in the industrial
area of Albuquerque that we are
going to come up with a tenant.
Probably within a few months
after opening, uh, and having
everything demised and set up.
Uh, we are using the funds that
you are providing us with,
hopefully, uh, for
infrastructure and build out in
the facility. uh Bank of
Albuquerque is participating uh
as the primary lender, and
they've agreed to finance uh the
rest of the money.
Um, and I hope you like you
don't spray it in your mouth.
Not Mo spray, just hands spray.
It can't hurt you. It's all
organic, so.
Right, what else do I need to
come? No,
it was.
Thank you so much for giving us
the time.
They might say no. Well,
whatever. Thank you for being
with us today and for the
overview. Any question? are you
Madam Chair and board members,
what I can do is kind of discuss
the financing structure for you
real quick and then I'll go
ahead and close out for
questions. Um, and thank you for
that. Um, so the smart money
participation program does have
an ability to participate with
the bank and the bank that's
participating in this particular
transaction happens to be Bank
of Albuquerque.
And the commercial lender that
we're working with in order for
this transaction to be
successful is Darren Davis. And
if you look at our portion of
the loan, you'll see that it is
a commercial term loan. Um, it
is for $1,000,000. Um, the
interest rate is 5.14%. The term
is very interesting. You'll see
that it's for 84 months, which
is a 7-year term, which is
important to know in the 1st 24
months will be interest only
payments and then the debt
service coverage ratio is 1.28
times. Look at the participation
terms, the entire loan amount
altogether will be $5.5 million
0.5 million of that will be from
Bank of Albuquerque, that will
be 81% of the participation of
the loan amount and um their
interest rate for that portion
would be 7.05% interest rate
fixed and um for the record,
they will be in first lean with
respect to the collateral which
I'll be sharing in just a
moment, looking at the smart
mini participation, as I
mentioned earlier, we're
participating $1000 which
happens to be 18% of the total
participation amount. And again,
the interest rates 5.14% fixed,
and we will be taking a
subordinate lien.
On our portion of the loan,
looking at the collateral
itself, Clis describe that
collateral. It's commercial real
estate, it is at the property
located there at 2810 Carston as
been discussed.
And it did have an appraisal
that was performed and gave it a
value of $7,200,000. We did
perform a 15% discount and
applied it and gave it a new
value of $6,120,000. And as I
mentioned, we would take a
subordinate lien on the
collateral. The LTV altogether
for the entire loan request
would be at 89.87%.
As mentioned, the building was
originally owned by Eclipse
Aviation and then also owned by
New Mexico Tortilla Factory. It
features 30 ft clear height
ceilings, over 4000 amps of
power and of course the FDA
certification that was mentioned
earlier.
I'm gonna be on page 119 and
we're going to look at sources
and uses so you can see how
these funds are going to be
distributed. You'll see um the
sources altogether, the total
project funding is
$6,5099,000625 and you'll see
both lungs there um with Bank of
Albuquerque and the smart many
participation, but also equity
contribution there that's over
$1,099,000. The uses of those
funds, of course, will be for
the acquiring the property which
is $60,200,000. There is um hard
costs and soft costs that will
be embedded in.
To the project to be able to
perform renovation to allow for
these tenants that were
described earlier to be able to
move into the property. And of
course, there's finance costs
there.
Looking at the obaggore, you'll
see that loan will be in direct
obligation of 2810 Carson LLC.
I've already described the
collateral, but again, we will
be in subordinate position in
the entire LTB for the entire
amount is 89.87%.
The Financial summary shows that
2018 carcinoC shows that the
project has more than enough
financial capacity to pay off
its debts and has a coverage
ratio of 1.28 times. The tenants
happy accidents and be clean
spot can comfortably pay their
rent according to the financials
that were provided to us.
The project is backed by Gilmore
LLC, which does have over 45
years of experience in real
estate.
Currently, as mentioned earlier,
18% of the building is empty,
but Gil more else. He does
expect to fill that remaining
space by the end of the
construction period.
Now talking about that
appraisal, the appraisal showed
as is at $7.2 million but also
reflected um um 8 million value
when it was reported as
stabilized, which is um with the
worth of the building would be
once it's fully leased in the
local area in Albuquerque, the
average rent was $11.82 per
square foot, and vacancy rates
were as low as 4.1% in that
specific area. The project is
expected to maintain a stable
ability to cover its debt
payments once it's fully leased.
Conditions of closing, um, Happy
accident is required to raise
$500,000 in equity to cover
startup costs before they can
move into the building and we
want to make sure that's a
condition of closing, and of
course, we want to make sure
that the tenants that are moving
in have signed lease agreements
in place before we do the long
closing as well.
You'll notice that the
management team bios that were
provided are on behalf of Paul,
Adam, and David Silverman for a
review as well as Blaze Montana
and Kate Irwin from Happy
Accidents for your review as
well.
I also perform market analysis
research on lessons of
non-residential buildings for
review, as well as a little bit
of research on canned alcoholic
beverages and hand sanitizer
market as well for your review.
On page 123, you'll see
strengths and weaknesses.
Strings include that the sponsor
does have over 45 years of
experience and over 1000 square
feet of commercial space that's
been developed.
They do have an adequate
coverage ratio using
conservative underwriting, the
guarantor with a strong personal
net worth and that as is
appraisal does have a healthy
loan to value ratio and that
participating bank, which is
Bank of Albuquerque, has
approved of the proposed
financing structure.
Weaknesses include that the NMFA
will be in subordinate position
with respect to that collateral?
Essentially the two tenants that
are moving in will be startups.
Also the 3rd space, which is 18%
of the occupancy is still vacant
and will be expected to be
filled and happy absence is rich
to raise that $500,000 in equity
to move in, as well as the lease
agreements to be signed. And
then lastly is in my face
sensitive to the amount of
exposure that we have to
alcoholic centric businesses
across the entire private
lending portfolio.
Um, staff does recommend
approval and um myself and the
Silvermans are all happy to
answer any questions that you
may have.
Thank you for that.
So a quick question about um job
creation.
So I realize you're gonna be
leasing leasing to two startup
companies. Can you talk a little
bit about the manufacturing jobs
that we anticipate will be
created with those two.
Well, I, I could, I'll talk for
BClean. Uh, we have, uh,
formulation and filling and
capping equipment, um, that is
being in the process of being
delivered to New Mexico, and um
we'll have, we've got a um uh a
chemist who will be running our
factory.
Uh, with 20 years of experience
in cosmetic manufacturing and uh
the jobs will be, it'll build up
as, as, as our sales grow we
keep hiring people uh for
various, you know, parts of the
manufacturing uh process. Um,
And um uh right now we're doing
this in about 4 different
locations, using many of our of
our investor partners. Uh, we've
got 8 investor investor partners
that um all have a very close
tie to this business entity of
their previous investors, they
wanted to see it go forward, um,
and we've got 3 PhDs, we've got,
I mean, people way smarter than
me, um, that are involved in it,
um, but from the real estate and
The managing and operation side,
um, we've got, we, we feel like
we've got it totally covered.
So, um, we expect our sales to
keep growing at at a very high
exponential rates, um, this,
this business, the hand
sanitizer business in the US is
$1.6 billion. Um, the, there's
only
Two major producers in the um
Uh, space of, um,
Uh, or in the organic space as
touch land and Doctor Bronner's,
uh, we expect to be a major 3rd
player in that having a very
healthy nine-figure.
Piece of, of that business. Uh,
I'm not gonna be happy until
it's till our volumes are up in
9 figures and that's gonna
employ a lot of people.
Great.
I, I'm gonna hold my jokes for
later, um, the Happy accidents
folks, uh, they have a plan to
hire about 33 people to begin
with. Uh they're going to have
an additional 4 people added on
every year as they bring on
different lines, uh, and
eventually, uh, as their cash
flow comes in, they're gonna
create a tasting room experience
inside the building, uh, is part
of a
It's like a winery or any other
distillery around the country
that have small taster that'll
actually be a different side of
the staff, but for the
manufacturing side it will start
with 33 and add.
that
Great. Thank you for that. Any
other questions from board
members?
Please try the product.
If not, do I hear emotion in
this project?
Move would be approved.
Thank you.
The 2nd.
Thank you, motion has been made
and seconded to approve.
This um project.
Is there any discussion on the
motion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye?
All those opposed, same sign?
Motion carries.
Thank you all. Thank you so
much.
So, Madam Chair and board
members, what we have here is
now an opportunity enterprise
commercial development
application. It is from an
organization that's called
Filmyard LLC and they are
located in Albuquerque, New
Mexico as well, and I'm on page
124 there in your material.
Before I begin my presentation,
I'd like to introduce you to the
CEO and owner of Filmy Yard LLC.
His name is Rick Metz. Um, he
will introduce himself and speak
on who Filmyard LLC is, as well
as the project description and
what the loan funds will be used
for. So I'm gonna go ahead and
hand this over to Rick, and when
he's done, I'm gonna go ahead
and discuss the
loan description and the
financing details. So with that
in mind, I'll go ahead and hand
this over to Rick Metz.
I'm chairwoman, members, thank
you.
Uh, for the opportunity to
present, Ryan, thank you for all
your help up to this point.
Um, from Filmyard, uh, we are a
film resource location in uh in
the South Valley where we uh we
built out the location where
General Electric used to be in
the San Jose uh community over
there. We feel like we're a part
of the revitalization that's
happening in the neighborhood
there since General Electric
left, um, you know, there hasn't
been, uh,
Any use on the site and so we're
excited. We have a 50,000.
square foot warehouse that we've
put up and we're hoping with
your guys' help to add two sound
stages and a community center.
So, I've been uh I've been in
the industry 20 years.
And um I remember.
It used to be kind of seasonal
and it would slow down at
certain times of the year and
then one year it just got busy
and it stayed busy, and so, uh,
it's uh it's exciting to see
having been in the industry so
long to see it grow and and
finally find its stride, and I
think that the industry is, it's
a public private partnership in
the sense that
You know, the state has come up
with a stable tax credit, which
is, of course, is a major draw.
for productions to come here.
But what we need is we need
private industry to also make
sure that we have trained crew
and that we have the
infrastructure that they need.
And that's, I think, something
that we're struggling to keep
pace with right now is just
availability. I mean, I could
give you in Albuquerque, the
warehouse availability is about
1%, which means there's just
really not that much to rent and
uh films need special
warehousing, you know, they,
they, they make their sets
there, they film there as as
sound stages, um, you know, they
need a lot of power, they need
tall roofs, and so we, we, you
know, we have a market that has
very little availability
already, and then when you take
the subset of what the film
needs, there's really not a lot.
Um,
spaces to rent and that's kind
of the tight end of the funnel
right now.
I worked with um an NBC show a
couple of months ago.
And uh they came up to me and
they said, Rick.
We've been looking for 3 months
for a location and, and this is
the only location that will work
for us and if you, we didn't
work with you on this, we were
thinking of taking the show to
Texas.
You know, and so it feels good
to just to think that, OK, we're
doing our part.
You know, to, to bring shows
here to the state, um, but it
also highlights how much we need
to focus on keeping pace with
the infrastructure needs and
that's something that private
industry needs to do.
So, um, the industry is changing
a lot and a lot of shows are
either filming their entire
projects or parts of their
projects in digital stages.
Uh, that we don't have in the
state right now. And the digital
stages bring, you know, with the
help of AI and computing power,
they're bringing these virtual
production environments, um,
that replace a lot of
traditional green screen and uh
post-production effects, and
they create these, you know,
interactive production
environments. In fact, most of
the new series that Disney is
turning out on the Star Wars
platform are all shot in these
types of stages.
So
What happens is that
When a when a film wants to come
to New Mexico, they call in
advance and they say, well, is
there a soundstage availability?
Is that, you know, do we have
the crew and the vendors that we
need.
And, and if we don't, then they
go to another state.
And uh which was kind of
highlighted with my ABC example,
but that's especially true.
With the digital stages because
we don't have any of that now.
So, uh,
This is gonna bring brand new.
Um, jobs to the state in an
industry that's already growing,
um, because once these
facilities are up, we'll be able
to, you know, tap into uh
You know, a new type of
business, so.
Last thing I want to say is, is
training. I think that the
Back in the day, the tax credit
was created.
To give
New Mexican workers and
students.
Opportunities, right? That's why
we originally created the
credit.
And uh
So training is a big part of of
what we do. We've been, we've
been doing uh industry
apprenticeship programs for a
decade with CNM and other trade
schools, and of course, gonna
continue that tradition at this
facility. And, and because it's
this cutting edge facility, and
we're excited because we're not
just showing people how we make
movies, but we're showing them
how we gonna make movies next
year, you know, in Mexico has
this long tradition of being a
technology leader. We have two
labs here and
And uh so, you know, our hope is
that uh with the help of these
facilities that Albuquerque and,
and the state and, you know,
make the, the statement that uh
You know, uh,
Not only is it a great place to
make,
Your next film, but it's, you
know, they're in step with, you
know, the modern methods, so.
Ryan, I'll turn it over to you.
So, Madam Chair and board
members, I think Rick did an
outstanding job of explaining
who film the LLC is and what
this project description is. So
I'll go over the loan details
and the financial description
and then stand for questions,
um.
So you can see if this loan is a
construction loan it does have a
5.1% interest rate. It is for a
loan amount of $6,900,000. It is
for a 10-year term with a 22
year amortization, you'll notice
that the 1st 24 months will be
interest only payments to allow
for construction and then um the
Du service coverage ratio is
1.47 times and that number was
generated utilizing 65%
occupancy when underwriting it.
Look at the collateral, you'll
see the collateral is the
property in question that's
located there at 336 Woodward in
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
An appraisal was performed and
it was as complete and it gave
it a value of $16,600,000. We
did apply 15% discount and
applied it and give it a new
value of $14,100,000 and then
this transaction you'll see that
we'll be in first lane with
respect to the mortgage real
estate property, and the LTB for
this requirement um for this
project is LT LTLP is a 48.93%.
Going to page 127, which is the
sources and uses.
You'll see that the total
project funding altogether and
I'm on page 127.
You'll see that the total
project funding altogether is
$7,665,000. You'll see this loan
that we're talking about today
is $60,900,000 with equity
contribution of $765,000.
The uses of all these funds will
be for $6 million and that's to
develop and construct these
digital stages that Rick did a
great job of describing. There
is a contingency in there for
$1,600,000 in financing costs as
well.
Looking at the financial
summary, you'll see the debt
service coverage ratio is 1.47
times and the ratio is based of
the 35% vacancy factor applied
to rental revenue at 22
amortization and a 5.1% interest
rate and interest only term of
two years on page 128, you'll
see that this is a loan that
will be in direct obligation of
Filmyard LLC. Um, I've described
the collateral, but as a
reminder, we'll be in first lane
and the LTB is 48.93%. Closing
conditions for this one, you'll
see that you
LLC is um to purchase key person
life insurance policy, naming
NMFA as a beneficiary and also
in MFA is also requiring the
payoff of an existing note to
ensure that NMFA will
successfully be in first lane
with respect to this loan
structure.
Um, management team bios were
written on Rick Metz himself and
Deborah Burns and John Hendry
for your review. I also
performed market analysis and
research on motion picture, TV,
and video production for your
view as well.
And on page 130.
I'll go over um strengths
weaknesses. You'll see strengths
include that Rick Matson Coyard
LC is an experienced operator.
Um, this construction is
considered to be relatively
simple.
Um, one thing that's really
important to to note with
respect to the strength is that
there will be a 10-year master
lease signed for both of the
production to studios that it
will be built. Uh, they will be
nearby Netflix and located in
the film industry there in
Albuquerque.
Uh, and there is an above
average debt service coverage
ratio and loan to value ratios,
assuming that the project
reaches pro forma expectations,
and if the project space was
converted to another alternative
use industrial, and given the
current Albuquerque market
rates, the net operating income
would cover the debt service and
nearly all of the preferred
interest payments.
Weaknesses include that there's
an indirect exposure to
short-term cycle of film and
television production. Um, this
does concludes my presentation
and staff does recommend
approval and uh myself and Rick
Metz will be very happy to
answer any questions you have.
Thank you. Questions from board
members?
Shelton.
Your uh
You're in the, in the uses on
page 127, your 1.6 million
contingency seems like a fairly
large compared to the
development costs. Can you talk
about what went into the
development of that number?
Madam Chair and member ban um
Shelton, um, it's a good
question being that this is a
digital studio type of
construction build. Um, it is in
a large amount of money that
will be contributing towards the
build of this, um, these two
digital studios, but it might be
best to have Rick Metz add some
color to this conversation as
well.
OK.
Yeah, there's uh there's some
unknowns in the construction
costs. We're working on, you
know, getting the best value,
but we, uh, uh.
It's not a common uh uh
structure and so we kind of
estimated high just to make sure
that we would
Uh
Have all of our ducks covered.
Thank you.
Mature.
um.
Mr. Metz, who's the contractor
on the project?
Has it been selected?
Two different contractors, one
is Brightspan. That's who we
used to do that, the other
building and right now we're
Where we haven't decided on the
contractor for some of the
components of the.
Of the digital stages yet.
Madam Chair, will they be, are
those Mexico contractors and if
not, will they be using local
subs and local
Uh, worker.
So some of the premanufactured
stuff is not New Mexico, bright
spans out of Ohio, I believe,
and the the other contract will
be local and all the subs will
be in New Mexico.
Any other questions?
If not, do I hear a motion on
this project?
You do, Madam chair.
Motion has been made. Is there a
second?
Motion is made and seconded.
Any discussion on the motion?
If not all those in favor say
aye?
OK.
All those opposed same sign.
Ocean carries and the project is
approved. Thank you. Thank you
very much. Congratulations.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So I would like to just start on
page 142 for a very brief um
update on uh Garrett Development
Corporation Array Technology,
you may recall we brought this
in July and we did get our
approval, our preliminary
approval. Now we are looking for
a final approval and our chief
legal officer, Mr. Opperman,
we'll go ahead and walk you
through the res uh resolution.
And with that, if we just look
at our snapshot real quick, the
difference, um, the
changes from July to our final
approval. Our first is going to
be our interest rate. So our
interest rate is 1.220, and that
is basically the cash that is
paid upfront. It goes into the
investment account, and once
they look at that, they come up
with a blended interest rate of
the 1.220.
Our estimated debt service
coverage ratio actually went up.
It's 1.19.
So we have a 3rd CDE. So when I
presented this, we had New
Mexico Finance Authority,
finance New Mexico, with a $100
million allocation.
We also had prestamos.
That is a subsidi that brought
in um and it's contributing $100
million and now we have a third
sub CDE which is Dudley
Ventures, and they are bringing
$9 million to this transaction.
Also, having both of those uh
three sub CDEs, so the finance
New Mexico for Stamos and Dudley
Ventures, the exit fee for this
project for a new market tax
credit, uh, the New Mexico
Finance Authority Finance New
Mexico will be senior to the
other two subsidies.
Also, we did get an appraisal.
Appraisal did come in and it did
change um our loan to value.
It's 82%.
And then also too, if we look at
the uh exit fee determination.
At number one was actually
changed to 215 jobs because one
staff was able to meet with the
rate technology, we realized
that the number of retained jobs
is actually 215. And with that,
I'd like to turn it over to Mr.
Opperman to uh go over our list
uh in our resolution.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the board, beginning on page
144 of your board book is the
resolution. This is the
resolution that grants final
approval to proceed to close
this transaction.
You'll see the 1st 7 pages, as
with all of our new market tax
credit transactions. It starts
with a background in an
education that we do on all of
our market resolutions, which
there's a reason for that, and
it's right, we want when there's
so many of these, they each are
individual, they're each tied to
an individual LLC that we've
created. We want them to stand
on their own. So if someone from
the outside were to look up each
transaction, they would have a
very separate and distinctive
view from that. So, uh, it's
really an education and a record
piece. It starts on page 77.
Your resolution?
That's on page 150, and it does
a few things. Uh, first on
section 2, it ratifies the prior
approvals, including the
preliminary approval that this
board gave a few months ago.
Section 3 ratifies the CDFI
allocation agreements that we
use. This is the agreement uh
with Finance New Mexico
investors series 33 that we are
using for this transaction.
Section 4 authorizes the $100
million sub-allocation, that's
the allocation that has received
by Finance New Mexico. It is
then sub-allocated down Investor
series 33 to be used in a
specific transaction.
Section 5 approves the
resignation of the finance
authority as the 1% member of
the sub CBE. The reason we do
that is after closing that,
therefore the finance authority
doesn't have a direct ownership
in the, in the sub CDE and what
that does is it better insulates
the finance authority for not
having uh from liability for not
having that direct ownership
structure.
Section 6 approves the term
sheet and substantially final
form that term sheet is in your
materials at page 157. That's,
that's really the, the crux of
the transaction and so, um, as
with all of these transactions,
there are volumes of documents
and uh.
As we prepare those documents,
they must conform to the final
term sheet that is before you
today. So if there's any
deviation.
The deal stops dead, we have to
come back if there's some sort
of approval that is required.
Section 7 approves the amended
and restated operating
agreement. That's the, uh,
that's the operating agreement
for Investor Series 33 that then
essentially the original exist
until we close, once it's
closed, um, then it moves in and
uh the parties change. This
document is
was approved when the program
was created and was, and we work
closely with the Attorney
General's office. So this
document does not deviate. There
might be, there's nuances
obviously to conform to the
various changes of the different
transactions, but otherwise we
don't deviate because we can't.
Uh, section 8 approves the
indemnity agreement and
substantially final form. This
is the tax credit
indemnification between the
Investor Series 33, uh, finance
New Mexico Service Company,
which is our tax credit
indemnity, which that's where
all of our liquidity and service
fees are held, that limits the
liability so when if, if there's
a problem from a liability
standpoint, they can look here,
but they can't go anywhere else.
So there's, there's a cap on how
they're able to uh from a
liability standpoint.
Um, that's another template that
was approved by the Attorney
General's office. We don't
deviate again from that.
Uh, section 9,
Authorizes the community
benefits agreement. Uh, this is
the agreement that will be
between Investor Series 33,
Chrisstamos, and DVCI uh
attached to that are the various
reporting and wage requirements
at compliance obligations that
they have to report to yearly.
That is how that will, uh, we
wanted to put that in before you
as well. Uh, Section 10
authorizes the actual loan into
GDC Sunshine.
Section 11 is a blanket catch
all for the other transaction
documents that aren't attached
because they're not yet in final
form as this deal progresses,
but the touchstone again, they
must comply and they must be
substantially consistent with
the final term sheet.
And then Section 12 authorizes
the finance authority officers
to execute any of the
transaction documents, so that's
where Marquita will get a hand
cramped, uh, in signing many,
many documents to close these.
So with that, Madam Chair,
members of the board, um, stand
for any questions. I know Carmel
is here and um happy to, happy
to answer them.
Thank you.
Um, any questions from
Board members on this project.
I just want to say thank you for
all your work on this.
Um,
It's a substantial project.
I think it's a
Great that we have yet another
investor that's coming to the
table
decreases our risk and
Uh, really shows that we've got
others who are willing to
invest.
Just looking at the diagram on
page 143 of, you know, how the
is put together and I just, so
this is why the thank you pretty
complicated
scenario here in which we're
Bring some lavender tea when I
do it.
Hm.
So I just want to thank you for
your work on this and, and
making it happen. I think we've,
we've ended in a pretty nice
place for approval.
Very much.
Any questions or comments from
other board members?
If not, do I hear motion on this
project?
So move, madam chair.
Motion is made. Is there a
second?
But
Motion made and seconded any
discussion on the motion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
Hi. Hi.
All those oppose same sign.
Ocean.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda.
Information only.
Presentation.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. Uh, it's
great to be back. Uh, we have
something a little bit different
today. I'm Ethan Sampson from
Nikita Investment Group. We have
um
Over the last year brought uh
investment opportunities before
you. Uh, today, we actually are
bringing some research that
we've done over the last few
months to you and um I'm pleased
to be joined by my colleague
Alison Adams, who led this
research and she's going to walk
through it, um, given the, the
timing, we're gonna try to keep
it fairly brief and then we'll
take questions, uh, or, and feel
free to interrupt us as we go.
Um, so I'll turn it over to
Alison to begin.
The overview.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. Um, nice
to meet you.
Um, you can, uh, start on page
295.
Um, I was told that I'm supposed
to introduce myself, so I I'll
do that. I'm naturally shy, so I
apologize. Um, I uh work at
Makita Investments alongside
Ethan, uh, and I'm a research
consultant. I'm, my team is
actually based out of our Boston
office, although I work from our
Portland office. Um, I have 18
years of industry experience,
um, as a by side analyst and
then working in general
consulting, um, and by way of
relevant experience for this
project, I also have a PhD.
From Harvard, where I studied
history of economic development
in modern Latin American
history. So I'm quite familiar
with this region and also um
what it takes uh to
Focus on economic development
from a governmental perspective.
So with that, um, I'll just go
ahead and uh.
Yes
Thank you so much. If we can be
on slide 289, please. Thank you.
Um, so we put together this
project, um, Ryan asked us to do
a deep dive on research, um, and
we wanted to see if New Mexico,
um, could, uh, actually, um.
Focus on um
The viability of proprietary
spin-out funds from universities
and research labs. Um, and we
wanted to also learn what are
the best practices um for um
supporting uh spin-outs and um
we also wanted to see what it
took to build ecosystems that
would support spinouts, and uh
we uh have a, a brief deck that
highlights quite a bit of work
we've been working on this as a
team since the end of June, um,
and we've conducted numerous
interviews with stakeholders
here at
New Mexico, um, in, in the
venture capital space. Um, so if
you could go to the next slide
for me, please.
I just wanted to take a minute
and for those of you who don't
know some of the terminology, a
technology transfer office is
something that uh most uh
universities will have, um, and
these technology transfer
offices are called TTOs for
short, and they manage the
royalties, the patents, the
intellectual property, and
they're often uh charged with
supporting entrepreneurial
efforts both at the staff level
and for undergraduates, um, and
depending on the university and.
their resources, these offices
can be quite large and
lucrative, or they can be um.
Very small, um, and still in the
process of building out.
Um, we wanted to take a look,
uh, first and foremost at
Stanford University. Um, next
slide, please.
Thank you so much. Um, and I
wanted to just introduce a
concept to you which is called
the Valley of Death, which
sounds very gloomy, but it
actually um is something that
all uh new startup space,
whether they come out of a
university ecosystem or research
lab, or if they're on
self-started or from a
corporation perspective, um, and
that's that, the Valley of Death
is basically that's that uh
space between a promising idea.
Or intellectual property or a
patent to an investable company.
Um, and that is quite a jump and
um it takes a lot of work, um,
and it takes a lot of resources
and expertise. Um, and if you go
to the next slide, please, I
have a snapshot here, um, which
is Stanford University. I mean,
it's just, um, it's a little bit
dated. I think it's from last
year, but it's, it's showing
what their TTO office is able to
achieve. They've been at this
for 50 years, and so they're
actually considered the leader
in what it takes to create
A startup ecosystem.
Um, and you'll see that they had
over 1000 investable ideas, um,
of which 568 were new
technologies with only 173
patents issued and 27 startup
companies that were actually
viably invested. So that gives
you an idea of the funnel.
Um, at a major, uh, research
university with uh quite
substantial funds and personnel
and experience, um, how hard it
is to take the number of ideas
and make them commercially
viable.
Um, we wanted to look at other
universities that, um, we can
just go ahead and jump to the
next slide, please.
And we just, we wanted to see
how other universities are
managing this process. And one
of the things that we came to
learn from our survey was that
it actually takes um quite a bit
of shift of focus from the old
model, which is sort of like
prior to the year 2000.
Where you would be focused um on
patents and uh prosecution of
patents and intellectual
property, um, to more of an
ecosystem entrepreneurial focus
from the university perspective.
And we we looked at places like
uh University of Michigan, um,
the University of Georgia and
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, um, just to see how
they were moving along this and,
and everybody is facing
challenges and there's no one
size fits all.
Next slide please.
We also looked at your regional
peers, um, so, uh, states
adjacent to New Mexico to see
how they are doing, um, and
again, you have this tentative
uh process between um uh
intellectual property to
ecosystem management and perhaps
your closest near neighbor
that's doing this very well from
a total state level would be uh
Utah, where you have the
governor uh with a
entrepreneurial state effort.
That is being uh replicated
through all of the higher ed
universities, um, and it's a,
it's a system-wide push if you
will to uh support ecosystems.
Next slide please.
And we also spent considerable
time looking at higher ed in uh
in New Mexico and also the
research labs and we have a
similar table in the next slide,
but I know we're time
constrained, but we found that
while each of the universities
and the labs are doing very
well, um, that remember that
funnel that I talked about like
there's just the sheer sheer
volume of ideas that you need to
be able to have um standalone
spin out, uh, invest invest.
companies is, is very
challenging even at the state
level for New Mexico. And with
that, I will uh turn my time
over to Ethan.
Thanks if you can turn to slide
297. I'm gonna talk about uh
some of the learnings and and uh
the outcomes of the research
that we did. So that slide is a
failure to launch and
essentially, um, what we've seen
is that the investable pipeline
in New Mexico is just too low,
um, for any one institution, uh,
to really have a successful fund
in and of itself. Um, and even
the companies that are spinning
out are generally uh too early
and may not really be ready for
investment. And so,
They are often given grant
funding or uh able to get kind
of impact loans, uh, which is
great, but there is a whole
commercialization, go to market
product uh product market fit,
uh.
That needs to happen with a lot
of these companies and a
professionalization of the
company in terms of adding
resources that simply doesn't
exist and they end up in that
valley of death and do not ever
make it across.
Um, and so what we found in our
research is more than just money
is really needed to solve this
problem. You could put, you
could put money to work, but,
uh, you actually need that
professionalization to to fill
the gap, and you need some of
these other things to fill the
gap as well. So if you go to
298, I will um talk about what
we, what we found.
Um, so one, you need a lot of
ideas to make this successful,
as Alison mentioned, Stanford's
a good example, thousands of
ideas, lots of patents, very few
companies, um, and that
ecosystem is significantly
bigger than what we're, what
we've seen in New Mexico in our
research.
Um, second, one of the big
challenges is that there's not
always in a perfect alignment of
interest between the
universities and the founders.
Um, and the companies because
the universities might have uh
an incentive to retain some of
the uh
Some of the patents, some of the
intellectual properties, some of
the talent, whether it's
professors, etc. Some of the
labs have the same thing, and so
there may not be alignment in
actually uh pushing that out and
and putting it into the economy.
Um,
They still will eventually need
venture capital. Most of these
companies, if they succeed, will
still need venture capital
fundraising to actually uh make
it, and the, the, the reality is
if they're attached to a
university backed ecosystem,
that can actually make it harder
because of that misalignment.
Um, finally, there's things like
audits, um, and university that
are more complicated with
nonprofits being involved, um,
and then you have employees and
faculty uh of the universities
and labs that might have strong
incentives to stay in their
current jobs, uh, and rather
than taking risks of being in a
startup. And so there's just
gonna be this misalignment in in
how they launch.
Um, but the, but the big
takeaway I would say is that
this is more than just a money
issue for most of these
companies, why they're not and
it's really this
professionalization of the
businesses that needs to happen,
um, that, that we were seeing
across the board in our
research.
So there have been some positive
recent developments, if you go
to slide 299.
Um, that we will share.
Um, as you know, just taking one
step back, there's uh
historically there was the
Catalyst Fund, which is
essentially a fund of fund that
backed a lot of groups in New
Mexico and had mixed results,
um.
And there was overlapping
investment between some of those
funds, and that often provided
some uh competition that wasn't
healthy, but also a dead end for
many of those companies.
Just in this month in September,
uh, the State Investment
council, uh,
Uh, is
Agreed to provide $500 million
in funding to Roadrunner Venture
Studios, uh, which is
Completely designed to capture
spin-outs coming out of the labs
and the higher education
institutes from the state. Uh,
we think this is a tremendously
positive development. We were
actually going to suggest
something like this and then
found out that was already in
the works. So we think it's
great and we don't think it
makes sense necessarily to
create a 2nd or 3rd uh group
that would be competing with
that because it's well funded,
um, and from our perspective,
seems like it's uh off to a good
start in terms of the the people
they have involved.
Um,
The other note that that we have
on this recent development slide
is that
And we've we've uh
Talked to the ecosystem about
this is that there seems to be
general dissatisfaction with the
way the higher education, uh, in
some of the labs are are dealing
with technology transfer, and I
think that's an area where uh um
The Road Runner folks are gonna
have to um create some change,
to be successful.
So, the last slide is our
conclusion on page 300, slide
300, um.
Which is really that we don't
think anyone higher education.
Institution in New Mexico or
lab.
Creates enough investable ideas
to really justify having a a a
venture spin out fund in and of
itself. We think the the whole
might, and we're excited about
what Roadrunner is doing, um,
and we think that the, the
Roadrunner model makes sense
because we think that that
professionalization gap is huge,
and we think that having a
studio where they can help
professionalize these companies
in in addition to actually
funding them, is really going to
solve some of the bigger
problems that we're seeing in
our, in our research.
Um, so that's, that's our, uh,
hopefully those are, those are
our takeaways from this
research. Uh, we thought it was
really informative and we're
excited about the direction that
the state is going.
Happy to answer a question, and
Alison as well.
Thank you for the presentation
today. Uh, and all your work on
this subject, which has been
talked about for a long time.
And then in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, any questions or comments
from board members on the
presentation?
Definitely curious to see what
some of the specifics are around
difficulties with tech transfer
from the labs.
Um,
We're working closely with labs
and in tech.
All the time, um.
Oh, my experience is that the
generally open and creative
solutions, whether, you know,
if, if full cost recovery for,
for Kreta, the problem, for
instance, for the labs, that's
something that I think they
ought to be able to.
Alison might be better to
address this, but I do know that
one of the things we saw in
looking at other examples just
outside of New Mexico, there's a
lot of flexibility around how
the tech transfer works. So
Stanford, for example, takes an
approach they described to us as
being very not greedy, so that
there were, there was a lot of,
uh, a lot of the company left or
a lot of the idea left over for
other for the venture investors
to come in. Um, and we think
that's an important concept that
just needs to be embraced.
Everywhere, um, so it's not a
specific uh recommendation for a
specific lab yet, but we think
that the ecosystem generally
needs to take a look at what
other states are doing and, and.
Um, and
Yeah.
Madam Chair.
Um, if the, um,
The governor is having an
economic development conference
as we speak and um
State investment officer John
Clark spoke at that yesterday
and talked about this exact
thing.
And and I think it's, it's a
compliment to, to staff and to
Makita for working on this, um,
ahead of, or I guess at the same
time as SIC. So, um,
You know, as a
As a vendor you could just do
whatever Ryan asked you to do,
but um
it sounds like you're, you're
looking at the ecosystem and
saying, how can we create value?
And, and I think that's uh
really a compliment to you, you
and your team.
Thank you
Any other questions on this
item?
Thank you.
Thanks for your work on the
Next on the agenda is the
revised venture capital
investment policy.
Good morning, members of the
board. It's great to be with you
here today. So before you um
Are some recommended changes to
the venture capital investment
policy. We made a few changes
back in May and actually talked
about coming back um and
readdressing uh the topic that
Marquita introduced earlier,
which is the portfolio
allocations to funds that are
focused and deploying to New
Mexico businesses and then the
portfolio allocations to funds
that are deploying um to New
Mexico businesses, but largely
also to businesses that are
located outside the state.
Um, so we wanted to circle back
on that topic and we have a
recommendation um before you as
to how we'd like to address
that, um, I just wanted to make
a few introductory comments, um,
first, so why we're investing in
funds, the venture capital
programm Act uh authorizes us to
make investments both in venture
private equity funds and also
directly into New Mexico
businesses for the last year, we
have been working to deploy
funding and have focused so
on investing in funds and the
rationale for that is really the
benefits of diversification, so
investing in startup in early
stage businesses is very, very
risky. Um, most businesses that
uh attempt to start up do fail,
um, and so, um, what we are
creating is what um in the
industry is termed a fund of
fund portfolio, um, that adds
diversification, um, benefits
and diversifies underlying
exposures to
Individual company investments,
also sectors, um, also
strategies. And so you'll see
that in the mix um, on the
second page of the memo.
The 7 commitments um we've made
to date and I'll touch on those,
um, but each of those funds that
we've committed to is targeting
to invest in between 10 to 20
different companies. Um, so over
on a portfolio basis right now,
um, we may have exposure, uh,
once those funds are deployed to
anywhere between 700 and 140
businesses. Um, so that's, um, a
much more diversified portfolio
than if we had started off um
trying to make individual direct
investments in, in, in single
business.
Um,
and the other, um, the other
main uh objective of our, our,
our parallel allocations to
locally focused funds and then
some of the national funds um
has really been to um enhance
exposure, uh, or enhance the
impact of the program because we
do have 5 different objectives
um that we articulate in the
investment policy, um, uh, two
objectives are very much focused
on investing in New Mexico
businesses.
Um, and creating jobs, um, but
we also have important mission
objectives around investing in
businesses owned by
entrepreneurs from underserved
communities. Um, we also have an
important objective, uh, around,
um, uh, helping leverage
additional private investment uh
into uh local New Mexico
businesses, um, and we also have
um an important objective to
invest in diversifying sectors.
Um, that is something we've, um,
really, really focused.
particularly given SICs um
significant activity in more uh
science and tech industries, um,
where traditional venture
capital funds and programs are
typically oriented, um, from the
outset this program was created
to do something different. So
we've been very focused on, on
uh diversifying sectors for the
state's economies. Um, and as
you'll see, um, in the, in the
table on page 309, um, it's
those, those national funds have
really um
Uh, brought, um, or given us
some exposure in the portfolio
to those um diversifying
strategies and different um
sector expertise, um, that we
hope will um benefit some of the
local businesses, um, that they,
that they would be targeting.
On slide 310, um,
You can see an overview of the
uh current portfolio, so the 7
commitments that we've actually
closed on to date, um, our last
um commitment to rethink Impact
Fund 3 closed in early uh uh
early September, so we've closed
on 44 million of commitments,
um, uh, I wanted to thank, uh,
and commend our, our legal team
and particularly Sue P for um
everything she's done um to get
all these um uh approvals um.
Uh, committed, um, really
appreciate everything she's done
there, so, um, but here you can
see under the towards the right
hand side of that table there,
the mission and diversification
objectives, um, the columns
there are the five different
mission and diversification
objectives I was talking about
that are articulated in the
policy and those um scores are
actually um in the underlying
due diligence and investment
recommendations that the venture
capital investment committee
reviews um before advancing
recommendation.
For your consideration. And so
you can see that each of the
underlying fund commitments
actually scores and we have um
different views on how each fund
um will hopefully um uh achieve
one of those underlying mission,
um, objectives. Um, and some of
the, um, so the local funds,
tramway, dangerous and advanced
New Mexico, um, those, all of
those are, you know, very much
focused on local businesses,
local jobs, um, but some of
The others Raven, Tiverton,
Vamos, and Rethink, in
particular, you can see that
they're scoring higher when it
comes to diverse sectors,
underserved ownership, and also
um leveraging private capital.
So those are kind of the trends
that we've seen as we've um uh
screened different funds to date
we've uh screened, I think, uh,
over 70 proposals since we
started um about a year ago, um,
and that's, that's why we have
this mix, um, in the underlying
uh
On profiles. Um, we have tried
to advance more um
More proposals towards diligence
um for funds that were focused
on investing in New Mexico
businesses, you all actually
approved a $1000 commitment to
um a new fund we were hoping to
anchor, uh focus on New Mexico
business, um, that, uh, fund,
um, didn't manage to close
within um within the deadline um
due to, um, issues raising the
private match, um, and marketing
the strategy to investors. Um,
we've also screened additional
local funds that
haven't been able to meet our
fund manager qualifications, um,
specifically around staffing and
just having um a dedicated
professional, um, uh, that's
their evaluating uh businesses
and, and related to that
conflicts of interest, so some
of the local GPs are not
actually staffed, they're just
um comprised of individuals who
are actually um uh spending
significant time on other
activities, also other
investment activities, and that
generally speaking is
Not really um uh structure of a
general partner that um is
suitable for institutional
investment in in a professional,
uh, professionally managed
investment.
Um, so, um, in order to continue
to um deploy capital that we
hope will reach local
businesses, we've really started
trying to explore other ways,
um, uh, to achieve this one
through uh carve outs, so funds
that are in the market that
overall the fund might have um
broader geographic exposure. Um,
we're working to see if we can
negotiate um uh for certain
dollars to be allocated to local
New Mexican.
businesses, um, we are, uh,
exploring uh just new new
strategies uh as we continue to
explore different uh capital
gaps in the ecosystem, the
research that um Alison and
Ethan just presented to you, um,
if their conclusions had been
different, you might have seen
um a proposal for um uh a new
commitment to a new fund around
that particular strategy, as you
saw that research concluded that
right now from a capital
perspective, um, that got.
Might be adequately addressed,
so you don't have a
recommendation for an investment
commit you commitment before you
for that. Um, and there are also
some other, um, there are other
approaches that we are um
starting to look at. One is, um,
with all the funds that we're
invested with, we do have what
are called co-investment rates.
So if um a fund is making an
investment in a, in a portfolio
company and that portfolio
company is raising additional
investments that fund can turn
to its LPs.
And offer the LPs an opportunity
to invest um on the back of
their commitment directly into
that business. So with our um uh
portfolio of managers, uh,
should they be, should they
invest in a local business, and
we would potentially have the
option to evaluate a direct
investment, um, in one of those
businesses, an investment that
they've already sourced and
vetted, um, and our, and our
managing as as part of their
portfolio. Um, and we are also
exploring um uh in a new
instrument called equity.
equivalent, um, it's a way of,
um, injecting equity like
capital into nonprofit
intermediaries, uh, because we
know, uh, again on the back of
some of the research that Next
Street did for us last year that
a lot of the um early stage and
and and local small businesses
here in the ecosystem, um,
actually need um a debt capital,
um, uh, to really finance their
growth and expansion, not
traditional equity instruments,
and it is um
Of the uh alternative, um,
actually, uh, lending
institutions and commercial, uh,
community development financial
institutions, um, that are, that
are most active in that space.
So we've been thinking through
how we could potentially um
support, um, support their
balance sheets in more creative
ways.
Um, so looking at those, um,
options, um, and some of the
constraints we have with some of
the um funds focused exclusively
on New Mexico businesses, um,
we're proposing that we, we, we
introduced into the investment
policy a target allocation on a
look-through basis. So if it's a
local fund, we, um, we say that
100% of that capital is going
into New Mexico businesses, if
it's not a local fund, we don't
give it any credit and we say
that money is not going to New
Mexico businesses.
Even though we are very hopeful
that many of those funds will be
deploying to local businesses.
So on that look-through basis
we're proposing a target of at
least 65%, um, uh, allocated to
funds in a way that 65% of the
fund's capital would be invested
in local New Mexico businesses,
um.
What that means right now 30% of
the fund, um, is expected to be
invested in New Mexico
businesses, 30% to non- New
Mexico businesses if you give
national funds zero credit. Um,
so with 40% remaining in
additional investments. So what
that means is that going
forward, most of the commitments
that we would recommend will be
focused on, on New Mexico
businesses and you'll see that
right now we're in diligence
with 22 funds, um, and those.
Um, those are working, uh, we're
working on proposals where that
those would be commitments to
investing $1 or or dollar
commitment would be deployed to
New Mexico businesses.
Um, we would like to maintain a
target, um, where we do have
some room to continue to
evaluate um funds that have a
broader geographic scope, we
think that um uh these
commitments that we're making
are are already changing the
ecosystem and we're really
excited about that. I had the
opportunity a couple weeks ago
to attend a startup conference,
um, uh, convened by Arrowhead,
um, Vamos Ventures, Maya
Trujillo and um Marcos Gonzalez
were both panelists.
On different panels at that
conference. Um, it was really
exciting to see them, they're
engaging with local
entrepreneurs, um, and exciting
that we're backing um investment
firms that are um starting to
work more here with our local
entrepreneurs and trying to
invest in local companies. So we
would like to maintain some uh
room in the portfolio to
continue to to evaluate those,
those opportunities.
Um,
I know it's been a long meeting
today and I apologize, my
comments were longer than I was
hoping, um, so the, the
investment policy, um, the red
line before you, the, the, the
substance of the changes um are
just on page 319, um, it's
pretty straightforward, just
adding a a a statement regarding
the target allocation 65% of the
fund to New Mexico businesses.
Um, you will also see in red
line there just um an
articulation that um our side
letters, so we are pursuing
where there are
Explicit in the side letter, uh,
legally documented commitments
to deploying investment capital
to New Mexico businesses and the
third change you'll see there on
page 319, um, was just really a
technical clarification to
improve the wording around um uh
that particular concentration
limit, which has nothing to do
with the main topic um of our
conversation today. So with
that, um, Madam Chair, members
of the committee are members of
the board, we stand for
questions.
Thank you. Any questions from
the board on this revised
policy?
No, thank you for your work in
putting this forward.
And for thinking through um our
commitments to New Mexico
businesses.
These dollars
Balancing the risk.
Um,
Of our dollars.
And supporting New Mexico.
I think you've done a nice um.
There's no other questions or
comments from the board. Do I
hear a motion on this revised
policy?
So
Motion is made. Do I hear a
second? Motion is seconded. Is
there any discussion on the
motion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed, same sign?
Motion carries.
Thank you for your time today.
Next, the finance and disclosure
committee
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
I was unable to attend the last
Wednesday's finance and
disclosure committee meeting,
but I wanted to take a moment to
thank uh memberspars and for uh
chairing in my absence, I can
see from our report that we
listened to the investment
report for the
Month ended August 31, 2024. We
also heard the bond issuance uh
forecast report and it looks
like uh next Bond dish you may
come as early as 2025. There
were no action items, uh, uh, on
the agenda, and uh very briefly
concludes my report.
Any questions
We
If not, we'll move to the audit
committee.
Uh, Chair Keith, the members of
the, the board, the audit
committee met on Wednesday,
September 18th, we did have a
quorum present. We had 5 agenda
items, uh, first, uh, an update
on the FY 2024 audit and we'll
be uh going into session for the
exit conference related to the
audit, uh, uh, next, uh, item is
uh presentation of the July.
2024 financial statements and
performance indicators. We also
heard uh an item uh for the
review of loans of our loan
servicing audit and the audit
highlighted loan servicing uh
system limitations and just kind
of emphasizing the word system,
um, you know, as we, uh,
implement a new system, we'll be
making additional system checks
and balances, uh, agenda item 4
was
Operational excellence and
internal audit update, uh, which
we received in lastly, we heard
an update on the NMFA building
project and uh it uh continues
to make significant progress
towards its completion date in
January.
That's my report. Thank you,
Burke. Any questions from board
members for the audit committee?
If not next on our agenda is um
to go into executive session. So
we would need a motion to do
that.
Motion to move it to executive
session.
I have a motion. Is there a
second?
