Recording in progress.
until 9. We wait until 9 here
and ready to go early this
morning.
OK, there we go, it's 9 o'clock.
I'm officially calling the
meeting to
Yes, good morning. Good morning.
Um, that is a sensitive
microphone. Thank you all for
joining us today, Madam Chair
Keith, present.
member Swao.
Remember to heal.
Member Garcia? Was it?
Remember Burke?
Let me check again. My
apologies. If you don't mind,
Madam Chairman, to start over
again, Madam Chair Keith.
Remember Swazzo
Member Trujillo.
Remember Garcia?
Remember Burke
Remember Nichols present.
Remember Collins? Yeah.
Member Constantinidis?
Here
Remember Shelton?
remember Raider.
and member Lovato.
Madam Chair, we do have a
quorum, and thank you for your
patience with me.
Thank you, and it's so nice to
have so many board members with
us this morning. We have a nice
forum and it's good to see
people in person and online um
joining us.
So next on the agenda is the
approval of the agenda. Do I
have a motion to approve the
agenda.
So move chair.
Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair. Motion made
and seconded all in favor say
aye.
Mm.
Motion carries agendas approved.
Approval of board minutes from
the June 27th meeting next on
the agenda.
I move for approval, madam.
Motion to approve the minutes as
presented. Is there a second?
I second
Motion is seconded, any
discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye. I.
All those opposed same sign,
motion carries.
Next up is a report from our
CEO. Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
good morning, board members and
all. Um, let me just say that
we've, uh, we're in the middle
of our legislative oversight
season, as I like to call it, we
had a really good meeting in
July down at the CNM campus. We
talked about our venture capital
program and the successes we've
had there, uh, we talked to them
about, well, we've updated them
on our opportunity enterprise
and housing development
programs, which since we met
with them at the beginning of
July, we'll have another update.
August for them, lots of work
has been happening there, um,
and the economic development
revolving fund. We also made a
presentation on innovative
financing tools and uh they
approved, we presented and they
approved our amended and
restated local government
planning fund rules. Um, so we
meet again with them in middle
August, um, in Gallup, and we
will be doing our comprehensive
review of the public project
revolving fund, which includes
this public securities
delegation report.
Um, it's interesting that law
passed it allows for uh the bond
issuance, as you know, to be
delegated to one
To one board member, um, so that
they can negotiate or approve
the terms of the sale, and then
it's reported back to the
finance authority. We're the
only ones that have to actually
report it back to yet a second
group, and that is our
legislative oversight group. So,
you know, uh, anyone issuing
bonds, public securities, gets
to take advantage of that
option, but we're the only ones
that has to report back to the
legislature. So we'll do that in
August, um, and then we'll also
uh present as we will today.
Um, amended and restated rules
for the PPRF. That's a long time
coming. We also will have rules
if all goes well today, uh, for
the Opportunity enterprise
revolving fund loans, as well as
the housing development
revolving fund loans. So we have
slated for them this interim, a
number of rule updates and um a
program implementation updates.
So they are um they've been
going really very well.
Um, as I mentioned just minutes
ago, the Opportunity Enterprise
and Housing Development Review
Board has been meeting
frequently. Um, they have met
several times since the
beginning of May, and they have
now approved a final set of
rules, um, that will be
finalized as of June 30th July
30th, um, and the, they've also
approved a final set of housing
development selection policies,
and um opportunity, revised
opportunity enterprise policy.
Policies. So from their
perspective, the projects are
the way in which we'll accept
applications, prioritize them,
and review them are all um set.
It's now up to the finance
authority to promulgate our
rules and our policies related
to how we'll structure those
loans and how applicants will be
treated throughout the process.
So that's we're in the second
part of that, our goal is to get
that um application opened right
after Labor Day. So hopefully
after today's review we'll be in
a position
to um
present these rules to the
oversight committee for their
approval. They also have to
approve rules under this
program, uh, then we'll feed it
back to the board. In between
that, we also have to consult
with the Opportunity Enterprise.
So we've, this is a very
confusing program. The board
will operate its programs or the
finance authority will operate
on behalf of the opportunity uh
Enterprise board with three sets
of rules and 4 sets of policies,
um, and the
Opportunity Enterprise Board has
to consult virtually um along
the way if they're not approving
them directly. So there's a lot
going on with that, um, and
we're our goal again to do
outreach at the end of August
and open those applications at
the beginning of September. Uh,
the other thing that the board
will be doing at its next
meeting in early August will be
to uh set a final application
schedule, so we'll be opening
rounds of applications we
anticipate 3 separate.
Application rounds for both the
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund and the housing development
revolving fund, um, but we want
to have a fixed schedule, um, so
that folks, applicants know when
they can expect the next
application cycle. We'll tell
them the opening and closing
dates that'll be promulgated on
our website so that there's less
um confusion and far more
predictability about the way in
which it will happen. So that's
a nice sense of maturity for
that program to be able to say
in advance
Or when the applications are
gonna open and this is how long
you'll have.
So we are pleased with the
amount of progress we've been
able to make with that program.
Um, we have, I've attached in
today's materials copies of the
policies for for both the
housing development review fund
and housing development,
revolving fund, and the
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund.
The trick these names are
getting harder and harder and I
used to be good at this. Um, we
have also proposed some
structuring terms that will be
wrapped into both kind of the
rules of the housing development
fund as well as um our policies
which will come to you in
August. Um, but the current
contemplated structure of these
housing loans will be in amounts
not to exceed $15 million. Uh,
the project proceeds themselves
can be used to finance the
acquisition, development of
housing projects.
Including pre-development costs,
we'll be able to uh pay some
developer fees, so we will be
limiting them, uh, the current
anticipated structure is capping
acquisition at 5%, um, and
developer fees at 12% of
construction or rehabilitation
costs and that we'll have
milestones for meeting the
dispersals of those uh developer
fees.
We are proposing initially,
we've proposed um
Terms of for single family
loans, terms of uh not longer
than 7 years, uh, with 3 years
up to 3 years of interest only,
multi-family, uh, we're looking
at not to exceed 3 years with a
maximum loan term of 20 years,
um, and infrastructure loans
with a maximum of 20 years as
well. Um, all of those would
have 3 year periods. I suspect
through your interest only
periods. I suspect we may get a
little pushback um on the
multi-family because there are
some.
funds out there some federal
programs that require that they
go out to 40 years, um, so the
law allows for up to 40 years,
so we'll see how that ends up
working out.
Um,
The service coverage we're
looking at 1.33 and then
interest rates will be set the
same way we set the interest
rates for the opportunity
enterprise Fund, which is 60% of
prime with rates not lower than
3.5%. We're looking at loan to
value of 75%, uh, there'll be
equity requirements as there are
with the Ounity Enterprise
program, um, and there will be
personal and or corporate
guarantees required. So we tried
to align the terms of both the
housing fund and the opportunity
Enterprise fund as.
As much as we could recognizing
that they're very different
risks, um, and they will need
different, uh, risk mittigants
in those rules and policies.
Um, so we'll be bringing back to
you and we'll present to you
today the form of those rules
will be bringing back hopefully
at the end of August a final set
of rules, along with a set of
management policies that will
provide a little more guidance
to applicants and to our staff.
Um, similarly, it's been a real
month at the NMFA. Uh, we are
working on a public project
revolving fund. Again, we're
looking at our debt management
policy, our loan management
policies and our uh the fund
rules. We are not in a position
yet to propose final changes to
the debt management policy, but
that is expected to happen in
August to you all. We have a
draft set of load management
policies that we want to present
to you today for review only,
and similarly, a draft set of
rules, uh.
Amended rules for the
The program again for review.
Our goal here is to get your
feedback, bring them to the um
oversight committee, have them
adopt what they need to adopt
and then um bring them back here
for final uh final approval.
Um, so that's what we have
before you today. So there's a
little bit of rule stuff in
there. Um, we find it
interesting, we hope you do too.
Uh, you know, we live by the
rules of the people at the NMFA.
And then lastly, um, I would
just mention we have one staff
update to present we don't have
any new folks, but Ryan back
there uh was promoted to uh
read.
Finance manager in early July.
He has been with us since 2019.
He's been a big part of our both
commercial lending effort and uh
he's a, a significant, um uh
asset down in the regional
finance manager, um, position.
So we're really pleased to have
been able to promote him, and
he's, it's really well deserved,
so congratulations. And then
that madam chair, um is my
update.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members? If not, um, next on the
agenda we have a series of other
items for the board's
consideration. First, the
approval of the strategic plan
goals.
Good morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board.
Can you all hear me OK? It is
yes, wonderful.
Um, the next item is the
approval of the mission, values,
competencies, and goals for the
the strategic plan and as you
know, this has been going, um,
has been in progress, and so
these are the next steps toward
the creation of this plan, which
will be the guiding document for
the next 3 years.
So on page 42 in the the board
book.
You'll see the mission.
Values and competencies.
And these were created beginning
with staff input and we had a
series of meetings with all of
the different departments and
then online surveys that all
staff could participate in to
give their feedback on what they
felt like the mission, the
values, the competencies were of
NMFA today as opposed to when
the the previous strategic plan
had been created, um, after the
staff input, these values were
brought before the board in
April and your feedback was
considered and this is what the
Um, the guiding identity pieces
are at this point.
In May, um, we had a strategic
planning session, um, with all
of the board and senior staff
meetings to take these guiding
documents, um, have
brainstorming sessions and
exercises to sort of think about
what we wanted the impact of
NMFA to be for the next 3 years,
where we were going and how we
were gonna get there.
And based on that feedback, um.
The consulting firm we've been
working with, LA LAH Consulting,
Leslie Hoffman and her team
created draft goals, which then
came back to the NMFA, um,
senior management looked at
these, tried to figure out if
that actually fit and if it were
things that could be doable and
today we present to you these
draft goals for your feedback.
And the goals as listed there,
um, the first one.
Advanced community and economic
development.
Strengthen New Mexico's
infrastructure to promote
healthy communities, maximize
community impact by leveraging
strategic partnerships.
And optimize organizational
effectiveness and efficiency.
So you're probably recognize a
lot of those themes based on the
discussions from the strategic
planning session and
Those are the discussions we're
trying to, uh, are incorporated
in these goals to kind of
provide an overview and guidance
for where we're going.
After the goals are approved,
then
Senior management will create
objectives that are designed to
get to these goals, and the
objectives may be department
specific, a lot of them will be
cross-departmental.
And they will be listed in the
dashboard that is shown up here.
So we'll have the goals listed,
the objectives listed underneath
that, which this will provide a
a nice snapshot of where we're
going and it'll be easy to track
whether we've gotten there.
On the right hand side of that
sheet.
We have a category for impact
categories. So for each
objective listed, we'll be able
to show what the impact will be
on New Mexico, on communities,
on.
The people in the communities,
whether it's health, whether
it's schools, kind of all of
that sort of stuff. And on the
far right, we'll show what need
what we need to accomplish that
objective, whether it's a new
policy, it's an amended policy,
whether it's new funding, if
it's a continuation of funding
if it's um kind of all the
different things we need.
So with that, that's kind of
where we are with the strate
strategic plan, um, staff does
recommend approval of the
proposed goals, mission values
and competencies for the next
strategic plan and stand for any
questions.
Any questions from board
members?
Madam Chair, I just might, I
wanted to kind of talk about the
crosswalk a little bit.
Thank you. Since ultimately once
we um identify objectives, this
um dashboard crosswalk is gonna
be what we keep referring to and
whether or not, you know, how
quickly we can get, meet our
objectives, what we planned to
um
Uh, the kinds of impacts we
planned as a result of the uh
impacts. And then lastly that
part that tries to get to
whether or not these are going
to be major new initiatives. Um,
are they new programs? Do they
need capitalization? How much of
a lift will it be for NMFA to
get this done, and, you know,
there are some dependencies in
there if it's a new program or
capitalization. There are
clearly some dependencies that
may be outside um our ability to
control things. So we want to be
able to kind of note that on the
side so we'll, we'll
Our objective will be to our
goal will be to meet those
objectives, but ultimately there
will be some need to have the
legislature or others really buy
into those objectives and help
us in many ways to achieve them.
Um, so wanted to just mention
these objectives. There may be
4, there may be 3, we just, for
purposes there, we certainly
don't anticipate more than 4
over the next 4 objectives per
goal over the next 3 years. Um,
so also feedback on this
particular
Dashboard and whether or not
that will be helpful for you is
also desired if you can provide.
So I just want to call attention
to the fact that our strategic
plan is a two-year window, 25 to
27.
Question is 32552 627 question
is it track and accomplish,
especially when we're talking
about infrastructure.
Madam, we talked a great deal
about this, um, when we were
meeting with LEH in particular
at the beginning, um, the NMFA
has grown so much in 3 years.
The concept that we will be
anywhere close to where we are
and who we are now in 5 years
seems um
Unlikely, um, so just given our
growth trajectory, we thought a
3 year window probably better
fit who we are now and then at
the end of 3 years or partway
through if we wish to extend it
and update it, we're certainly
welcome to do that, but we
didn't want to suggest that 5
years would be the same kind of
entity doing the exact same
thing. That was our concern
about 5.
Thank you. Any other questions
from board members? I have a
question on this.
The strategic plan spans guna
towards that impact the way that
you implemented it all
historically, I, I don't, how
many of these have you had that
went across you just flexibility
that's an excellent question. So
the, this is our second
strategic plan. It's an update
of the one that began in 2018
and was put in place by that
board knowing full well that
there was going to be a change
in administration and therefore
likely a change in the board,
and they wanted to give the
board a head start, um, because
it takes a while to understand
the finance author.
as a new board member and to
understand sort of the impact
you can have and the things you
can achieve with the statutory
authority and the staff and
systems that you have. So it was
actually intended to be that
bridge to the next
um administration to give the
board that the future board some
sense of what's expected, so we
are updating with the this
board, I don't wanna call it a
new board, but the uh Lujan
Grisham board uh ratified.
The
Martinez boards, uh, strategic
plan in early 2020, um, after we
got some new chairs on board and
that's, you know, that's what
we're working with now and
updating again, the goal would
be to look at this annually,
make sure that it's still
meeting the goals, um, just
because it's 3 years now doesn't
mean we couldn't extend it 5
years or change course if that's
necessary.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
If there are no me chair I'd
move for approval.
Thank you, motion has been made
to approve. Is there a second?
Motion has been made and
seconded any discussion, if not
all those in favor say aye. I
I.
All those opposed same motion
carries.
Thank you.
Next on the agenda, the review
of amended and restated public
policy, um,
Public project revolving fund
rules. So first we take the
rules, then we take the policy.
I believe that's.
And I'm sure that's correct. I
think if you're following along
in the board book, however, as I
am now, uh, we have a, we appear
to have our policies and rules
mixed up, so I will.
Um, page number. The, the rules
start on page 96. Yes, on page
96, and then we'll have to go
back but.
And I see Chip is on. Uh, good
morning, Madam Chair, members of
the board, you're right, these
microphones are.
Very sensitive this morning.
The, the first item before you
is the amended and restated PPRF
rules. These are a long time
coming. They're outdated. They
don't accurately capture the
current processes that the
finance authority follows, and
they're also put in place and
and coming to you now due to the
recent changes in the
legislation that happened this
past year. So, the memo is
pretty short.
Can you hear me without the
microphone? yeah.
Yeah
So the memo that's before you is
pretty short. Uh there's a clean
set of rules and a red line set
of rules in your materials. The
red line starts on page 109,
probably easier for you to go
through and for Chip and I to go
through the red line and the
clean so you can see the
changes.
And I will be brief where I need
to be and try to capture some
things kind of in a.
A pretty broad spectrum.
Definitional changes to the NMFA
uh throughout you'll see, so
you'll see quite a bit of red in
this document and some of it is
just not material.
And so I don't want you to focus
your attention there. You will
see some changes where there's,
there's a removal of rules and
regulations.
That that's because it's
redundant and in the
Mexico statutes rule is defined
as rule or cleaned it up.
We cleaned up the definitions to
match some of the changes that
came this past year. Um, we
updated them to refer to the
correct committees because when
these were put in place
committee uh board committees
updated that, you'll see that
throughout, but as far as the
structure that hasn't changed.
Um, as you remember, we have,
uh, this board approved a couple
of months ago, our junior lean
and the junior indenture, so
we've added that to the PPRF
program added a reference to
that in the rules.
And
So as you go through section 4
on
Page 113.
Of your material starts to get
into more of the substantive
components of the rules, Section
4 is the request for legislative
authorization. That was
outdated. That's not the process
that's followed. What we've done
is we've put in language that
says
NMFA will develop an outreach
program. We'll reach out to our,
uh, to the, to our member
communities, uh, so that they
have an idea of how they can get
their projects to us and then we
can take those to the oversight
committee so that those can be
included on the list of projects
that are required to be approved
each legislative will.
The
Application procedures on the
next page on section 5.
Uh, make some, make some, again,
some general updates, uh,
correct references to the policy
name, um, adding in, we did
remove in section C 6, we
removed uh some of the charter
school specifics.
Those are gonna get captured.
In another month or two, we will
be before you with another set
of rules uh for the charter
school revolving fund. Uh, so
we're gonna, we're gonna, we've
stripped out a couple of things
here, you'll see them slide into
another rule and some additional
policies going forward.
The next
Section is section 6, the
evaluation of the projects,
again, clean up, streamline
changes, uh, references to
taking away some of the
specifics and saying that
projects will be of value
evaluated according to the
policies that are in place which
TI is gonna go through next,
where you'll see a lot of that
more detailed information which
gives us some flexibility rather
than having them in the rules.
It gives us the flexibility when
we need to change policy or even
waive policy that this board
might do.
The
Next
We, we made some changes to the
uh
Disadvantaged funding sections,
uh, or references in section 8.
B
Um, to coincide with the uh
statewide medium household
income definitions, those
definitions across evolving, if
you will, and so these again are
to provide for programs.
Um, you'll see the same in
section 9 with the
tribal.
assistance for the uh tribal
entities.
Those, those removals will be
captured again in policy.
We've updated the appeal process
that went to a um
that no longer exist now
applicants can appeal directly
to the CEO.
And then if they need to appeal
that decision, they would take
that to the public lending
committee and that gives us the
appropriate channels on the
appeals process.
With that, Madam Chair, members
of the board, uh, I
I'll, I'll defer to Chip to see
if he has, uh, I know Chip's
gonna have some, some good
comments. Look at him smiling,
uh,
you know, to add, adds a matter
of opinion then.
um, I, I guess one thing I would
just add is that the
it it is fortunate that we were
doing this update of the rules
at the same time that we're
doing the update of the loan
management policies because the
two overlap in so many ways, so
as we were
Going through this process, it
was very helpful to be sort of
looking at the two, excuse me,
two documents side by side and
making um adjustments as we went
along. So, um, I'd say the the
the only other thing I would add
is that there was a concept in
Section 8 of the
Rules that was um the concept of
a loan guarantee, which is
something that we did and
Years and years ago, I think
that we use, we use this for
like Metro Court and the UNM
Cancer Research Center and what
that was was basically when we
just had the senior lien, we
kind of created this notion of a
subordinate lien before we had
the subordinate lien where
anything excess from the senior
lien could be sort of pledged as
a loan guarantee to a a bond
that was outside of the PPRF but
was still
sort of secured by the BPRF.
That concept is no longer
relevant because we have a
subordinate lien and now even
more so once we have the junior
lien set up, anybody that's
gonna be needing credit support
from the PBRF is just gonna be
in the PPRF either in the
subordinate lien or in the
junior lien, so I think it was a
good time to to sort of dust
these off and like I say, do
them in concert with law
management policies because
there is a lot of uh a lot of
interplay.
Chip, can you remind us what
page that's on.
I've been so um let's see, 8, so
it's uh section 8 of the 119.
Thank you. Oh, thank you.
Mhm. Yeah, Madam Chair, members
of the board, that reference as
Chip pointed out in apologies is
important part of the rules to
update that I gave you today.
Uh, there is no other reference
in the New Mexico Pacific carve
out.
And as Chip said, in the Metro
court situation. So, um, again,
outdated rules.
Good time to pull it out and
make currently do things.
Um, Madam Chair, there was one
other section that was
substantively um eliminated,
which was the requirement for
you all to review a public
project and determine if there
are basic flaws in its concept
or design. Um, so that was part
of in as part of your review,
you were given that kind of
direction in the rules, um,
everything else though has been
that, that we're removing here
really is just moving to the
policies. So things that we have
anchored in.
are now really just in policy,
which allows us the opportunity
to, to modify conditions as
market conditions change, um,
and I think that's probably the
most important point um.
As market conditions change, if
these are outdated, uh, you
know, we can't really update
these any time of the year. We
can only do them when there's an
interim committee that's meeting
because that's the requirement
that they go both to this board
and to the interim board. So we
are limited in the time period
in which we can get these things
updated. Um, and so it's, we
think it's more appropriate to
have many of the elements that
are currently in here just in
policy, but the two things that
are eliminated entirely are your
requirement to review uh the
basic concept.
Of each project and this loan
guarantee section.
Madam Chair, members of the
board, this, this item and the
next few items that are before
asking you to do.
Take a look at them if you see
anything that we've missed or
that you will then go to the
oversight committee for their,
for their sign off, then they'll
come back.
With that, are there any
questions from board members?
I would note, Madam Chair, that
historically, this is the one
set of rules that the finance um
oversight finance authority
oversight committee has
commented on the most. It's one
of the reasons that you're
seeing it as uh an act as
information item and then as an
action item following theirs,
they've had a lot to say usually
about median household incomes
and disadvantaged entity funding
as well as legislative
authorization process. So if it
comes back, those would be the
two areas that I would expect it
would come back, um, and maybe.
potentially one of those two
things we just took out, but
unlikely.
And we're really not making any
changes to the median.
Income.
No, Madam Chair, we just, the
definition is more consistent
there was, there was some
They were unclear before, so
what we've done before was just.
And that's because the
legislative oversight committee
made changes on the fly the last
time they approved updates to
this, so I would.
There's a connection. Great.
Any questions or comments?
If not, we'll move on to
policies.
I'm sure that starts on page 46
again our apologies for the
confusion,
the memos on page 45, on page
46, and Chip will turn it to
you, sir.
OK, thank you, madam chair and
board members, um, yeah, it's a
lot for you to all have to
process, but you know,
fundamentally what we're trying
to do here with the updated loan
management policies is uh kind
of streamline them, um.
Historically, what we had in the
low management policies was, uh,
is as you look at the red line,
in fact, maybe we should.
scroll ahead to the red line.
Um,
They are.
The historically with the loan
management policies had were a
bunch of sub policies, so we've
sort of done a uh
Some policyectomy of the of the
law management policies to to
eliminate things like the
application procedures policy,
the interest rate setting
policy, the structure,
structuring policy on and on and
on. In addition to the fact that
um uh I think, I don't know, 10
years ago we added a trial
lending policy, and then we
added a a charter school lending
policy.
And with the uh the some of the
changes that we've had recently,
we'd be adding a
Um,
Uh, nonprofit housing policy and
a, uh, you know, Merced.
A landfalls. I mean, it would
just get
looking at it, we all kind of
came to the conclusion that this
thing was just becoming this
sort of cumbersome, uh,
Policy that had a bunch of
attachments to it, so our intent
here has been to let's sort of
strip this thing down to the
basics and
Have, have the information in
there that
Either a perspective applicant
or prospective applicants, uh,
advisor could go to the policies
and relatively quickly find what
the coverage ratio requirements
are with the additional bonds
test requirements are, um, what
the sort of specific credit.
Elements that are gonna be
reviewed, uh, for each of the
credit types, and so,
What we've done is we've taken
all of the stuff that applies to
every perspective borrower is in
the body of the policies and
then the specific issues that
we're gonna be looking at.
For each type of credit for that
system revenue, what are the
things we look at for general
obligation, what are the
specific things we look at for
mill levy, for fire protection
fund loans, all of those have in
in an appendix, we've tried to
lay out those features that are
unique to that specific type of
credit pledge, um, the intent
again being to just make it
simpler so that somebody doesn't
have to dive into this loan
management policies and then go
through.
Page after page to find the
policies associated with fire
protection fund bones, for
example.
So that's, that's sort of
broadly what our what our
objective is. Um, some of the
specifics, um, and I'm sorry, I
don't have the what, where
exactly we find this, but we've
uh, introduced a
A threshold for the simultaneous
lending. It's been sort of
squishy between $10.15 million
dollars a year. Um, what we're
proposing is that that, that uh
threshold become a fixed $10,000
a year. Uh, of course, we can,
the, the board can always make
um a
Uh,
A policy chain or not a policy
change, but basically waive the
requirement, uh, if, if there's
some circumstance where somebody
has an $11 million loan and
absolutely has to get the money
right away. We can deal with
that at the time, but it it
rather than have the sort of
uncertainty that was in the
prior policies, we try to make
it uh clearer here.
Um,
Also, we've uh
Tried to introduce the concept
of of really monitoring uh
disadvantaged funding levels,
both in terms of how much the,
what's the, what's the pool of
prospective disadvantage funding
going to be for a given year.
And also, uh, how do we
determine
How do we, how do we monitor
that over the course of the
year, uh, and, and the, the
expectation is that we'll be
making a quarterly report to the
board that we started the year
with a a balance or a uh a
budget for disadvantaged funding
of $5.5 million say, and we're
going to keep you apprised as we
are spending it essentially
blending out that disadvantaged
money so that we're all
cognizant that um
You know, that, that either the
demand for disadvantaged funding
has been higher than expected or
lower than expected, and then
make uh any corrective uh course
changes during the course of
the, of fiscal year.
Um,
I've tried to, I, I think we,
we, one of the things I wanted
to achieve here is for loans
that are less than $500,000 to
try to make those as flexible to
be borrowers as we can. It used
to be, I think the thresholds
for a lot of these were $100,000
loans. The fact is we're not
going to reimburse loans of less
than $500,000. So, um, as far as
uh, their ability to prepay, for
example, which
Obviously for a larger loan, we
don't want to get back into a
situation where we make $1000
loan, we reimburse it with
bonds.
That have a 10 year call and
suddenly, you know, and we've
given the, the borrower the a
one year call option. We don't
want to do that, but for smaller
loans, um,
You know, I don't think we care
if they, if, if they want a 10
year loan, but they want to be
able to prepay it.
Uh, in a year, that's no
problem, that's that there's no
impact on our bonding program at
all, so it just basically
returns the cash to the PPRF
which can then subsequently be
uh relent to another borrower,
so there there are a number of
situations here where we've
tried to make the program just a
little bit simpler for uh
smaller, smaller loans and that
500,000 last category.
Um, same with, you know, some of
the requirements for that
service deserves. We've tried to
eliminate uh some of the
requirements for debt services
are for those uh smaller loans
as well.
Um, if we go forward that we've,
we've summarized uh the
Additional bonds test and
The uh the minimum coverage
ratios for the different credit
types in tabular form, uh,
rather than having again these
sort of
Litany of paragraphs talking
about those things. So, um, you
can see those, I'm sorry, I
should have thought.
And that, yeah, that's right,
right down there. There we go.
So there's this nice table where
you just go down, you know,
you've got a
Hey, uh, um,
You know, net system revenue
pledge, you can look right down
the table and say, OK, so if
it's, if we're unrated, less
than BAA13 B plus, or the
equivalent uh 130 coverage and
if we're better than A3, A minus
or equivalent, then we're uh at
120. So anyways, yeah, hopefully
it's, it's just a a a bit easier
for a perspective borrowers to
to navigate.
Um, and as I mentioned, yeah, we
have the ABT test,
uh, additional test, uh, forward
there as well.
And
And then we kind of, and then it
We've, uh, going forward, we've,
we've eliminated the policies
associated with tribal lending,
and we've eliminated the
policies related to uh charter
schools.
But, and then, yeah, here's the
information about
diversification. I've tried to
simplify that also in, in
tabular form.
Um,
But we uh
So we took out
The yeah, the tribal, the, the
char charter school stuff and,
and here's where we try to just
focus in on if you have a
certain type of credit pledge.
Here are the things we're gonna
be looking at. And, and as, as
you scroll down, you'll see that
the descriptions of the
information that we need from
charter schools and from tribes,
tribal borrowers is more
extensive than some of our more
traditional, uh, type of
pledges, um, yeah, you can keep,
keep
Or, um, it's kind of a mess. I'm
not my,
my, uh, facility with the black
lining function of uh Microsoft
Word is probably not as strong
as it should be and so some of
this stuff, you know, when it,
when you turn it into a accept
changes, it looks fine, but the,
uh, in the middle of it, it uh
it looks a little uh sketchy,
but if you keep going forward,
let's get down to the, uh, where
we start talking about, yeah, so
here's, here's the
on travel credits, and you see
that it's, it's fairly extensive
relative to, for example, GO
credits or net systems revenues,
it's just because there's more
for us to consider in the course
of uh reviewing those credits
and then saying that we roll
forward to a charter schools.
Um,
That's where the policy was, but
now we've just got it as sort of
a separate.
Um,
Set of information in the
appendix. So
that is uh kind of a quick
overview of what we're, what
we're trying to accomplish here.
And as I said earlier, I mean,
it was, it was really very
helpful to be doing.
This
Uh, review, you know, all the,
the staff that participated in
this as we're doing this and
doing the rules at the same time
and it
They were the sort of mutually
reinforcing, uh, cause we could,
we would see discrepancy or
inconsistency in the rules that
we had to fix in the uh loan
management policies and vice
versa. So hopefully the, the
result is a a a more seamless uh
connection between the two
documents.
Uh, that's all I had for anyone
has any questions, I'd be happy
to.
As Dan to answer them.
Chair members of the board,
typically I encourage you to
review the red lines. This is a
situation where I would
encourage you to review the
clean copy and then use the red
line as a reference if you see
if you were to change the red
line is just difficult to
follow, you know, with Chip and
the other folks that did this.
This was, you know, the, the
rules. I mean sure we did add a
couple of things on note, for
instance, healthcare facility
loans were silent in our
underwriting um criteria in the
prior set of policies that we've
not only streamlined the current
versions, um, but we have
added new sections to deal with
new kinds of credits that you
know we found our historically
more challenging than our
policies would have otherwise
provided, so, um.
And I just wanted to mention
that these are not only
streamlined but enhanced for
when it comes to the board next
month for approval, we will have
a side by side where elements of
what the policy contained before
and what it contains now so that
you have a much better
perspective, um, and as we'll
get that out as quickly as we
can, but we wanted to make sure
you saw.
You know, the process we were
in, so that uh you knew what was
coming to you in August.
Thank you that any questions
from board members? Yeah,
so for me,
uh, on page 93, uh, where we
talk about pits, tits, muds,
etc. etc. Uh, that's just gonna
become a rule, uh, as opposed to
a policy, correct?
Mm
Uh,
Um, I'm sorry, uh, Madam Chair,
I, I'm not sure I, I mean the
the
The information about the
different types of districts is
going to be included in the
policies. We're not gonna have a
separate, um, a separate policy
for them they're just gonna be.
Considered in the same kind of
context as any of the other uh
types of underlying securities,
um, but I'm not sure that's
answering your question. That's
fine, understood.
For instance, me a chair on page
93, you'll see the things that
we'll look at relative to the
credit of them, uh, so that's,
kids, tits and muds, uh, will
all be, yes, I'm not joking. Uh,
we'll all be covered in, you
know, we'll be looking at
Different elements depending on
the kind of credit it is,
obviously, a tit is gonna be
very different than, for
instance, a public improvement
district. So, uh, but these are
the, the things that we'll be
looking at as we make
recommendations to you.
Understood. Thank you.
Any other questions?
Madam Chair, let me ask you a
quick question.
Remember Tree Hill?
Yeah
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Chip, did I
hear you mention that the
reserve requirement was going to
be removed for certain smaller
um credits or smaller loans.
Could you kind of just explain a
little bit of the thought
process behind that if I did
hear you correctly?
Yeah, I think, um, for, for
Loans of less than $500,000. I,
I think the intention is to um
make
You know, make it, make the
process more streamlined for
them, um, to, you know,
approach the PPRF program.
Um, we've, we've sort of gone
back and forth on this, uh, as,
as applicants have, have come
in, some of whom, uh, the, the
burden of having a reserve is,
uh, you know, kind of makes the,
the project cost
a challenge. So, uh, in some
cases for smaller loans we will
be waiving that that reserve
requirement, and obviously it'll
be something that we will uh be
turning to the extent that it's
a, you know, we start having
actual loan payment deficiencies
we may revisit it, but, uh,
again, for, from my perspective,
and I think for the group's
perspective for the pretty good
people alone uh regional loan
officers who are dealing with
these smaller credits. It's just
a way to make the program.
More accessible and also not
have any, any impact on our
bonding program because that's
I think one of the things that
we always have to be cognizant
of is.
How do the policies
Impact potentially our, our
bonding program.
And so, uh, for the, for the
loans that we don't have any
intention of including in a
reimbursement bond, we can be a
bit more flexible.
Sorry, not clearly not been
talking about this morning
because got the frog in my
throat, but, um, so I think
that's the intention is that,
that, that take an eye toward
What are, what are our
reimbursement type loans that
are going to be included in a
bond issue.
And for the, for the group of
borrowers, which is a fairly
large group in terms of the
number of loans, um, uh, you
know, just make the program a
little bit more, uh, uh,
accessible, I guess.
That's the intention, yeah.
If I could ask a follow-up
question on that. I'm on if we
scroll down a little bit, this
is the sad to mugs thing. It
does say confirmation that these
loans are for reimbursement only
after construction is 100%
complete. So in what
I mean, that to me seems like
it's a loan that's not very
accessible because typically
loans are to do something and
then get reimbursed. So I'm not
quite sure I understand the
functionality of this the PPRF
for special districts. Uh, it's
good questions, and I, I think
that the term reimbursement is
um I'm using it in one way and
in in this case it's talking
about something else, but that,
so.
In this case, basically it's
saying we're not going to take
construction risk.
Um, and I think that's been
Uh uh uh policy that we are
feeling fairly uh strong about
because we, we have participated
in some uh development type
projects where we did take some
construction risk and they have
not always gone particularly
well, so I think going forward,
the intention would be to do
takeout or you can do a takeout
loan with the PPRF based on a a
A district that has been
Had they had some sort of
mezzanine financing that we, we
can then take out once the
project's in the ground, but
it's really, this is really
related to construction risk.
And I, I don't know Market, if
you wanna sort of weigh in on
that, but I mean, I think that's
sort of a general feeling that
we've been coming to, I think,
is the, the reticence about uh
taking uh
Taking project development risk.
Man, I think that that uh
essentially is correct. We are
looking at trying to minimize or
mitigate any construction risk,
um, cost of construction have
gone up. We obviously don't want
to be reimbursing on a draw by
draw basis only to find out that
they can't complete the project,
um, particularly with these, um,
alphabet districts, uh, you
know, there's, uh, they're
developer driven districts and
so our goal is to have them
assume the risk until it
It's at a point where it's
complete and the municipality or
the local government can take
over kind of ownership of that
uh that infrastructure, um, and
then reimburse them from the
bomb proceeds. So they can be in
phases, you could have a
three-phase loan, do phase one,
get that completed, get
reimbursed, go to phase two, get
that completed, go to phase 3.
So it doesn't have to be per
loan, and maybe that wording is
a little um misleading, but our
goal here is to make certain
that the dollars.
That are being extended are for
projects that will be completed,
and with these kinds of
transactions, that's really one
of the only ways that we can to
make certain we hit that target.
Um, and we will keep an eye on
that one, we expect this to be a
growing area of activity or so
if there are other mittigants
that we have not considered.
We're certainly willing to
consider them and take in, you
know, modify the policy as
necessary. Again, this is one of
the reasons we don't want these
things in rule. Um, we wanna be
able to have these policies
breathe with both the um
evolution of the finance
authority and our, our, our
monitoring systems and our
technology, um, as well as
market conditions. So we'll
continue to look at that if
there are other things we can
do, we'll take them into
consideration.
And being a developer that makes
perfect sense actually.
Yeah, and if I might just, uh,
just to close the loop, uh,
madam chair remember comes in
need the
loop, uh, madam chair remember
comes in need he said
the, the, when I talk about
reimbursement, uh, in the course
of just sort of the general PPRF
program, um, what I'm referring
to there is uh a loan that we've
made out of the PPRF with PBRF
cash over the course of a period
and then subsequently, we will
issue bonds against that loan
cash flow
to reimburse ourselves back into
the PPRF, um, so that's, that's
where, you know, I mean, I could
see I, I'd be confused too, so
because reimbursement here is
talking about for project
construction reimbursement in
the general course of the PPRF
is distinguishing between most
of the loans we make, which are
reimbursed with bond proceeds
against what we call the
simultaneous loans, which is a
loan of now $10,000 or more,
which has to be issued.
basically in concert with a bond
issue, so that we don't take
any, uh any interest rate risk.
So hopefully that uh helps to
clarify.
Thank you.
Yeah,
Keith, uh, this is
Remember Burke, can I just make
a quick comment? Yes.
Um, yeah, good questions. I, I,
um,
I think this is a a good step in
the right direction and it looks
like, like staff has uh
basically taken a
You know, policies, um, you
know, as they've explained and
uh uh and purposefully, you
know, stream streamlined uh at
least the content to to what
looks like about half the size
in terms of the document, and I
think um
You know, going through it, um.
Kinda as we, as we talk about
it, I, I think, you know, us as
board members will have the
opportunity to, to flag any
other questions we might have
for our next meeting before
approval, so appreciate the
work uh that both uh
Dan and Chip have put into this.
It's very much a team effort.
Madam Chair, um, given the size
of this effort, once we've met
with the oversight committee on
the rules, we'll endeavor to get
this information out in advance
of the board meeting as quickly
as we can so that you have more
time to review them. Um, and
obviously you can make
amendments at any time. We can
bring this up if you find that,
you know, ultimately 2 months
later, this seemed to be more
restrictive or um perhaps more
permissive than intended. We can
always come back and and
Update this document, uh, but
we'll try to get that
information with a little more
context at the front end, uh, to
you as early as we can following
the oversight approval of the.
Yes.
Thank you. 11 quick question
about coverage and um charter
schools.
So
Will we, if we had a borrower
come in in the next couple of
months, and we're between
putting out a new policy on
charter schools, would we have a
way?
To put that loan application
through, do we anticipate having
some? I just don't want us to be
left in a position where we have
an application and we don't
have.
Approved policies to be able to
deal with it. Madam Chair,
specifically on charter schools,
we have approved policies, um,
they're, you know, the these
policies once they become
effective, we'll replace our
existing ones. There is existing
policy in place and charter
schools are um interesting
because we're not really making
a loan, we're buying a piece of
land, we're buying the building
and then leasing it back to the
charter school. So we're not
seeing a lot of different
specifically on the charter
schools in, in the, in the
criteria that we'll take into
consideration.
is ultimately the risk is not
changed at all in our
perspective. We'll have a
broader appetite for it given
the new junior lean. I think
that's the good news, um, but
the policies themselves are not
a significant difference. The
charter school revolving fund
that was created several years
ago and now has $1000 is the
place where we think we will,
we're trying to create that
mechanism for the construction
risk that we've talked about,
because most charter schools
don't just buy a building, they
buy a building and then have to
Do some substantial renovation,
and because they're limited by
the revenues that they can use
to repay the loan ultimately,
the lease purchase agreement,
um, we're particularly sensitive
to the interest rate, uh, to the
construction risk here, uh,
because of their construction
risk doubles, their capacity uh
at the school level is likely
not gonna double. They're gonna
be authorized to have a certain
number of students. The building
will only house a certain number
of students, and so that lease
revenue that comes in from the
state is gonna.
Be fixed so doubling the
construction cost and not having
the ability to change at all,
the underlying uh revenue stream
is what we're particularly
concerned on on charter schools,
so that.
Her school revolving fund, which
was not quite figured out what
to do with because it mirrors
almost entirely our PPRF
legislation. We've determined
that that's the best place. See
if we can do some construction
risk in that standalone
cash-funded program and then
ultimately transfer it to the
PPRF as a permanent kind of
loan, if you will, um, at the
point at which it's complete so
that we then free up the
capacity to do more
construction. That's what we're
trying to hit here, um, because
the balance between the
kinds of risks that charter
schools um
bring into our program is very
difficult for us, and so this
is, we think the balance would
provide uh a nice opportunity
for
The expansion projects or the
brand new construction projects
to get done. If they're being
refinanced right now, there
won't be a problem through last
policy or this policy, it's,
it's gonna be virtually the
same, and they'll have just more
access. Thank you.
Any other questions from board
members?
If not, we've got another set.
rules to review. These are
simpler, madam chair. the page
number please.
So next is the review of the
housing development revolving
and rules.
Many members of the board, as
Marquita explained earlier,
this, this set of rules you'll
see a clean housing to help
accommodate affordable.
It created another fund. So
within the app, you have what we
did.
Uh, I took the
Rules that were in place since
2022, our rules and essentially
mimic them into a new set of
rules to cover the housing
development. And what I ended up
doing was strip a lot of things
that look nearly that only so
the the enterprises will only
contain those provisions.
So
The goal is that rules and
figure it out.
So that is what is before you.
Really capture, so we wanted to
make sure that everything I can.
They confusing.
This captures the applications
and applications systems.
Yeah.
approval the loan terms.
you have the broad, broad
statue.
The rules that come in into the
housing system.
But it does give an outline. It
does give a frame to the
You know, this is a
Evolving rules get developed as
the policies but we wanted to do
the schools again.
has any comments or questions?
Madam Chair, I would just note
on page 133. There's some new
sections for that relate to some
of our loan loan conditions, um,
and again, these are gonna be
housing assistance loans, so
they'll either be for the
infrastructure for affordable
housing or infrastructure or
vertical construction or uh
workforce housing. Uh, what we
want to make certain of
regardless of that is if we're
taking a mortgage interest that
there is a deed restriction
there that that income.
restriction, whether it was for
the affordable housing side or
whether it's for um the
workforce housing that we have
the, the uh
Restrictions that this property
not be sold to a market rate
entity for quite some time. So
we have a minimum of 10 years in
here, um, so it will be at least
for the duration of the housing
assistance loan, it's 20 year
loan and we'll have a 20 year
deed restriction if it's a, uh,
you know, if it's a seven-year
loan, we're going to have at
least a 10 year deed
restriction. So again, we want
to make sure that that deep,
that the, that we are
restricting at the, at the
actual mortgage level, um.
The income risk, uh, income
requirements. So that's new for
housing. We don't see that in
any other program that we offer.
Um, we have a provision in here
to limit the developer fees. We,
there needs to be some, you
know, there's a state dollars,
uh, we're providing below market
rate lending. We want to make
certain that there is not too
much um of our proceeds going to
line the pockets of developers,
you know, there's certainly not
a problem with people making
money.
And needing to use that money to
then fuel more housing, uh, but
we certainly want to put some
prudent limits on that, so we
have an anchor in the rules,
section K, um, that limits that
and then um we are looking at
ways in which to
Uh, put some guardrails on the
use of these proceeds to
reimburse developers or land.
It's not specific here. It will
come out in our policies, but we
do need to have some
restrictions on how much of the
proceeds can be used to
reimburse uh developers. So
those are three things that you
don't see in our rules typically
that we are including here
because of the kind of
development and because it's
specifically being targeted to
either affordable housing or
workforce housing, and we want
to make certain
That the, you know, the funding
is primarily going to construct
that and not necessarily uh to
the enrichment of the undue
enrichment,
um.
Profits are OK, but not uh.
There are some limits, um, of
our
of developers
very nervous being around a
developer and telling them that,
but you know, there do need to
be some guidelines in place and
guardrails in place, and that's
will come out on policy and
you'll have the opportunity to
prove that policy. Perfect. I'm
sure that's the purpose of the
workforce housing to begin with
is, is to sell below market rate
and, and you know, minimize
those risks. Uh, is there a
definition for de restriction
yet?
Excuse me. Is there a definition
for deed restrictions? Not yet.
That'll come out in policy as
well. Understood. Thank you. And
we'll be working through all of
this with our opportunity
enterprise board, their housing
development committee is
required to consult, so they,
we've already proposed to them
some of these structures, um,
and that housing development
group in particular is very uh
in the weeds, so we, we expect
to get a lot of really good
feedback when we propose
policies and rules to them, um,
in August.
Beautiful Madam Chery just would
point out that the restriction
prevents a house from being sold
as an Airbnb or to, or just
somebody from out of state that
keeps the money in the state,
which is actually uh a good
thing and what we're trying to
accomplish.
Great, thank you for that. Any
other questions from board
members on these proposals.
I'm sure I would just note that.
go to the oversight committee or
uh you know if it um we'll bring
those back in a red line format
or.
There's no other questions,
we'll move on to item 5.5.
Review of the amended
Opportunity Enterprise
revolving. No chair, members of
the board this is exactly what I
outlined before. This item with
the memos on page 136.
Uh, and the materials and the
red line are on page 138 of your
of your materials. This is the,
the red line to the existing
rules.
Which did not include housing,
but what it does do is it
updates, uh, it updates it to
reflect the statutory changes
that and
um including the commercial
development Committee, which is
the committee that's going to be
a tide uh to these enterprise
loans, the other, the other set
of rules has the housing
Development Committee that
Marquito referenced.
Um, there were some changes to
the definition of what an
enterprise development project
means so that
The statute
There are not a lot of
substantive changes to this.
In the section.
Or
Uh, you'll see some, some
changes in the uh
prioritization, the rule rules
will get reviewed by the
commercial Development
Committee, um, then we'll get
recommended, you know, it, it,
it outlines the current process
that we do so that that
committee will take it to the
economic development. So again,
it just outlines current
practices of changes other than
some allows us to
Do what we create a new set of
rules so that these rules. Thank
you.
Any questions on these rules?
If not, we'll move on to the
public lending committee and get
on to some projects this
morning.
So do we have a report uh from
member Nichols. Yes, thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, the public
lending committee met on July
17th, and we did have a quorum,
um, we reviewed, um, 3 planning
grant projects and we
recommended all three to the
board for approval and those are
on the consent agenda.
We also reviewed one colonial
infrastructure board project for
the village of Santa Clara, and
that was uh 80% grant and 20%
loan funding um for
rehabilitation of a water well,
and we recommended that project
to the board for approval as
well, and that's on the regular
agenda, and then finally we
reviewed 5 PBRF projects um and
recommended all for approval to
the board, and one of those is
on the consent agenda and the
other 4 are on the regular
agenda. Thank you. Thank you.
And if not, we'll move on to the
consent agenda.
M.
Wy, madam chair, um, members of
the board consent agenda agenda
item 7.8 were reviewed and
recommended by the public
lending Waters Association. Can
you hear me? Is it green or red?
It's green. I maybe I need to be
closer.
Is that better? Let's ask
members online. I just want to
make sure they can hear as well.
Yeah, it's better at the end.
OK, OK, OK, consent agenda
items, that is better. Um, 7.1
through 7.3 were reviewed and
recommended by the Public
Lending Committee, right? Um,
Rio Chiquito Mutual domestic
water consumers and mutual
sewage Works Association has
come to our program for an
environmental. The second one is
for Vvito Hal domestic water
Consumers Association for a
public, I mean, uh, excuse me,
liminary engineer report for
50,000.
Um, the same entity has come to
our program for water acid and
they qualified for 50,000. Um, I
recommend approval on all three
of these items that I could
stand for any. So good morning,
Madam Chair. Members of the
board of directors.
Uh, the only item on today's
consent agenda for PPRF is on
behalf of the San Juan Municipal
School District was applied to
the PPRF to finance projects
within the districts.
The proceeds will be used for
purchase of new furniture,
equipment, computer servers, and
the cost of issuance. The total
loan amount is 250,000, of which
they will receive 150 in the
form of disadvantaged funding at
0%, and this will be a short
seven-year term.
This is the first time this
project.
Here's more the sport and staff
staff does recommend approval
that stand for questions on item
7.11.
Thank you.
Any questions from board
members?
On any of these projects?
Madam Chair I would move that
item 7.1 to 7.4 be approved as
presented?
Thank you. Is there a second?
Second, Madam Chair.
Motion is seconded any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor of
the consent agenda say aye. Hi.
All those opposed same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Next is our regular agenda.
Thank you, Madam Chair and board
members. I bring before you the
last project that the colonius
ard awarded in May, and this is
the village of Santa Clara for
the uh water rehab.
This comes in as an awarded
amount of $2,230,000 with the
financial structure of 80%
grant, 10% loan, and an
additional 10% loan in lieu of
the required match, which is
required by colonial.
Policy, um, as the previous
projects that came before this
board in June, the 30 projects,
this one has been rated and
vetted through technical
assistance and went through the
colonia's annual um application.
So the reason why this was
delayed is the village was
trying to figure out what the uh
pledge that would be most
advantageous for them. And so
with that, uh, the loneus board
recommends
Approval of this uh project from
the village of Santa Clara, CIF
6436 in the amount of $2,230,000
coming as a financial structure
of 80% grant, 20% loan, and I
stand for any questions.
Any questions from board
members?
On this project.
Madam Chair, I would just note
that they, um, it took them a
little longer. They have
existing USDA debt that is
secured by their uh water
revenues, and we have been uh
continuing to face major um
issues with getting the consent
from the USDA to issue a loan,
even subordinate to theirs with
revenues that aren't needed for
their debt service. Um, it can
take upwards of 2 years and so
rather than go through that
headache, they spent a little
more time
a different pledge um for this
loan and that's what took them
longer. Uh, so they were delayed
30 days but just saved
themselves almost 2 years on the
other side of this approval, uh,
because it just takes so long to
get USDA um consent on anything.
Major projects are being held
up. Any other questions on this
project?
If I hear no objection from
board members, is it OK to take
the votes on these projects and
hold them.
You're fine with that. Yeah, I
think so. Perfect. Let's do that
then and move on to Project 8.2.
Madam Jarrod and board members.
So what you see here pre present
in front of you and I'm gonna be
on page 181 there in your board
material. You'll see that this
is foraughan Municipal School
District, and they are the home
of the Eagles, and they are
located in, New Mexico, and for
those of you that are not aware,
there are about 40 miles
southwest of Santa Rosa, New
Mexico, and this is a PPF 2024
general obligation bond loan
request. So in November of 2023,
this district did receive voter
approval and it was for
$2,400,000.
And that approval is valid for a
period of 4 years.
And so the Bonn Municipal School
District does have a loan
request for us today, and it's
for $600,000. You'll see that
it's for a 20 year term and it
does have a 3.33% net interest
cost.
And as you look into the project
description, you'll see the
proceeds of the slum will be
used for the projects that are
consistent with the district's
2024 through 2028 facility
master plan.
Which does include but are not
limited to campus security
fencing, parking lot and
sidewalk improvements and
library upgrades as well as that
cost of issuance.
And this project is very
important to the students and
staff of the Vaughan Municipal
School District. If you look
into the strengths, you'll see
that the major taxpayers do
equal 39.36% of the total
assessed valuation, which
reflects a medium concentration
risk of the tax base, and
important to note that the
majority of those major
taxpayers are utilities and
infrastructure businesses for
that specific community.
Now as you look at the
weaknesses, you'll see that
there's none to report.
And as you look at the audit
results, you'll see the fiscal
year 2023 audit was unmodified.
They did have two findings, but
those two findings do not impact
this product or the financing
request whatsoever.
Um, this is the first time that
this project has appeared before
the board. Staff does recommend
approval, and I'm happy to stand
for any questions.
Thank you. Quick question about
why this is being considered.
Madam Chair, I'll just note that
um we don't have anywhere and
we're looking at ways to address
this. We don't have anywhere to
play for how much falls onto a
consent agenda. So typically
it's been about 500,000, um, you
know, certainly we could make
them $1000 if they're
straightforward. We need better
guidance. We need to give you
some recommendations so that we
can make this a little more
straightforward, but that's why.
Any other questions on this
project? If not, we'll proceed
to 8.3 Cuba Independent School
District.
Good morning, madam chair.
And members of the New Mexico
Finance Authority Board. So
before you today, we do have
Cuba Independent School
Districts, and we are school
district. We are on page 194. So
our loan is 4,500,000. It does
have both a disadvantaged and a
tax-exempt component.
We have a 12-year term, and in
that interest cost of 2.68.
In November of 2023, the voters
did approve $6.5 million.
They've already issued $2
million so this will be the last
tranche of that funding.
So the projects listed will be
um
Will be improvements to 3
community schools in Cuba.
3K through 12.
This is a general obligation
bond and they are a long
time borrowing partner of the
finance authority, uh,
specifically, we've done 5 loans
with the Federal Impact.
Appropriation.
And I would also share that uh
under strengths we have 79% of
the loan proceeds will be paid
in the 1st 4 years.
Last audit, 2023, unmodified.
Uh 3 findings with that staff
recommends approval and they do
stand for questions.
Thank you. Any questions on
this?
If not, we'll move on to 8.4,
the Dexter Consolidated School
District.
Okey dokey. Good morning, Madam
Chair and board members. We are
looking at Dexter Consolidated
School District. It applied to
the public project revolving
fund or financing projects
within the district, they are
going to use their general
obligation bonds in the amount
of $600,000 which NMFA will
purchase with the public project
revolving fund.
This includes remodeling
equipment and refurnishing uh
school buildings, uh, purchased
to improve the school grounds,
purchase of the uh computer
software and sort of
infrastructure that they need to
do so, um, they will also be in
accordance with their uh
facilities master plan, which is
2023 to 2028, and what they're
planning to do with these funds
is to furniture to buy furniture
and equipment for the high
school, middle school, and
elementary school.
Um, they're also using the
public school capital outlay PC
PSCOC match repayment, which
will be the taxable loan
component. They have a field
house renovation, construction
for the districts, uh,
properties and dwellings,
computer desktop and laptops um
for the district, which is going
to fall into the tax exempt uh
portion of the component which
um according to their MHI they
do qualify for the 2% and they
also
So are using that for the cost
of issuance, uh, they strengths
include major taxpayers, um,
equals 17.03 of total assessed
uh evaluation reflecting a low
concentration risk in the tax
base. They also are gonna
receive a guarantee from the
DFA. There are none uh no
weaknesses to note, uh, they did
have an audit last completed in
2023. It was unmodified, and
there were two findings, no
material weaknesses or repeated.
Significant deficiencies that
does recommend approval and I
stand for any question. Thank
you. Any questions from board
members on this project?
So our final project is 8.5, the
city of T or C. Yes, thank you,
uh, Madam chair and board
members. I do have um Mayor
Hetchler and his leadership team
here, um, they are in tenants
with their FAs, the Valenzuelas
from Bossy advisors. The mayor
will be given an opportunity if
he fails to do so at the end of
this presentation and I just
wanted to give you a heads up
about that too, right before we
start the come up and join you.
Ocean.
Here you go.
Thank you Mary Bachelor.
Welcome, Mr. Murray. Thank you.
So the project is going to be uh
as a city of truth or
consequences, uh, with me, Mary
Hetchler will be able to answer
any questions at the end of this
as well. They have applied to
the PPRF to fund and purchase
the renovation of an existing
facility uh for law enforcement.
Uh, the proceeds will be used
but not limited to construction
facility acquisition,
contingencies, cost of issuance,
and a debt service reserve fund.
The police department has
outgrown their current location,
which is
Kind of outside of the, the, the
city a little bit, so they're
gonna move into the downtown
area to make sure that, you
know, there's more public
safety, and I know there have
been some traffic violation
issues, so they'll be able to be
more of a present in downtown
Tier C. I know they're currently
in a mortuary and they really
want to get out of that spooky
vibe to now uh renovated bank.
It used to be an old PNC uh bank
that's large enough to host um
new, new staff, police officers.
You know, anyone in in the
operations as well. Uh, the city
will pledge, uh, the portion of
the state gross receipts tax to
the source of revenue for this
loan, um.
There are contingencies, uh,
that we are going to look to the
project uh has um.
To theraal that should be
accepted by the property tax
division of the taxation and
revenue department. Um, so
there's contingencies on that.
There's also special conditions
of closing as lung council
review and approval related
documents to the project, um, as
mentioned their financial
advisorsor our boss advisors,
they are here with us. The
strengths include the new
facility will provide public
safety and will assist in
operational fici these, as
mentioned, the city qualifies
for disadvantaged funding which
helps with the taxpayer base.
And the weaknesses, there are
none to note. Um, last audit was
in 2023. It was unmodified.
There were 3 findings, but there
are no repeated material
weaknesses or significant
deficiencies, um.
Staff does recommend approval
and
I have, I, I stand for questions
at this time, but I will um say
or, or the board has any
questions.
Mr. Mayor, would you like to
address the project? Well, sure,
and thank you for the
opportunity to do so. So we're
so excited for this opportunity
because this PNC bank was
vacated earlier this year. It's
in the heart of our downtown
area. We did try to move our
police department uh last year
in, in, in almost 10 years ago
to another location which was
not in the downtown area and we,
uh, we, we faced, uh, uh
Lack of support from our
community and we understand
that. Uh, I'm really pleased to
know that we had our commission
meeting yesterday and we
actually got a petition from our
downtown merchants, uh,
approving the move.
Requesting that we move to that
area, uh, and, and supporting
it. So I'm, I'm pleased with
that.
It's interesting to know that we
are able to acquire this
building for less than $70 a
square foot. New construction is
$200 to $250 a square foot,
which we were considering and
even if we spend another $70 a
square foot to renovate, it's
well under uh the market prices,
so we're very pleased with this
opportunity and I, and I thank
you for being able to speak to
you today. Thank you, thank you
for coming. We appreciate that.
Yes ma'am. Thank you. We also
appreciate your good financial
reports, so thank you for those
Any questions from board
members, Madam Chair.
On page um.
224.
The grocery seats tax
collections are just going
through the roof. What's, what's
going on down there?
Sure, I'll be glad to address
that. You know, we're, we're a
small community of about 6000
people and over the past year
we've had over $100 million in
projects.
Uh, from the Veterans
Administration to the rebuilding
the bridge on the, on the south
side of town to the 3
roundabouts we just acquired on
the north end of town and so uh
those, those crews, those people
eating their restaurants, they
stay in our community, they
purchase goods, uh, and we
provide those goods in our, in,
in, in and around our area. So
we're very fortunate the last
couple of years we know it's not
gonna last forever, but we're
gonna ride the wave while we
can.
OK, thank you. Thank you, sir.
Any other questions from board
members?
If not, um, we held the votes on
all 5 of these projects.
If there's no objection, and we
take them together. If anyone
does object, happy to pull them
off and vote.
Madam Chair, objections I would
move to approve items 8.1
through 8.5 as presented.
I'll stick in that motion, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Motion has
been made and seconded any
discussion.
If not, all those in favor, say
I. I.
All those opposed, same sign.
Motion carries. Thank you.
Congratulations. Thank you.
Next on the agenda, an update
from um Chair Collins and the
Economic Development Committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee on page 233.
Is the economic development
report, the uh economic
On Tuesday.
Um, July 16th, we added member
Shelton.
Uh, to the group, um.
The lone staff reviewed um.
The different loan programs and
and um such you ever wanna see
the nuts and bolts of this deal
come to that committee. It's,
it's some good stuff.
Um, the, the other thing we
talked about was the uh venture
capital allocation. Uh, we're
recommending an approval to the
board today to increase the
amount allocated to almost
ventures Ryan will explain that
here in a bit. Then we also
looked at a couple of uh new
markets tax credit transactions.
Uh, which will also be on the
day, so.
So.
Thank you. Any question for?
If not, we'll proceed to item
9.2.
Um,
Recommendation of amended
investment committee, uh, to V
Vmo. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the board, it's great
to be with you here today. So
before you as a recommendation
to increase our investment
commitment to Vamos Ventures
Fund 2, you all approved a
commitment of $4 million back in
April, um, and we're proposing
to increase that included in
your packages are the materials
from that April meeting just for
reference, um, and just a
Brief reminder, so, uh, Vamos
Ventures is an early stage
venture capital fund investing
at the seed in Series A stages,
and they focus on diverse
entrepreneurs, um, specifically,
very much so, uh, Latinx
entrepreneurs, um, from a
treasury perspective we're
expecting 100% of the
entrepreneurs in their portfolio
to qualify as study business
owners.
Um, and the rationale for the
recommendation on this increase,
um, is because Vamos has been
very successful in raising uh
private um matching capital, uh,
we're coming into the 2nd close
of the fund, we expect that that
will bring the total that
they've raised to roughly 65, 70
million across their initial
close and this second closing,
um, as I think we've discussed
in previous meetings, um,
Uh, the ability of venture
capital managers to raise
private capital, um, uh, varies,
and, um, certainly in the local
ecosystem has been a challenge.
Um, so this gives us an
opportunity to um more quickly
deploy the SSBCI funding we have
for VC funds, um, and we, we
want to do that, not only um uh
In our work with EDD on
deploying the SSBCI award, um,
but this is also a very mission
aligned um fund for what
Treasury is trying to achieve,
um, with SSBCI.
Um, Vamos already has local
pipeline, um, they had pipeline
before we started talking to
them, um, and they've been
meeting with entrepreneurs here
in New Mexico. Um, they have not
yet made an investment in a New
Mexico business, um, but they
are um they are uh very
enthusiastic that they'll have
one or two portfolio companies
in fun too here in New Mexico,
um, as part of our initial
recommendation on the 4 million
they committed to hiring at
least one local scout that's
Gonna be someone here on the
ground, um, that's trying to
source um investment
opportunities for them to be
investing in. They also
committed previously to um
hosting office hours for uh New
Mexico entrepreneurs here
locally, at least 4 times a
year.
With this um uh increased uh
allocation which they're very
excited about. They've committed
to an additional, uh, uh, two
sets of office hours um per
annum, uh, hosting those
virtually. So every other month
roughly, um, their staff will be
working with entrepreneurs here
based in New Mexico on um
potential investments or
offering um advice to those
entrepreneurs on how they can
become more investment ready,
which we think is a real value
add in this.
Ecosystem, um, and NMFA would
also have a voting seat on the
limited partner partner advisory
committee. Um, so with that more
substantial allocation, we would
actually have a role in the
governance um of the fund. Um,
we're really excited about this
relationship and um we're really
excited about a potential to
increase our commitment. We
discussed this with the venture
capital investment committee and
also economic Development
Committee, um, uh, and last but
not least, I just wanted to
highlight.
Some of the investors in the
fund that um will be standing
alongside us, um, some corporate
entities include Apple, Bank of
America, Delta Pension Fund, and
on the philanthropic
philanthropic side we're
co-investing with the Ford
Foundation, Cerna.
The Kellogg Foundation. Um, I'm
gonna hand it over to Ethan
Sampson. He's here online with
us, our investment consultant.
He just has some brief remarks
and then we'll stand for
questions.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the board, um, and
thanks, Ryan. Um.
I just wanted to echo uh Ryan's
comments and let you know that
Nikita is supportive of the
staff and uh and the
recommendation here to increase
the commitment to Bamos
Ventures. Um, we think as, as
we've told you before, uh, we've
gone through and conducted full
due diligence on this
opportunity. We think it's a
really interesting opportunity,
uh, and to get a national
venture capital manager to focus
on New Mexico, and we think with
the increased commitment, you'll
bring additional attention from
the manager to the state and
potentially
Increase, uh, both the amount
invested but also uh more likely
be a number of times they're
going to be in the state meeting
with entrepreneurs, um, doing
educational events and
increasing the venture capital
ecosystem. So we think this is a
really positive development and
it's great that they've been
able to raise um so much fun
matching funding so quickly, so,
um, just wanted to uh make sure
you knew that Mikita was
supportive of this um increased
proposal.
Happy to answer questions
alongside Ryan.
Great. Thank you for the update.
Any questions from board
members?
Can I ask for a little clarity
around the rounds of funding.
So they're trying to raise 100
million for the fund in total.
They've done 30 and our first
investment was for the first
fund.
Now they're going for a 2nd
tranche. How much are they
trying to raise and of the
matching funds that you
mentioned were those for phase 1
or phase 2? Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's a
great question. So, um, uh, when
venture capital funds raised,
they'll have a fundraising
period.
And they will close, they will,
um, typically hold multiple
closings over the course of that
entire fundraising period um on
amounts of capital. So they held
their initial clothes in April.
And that was on the roughly 300
million that you pointed to, um,
so we didn't participate in that
cause we were still in the
process of approving
our commitment, um, so it was
always our intention to
participate in this 2nd
round of closing. Um, some of
those investors that I, I
mentioned earlier, they actually
came in in the first clothes, so
technically, um signed their
legal agreements prior to us,
um, we would be participating in
the 2nd close which is targeted.
For the end of this month.
Um, and we would be doing that.
I don't know specifically um the
private investors uh in in that
second close, but they will
exceed our amount, so that's the
match that's being raised as a
concurrent to us in the clothes.
Um, I do know that the state of
California.
Um, is also coming in, um, at
the 2nd. Um, so we'll come into
the 2nd close and then Vamos is
gonna continue to fundraise. Um,
and in the future, hopefully
they'll be successful to um a
subsequent one or two closings
and get them to the 100 million
target, at which point they
would hold their final clothes,
and they would, they would cease
fundraising.
OK.
And how much do we expect to
raise? What will be so.
Um, I, I think between 25, 30
million, OK.
So 30 million and 7. always good
to not be the only one.
Be a good company on these
things.
Any other
If not, I note that this is an
action item and I'd ask for a
motion to approve the amendment
investment it be approved.
2nd manager is made and
seconded. Any discussion.
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
All those opposed same sign?
Motion carries. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the board.
So, um, next on the agenda is
preliminary approval of 100
million new markets tax credit
allocation.
For Garrett Development
Sunshine, and we have a hard
board members.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So I do
have some guests here today.
I do have uh Jim Howard.
He's with Deadly Ventures, I
have.
Mr. Jeff Garrett with Garrett
Development. I also have one of
his vice presidents, Wyatt
Brown, and then of course I have
our chief of programs, John
Brooks.
And with that, um, yes, you do
have the presentation and I
would like to turn it over to um
Mr. Garrett to talk about a
project. Talk about his company,
talk about the tenant, and then
I would like to talk a bit about
um the structure for this New
Mexico Finance Authority, new
market tax credit allocation of
$10,000. And with that,
Hi, I'm Jeff Garrett. I want to
thank you, the committee for
your time today. I appreciate
it. I know you guys. Thank you
for your service and everything,
Um, thank you, Carmela and John
and Earn for working with us on
this too. Um, I'm Jeff Garrett.
I'm the president of Garrett
Development Corporation.
Uh, we own 53,000 acres on the
west.
Um, past projects have been
like, you've probably seen the
large 3.2 million square foot
Amazon building that's about 100
ft up in the air, and then we
did a 300,000 square foot Amazon
building next door to that.
We have uh in the park another
800,000 square foot Tempur-Pedic
deal, the 250,000 square foot
shamrock project.
A 50,000 square foot cross dock
FedEx. Our next project is to be
Ray.
And that's what we're here to
discuss today in new market tax
credits for that.
Um,
Bray is an amazing company. I've
gotten to spend a lot of time
with the people on the on the
manufacturing line up to the CEO
and uh very good people. It's a
company that New Mexico needs
born and raised here.
It's um they've been so
successful they're public right
now. They're worth about $2
billion the market cap.
And um they've been so
successful that they've outgrown
their 65,000 square foot
facility.
And they're in the market for.
Um, a 200,000 square foot
facility.
New Mexico does not have a
speculative industrial building
on the ground that meets their
needs, so they had been out
looking around it, um, being I
was raised in New Mexico, I went
to Osuna, Madison, Sandy, and
UNM, uh, that, that kind of
breaks my heart and I want, want
him to stay. So, uh, I've been
very aggressive about chasing
this, um, I finally really got
their attention in August of
last year and um.
They agreed to stay, so we have
a signed lease with them.
Um, we have construction
drawings done and ready to pull
the building permit with
Bernalio County, um, for a
216,000 square foot facility.
They'll run manufacturing out of
it and the facility will have 36
ft clear height, which is a big
deal now. um, there, there
really are no industrial
buildings with this clear height
available in in really the state
of New Mexico.
Um,
So, we've uh cut the lease with
them. We've spent $1,000,000
our, our organization getting
the permits ready and everything
so we're ready to pull permits.
The first time we went out for
debt at the beginning of the
year.
Um, especially with interest
rates where they are, the debt,
we went to 76 banks and we got 4
offers, and they were not, um,
it was basically I have to move
100% of my net worth over to the
bank and then they'll lend me
back my money.
So it wasn't a very promising
uh group. So, uh, why it
started.
Uh, looking around New Mexico
and seeing if there was other
ways to uh facilitate this
project and hope to close that
capital gap.
Um, during his research, he met
Dudley Ventures, and he met John
Brooks and his team. So that's
how we've kind of arrived um.
I think it's an awesome
opportunity. We're gonna save
300 New Mexico jobs. We're going
to grow, uh, this is going to be
the world headquarters. They do
do business all over the world.
This will be manufacturing kind
of for the northern hemisphere
they build real quick is just.
Uh, they don't build solar
panels panels, and then uh a
device that turns the solar
panels and then they write the
programs that keep it to.
With that, I think I'll close
out um if there's really details
Carmel has done a great job and.
Great. Thank you. Any questions
from board members?
Only I, I do actually, Madam
Chair. I'd just like to add
that, you know, being old
school, I think it's great to
have a hard copy in front of me,
finally, uh, you know, it makes
it much easier to follow, so I
appreciate you guys doing that.
I'm old school too.
and uh Carmela on, uh, it's 100,
correct? Uh yes, thank you,
yes, um, thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Members. So I'd like to, if we
may go to page 254, and I want
to talk about the structure of
the loan and what we anticipate
for our preliminary approval
today.
And I will fix that 0 wherever
that is. Thank you.
So we do have um the New Mexico
Finance Authority New Market tax
credit allocation of $1000.
And that is finance New Mexico,
so we're gonna do that through
finance New Mexico and that is
in the middle of our diagram.
We have a 2nd CDE which is
prestamos, and they as well are
going to do a $1000 allocation.
We have, um, if we look at the
very bottom on the left and
we'll work our way up array
technology, they're going to
prepay rent a little over $7
million and that'll be part of
the project as well.
And then above that, we
anticipate both the source and
direct loan from Enterprise Bank
today, when we bring this back
in August, our structure may
change slightly and our
Our our equity positions and our
loans may change slightly
outside of Newmarket, uh, the
New Mexico Finance Authority's
new market tax credit allocation
of 10 million.
And then above that, we do have
Garrett Development Corporation,
who is our leverage lender, and
their equity contribution, so
about $5.7 million.
And then our um tax allocation
is going to be purchased by um.
United Bank share uh
corporation, I'm sorry, US Bank
Share Corporation. Apologies.
All this money is gonna flow
into our investment fund.
And then from there we will have
our qualified low income
community business.
Also, I just want to share that
um we will be taking a 2nd
subordinated position on a data
trust for the property and also
subordinated second position for
assignment of the lease. I'd
like to also note that the
property is is located at 7701
Attrisco Vista, which again is
in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and
then if we may just look at page
253 of the board book, so go
back once.
Page.
Here's our exit fee
determination that we have uh
negotiated with Eric, um, with
Garrett Development, and again,
we want to make sure if we look
at number one.
That we do maintain 252 jobs. We
also want to make sure that we
create 51 new jobs, and as Mr.
Garrett noted, 303 jobs. And
then also for the construction
of this um project, we also want
to make sure that 150 jobs are
created with at least 50% of
those being New Mexico-based
workers.
Again, um, the project is about
45 million.
As where, you know, where we
stand today, and again, that
does include um the model that I
did share. We do anticipate with
the um the amounts of revenue
collected, um, a net debt
service coverage ratio over 1,
which is we're looking at about
1.06.
And also I'd like to just share
that we do have Alita Grant.
We have, um, from the state of
New Mexico.
From the city of Albuquerque and
also from Bernalio County for a
total of 30, so 2.5 and then uh
a 250,000 from both the county
and the city respectively, and
also the county is going to
issue a taxable.
Industrial revenue bond, and we
do have that, and if Mr. Garrett
noted, there is a um a lease in
place and it is a triple net
lease, and so the industrial
revenue bond will be uh payment
in liu of taxes, so we'll reduce
the uh property taxes that are
required on the property, 75%,
and then um if we do look at
just our last page 257.
We do have um some uh Project
strengths, and um I've mentioned
most of them already again, uh,
new capital investments with
through the New Mexico Finance
Authority with our new market
tax credit allocation and we do
have the job retention, um,
also, um new job creation. We
have our other partners, the
county, the city, the state, and
we also have Ryan Companies who
be uh working with Garrett
Development and the creating the
building and building the
building, and they are
qualified um uh builder, and
then also number 11, we do have
some uh compliance requirements
to complete our approval and of
course that's a review of the
appraisal, of course, that's
gotta be uh reviewing the
construction contract, and then
again reviewing all the
documents related to the uh
property, this surveys.
The title policies, etc. And
with that,
Staff does recommend a
preliminary approval. Again,
we're going to bring a final
approval to this board in
August.
And with that, we do stand for
questions. Madam chair, if I
just might remind the board
preliminary approval um is
somewhat misleading because what
we're saying with this approval
is that the underwriting, the
project, and the described
collateral is all acceptable and
that the final approval is
subject only to um uh
documentation uh to the
satisfaction of the finance
authority. So when you, when
this comes back for final
approval, they will have spent
all those attorneys' hours and
time to
Construct numerous uh documents.
We don't want them to undertake
that legal uh expense and
headache until we've told them
we're, we wanna go forward with
the project. The preliminary
really is somewhat misleading,
final approval will come with
the documents, but will be
substantially unchanged from
what you're seeing here. I just
wanted to mention that since we
don't see this as often, um, and
I would also note that Finance
New Mexico Advisory Board.
is required to review this
transaction and they did review
the transaction and they
recommend you that you approve
this as well and their job is to
oversee the use of the funds
relative to um community impact.
So they were particularly
focused on the community. We've
had the that additional review
as Madam Chair.
Um, this is an amazing
transaction.
I mean, it's firing all weapons,
um.
You know, you said state, local,
you know, government's doing all
they can. None of this happens
if we don't have a developer.
Who's willing to, I mean, that
chart they showed on.
254.
The structure of this financing.
Most developers, so I, I want to
thank Team Garrett for stepping
into this, you know.
Being willing to
Work through that, that
structure and, and uh and work
with us and, and we're so
thankful to have her um a way to
be able to keep a company like
Array.
Here in Mexico.
Yeah
OK.
Motion has been made for
approval. Do I hear a second?
You do, Madam Chair, and is uh
remember Collin said good stuff.
Motion is made and seconded. Is
there any discussion or
questions on this? If not, all
those in favor say aye.
Hi.
All those oppose same sign?
Motion carries.
Well you and all that work is.
Dudley ventures and these guys,
Wyatt and everybody. I don't
want to take credit for it they
did great. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for making it look
easy.
Next on the agenda,
recommendation and request to
open around 33 um
Of new market's tax credits for
rural projects only?
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the board. Morning.
Before you as a request to open
the market. Um,
Which would be around 33.
To date, the Mexico Finance
Authority Board has a vacation
cycles.
Yeah.
Several of those cycles have had
rural projects receive
allocation.
Following following the approval
for a ray technology, there will
be $700 remaining.
This request was presented to
the Finance New Mexico Advisory
Board on July 12th, staff
proposes that.
First through September 16th,
following
Or I'm sorry, allowing 45 days
of staff recommends.
any questions.
Any questions? Madam Chairman
moved to approve.
Motion is made to approve a
there a second.
Sector
Motion is seconded by.
Mm
Um
Member Lovato.
Yes, ma'am.
Sorry, I can't see your face.
I just sorry
Motion is seconded by member
Lovato. Um, is there any
discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
I. All those opposed, same sign?
Motion carries. Thank you.
Next on the agenda is the
finance and disclosure Committee
Chair Sposo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'll
be brief as usual. Uh, we did,
uh, meet, uh, last Wednesday. We
were in quorum, uh, one of the
things, uh, that was that we
heard was a presentation of the
investment report by Mark
Lovato. He will be doing that
again for the full board here
today. We also heard the bond
issuances forecast report and uh
the only action item before the
board today is a waiver of the
annual RFP requirement for the
NMFA underwriter pool which
Uh, we voted in the affirmative
and recommended to the board.
Thank you. Thank you.
Any questions from the board for
the finance and disclosure
Committee?
If not, we'll move on to um
Information only item, the
presentation of the investment
report.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the board.
Um, I will be going over the
investment report, um, for the
period ending June 30th.
It will also be going over an
annual report that was actually
prepared by our external
investment advisor, GPA, um,
that report was actually given
to finance and disclosure pretty
much full detail.
I'm going to pay.
263.
Um, we, MFA has two groups of
funds. We have the NMFA funds.
Which has a
Uh, June 30th was 1.2 billion.
Then we have the Department of
Transportation funds, which was
190 million.
We have a total of 1.4 billion
invested at the authority.
Um, went on to the next page.
Um, before I actually go over to
the NMFA portfolios. There's a
few interesting items that
happened within um in June.
Typically in June you would see
the actual in my portfolio
actually decreased because we
make uh our annual bond
payments.
This year, those bond payments
and the senior and subordinate
uh totaled $161 million.
This year, the actual portfo
grew,
um, and that is because we got
in.
A legislative appropriation of
$175 million for the Opportunity
Enterprise Fund, and we also did
our annual flow through, which
goes into the operating fund
from the bond funds that totaled
63 million.
24 million were the excess
revenues after paying the bonds
on the loan remnants and also uh
the annual collection of the
GDRT which was 38 million. That
was it, um, an all-time high on
the GTRT.
Going on to um page.
264.
The portfolio is the group I
like type of funds or by what's
actually dictated in the
indentures for the PPRF program.
Um,
So most of these funds are
actually governed by the
indenture, um, starting with our
longest phone, we have our debt
service reserve funds.
We use a 0 to 5 year benchmark
on those funds. These are entity
reserve funds, so the earnings
on those funds go back into the
entity's accounts.
Um, that has a market value of
53.8 million, a book yield of
2.76.
The current market yield of 4.81
compared to the benchmarks at
4.80.
Duration is 1.8983 compared to
the benchmarks at 2.103.
12 month total return.
was 4.6.
4.601 compared to the benchmarks
at 4.448.
Next, we have our operating
funds. Again, this is the fund
that actually had um a really
large increase, mainly because
of that appropriation as well as
the flow through that happened.
Um, it's our operating funds.
These are not governed by the
bond any bond indentures, so
this falls under our investment
policies or state statutes.
And we have 619 million in in
that group.
The book yield of 4.81 mark
yield of 5.02 compared to the
benchmarks at 4.97.
Duration is 0.731.
Compared to the benchmarks at
1.381.
I told to return 5.219 compared
to the benchmarks at 4.807.
Our next group of friends is
all, all 4 of these funds are
governed by the indenture.
Um, the top two programs are
basically entities project funds
or program funds.
Um, those funds, the earnings do
go back into their project
accounts that the specific
entities project accounts.
Um, the next two items are the
common debt Service Reserve,
which is dedicated to the senior
lean bonds.
And the supplemental credit
reserve is dedicated to the
subordinate lean bonds. Those
earnings stay within those
funds.
In that group, we use a 0 to 1
year benchmark.
Total market value is 492.7
million.
The book yield is 4.81.
Mary 5.15.
Compared to the index at 5.32.
The duration is 0.708 compared
to the index at 0.508.
Total 12 month return, 5.196
compared to the index at 5.331.
Um, finally at the bottom of the
page that last group, these are
mainly debt service type funds.
Um, most of, actually pretty
much all of these funds are um.
Dictated by what's uh in the
indentures.
As you'll notice the two top
bond funds, the senior and
subordinate, those basically go
down to 0.
After all of the flow-through
happens, that's exactly what
happens in those funds.
Again, overall we have 1.2
billion in MFA funds invested.
Total book yield is 4.70.
Current mark yield is 4.986
compared to the index at 5.115.
The duration is 0.753 compared
to the index at 1.009.
12 month total returns by 0.221
compared to the index at 5.129.
Went on to the next page.
The chart at the top right.
This will show the uh total
return versus the benchmarks, as
well as the unrealized gain and
loss in the portfolio over the
last 6 months.
Um, the unrealized loss in the
portfolio is kind of
interesting, um, in January, you
see, we had a loss of $1000.
That is because at that time the
markets and investors believed
that we were gonna have 5 to 6
rate cuts between now between
that period and the end of the
calendar year 24.
Didn't just didn't transpire.
Um, so rates started to increase
again, and that's what you'll
notice back in April we had uh a
loss of around 5.5 million $5.6
million.
Um, as inflation has now
somewhat started to ease again,
um, rates are going back in our
favor and you'll see that we
ended the fiscal year with a
loss of $3.6 million.
At the bottom of that page.
This will show the net income
for the fiscal year.
On 12 months or full fiscal year
we had uh earnings of $46.4
million.
That's 121% increase over the 21
million in fiscal year 23.
And before I go on to the GPA
report, do you have any
questions on that portion of.
Any questions from board
members?
No,
not,
not to page.
Uh, 268.
Um, governmental portfolio
advisors gives us an annual
report like I mentioned, they,
they did go over this a little
bit larger report at finance and
disclosure.
Um, but on this page just shows
what the market yields have done
over the fiscal year.
Um, on that left hand side
you'll see the quarterly yields.
Um, on that 2 year line, you'll
notice that the beginning of the
fiscal year um rates were around
490.
They increased going.
Forward into the end of that
year to 5.05.
We ended at around 475.
Um, as I mentioned, like when I
was talking about the unrealized
gain losses. That's exactly what
happened in um.
The next page just shows
inflation, um, again, inflation
is starting to somewhat ease
with the anticipation that we
will end up with about 1 to 2
base of
Um,
between now and the end of the
year.
And that's again reiterated on
page 270.
And 271, um, you'll notice that.
on the bottom of 271, the Fed
fund features.
Declining rates.
So with that, uh, declining
rate, our strategy as well as um
as.
Being in touch with GPA is we're
gonna try and focus on moving
our core portfolios from
durations around neutral to
slightly long.
And that is because we want to
try and lock in rates where
they're at.
Um, as they're starting to
decrease, we will be locked in.
Um, we're gonna try if the
portfolios do allowed.
To try and look into the 2 and 3
year buckets. Um, again, that
would just depend on the
liquidity needs in each of those
funds.
That is our goal is to try and
lock in those uh higher rates.
And went on to page 274, um,
GPA's role with us is always to
make sure that we are doing
investments um that are
compliant with our.
Policies.
Bond indentures, state statutes,
and all of that.
Um, so they run a report which
we actually have access to on
our system as well to make sure
that we are actually within
policies on any of our
investments.
Um, as you can see, we are
compliant.
Um, policy diversification
constraints.
Um, treasury applications, we
can hold up to 100% we're around
70%.
Um, money markets, we can also
hold up about 100%.
Um, but we're around 27, 28%.
It's actually a good mix.
We, we're slightly low on um
agent securities. We're only at
1.2%.
And that is really relative to
what what the indentures
actually dictate. They're really
pretty restrictive as far as
what kind of agencies we can
have, um, so, and there's not
really much yield pickup and
agencies versus treasuries, so
we just stay in treasuries at
this point.
Um, as spreads start to widen,
we'll begin looking at more
agencies, um.
H 275.
Again, um, more compliance.
And we are compliant in the
maturity constraints.
Treasury maximum at the time of
purchase, we can go up to 10
years, we're out of 5.
Um, agencies, and we can have a
maximum up to 10 years at the
time of purchase, we're at 2.8.
And the overall weighted average
um under policy, we can be
around 3 years, we're at, went
on to the next page.
Um, we already went over the
portfolios, but you look on that
right hand side, you'll notice
that the book yield, the
beginning of the fiscal year, we
started around 379.
We ended the year at 470. It's
almost 100 100 basis point
pickup.
Uh, market values, beginning of
the fiscal year we're at 93034
million, we ended it at 1.2
billion.
And unrealized losses.
Began at 10.6 million loss, we
ended at 3.5 million last year.
Went on to the next page. This
will show the investment
activity for the fiscal year.
On that right hand side, you'll
notice that we had maturity
during the fiscal year that
totaled 465 million.
That purchases in the fiscal
year that totaled 668.4 million.
And what we're typically a buy
and hold strategy we
Do occasionally have to make
some cells and this fiscal year
we did, uh, around $300.
Going on to the next page.
This will show the allocation by
asset class. Um, again, we are
heavily weighted towards
treasuries at around 70% with
the remaining in agencies at 1.2
and money markets at 27%.
Finally, on page 279.
This will show the distribution
by effective duration, you'll
notice that we have 50% of our
portfolio that will be
monitoring within 6 months or
half a year.
But you also noticed we have 23%
in that 1 to 2 year bucket.
That's us trying to lock in
those higher rates for that that
longer period.
What that time for any
questions?
Thank you. Questions for board
members. Well done.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Our final um item on the agenda
is the waiver of the annual RFP
requirement for the underwriter
pool.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the board.
This next item is, as you know,
we have an underwriter pool
policy and each year that policy
requires us to RFP to select the
pool. The pool is composed of 6
underwriters and 2 alternates.
They then rotate as each bond
sale comes in, uh, each of them
get to essentially just be the
lead underwriter and and moves
on.
Um, because we are now in the
market less frequently than we
have.
The underwriter policy, the
review of those of that RFP is
extremely timely, time
consuming. Uh, the underwriters
do a fantastic job. There's a
lot of information, but it takes
a lot to get through it.
And so what we've talked about
is and what the finance and
disclosure committee recommended
to this board is to waive the
annual requirement for the RFP
allow us to extend that for one
year. We'll then come forward in
the next several months with
some proposed minor changes to
that policy, but one of them
will be to make that change to a
two-year RFP requirement, uh,
especially, like I said, we're
in the market less frequently,
that allows more even
distribution for the
underwriters, uh, and.
They're probably gonna be quite
happy that they don't have to go
through this uh voluminous
exercise every year. So with
that, Madam Chair, members of
the board, we would recommend uh
approval of the waiver to allow
the underwriter pool that was
put in place in last year's RFP
to continue for an additional
year on this action item?
Why not go longer?
Why not go longer?
Uh, I, I think at this point
until uh um
The amount of the amount of
times that we're in the market.
So we would go, typically we're
in 3 to 4 times a year, uh, or,
or more, um, so this will allow
us through this current RFP, at
least for this time, and when we
come back, we can discuss
whether or not we want to make
that extension 2 years or 3
years or 4 years. So the one
year waiver gets us to that
point. Um, we will talk, I'll
talk with Chip and Marquita, and
we can determine if 2 years is
the right figure, 3 years might
be the right number. I think a
lot of that will depend on the
market timing as we look forward
to the next year, but um that's
the initial recommendation, uh,
at this time but.
I can definitely change. So
we'll, we'll bring something
forward next year.
Uh, in the coming months. Thank
you. Yeah, Madam Chair, uh,
board members, I guess the the
The municipal market has been
fairly um
Active in terms of the comings
and goings of different
underwriters, uh, in our last
pool, for example, Citigroup was
a uh uh part of the pool as a uh
an alternate they no longer are
uh in the municipal bond
business. So one
Concerned about making it too
long of a period that you can
end up uh having
Uh, banks just cease to exist in
terms of their municipal bond
activity, and so, yeah, I think,
I think right now 2 years feels
like a fairly good number and
Dan mentioned the how much the
underwriting uh
world will appreciate not having
to do proposals every year, I
think he can speak for the, the,
uh, team of people who have to
review those proposals feel
equally positively but
this to once every 2 year
process. Um, and I just to
Confirm, I mean, the, the fact
that we're issuing less is
actually a good thing because as
Mark mentioned earlier, we're,
we're seeing record $38 million
GGRT in this past year that
Plus the direct loans that we
make, uh, with that money
produces 50 to $60 million flow
through into the PPRF at the end
of every fiscal year. So because
of that, uh, being flush like
that, we just don't need to uh
access the, the bond market as
frequently, so yeah, it's a,
it's a a good news story.
Any other questions from board
members?
If not, do I hear a motion on
this, uh, a motion on the policy
waiver request. Some movement.
Motion is made, is there a
second.
Motion is made and seconded.
Or is there any discussion?
If not, all those in favor say
aye.
All those oppose same sign.
Motion carries are remaining
agenda item is an audit
committee report.
B.
Thank you, uh.
Chair Keith and members of the
board, the um audit committee
met on Wednesday via Zoom on
July 17th, um,
Members, uh, swao myself, uh,
Constantinidis, Sam Collins, and
our our new member from the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources uh department Ben
Shelton were in attendance. I
wanna thank uh uh member Swao,
he chaired the meeting on my
behalf. I, I couldn't get on
other than through my phone on
that morning, we had 3 agenda
items, um, and really all three
were
routine, uh, we reviewed the
financial statements and
financial performance
indicators, uh, the committee
had accepted them, uh, and that
review, we also heard about
progress uh from our uh external
auditors, Moss Adams, and we're
on track in terms of uh our
external audit and uh our
anticipated timing for our exit
conference with the board in
September, and then we also
heard a report on the new NMFA
headquarters.
Project, which is continuing to
make good progress and our final
shipment of of structural steel,
which is kind of the last large
material item we we we're hoping
to get, uh, should, should be in
if it's not by the end of July.
So that's my report.
Any questions, be glad to
answer.
Any questions from board
members?
If not, um, our next board
meeting, August twenty-ninth.
9 a.m. at the state Capitol.
Um,
Meeting stands adjourned.
Thank you.
Thank you.
OK
Thank you.
Hard.
