All right, everybody, good
morning.
Thanks for joining us. This
morning we have uh
Our wake up session with Aaron
Lecoq, our appellate specialist
who's gonna do a 2024 Appellate
roundup. Uh, Aaron came to law
school as a second career. Her
first job was or first career
was teaching high school French,
recording in progress,
uh, when her daughter was only 7
weeks old, Aaron attended the
part-time evening program at
Seattle University School of
Law, graduating cum laude in
2015.
She and her family relocated to
New Mexico in 2019 and worked in
civil litigation at the New
Mexico Attorney General's
office.
There she handled severed
appellate matters, uh, and
developed her passion for
appellate work and handled some
rather exciting cases at the
10th Circuit. Uh, I'm sure she
will be happy to tell you about
that at some point if you ask
her, and we're excited that
she's here with us at the PRC
handling our appellate matters
because as you heard yesterday
afternoon, we have a lot of
them. So she's here to talk
about what's new in uh
government law and the PRC.
Thanks, Erin.
Thinks toy. Oh, this is hot.
Thanks, Toya. Good morning,
everyone. So I'm gonna stand
like just as um Thompson did
yesterday because I used to be a
high school teacher and that
makes me feel more engaged
rather than sitting and talking
at you. Also, it's first thing
in the morning, so maybe I can
wake you up a little. Um, I will
just tell you that at the 10th
circuit, my claim to fame is
arguing against Sydney Powell,
um, at the 10th Circuit for a,
for a case and I crushed her. Um
So
Um, so let's talk about
appellate law this morning. Um,
what has happened in 2024, um,
I, if you were here for Zoe's
amazing presentation yesterday
on the overturning of the
Chevron deference, then I'm
gonna
Talk about it again, and if you
weren't, then we'll talk about
it briefly. Um, I'm not gonna go
anywhere near in as much depth
as Zoe did yesterday. Um, and
we'll talk about a little bit
like Justice Thompson talked a
little bit about the term
system, but I'm going to talk a
little bit about changes at the
Supreme Court this year. Um,
Loper and the Chevron deference.
We'll talk about recent Supreme
Court decisions affecting the
PRC that has come out this year
and
Then a summary of those
decisions. So let's talk about
Supreme, New Mexico Supreme
Court. For those of you who
don't know the New Mexico
Supreme Court has started a term
system, uh, this year. Um, so
similar to the way the United
States Supreme Court is doing
it. They are trying to keep
everything in one term. So the
case, as you know, PRC cases are
automatically um uh set up to
the Supreme Court for review and
the Supreme Court
does not have a choice whether
to take them or not, um, for
better or worse, um,
So all of the cases that are
that all the appeals that are
filed within this term system,
then our, are going to be heard
this term, is, is the idea. Even
the ones that have 40,000 page
records, um, like the PNM rate
case. So, the way they're going
to do it instead of having, um,
one argument like arguments
every month, they're clumping
them into oral arguments in
September for a couple weeks in
November for a couple of weeks.
And then they said December and
then maybe March, um, which will
be a definitely March if, um,
the, uh, if they really want the
PRC cases to be heard, um, this
term because I think briefing on
all of the cases are not going
to be done until
December, um, so.
I, if they want oral argument,
it will be in March.
Um, this is important. So for
anybody that has um
Appellate matters at the Supreme
Court, whether it's a PRC case
or not, um, what the court is
saying is that once you send it,
so I, if, when you, when you,
um, are assigned an oral
argument date when your, when
your case is set for oral
argument, you have to respond to
that, um, notice of oral
argument and say you've received
it, and then tell them, Here's
who's going to be arguing.
Here's how much time we need.
Here's who's going to sit at
council table. Once you send
that email and you're supposed
to send it 2 weeks.
For your oral argument. Once you
send it, there are no changes.
And I think the clerks are going
to be really mad if you change
it. So, um, that's something to
keep in mind. Um, they are
I think everybody's really time
constrained with this new term
system, and they are not going
to want, um, last minute changes
to, especially the amount of
time that you have allotted for
your argument because I think
they have to set that up well in
advance. Um, and they're gonna
be really cranky if you come to
them on the day of argument and
say, Never mind, we changed,
we're going to split it 15
minutes, 15 minutes or whatever,
um, they may tell you no. So
keep that in mind.
Um
All opinions they say, and I
fully believe them. All opinions
and dispositional orders will be
for the term will be in theory
filed by July 15th. So, no more
waiting, hopefully, 1 year or 2
years for um Supreme Court
opinions to be released. The
theory, even in our very complex
PRC cases, um, is that they want
to get him out 6 months after
the case has been submitted to
the court, so either 6 months.
after oral argument or what
they're doing now in some cases
is vacating oral argument and
just uh submitting it on the
briefs, um, within 6 months of
that day that the case is
submitted to the court, you
should hopefully have an opinion
or dispositional order from the
court.
Um, so because of that,
everybody's really time
constrained, and it used to be,
you know, if you needed more
time, you needed an extension of
time to uh file the brief, you
need an extension of time to
file the record, um, the court,
you know, as we know, usually
your first request for an
extension, as long as it's
reasonable, it's usually
automatically granted, not the
case with the court anymore. Um,
Except maybe for our cases,
because we have such huge
records, and because there are
more of them, um, then maybe
some other cases that they get,
although what Justice Thompson
was saying yesterday about the
writs and the, um, capital
cases. Um,
They are not gonna want to
extend time, so it's not an
automatic grant extension
anymore. Um, I think some people
maybe have seen if you ask for
an extension of time to file
your brief, you ask for an
additional month. I've been
seeing that they will give you a
week of additional time instead
of the month that you have
requested. So just keep that in
mind when you're filing, um, any
motions for an extension of time
are likely to either be
shortened or denied altogether.
Um,
And what I've heard is you have
to have a really, really, really
good reason. So if it is a
40,000 page record, say this is
a 40,000 page record and I can't
do it and um maybe they will.
Give you some mercy and give you
some a little bit more time, but
maybe not. So, um, so that's
what's happening at the court.
That's kind of some of the
changes with the new term
system. I think hopefully it
will be uh really beneficial for
everybody, so we get these cases
moving a little bit faster for
our um
Uh, subject area that we don't
have to wait, um, especially on
like, rape case appeals, um,
that hopefully we get those
answers quickly so that we can
move on and that I think is
beneficial for the commission
and the utilities and
ratepayers and everybody
involved, so I am optimistic.
Um, let's talk about recent
appellate decisions just across
the country, um, and in New
Mexico that affect not just the
PRC but kind of government
agency, state agencies in
general. Um, and the 1st 10.
It's complicated, right? Um, so,
the first one is looper, which,
um, Zoe really beautifully
talked about yesterday. So I'm
just going to touch on it just a
little bit. Um, the main holding
that Zoe quoted yesterday, and
I'm quoting again, is that the
Chevron deference, um, that,
that Chevron case, um, Chevron
is overruled. The court said
that courts must exercise their
independent judgment in deciding
whether an agency has acted
within it within
its statutory authority as the
APA requires. So it's pretty
clearly um overruling that
Chevron deference that we talked
about yesterday. So in case you
missed yesterday, um, are you
new to this? What the Chevron
deference was, um, and this
comes from Chevron itself, is a
required courts to defer to
permissible agency
interpretations of the statutes,
those agencies administer, even
when they're reviewing court
reviewed it, um, interpret it
differently. So that is not the
case.
anymore. Um.
The
court reasons, Chevron was a
judicial invention that required
judges to disregard their
statutory duties. And the only
way to ensure that the law will
not merely change erratically,
but will develop in a principled
and intelligible fashion is for
the court to leave Chevron
behind. So, as Zoe talked about
yesterday, um,
I don't, and this is not the
PRC's opinion, but my opinion, I
don't know how well that's gonna
work, because again, we have
complicated technical questions
um that go to the United States
Supreme Court that maybe that 9
justices don't fully understand
and the agencies who are
supposed to implement them are
the ones that do understand it,
and that's how you have a
straight, you know, a
straightforward, um,
interpretation of what these
statutes mean, but we will see.
Um, however,
The court did specifically say,
with respect to those prior
cases that have relied on
Chevron, that in adopting this
and overturning Chevron, we do
not call into question prior
cases that relied on the Chevron
framework. The holdings of those
cases that specific agency
actions are lawful, including
the Clean Air Act holding a
Chevron itself are still subject
to statutory stare decisis,
despite our change in
interpretive methodology. So
that's good, right? If they
don't completely disregard
everything in the past.
40 years, it is, um, those
individual cases will still hold
up, it's just kind of from here
moving forward.
Um,
I don't know if it's good news
or bad news, but Loper, this
holding does not apply to
states. It doesn't apply to the
PRC, um, we have a series, so it
applies only to the federal
agencies under the APA, um,
Chevron reasoning has already
been adopted in New Mexico by
our state Supreme Court by
virtue of several cases. And so
you'll see it, oh, it's
everywhere, right? Um, PNM VPRC
in 1987 says, however, it is
well settled the court.
Should court deference to the
interpretation given to a
statute by the agency to which
it is addressed, and Groy
transport, where an agency is
construing the same statutes by
which it is governed, we accord
sole deference to the agency's
interpretation, particularly for
legal questions that implicate
special agency expertise or the
determination of fundamental
policies within the scope of the
agency's statutory function. So
those cases are still good law
here in New Mexico. Uh, I don't
even know if we're gonna call
it.
on deference anymore, but that
deference to agency
interpretation, um, it will
still apply in New Mexico until
or unless the Supreme Court, um,
Decides that they are going to
follow the path of the United
States Supreme Court, and
whether that happens, I don't
know, we will, we will see.
Any questions so far?
Yeah, good.
Yeah
OK, so let's talk about another.
This is a court of appeals case,
um.
This is not a PRC case, but it
affects um state agencies, so I
wanted to bring it up and talk
about it. Um, this is called
Berlin versus the New Mexico
Racing Commission, um, and this
stems from a racing commission
case, uh, where, and this is,
this is kind of fun cause
Raising commission cases are a
little wacky, um, jockey, um,
at, uh, one of the, I don't
actually know which
Racetrack it was. I don't think
it matters. Um, got really upset
and uh went and yelled at um
somebody at on the racetrack and
kind of berated this person and
um was disciplined as a result
of that for impugning the
integrity of racing, which is a
a rule under um the racing
commission rules. They had a
hearing at the kind of a lower,
lower administrative level
called those stewards hearing.
Um, they were found to have
violated this rule.
Um, he appealed it to, it's
another step up to another
administrative hearing in front
of an administrative, um, judge,
and it was also found to have
violated this rule, um, and then
instead of appealing it from
that level, at the racing
commission, you can appeal it to
the district court.
Under Rule 74, 75 appeal. Um,
but instead of doing that, he
decided that um this rule.
Um, violated his constitutional
right to
Speech, um, and that he was
being disciplined for speech. So
he sued the racing commission
under the New Mexico Civil
Rights Act, uh, saying that the
that him being disciplined for
this action, um, was that was a
ended up violating his, his
right to to speech. Um, and the
court granted the lower court,
the district court granted
summary judgment in favor of the
jockey, saying, yes, this, you
know, you cannot be prosecuted
for
This speech uh that you have
made, um, and, uh, found some
summary judgment in favor the
jockey. So they appealed the
Court of Appeals recently
released a case, the opinion in
April.
Um, and the issue that they were
being asked to address was
whether the idea of judicial
immunity applies to, um, as a
defense available to a public
body. So what the racing
commission argued was that we
are a, a public body that has an
adjudicatory function, just like
a court. And so we have to
prosecute these cases, um, under
our rules and under our
statutes, you know, just like a
court would. And so we should be
given this immunity, um, just
like a court is, um, because
this is, you know, under the CRA
this is not a, a, like a
persecution, a violation of
your, you know, constitutional
rights. This is a rule that we
have, and we have immunity, you
can't sue us for pursuing the
law in the way that we're
supposed to.
Um, the Court of Appeals held
that the plain language of the
statute, um, the CRA
specifically says a public body
that is sued under it, it says
that, you know, it, it should
have put the actual language in
here, sorry. It says that it's
abrogated. Um, except for
judicial immunity. So the Court
of Appeals held the plain
language of the statute is clear
in affirming a public body that
is sued under the CRA may raise
judicial immunity as well as
quasi-judicial immunity as a
defense.
So, what does that mean? So,
quasi-judicial immunity is an
extension of judicial immunity,
um, to various persons whose
adjudicatory functions or other
involvement with the judicial
process have been thought to
warrant protection from
harassment, intimidation, or
other interference with their
ability to engage in impartial
decision making. Um,
So the Civil Rights Act, the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act, allows
a person to bring an action to
establish liability, recover
actual damages or equitable and
injunctive relief in any
district court for the
deprivation of their rights
under the New Mexico
Constitution. And this is the
important part. Due to acts or
omissions of a public body or a
person acting on behalf under
color, da da da, um, within the
scope of the, of the public
body. And the CRA defines a
public body than a state or
local government, and advisory
board, a
um, an agency or an entity
created by the Constitution of
New Mexico or any branch of
government that receives public
funding. So, a lot of things are
public bodies.
Um, and then section 4148 10,
which is the CRA says the
prohibit the prohibition on the
use of defense of qualified
immunity of the New Mexico CRA
shall not abrogate judicial
immunity, legislative immunity,
or any other constitutional
statutory or common law. So,
But the Court of Appeals then
found is that that statute is
really clear in its plain
language, it says right there
that it shall not abrogate
judicial immunity. So,
therefore, you cannot see a
public body with an adjudicatory
function under the uh CRA for
this. It's kind of a, a narrow
holding, but um that's, that's
what the Court of Appeals found.
So, um, search to the Supreme
Court was granted to review this
case in July, um, and they
haven't, I think oral argument.
on it is coming up at the end of
November.
Um, so we'll see what the
Supreme Court does with it, but
this is kind of where we are
now.
No.
That's,
yes.
Yeah, let me go back.
No, no, no, no, you're fine. So
the holding is the plain
language of the statute is clear
and affirming a public body that
is sued under the CRA may raise
judicial immunity, as well as
quasi-judicial immunity as a
defense. Yeah, may raise, yes,
Judy.
Sorry, I don't know the actual
speech that he said all, um, I
could, all I read was that it
was, he was, he berated somebody
else at the racetrack, right? So
he went and probably started
yelling him, I don't think he's
super nice words, um.
No, so,
The way the racing uh I'm gonna
do this very quickly, the racing
commission works is they have a
rule, an administrative rule
that says that you have to act
in a manner at the racetrack
that um
Maintains the integrity of the
sport, right? And so he was
Essentially not prosecuted, but
he was disciplined for violating
that rule because he went and he
yelled at this guy during a
race. They said, you have
impugned the integrity of
racing, and we're gonna
You've, you've violated a rule.
So they violated a rule of the
commission and then sued, saying
that that, that process, that
procedure of disciplining him
violated his constitutional
right to speech.
Any other questions on that one?
commission cases are always kind
of fun to talk about, so.
All right.
Um, OK. So those are kind of the
big kind of overarching, oh,
there's one more I want to talk
about, um, which I didn't put in
here. Um, and I'm gonna try to
remember this off the top of my
head because it just came out
recently. This is an IPRA case.
The Court of Appeals, um, just
released at the end of October.
And I think it is energy policy
advocates versus
I think it's the New Mexico
Attorney General's office, which
is now the DOJ. John, does that
sound right? Is that the name of
the case? I think that's the
name of the case. OK. Um, so
this stems from a an IPRA.
Um,
And upper case that uh that was
an IPA request that was given to
the Attorney General's office
requesting um all documents
having to do with this, with
this one, it's a, it was a
multi-state litigation case. It
didn't actually start
litigation. It was just a like
prepping for it, but a
multi-state case and you may
need to correct me if I'm wrong
cause this is not what I did at
the AG's office. Um, involves,
um,
Attorney General's office uh
from around the state, working
together to um bring suit
against somebody, right? So this
one was potentially, I don't
even remember what it was, but
it was a lot of different
states, 1415 different states
working together to kind of see
if there was enough, um,
Enough to file suit against, I
think it was the Trump
administration at the time. Um,
and as a, as part of that, the
states signed what are called
common interest agreements. And
that kind of allows them to work
together and keep all of their
work products.
Work product, right? Um, and so
when the when New Mexico
received this IPA request, um,
we, they withheld documents that
that AG's office withheld
documents um under the work
product exemption of IPRA, which
is a kind of a complicated
convoluted exemption, but it is
there, kind of. Um, and so they
said because of these common
interest doctrine, there's
common interest agreements are
um
Work products, everything that
stems from that is also work
product. And what the Court of
Appeal, so we, uh, the AG's
office prevailed on summary
judgment at the lower court,
saying they didn't have to,
like, guess this is protected.
Yes, this is an IPRA exemption.
You don't need to, um, provide
these. But the Court of Appeals
said is that the common interest
doctrine is not a a valid.
IPA exception. Um, and so they
needed to send it back to the um
To, to the lower court to do an
income review and all of that.
So, um, this one is a little
shaky. I'm not sure exactly
what, if it's gonna be appealed
to the Supreme Court or what the
ramifications of this are
because this one's relatively
new, um, and if you want more
information about it, come talk
to me and I will do a better job
of researching it and knowing
it, and then I can talk to you
about it. Um, but it is
something to think about with
IPRA and how it affects
government agencies, especially
agencies that work together, um,
and especially agencies that
maybe have, um,
different, uh,
Different, like, have reach out
into different states. So.
Um
That sound right? OK.
Yeah. OK, so let's talk about
PRC decisions this year. So as
Justice Thompson mentioned,
there were, I think 5 that came
out, but there were, um, or 6,
there are only a few that are,
um,
Uh
call them published, but none
that that are precedential,
right? There are a couple that
came out that are
non-precedential and I'll just
touch on those briefly, but um,
That I think the Supreme Court
really loves us and we love them
because we keep sending them all
of our, all of our cases, so
they, they must know that we
love them a lot. Um, and here
are the cases that came out this
year. So just in summary, um,
so, uh, SPS Southwest Public
Service, PRC was a statutory
interpreting case, statutory
interpretation case talked about
the use of incentives in the
rule and the way that the PRC
interpreted that, um, that, that
word
incentive. Um, SP SPS EPE and
PNM versus PRC in the community
solar case, that one is the one
that Justice Thompson alluded to
yesterday, where the court
affirmed the commission's rule
on the day that we had oral
argument, because
We put forth the argument that
this is, you know, the Supreme
Court is essentially holding up
this, this program and, and the
implementation of this program,
and that's what he was talking
about, that if there is
something that the court needs
to know about if they need to,
like, I think Russell, you said,
give this case priority that we
need to let them know that
either in briefing or oral
argument, like, you need to move
faster on this one because we
have developers waiting. We
have, you know, ratepayers
suffering, whatever it is, like,
let them know. Um.
The uh CCAE and REIA VPRC, um,
this was a declaratory order,
uh, that the commission put out,
um, talking about whether the
statute described full or
partial revenue decoupling, and
um the, I'm gonna talk a lot
about this one cause this one's
interesting, but it said
basically the statute plainly
describes full decoupling, but
the commission is not bound to
accept a decoupling petition.
Um, it has to, it has to do
some, some examination of it.
And then Sequora Electric Co op,
VPRC was a statutory
interpretation and a question of
commission jurisdiction case,
and this had to do with, um,
whether, when a co op is setting
a rate, and there's a sufficient
number of protests filed,
whether the commission can just
accept or deny the proposed rate
or whether the commission can
actually fix the rate for the co
op. And, uh, the court said that
once the commission's
jurisdiction is invoked, the
commission has plenary authority
to
Fix a rate. Um,
So, let's start with this
incentive question. So, uh, the
issue before the court in this
case was whether the commission
misconstrued financial incentive
provision of the um renewable
Energy Act, the REA, when it
denied SPS's 2021 application
for an incentive.
And what the court found, sorry,
actually, the law, let's look at
the law first.
Section 62, 164 provides for the
award, this should be award, I'm
sorry, a financial or other
incentives for exceeding the A's
minimum requirements. The
statute says the commission
shall develop and provide
financial or other incentives to
encourage public utilities to
produce or acquire renewable
energy that exceeds the
applicable.
Annual RPS, uh, results in
reductions in carbon dioxide
emissions earlier than required
or causes a reduction in the
generation of electricity by
coal-fired generating
facilities. Um, the commission
rule taken from that statute as
a little bit more specific, they
define incentive, um, and say
that an incentive is available
to encourage certain behaviors
or actions that would not
otherwise have occurred in order
to further the outcomes
described in the REA. So the
question then
whether when when will an
incentive be awarded then. Um,
The statute says an incentive
will not be awarded with respect
to particular investment of the
cost that it of that investment,
um, if it exceeds demonstrable
value of the corresponding
reduction in carbon dioxide or
other emissions. So the court
said, if you look at the plain
language of this statute, that
um
The the key, and I'm gonna go
back because the key phrase here
is, um, and I wish I could do
this, but it, um,
Where is it? To encourage public
utilities to produce or acquire
renewable energy. That's the
that's the key phrase, that's
the phrase the court looked at.
So they said that the proposed
retirement of banks renewable
energy certificates that exceed
the RPS requirements is not
sufficient to meet that
standard, that it is produced or
acquired renewable energy.
That's the, that's the key
phrase. So that is what
incentive is um trying to
Incentivize, um, that, that's
the, that's the action that,
that the statute trains to
incentivize. That's what the
court found. So the court
determined the use of incentives
as used in this rule then was,
was consistent with REA and then
upheld, um, the commission's
determination of that. So.
That is that one.
Questions so far?
So
All right, um, community solar.
So this was um
Another question about whether
the rule um violated the
Community Solar Act and whether
the commission exceeded its
authority when it approved the
community so the rule,
particularly whether so these we
we don't have an opinion on this
one yet. We only have a
dispositional order saying the
commission's rule is affirmed.
Um, and so I don't know why yet.
I'm, this was
8 months ago now, Justice
Thompson, so we should have an
opinion, but we don't yet. Um,
so I'm not entirely sure what
the court's rationale was yet,
but he, these were the issues on
appeal. So whether the uh rules
use of quote unquote team
violated the due process of the
parties, whether the rules use
of the team was improper ex
parte communication with the
commission, whether ordering SPS
to implement the rate, um,
violated SPS's due process
rights and whether the rules
exclusion of transmission costs
violated the community.
Act. So again, all the court did
was, um, issue an order pretty
much immediately following oral
arguments saying the
commission's rule is affirmed.
Um, and I don't know why yet.
So, again, when that comes out,
if you have questions, I'm happy
to talk about it. Um, but I
We don't know exactly what.
Um
What they're going to say about
that.
So, um, OK, so this one is the
decoupling case, CCAE and REIA
VPRC. So the issue here, this
was a declaratory order. Um,
that with the commission was
asked to um to issue that
basically talked what, you know,
does this section of the statute
describe decoupling mechanism,
and if so, what kind of
decoupling? And with the
commission issued was a, uh, an
order that says
This is not full decoupling
because it allows the commission
the opportunity to kind of
examine these petitions that
come in and um and make these
these balance, right, balance
the interest, which is kind of
the key thing that the
commission does, right? We're
always balancing utility with
the interests of the ratepayers,
with the public interest. Um,
and so as a result, like it
couldn't be this automatic
acceptance of a full decoupling
petition that it had to be
something else.
And the uh court reversed the
declaratory order of the
commission saying that the plain
language of the statute clearly
described a full decoupling
mechanism. However,
Um, the court did not read this
section of the statute to compel
the commission to approve a full
revenue decoupling mechanism
whenever that petition is filed.
So it is full decoupling, but
the commission still has its
authority to look at this
petition and, um, make a
determination. It's not
compelled to accept it. Um, so
the court said that the
commission is able to consider
the interests affected by the
mechanism and its effect on
rates, holding that the
commission may review the
reasonableness of any revenue
decoupling.
mechanism and that the burden
rests upon the utility to show
that that proposed mechanism
will result in just and
reasonable rates, which is kind
of what the
Recommend a decision and the
declaratory order from the
commission ultimately concluded,
um, the court just kind of went
about it in a little bit of a
different way, so.
That, um, that is that.
Any questions so far?
Right.
And then Scora Electric, um, so
this is a jurisdiction question
about, um,
The commission's jurisdiction
over uh co-ops. Um, the issue
before the court was whether the
commission had authority to fix
the rate from the um
RC, which I can't think of,
real.
what RIC stand for? Re electric
co op
um, I've been here for a year
and I still am learning these
acronym acronyms, um, or only
approve or deny the proposed
rate. So whether the commission
can just give a thumbs up or
thumbs down, or whether the
commission actually has the
authority to look at the rate
and ensure that it is just and
reasonable and and fix it if it
determines it's not. So, the
underlying facts of this one,
the core electric plan to.
Increased rates, um, pursuant to
the statutes, um, 6287, that
allows members to file protests,
um.
protest against the, the
proposed rate. Um, they objected
to the rate increase. There's a
certain number, a certain
percentage or a certain number
of protests that have to be
filed to trigger this commission
oversight to to trigger
commission jurisdiction. Um,
sufficient number of protests
were filed, and the commission
determined it had just cause to
review these proposed rates. Um,
and then the commission denied
the rate and then set its own.
Um, so, the question was, there
wasn't a question of whether the
commission could
you. Like that's pretty clear in
the statute. The question was
whether the commission had
authority to set a rate and
Socora Electric argued that it
didn't, that it had, it could
only give a thumbs up or thumbs
down, and I had to send it back
to the co op, so that they could
redo it. Um, and the court
disagreed with, um, S Socora
Electric and said, once the
commission's jurisdiction is
invoked in matters of rate
setting for electric co ops, the
commission has plenary authority
to resolve the issues identified
in the rate-making proceeding.
And may determine the just and
reasonable rates to be charged.
So.
Um
Any questions about that?
Yes
So, are you asking whether
I do not know the answer to that
question, Russell, and I will
find out for you, but I don't, I
don't think so. I think it was
just, here's the proposed rate.
They had the sufficient number
of protests on, on that, the
entire, you know, proposal, and
then the commission that that
The holding is really, once the
commission, once those protests,
the sufficient number of
protests are filed, the
commission has the authority to
review everything that was, that
was, you know, sent to it,
everything that was protested.
And then there's that, there's
that, um, I think it's in
mountain states that it says
that the commission is not just
like an emperor in an arena,
right, that can give a thumbs up
and thumbs down, that it has a
mandate to ensure that all rates
are just and reasonable, right?
And it's not, it's a, it is a a
statutory man
So
using that argument from using
that reasoning for mountain
states, the court said, yeah,
the commission has, once that,
once the once the um authority
of the commission is invoked
once it reaches that threshold,
then the commission not just has
the authority, but an obligation
to ensure that those rates are
just and reasonable.
Yeah.
Good
Thank you, Keith. So Keith
answered Russell's question
brilliantly, of course, and said
that, uh, the commission is
plenary authority to revise all
the rates, not just that one. So
thank you, Keith. I appreciate
that. Um, any other questions?
Comments about that one. OK.
Um, so then we had two
non-presidential opinions that
have come out or not opinions,
but um orders.
Well, one was an opinion and
one's a an order. Um
This is the, uh, having great
case, um,
Not going to go into the whole
lengthy history of that, but
ultimately, the whole
Uh, denial of the merger was on
appeal. Um, the, uh, Avangrid
filed a motion to dismiss itself
as a party and also um to remove
the issues of whether the
merger, you know, the, the, the
commission's denial of the
merger. Um, and so removed all
of that, the court granted that,
removed all of that as from its
consideration on appeal. And so
the only question left then
before the court was this issue
of sanctions, and the commission
order sanctioned.
Both avant grid and P&M and the
commission said, no, no, no, I'm
sorry, the court said no, um,
that, that is overbroad, um, the
sanctions should have just
applied to one party. So it's a
real short.
Kind of
anticlimactic ending to that
massive case. Um, and so the,
uh, so that portion of the, of
the order, well, the order was
vacated and then um
I actually don't know what,
Bristle, what do we do with
that?
I issued another order.
Ultimately, what did the
commission do? Do we?
With this one.
OK, cool. Thank you.
OK. And then the last 9
non-precedential cases the city
of Las Cruces, um, the PRC and
EPE was an intervener in this
one. The question is whether the
commission erred by applying the
REA's cost limitations to EPE's
proposed solar procurement
project and failed to include
other necessary factors in its
analysis of the project. So
basically, whether the
commission only applied the
requirements under rule 573 to
this proposed project and also
it should they.
argued that it should have also
applied requirements under Rule
551 as a capacity resource. Um,
the commission, um,
I'm sorry, the courts vacated
oral argument and just
determined this one only on the
briefs, and we got a very short
dispositional order, um, pretty
quickly after that, that
basically said that the court
reviewed evidence in the light
most favorable to the
commission's decision, which is
what it does if there's a
substantial evidence question
before the court, and then it
recognized that the commission's
decision requiring expertise and
highly technical areas, such as
utility rate determinations are
accorded considerable.
deference. Hello, Chevron
deference still alive and well
in New Mexico. Um, and so the
court issued basically a summary
affirmance. It wasn't an
opinion, so I don't, other than,
you know, there was substantial
evidence and we give deference
to the commission. Um, I don't
really know why else, uh, the
courts, um, affirmed the
commission's order in this one,
because it was just summary
affirmances.
So
Um,
oh, the motion for
reconsideration on that one has
been filed, so this one's still
live, so we're waiting to see
what the court says about that.
OK. So, um,
Any questions before I
9, 10, how long do I have to go
to get the hour?
OK, all right.
So we can talk more about these,
about any cases, um, that have
come out in the past year,
Chevron, anything, any questions
about anything, or we can just
talk about what I hope you take
away from this and hopefully
what will be helpful to you, um,
as you go into this, this term,
um, with the court.
No? OK.
Um, so, oh, wrestle, OK.
OK.
Yeah, um, so Russell asked
whether the court switched the
terms will speed things up. So
far it looks like it will. Um, I
think things are moving pretty
quickly. I think the court
vacating oral arguments for some
of the uh cases that maybe are
I don't want to say they're
simpler, but some of the cases
that can maybe be decided, like
the court's like, yeah, yeah,
yeah, we know about the
commission. You don't need to
talk to us anymore. Honestly,
I'm a little hurt by that, but
that's OK. Um, so I think, but
those are, those are moving much
faster. So we had, you know, I
think that one went from appeal
through briefing to it.
An order in
Yeah, 12.
Yeah, it's about a year, which
is much faster, right? So.
Yeah.
Um, do, do you have a question?
I haven't seen that yet. I
It is going to be coming, I'm
sure, but I haven't seen it. Um,
And I don't know, you know,
cause I kind of will keep an eye
on the
I mean, we, the, the commission
cases are interesting because we
go right up to the Supreme
Court, right, and most of the
other ones, it's going to have
to go through these levels of
review.
Mhm.
Right, yeah, yeah, it could be,
but I, I, it hasn't come up on
my radar yet and certainly not
in a commission case yet.
Any other, yeah, Keith.
You want me to answer that for
the commission or just for me?
I'm gonna speak for myself. So
for myself as an appellate
attorney, I think it's a
brilliant idea because I don't
love reading these 4000 4 40,000
page records either, especially
because I'm not involved in the
underlying case. Um, that's a
lot for me. Um, so I love that
idea of designating a portion of
the record. I
For me, right? I also think as
an attorney, I think it's
beneficial for the court. I do
think even though it seems like
the court adores us because they
see us so often. I, I think that
they
Sigh a lot when they get a PRC
case, especially these ones that
have, you know, 200 volumes of
record that's sent to them. Um,
and I think that it is a lot for
them to have to review. I know
he said he doesn't look at it
all, but like trying to figure
out where it is in the record, I
think it's hard, um, especially
if it's a substantial evidence
question. So I think if we are
able to limit it and say, here
are the pertinent parts of the
record, particularly those very
lengthy, you know, 10-page
certificates.
service, those don't need to be
in there. Um, and it's a lot of
it is repetitive, right? A lot
of the record is really
repetitive. So I do think that
if we're able to, um,
Work with each other to limit
the size of the record and to
really point the court to where
Where the issue is, that will
help everybody, I think, um,
that all the litigants and the
court, I think it's a really
good idea. As far as the
briefing goes, um,
That probably, I mean our job
really, like there's a reason
that I started as a teacher and
then became a lawyer, because
really, it's you're teaching the
court, right? And so the, the, I
think the most beneficial thing,
especially to teach the court
about these issues that they
don't, they just don't have the
expertise that
You do. Um, and our job is to
teach them, right? Why is it
important? What is important
about this? What can we agree
on? What, what do we need the
court to look at? And I do think
it's a good idea to work, work
with me and, um, let's come up
with, or the, you know,
appellants can work together and
say, here's where we agree, here
are the issues. Here's maybe how
this affects, you know, the
utility versus the interveners,
um, but I think that, I think it
would be good, and I think it,
it would help.
would be really helpful for the
court, and anything we can do to
help the court to get a faster
decision, a more streamlined
decision, and a decision that,
um,
Hopefully not, you know,
hopefully gonna be um
Correct.
Depending on what side you're
on, yeah.
So yeah, I'm pleased, you know,
if you have a case against the
commission, um, please reach out
to me and let's work together
to, to do that because I really
think that that would be
beneficial for everybody.
I think
It
Yeah, I don't, I wouldn't say
it's disappointing. I, I unders
I know, I understand where
you're coming from, absolutely.
I think there is a huge amount
of effort and time and um put
into each of our cases, and I
know that, you know, the hearing
examiners in particular, you
guys put a lot of energy and
thought into, into everything,
and you have to look at these
records, like I, I understand
that. I also understand, I
think, where the court is coming
from, that they are 5 people
with a lot
of stuff on their plate, um, and
I think just like, you know.
There's only 24 hours in a day,
and I, I do understand that. I
wish that, and I think that's
why, you know, going with
Keith's question, I think that's
why if we can point them and
help them and say, this is the
part you need to look at, please
look at this, that that will not
have those, all of that work
kind of be in vain, um, and it
will help the court because, you
know, just pragmatically
speaking, I, I just don't think
they can, like I, you know.
Well, yes, yeah. So, and I think
that that's
Yeah.
Yeah, and I think
Yeah, yeah, and I think that one
of the things that he mentioned
yesterday that I think is really
good and we should definitely be
more, I, for one, will
definitely be more cognizant of
doing is in the briefing, when I
cite to the record, make sure
I'm citing yes to the
recommended decision and yes to
the final order, but also to
where in the record that points
to, right? Like you are so good
about putting, you know, here,
here's what we're saying in the
RD and then those lovely sites
that we have at the bottom of
where that comes from in the
record. I think it's very easy
for me in particular, to say,
yeah, yeah, like here's the
page, read the footnotes
yourself and go find that in the
record, and that is probably too
much to expect from the court.
So if I want them to say, here's
what the final order says,
here's what the RD says, and
here is where it is in testimony
and the RD pointed it out and
I mean, it did, you're teaching
the court, right? And it's kind
of, I mean, I, the court is, you
know, there's the Supreme Court,
but sometimes you have to take
them by the hand and say, look
at this, and now look at this,
and now look at this. And I
think if we do that,
That we're better about doing
that. I think that that will
help, it'll help everybody.
Yes.
I think the amount of time that
that would take would
Be just it completely
impractical, I think. I mean,
it's hard enough to kind of get
these cases through the Supreme
Court in a short amount of time
that really affects, you know,
people are waiting all the time,
right? Um, so I think if we were
to send it back through
traditional review paths that it
would, it would be years and
years before we'd ever get an
agreement. So, no, I think this
is the best way to do it. I do
think that maybe a run like,
like the chief said, amending
the rule to help the court do it
even faster, is a better.
idea.
Yeah
Any other questions, comments,
maybe?
OK, so that's
Great. Yeah, things to think
about when you're going before
the court, especially with the
court's term system, be
cognizant of like they are
trying to help us by move things
fast moving things faster. So
let's try to help them help us
get these, get these done
faster.
Um, again, impacts of recent
decisions, so Loper signals the
shift in judicial deference, um,
but we don't know what it's
gonna look like in New Mexico
yet, although I'm sure that
there will be a challenge at
some point. Um, and then kind of
the takeaways from the court
this year for the PRC is that
the court really affirmed the
commission's authority in
setting rates, um, really leaned
on that mandate that the
legislature has given the
commission.
have, um, you are mandated to
ensure that rates are just and
reasonable, um, and so that goes
beyond authority, right? That is
a uh a requirement, um, and the
court really has highlighted
that. Um, the court has shown
interest in implementing these
renewable energy initiatives,
um, and then,
You know, seeing what we're
gonna do from there. I think,
again, I think if we think of
it, not so much as an
adversarial process, but as a
like, let's work together to
help the court help us so that
we can move things forward as
fast as, as possible while still
making sure that the court has
all the information they need.
Um, I think that has been, um,
really shown to us in the past
year and obviously now with this
term system, um, and then I know
we are lawyers or the lawyers
here.
You have to wait till the last
minute to
do things, um, and the court is
saying don't do that anymore,
like, again, help us. Give us
time, give us notice. Um, if you
need more time, tell us why. Um,
and just make sure you do it
early, early, early. And
Yeah.
And then if you have any
questions, please reach out to
me if there's something I can
help you with, reach out to me
if we are working on a case
before the court together,
please reach out to me. I'm
eager to work um with all of you
to um see if we can come to
agreements ahead of time to see
if we can align the briefs ahead
of time to see if we can
designate the record ahead of
time, whatever, whatever you
need to do, um, please reach out
to me, so.
There's my info and
Thank you. Yeah, Judy.
Yeah, I think, um, in motions to
stay that, you know, you have to
bring emotion to stay at
commission order to the
commission first and then if the
commission denies that, then you
can bring it to the court. Um, I
think like Justice Thompson said
yesterday, really highlighting
the implications of what happens
if they either grant it or
don't, and putting it like, I
know we love to use flowery
language, you know, blah, blah,
blah blah blah, but like first
sentence, a stay is required
because boom, um, and put it out
there. Um, I think that that
might help kind of key in like,
why are we looking at this? Why
is this important? Why is this
something that we should issue
an order on.
Um, I think that's just best. I
mean that's, I think it's just
best practice in general. I know
I'm kind of a newer attorney,
and I think a lot of the flowery
attorney language that we use is
kind of going away, and I think
best practice now is saying,
here's what I want, here's why I
want it, and here's why you
should give it to me, right? And
put that, here's what I want at
the very front and center so
that the court knows and they
pay attention, and that they
know that this is something we
need to make a decision on like
right now, or here's why you
shouldn't.
And here's how it will affect
us, right? Um, but put that at
the very front and center so
that they see it. I don't know,
I know that, you know, just, I
don't, I know the court is a
little bit slower with motions.
I don't know how the term system
is going to change the motion
practice in front of the court,
um.
If it's anything, you know,
maybe it'll make it go faster.
I'm not sure, but I, again,
like, what can you do to make it
easy for the court. That's, you
know, that's probably what they,
what they're gonna want to see.
Anything else?
Great. All right. Thank you very
much. And then please reach out
to me if you have any questions
or you need anything, um,
That's it. Thanks.
There's a uh gentleman in the
back of the room without hair
that likes to say, uh, the
Supreme Court doesn't have to be
right, they're just last.
That's, as I'm hearing you talk,
Erin, that's what I was
recording stopped.
All right, so, uh, my fellow
panelists will join me up front.
We will get
All right, this is a
Alright, everyone, we're gonna
get started here.
Recording in progress. The
traditional principles behind
rate making and whether it's
time to consider something new
in the interest of equity and
justice.
So since I'm the one usually
tasked with introducing
everybody. I'll go ahead and
introduce myself. I'm Troya
Cory. I'm the chief of staff at
the PRC. I've been cheaper stuff
here since about February of
2023, and prior to that I held
or wore many hats at the office
of the Attorney General,
including Chief Deputy Attorney
General, director of the
Consumer and Environmental
Protection Division, and most
relevant to this as the utility
consumer advocate.
I've been with the EG since uh
2010, under Gary King and in
2013, he asked me to step into
the position that was in what
was then called the Wiiu
division, water, environment and
utilities, WEU.
And I took over from a legend in
this space. Some of you may
remember Jeff Taylor.
I have like a frozen moment in
my memory meeting with Jeff for
about an hour before he went
into retirement, which was the
sum of my training to take over
utilities law for the Attorney
General's office. Uh, and he
left me with three things that
are like frozen in my memory
forever, you know, super simple
things, uh, the appeal of SBS's
rape case at the time, which
involved challenging the pen
pension asset.
Super simple. Uh, the
acquisition of New Mexico Gas
Company by Tico.
And then also a super simple
case, uh, with the cat or the,
yeah, the caption was 13,390,
and some of you may remember
that as the first closure of San
Juan, the 1st 2 units of San
Juan. So that was my intro into
utilities law, jumped in and
apparently it's worked out cause
here I am. So excited to be here
with you all. Also with me today
is Gideon Elliott, um, Mr.
Elliott is the utilities bureau
chief for the New Mexico.
Department of Justice, where he
has served since 2018.
Gideon conducts a detailed
research and analysis on issues
impacting residential and small
business consumers, because as
you're aware, the AG's office,
the Department of Justice
represents small business and
residential ratepayers in front
of the commission.
His work ensures that consumer
interests are represented in
regulatory decisions, and it
focuses his work focuses on
advocating for fair utility
practices, transparent rate
setting, and equitable access to
essential services.
Also with me is Mr. Kyle
Teasdale, who works at uh
Western Environmental Law Center
and has since 2011, serving as a
senior attorney in the Climate
Energy Program director. His
work centers on the nexus of
public lands and fossil fuel
development with an aim of
aligning federal decision making
with the demands of climate
science, bringing a managed end
to fossil fuel exploitation,
ensuring a just transition for
indigenous and frontline
communities that have endured
generations of
arms from fossil fuels.
Also joining me.
Is, uh, Miss Miami Chavez
Barrudin.
Uh, who is dedicated to
fostering economic prosperity
and environmental justice for
her community and indigenous
people by championing an
inclusive clean energy
transition.
As the founder and executive
director of Sovereign Energy, a
native led nonprofit, she
focuses on centering tribal
energy sovereignty, sovereignty,
excuse me, and amplifying
indigenous voices within the
renewable energy sector.
So I'm very excited for this
panel. I think it's a very
timely topic since we are seeing
more and more, um, I guess what
I'm gonna call social
programming in the utility
space. And as we move into this,
uh, and we'll start this
discussion. I'm just going to
share a couple of slides, so we
are all working from the same
foundational concepts.
I say that like I can do this
confidently.
Share my slides that is.
Success. All right.
Um, so this is just going to be
a look, so we're all kind of
reading from the same sheet of
music.
There are many, many, many, many
principles of ratemaking in the
work that we do, and these are
just a select few so that when
we talk about
The social programs and the
social justice issues that we're
seeing, we kind of can sense
where they might fit in the
utility work that we do in the
rate-making.
So, um,
If I could figure out how to
share, actually put this on.
I don't know how to do this.
All right, this is what we're
getting. All right. So, first
and foremost, I want to um share
a disclaimer.
So this is not the official
position of the PRC.
This is not even necessarily my
physicians. These are important
issues that are worth thinking
about. So my participation here
today is to invoke and inspire
thoughtful and careful
consideration of these issues,
not necessarily to take a
position or imply my position,
um, and I'll let, I'll let each
of the others make their own
disclaimer, but I'm looking
forward to a thoughtful
conversation.
So the first principle that's
worth um talking about is just
in reasonable rates.
Every rate
Made must be just and
reasonable, um, it, that means
it's got to balance the
interests of uh.
Ratepayers against the interests
of utilities, um, the public
interest is what we're going for
here.
Rates and things that are
included in rates must be used
and useful.
Meaning that it uh is
Actually being used or it's
gonna be used shortly, and that
it's useful in the sense that,
quote, uh, its use is reasonable
and beneficial to the public.
And there's some citations there
in case you thought I was making
it up.
So, another principle that we're
dealing with is cost causation.
Um, so this is a really
interesting one researching and
trying to find the right
citation for this because it is
implicit and pretty much
everything that we touch.
Cost causation involves
attributing costs to those
consumers or classes who caused
them.
Or who benefit from them, or
maybe and to benefit from them.
It's not only an attribute of
rates, but it's kind of the
linchpin of it as you can see,
um, and there's the case that I
drew that from. Again, not my
words, but it's very
It's a very foundational
principle of what we're doing
here. And so, I think it's
important to keep in mind as we
move forward.
And then last but not least,
There's a prohibition on
discriminatory rates. Uh,
there's a lot of case law on
this. I just put the statute
here that guides us, meaning
that the commission and utility
companies can't charge rates
that are discriminatory within
classes, um, and must treat
equally situated ratepayers the
same.
And so with those foundational
principles, there might be more,
but these are the ones that I
picked out with those
foundational principles in mind,
I'm going to turn it over to Mr.
Elliot to discuss, uh,
His views on this, what we're
gonna do just
Coming attractions, each of us
will, each of our panelists will
share about 5 or 10 minutes of
thoughts about this subject, and
then we've prepared some
questions to have a
conversation. So, Mr. Elliot,
shall I?
Share uh the screen if I can do
that, how do I stop sharing now?
All right.
Let me pull up your slides.
I'll just say I did not ask, uh,
Miss Corey to.
Call me by Mr. Elliott, um.
That, that never happens, except
maybe in a hearing.
No, it was there for a second
though.
This is why I shouldn't be
trusted with technology.
So I, um,
I also have a disclaimer on
I'm speaking for myself, but the
office did allow me to have
these slides.
Um
And, uh,
So, you know, my, our focus is
on low income customers. We
don't
And small businesses and, and so
we don't look at
Uh, specific classes within the
residential.
Um, class of customers.
Um
But we represent all. However,
Certain customer groups face uh
more profound challenges. So,
um, you know, what I did
yesterday, I just was curious
what equity and justice credits
were supposed to, um,
Do, uh, and
You know, reading from the rule,
it's identifying uh and
eliminating the effects of
prejudice, bias, and racism. Um,
and addressing topics of race
and gender.
Um, and so if you'll just go to
the next slide.
Um, so what, you know, the, the
thing about low income
households is that um
I think that they, uh,
They fit that description. These
are disadvantaged households,
um,
And the research shows that, you
know, low-income households
spend
Um
A disproportionate amount of
their income on uh energy.
Compared to non low income
households. And these are
multi-family households
generally. Um,
And um,
They are predominantly uh
Minority. So, you know, here,
these are national figures,
black, black households, uh, 43%
higher than for non-Hispanic.
Um
White households, uh,
Median energy burden for
Hispanic households is 20%
higher than for non-Hispanic
white households.
Um
And if you flip to the next
slide, sure.
I, these numbers, the numbers
that um that I used here are
from the lead tools. I don't
know if anybody's uh familiar
with it, but it's from the
Department of Energy and uh
It's just a fantastic tool lets
you break down, um,
Information across, uh,
Basically, the, the entire
country, but also county. And I
think it can even break it down
by census block.
So you can also look at uh
You know, people who rent versus
uh own their homes, uh,
And, you know, it goes from 150%
of the federal poverty level up
to, uh, 400% and above. So,
Um, I just wanted to share that.
So the next slide.
Thanks.
So, uh,
This slide, I looked at this,
um,
I put putting together some of
this information. This slide
just shows you what the current
energy burdens are.
For, um, or the average energy
burden across counties. So
low-income households, for
instance, in Mora.
Their energy burden is 20%.
Um, that's not just from
electricity, that's also from um
propane and gas.
Um
For pain being the more
expensive.
Um
And Rio Riva, 17%, San Miguel,
17% Taos.
Um
So there's interesting things to
pull out here. San Juan, uh,
it's 14%.
Um, so, uh, and you see Santa Fe
and Donana they're 12. So, um,
if you go to the next slide.
So this, uh, this slide I just
broke it out according to um
Uh
I wanted to show the percentage
of households that are burdened
within each county. So, again,
Moura.
49% of households are energy
burdened.
Um
You know, that's Catron County.
44%, 34%.
Santa Fe, 28%.
Um, and of course we have the
metro areas of um Berlio, 22%,
23%. So the point is, is that
energy burden is, um,
is acute across the state and in
some parts, it's worse. So the,
the next slide.
Um, so this was just the rural
versus urban divide. So, uh, the
state, uh, Department of Health
or the health authority. Um,
they divide uh our counties as
metropolitan, small metro, mixed
urban, rural, and rural
counties.
So, uh, the next slide please.
So what you see here is just
that, um,
Obviously, the number of
burdened households is greatest
in um the metro area.
Um, not by much.
Uh, and, and I just wanted to
say these numbers are from 2022.
So they're probably different,
uh, today, but
Then you see it's followed by
the mixed metro areas, um, small
metro areas which are uh Santa
Fe, Donieta, and I believe um
Uh
Uh, San Juan as well.
Um
And then rural areas, only
11,000, but then you look at um
The percentage of Burton
households in these areas, and
you see that in rural New
Mexico.
The percentage of households
that are burdened is.
27%.
So
You know, when we think about
energy burden, it's not limited
to households that are in metro
areas.
Where we have the densest
populations and where our
investor owned utility serve. So
point being, it, it goes beyond.
Um
Invest their own utilities. It
reaches to our co-ops as well.
Cause if you're customers are
burdened, your co-ops and your
uh services are are burdened.
So that's, those are my slides.
Um,
And so obviously, when we think
about uh
cost recovery and principles,
um,
Pa causation is there, but also
what
What type of costs are we
talking about?
And, you know, a lot of the
things that we see, um,
In rape cases,
Whether it's energy efficiency
riders or grid modernization
riders, um,
Even parts of the ETA.
You know, they're, those are
social policies that the
legislature has passed to
achieve, um,
A public benefit that I think
goes beyond.
Uh, in some cases, rate pairs,
and so,
Our fundamental challenges like
how do we transition to
This, um,
New
Energy infrastructure while
keeping rates affordable.
And, um,
Is it possible?
How much of um the transition
can uh ratepayers.
Uh
shoulder before we all become
energy burdened, really. So
those are uh just my framing.
thoughts for today.
Thank you, Gideon.
Uh, following that direction
then, Kyle, do you wanna give
some opening thoughts.
Yeah, thank you all. Um, so I
approach these issues from a
little bit of a different lens,
um, you know, I'm, I'm honored
to be sitting on a panel with
folks who have tremendous
utility expertise in a room with
uh many folks who are experts um
in the field as well. I would
not necessarily count myself
among you, um, in my sort of
practice is traditionally in,
in, and in federal court. um,
but where I have
engaged at the PRC has been on
behalf of um indigenous and
community organizations in the
Four Corners region, um, who are
not within um PNM sort of rate
base, uh, but they are the
communities and individuals who
have been burdened by, uh, that
energy generation, um, for
generations at San Juan as well
as at Four Corners. And so in my
engagement at the PRC, it has
been
on behalf of those groups who
have again been shouldering the
sort of externalities and the
harms of coal-fired power, but
also in communities where, um,
you know, there's 40,000 oil and
gas wells um in the four Corners
region. Um, so how do we look
at, um, impacts to those
communities and, and how do we
sort of think about um public
interest factors. Um, for
representing those individuals
and groups before the PR.
RC, um, they're not groups or
individuals who, uh, you know,
cost or reliability, those
traditional public interest
factors. Um, those are not the
driving concerns for them,
right? It is impacts to their
health. It is impacts to their
community. Um, it is, uh, when
San Juan closes, uh, it is how
do we replace, um, the tax base
for the school district, um,
that their children attend. Um,
there's also different
Concerns with energy and
security in those communities.
Um, and the percentages might
have changed recently because of
programs, but, um, you know, 40%
of the Navajo Nation was um
didn't have electricity or
running water to their homes,
right? And so how do you account
for um those levels of services
and impacts to those
communities. Um, and then, you
know, the other lens that I sort
of approach my work and, and in
representing community.
is understanding that we are at
a moment, um, as a state and as
a country and world really where
we need, um, to rapidly
transition off of fossil fuel
energy, um, to renewable
sources and um we need, and, and
that's driven um by the science
and um the reality of climate
change and the impacts of the
climate crisis that are already
being experienced, um, you know,
we've got, uh, first
experience in the state of New
Mexico with uh Hermit's Peak and
Calf Canyon fires that, um, you
know, there's, there's really
dramatic impacts that are
already being felt and so how do
we account for those? How do we
drive an energy transition and,
and what are the myriad of
factors that go into um the
choices that we make, including,
um, you know, at the PRC and,
and with our utilities in the
state of, of how do we drive
that transition and adjust and
equitable and um adjust and
equitable way.
So,
um, I will leave it at that and
just look forward to um the
conversation.
Thank you, Kyle. Ian?
Guihopa, my Chavi brood and my
answer give mansota natikoia.
Good morning, everyone. May
Chavez Brudden. I'm from Santo
Domingo, Guihua Pueblo, and
thank you for allowing me to
join you today. I am the founder
and executive director of
Sovereign Energy, but I also
hold the hats, um, and this is
my disclaimer of serving on the
New Mexico Renewable Energy
Transmission Authority, uh, the
New Mexico Sustainable Economy
Advisory Council, the State
Landrust Board, and newly, the
newly formed New Mexico PRC
Tribal Advisory Council, which
is underway, um, and just to
share
you know, a little bit about how
I view these issues in terms of,
you know, an indigenous context
in the communities that we work
with, um, and then we'll move
into, you know, just some
possibilities for um re
remedying these issues. Um, so
as an organization, one of our
utmost values is of course to
advocate for tribal energy
sovereignty, and we define it as
the inherent right of a tribal
nation to steward, govern,
manage, and advocate for energy
development according to each
tribe's unique core.
responsibilities and knowledge,
and this is to ensure the
social, cultural, and economic
health and well-being of present
and future generations. So to do
that requires a lot of nuance,
um, as you're probably aware
there's a lot of jurisdictional
issues when it comes to tribes,
especially in terms of utility
service and regulation, uh,
although tribes are sovereign
nations, we are often beholden
to a state regulated electric
grid, um, which kind of limits
our opportunities to be able to
pursue our different energy.
Sovereignty initiatives based
on, you know, whatever those may
be for each tribe, so that could
be um forming their own utility
that could be having a community
solar array that could be
solarizing individual rooftops,
um, but we really do have to
kind of are structured within
what the utility service and um
provides for us some
opportunities exist there or may
not exist there, um, so when it
comes to the PRC, you know,
that's, it's very difficult, um,
area to really have a full.
Jurisdictional understanding of,
um, you know, there's a number
of cases where you see tribes,
you know, just trying to form,
um, you know, their own
microgrids or you trying to get
their real distribution co-ops
to cooperate with them and help
them, um, you know, on their
path to energy sovereignty, but
they're unable to do so. At the
same time, a lot of our native
communities have a much higher
energy burden than any other
even rural communities, so I saw
a figure, um from 2020 from the
American Council for an E
efficient economy where energy
burden is up to 45% of household
income. And these are issues
that we're continually trying to
navigate. Um, and then we also
look at, you know, just what
type of services we have on
reservation. More often than
not, these are end of line
services, so we're more prone to
power outages and blackouts, um,
you know, that holds, you know,
near and dear to my heart for
many of my community members,
elders who are often, you know,
the, the victims of those power
outages. So how do
like a grand modernization from
a more, you know, from an equity
standpoint, and make sure that,
um, you know, although these
tribal members are ratepayers
that they also get equitable
services.
Um, and then
Also like again coming back to
um looking at, as mentioned
earlier, you know, who are the
main contributors to climate
change and environmental
cleanup, um, native communities
more often than not have had the
least carbon footprint, um, as a
demographic, as households, so
it comes to be the question of,
you know, what is just and
reasonable for native people,
native ratepayers having to pay
that cost, looking at the fact
that many of them have only
previously had access to
electricity, um, and have had a
proportionately less impact to
those carbon emissions. So
there's a lot of, again,
everything is nuanced within
this work, within what we look
at. Um, one of our main
components as an organization
and a core pillar is really
focusing on renewable energy
education and making sure that
our tribal leaders, our tribal
staff is well versed in these
issues. I think, um, you know,
it's not, uh, common for most
New Mexicans or most Americans
probably to even know how
ratemaking exists, what it, what
goes into it.
or have to, you know, go on to
rate making school, um, so as an
organization, we really try to
teach and pass as much as that
information back onto the
community. Um, so can, you know,
go through a number of different
opportunities that we see that
can be beneficial, but, um,
again, there's just so much to
go through, so I'll try to keep
it brief within the time
allowed.
Thank you, Miami. So I'm gonna
kick us off with a question, but
I wanna invite my fellow
panelists to ask each other
questions as well, and anybody
in the audience who has
questions, I will ask that you
do use a microphone though
because um hearing will be
difficult. So my first question
is, given the intrinsic
intrinsic nature.
Of the public interest.
In utility operations.
Where should that line be or how
do you draw that line between
things that are appropriate to
leave with ratepayers and maybe
some of the social initiatives
that maybe you'd like to see
paid by other means.
How do you make that call?
I attended the um AI meeting or
CLE yesterday, so I asked Chad
GPT,
because John Crinkamp, uh,
recommended it.
And no, because I was curious. I
mean, I have my own thoughts,
but I asked, what are some
examples of costs that should
not be imposed on utility
ratepayers.
Uh
But instead, perhaps taxpayers.
And um,
It said, uh,
Costs that should generally be
funded by taxpayers rather than
utility ratepayers are those
that serve broad public
interests, rather than
specifically benefiting utility
customers, and it gave examples
and there were
Uh, 8, and I'd be happy to uh
add this to my slides. Uh, but
it was one was environmental
cleanup costs. If a utility is
responsible for cleaning up.
past environmental damage, these
costs are often more
appropriately covered by
taxpayers, since the impact is
broader and not directly related
to current service to customers,
which I think goes to another.
Issue of intergenerational
equity.
You know, we try to, you know,
and cause causation.
Um
When we think about depreciation
rates, we try and match them.
Uh
So they don't extend beyond uh
the current generation of, of
utility customers. Um,
You know, uh, another one was
research and development for
broad public benefit. I think we
heard some discussion yesterday
about the type of R&D that's
necessary, whether it's like
long term storage, you know,
utilities are not, um,
Well, they're generally risk
averse because costs have to be
reasonable. So,
You know, I would say that if a
utility is spending a lot of
money on
Um, research.
Perhaps that
That's better, uh, shouldered by
shareholders than ratepayers.
Um, social programs. Again, if
it has a broad, um,
A broad benefit to society as a
whole, that's something that um
Extends beyond just rate pairs.
So, um, you know, especially
with low income programs, right?
Like, I think from my slides,
you can see that low income is a
challenge across the state. I
don't know if, uh, you know, the
rural co op that serves Mora.
can ask 50% of its customers to
pay more, so that the other 50%
can pay less.
Um
Emergency preparedness.
Uh
You know, Calf Canyon. Could we
ask Maura?
You know, Maura's rural Electric
Co op to.
to pay, um, more to prevent, to
prevent these wildfires that
clearly impact
Almost the entire state.
Um
Economic development.
And uh
You know, health and safety
standards were some of the
others. I, I think economic
development is really
interesting cause utilities play
a critical role in it, but
It might have a broad
Um, it clearly has a broad
benefit to everybody in the
state.
I certainly want PNM and SPS and
um EPE to be able to compete
with uh companies or
Utilities in other jurisdictions
that are trying to land big
companies. It benefits the
entire state.
So those are, that's how I think
about it. And uh, you know, chat
GPT agreed with me, so
Any other thoughts?
Mhm
Sure. Um, again, these views are
entirely my own, um, but I think
there's opportunity to look at
the more systemic ways that
rates are constructed, um, so of
course, you know, utilities
coming to the commission with a
cost recovery, with a return on
equity, and a lot of that is
driven by um a stated need for
more infrastructure and really
examining what the underlying
need is for that infrastructure,
um, of course, balancing the
fact that we do need
Upgrade aging technology and
infrastructure, but also that
there are other opportunities,
um, that may exist that may not
necessarily require, uh, you
know, a greater return on equity
for them, so that could be
through distributed energy
resources or other models where
um we're really trying to get to
the root of the cause of why the
rates are high in the first
place. So that's, that's one
possibility I see, um, of
course, you know, there's so
much um rhetoric about how that
would play out and how that
would work, um, but
I think, you know, when it's
really coming, you know, we're,
we're talking about how
We're talking about energy
burden and ultimately, you know,
I don't think any of us like to
pay high electricity bills, um,
and there's one way I think, you
know, where we can really
identify the source of that and
start to uh to look and examine,
um, you know, those different
ways that we can have a more
balanced energy mix, a more
balanced way to um make sure
that the shareholders aren't
necessarily the ones who are are
profiting.
Yeah, I appreciate all of um
what
Gideon and May have to say, um,
you know, I think
The question of
intergenerational harm is an
interesting one, right? So,
historically, I think we've all
benefited from, um,
The harms and impacts of energy
generation being externalized.
So not within our rates, right?
So there is uh a history there
of um certain communities
shouldering those burdens, um,
while ratepayers have benefited
from lower rates sort of across
the board. Um.
That doesn't necessarily answer
the question of what, how we
should view future rates going
forward, um, or, or current
rates or, or future rates and
how to balance those equities,
um, going forward. Obviously,
there are um
You know, we're at a moment
where a just transition and, and
making a rapid transition to
renewables is something that is
being looked at not only in the
state, there's federal programs,
um, the infrastructure Act has,
um, a huge amount of money that
is available for um supporting
uh uh clean energy or renewable
energy in our states. Um, and
there's real difficult questions
for how we're going to put those
funds to use, but there's things
like, you know, the justice.
40 initiative, which has um that
40% of that investment should go
to sort of underserved
communities. Um, but the
interesting question just
becomes, you know, through the
lens of, of rates and sort of
authority, um, how do we balance
these competing questions. I
don't know that I have the
answer to it. Um, but there's,
uh, that intergenerational harm
and the impacts of that and how
do we account for that in future
rates going.
For, um, quite frankly, it's, I,
I think in order to make a
transition at the pace and scale
that needs to be made, it's
probably in all of the above
proposition, um, you know, we've
got social programs or social um
legislation in the state with
the energy transition Act that
has started to look to how do we
account for this and how do we
um speed that transition. Um,
but I don't think that that is
the silver bullet for us. So,
um,
You know, there is undoubtedly
just this tension that exists um
in our rates to how to account
for, um, you know, those, those
past harms. Um, the interesting
thing in, and so in
participating in um San Juan's
abandonment and that replacement
power case, you know, one of the
things that, um, you know, you
look at when you're looking at
sort of um, you know, uh, uh,
San Juan, you know, which is now
not only um retired, but also
has been demolished in the last
several months, right? Um,
that's a, uh, symbolically a, a
very significant thing for those
communities. Um,
But there's
You know, you look at
reclamation costs and a lot of
these things came into that
case, right? So what is it going
to cost? Um, to, you know, leave
the units in place um to sort of
fence and and sort of keep it
off versus, you know,
demolishing, um, but what didn't
really come through was
remediation costs, so the legacy
of coal ash and how that was
treated and the impacts and the
ongoing impacts that cool ash is
gonna have on, you know,
drinking water in the local
community, so.
how do we account for those
things? Certainly.
Um, you know, ratepayers have
benefited from that, but also
PNM shareholders um have
benefited from that. So, uh, a
question for me also is, um,
shareholders does PNM have a
responsibility to come in a
little bit more, um,
substantially than they have
historically come in um with
those externalized costs.
I, I just, you know, whenever I
hear repairs in these
conversations, I think about
Um
Whether we can achieve those
goals.
Um, by relying on repairs.
And
You know, when I say we, like I
think, OK, we as a society, and
when I think we as a society or
New Mexicans, I think of
taxpayers.
And the reality is, and I look
at
I think the ETA is a perfect
example in San Juan.
Uh, you know, section 16 of the
ETA provided a specific amount
of money.
Uh, to the affected communities,
uh, for various purposes.
And I don't think that's enough
money to achieve any of them.
And, um,
So, you know, here's this piece
of legislation that has these
this noble end.
Um, but ratepayers
Uh, are not gonna help achieve
it. We've given our money.
And the problem persists. So
what do we do?
Um
I don't think you can go back to
repairs and ask.
Um, them to solve it.
Uh, because, quite frankly,
Um
It's not, I mean, I don't, I, I
don't wanna say it's not fair.
There are issues of fairness,
and I get it.
But
If we want to achieve a just
transition, we need to think
bigger.
And
Um, the pie is just not big
enough. Um, amongst repairs.
Uh
To solve it. So,
Um, you know, and, and I think
this is like a, you know,
affordability.
And a just transition. It is
Like a crisis, you know, we're
not gonna hit 2050, um, by
relying on ratepayer and rates.
It's just impossible without
driving a lot more people into
um
In very high energy burdens. And
so, um, you know, I was just, I
was, there was an article in The
Washington Post. I don't know if
it was 2 weeks ago and it was
about um a coal plant in Omaha
that was scheduled for closure.
But I think Google came in with
a data center, and that plant's
not closing, and it's located in
an under in a disadvantaged
community.
Where, you know, cancer rates
are high, uh, asthma rates are
high, and they were very much
looking forward to the closure
of that plant. That's not
happening.
Obviously, the ETA um, puts a
cap on, um,
just how many data centers we
can have in New Mexico.
Um
Because we're trying to achieve
this.
broader objective.
And I guess that's the point.
It's we as a, you know, we as
New Mexicans are trying to
achieve a just transition in
order to get there, um, in order
to pay for the batteries, in
order to pay for the
transmission lines in order to,
I mean, the secretary of Ener
gave us those amazing slides
yesterday. I think the message
was it's gonna be expensive.
So when we talk about like the
regulatory paradigm, and I guess
this is, you know, my final
point.
Uh, the regulatory paradigm, you
can only stuff so much into it.
Right? Before you start
distorting rates.
And you end up with rates that
are not just and reasonable.
Right? So, that's my
You know, when we talk about
cost recovery, alternative
models, um, and I'm sorry, I can
talk about this all day, but
Kyle's point, you know, like, is
it fair, you know, cost recovery
for utilities, uh,
investor-owned.
You know, how do you reduce the
cost.
That they're seeking to recover.
Like if, yeah, we have all this
federal money. What are we doing
with it? Does this, do we buy
the resources?
Does the state do the lending,
uh,
I mean, there are a lot of
alternatives, but they all have
to be focused on like reducing
the cost, not making the
utilities.
Return on investment bigger,
cause that's just an inefficient
use of the money.
Well, I, I, I
I would agree with Gideon
wholeheartedly on this point
that
One thing I just want to insert
as well is this idea of, you
know, energy justice is also
about sort of procedural
justice. It's about who is able
to show up and be represented
when these decisions are being
made and um you know,
historically what the room at
the PRC looks like is it's not a
lot of, you know, um, groups
that are out there concerned
about um low income ratepayers.
There's not a lot of groups that
are
In their representing impacted
communities, um, you know, it's
commercial, it's industrial
ratepayers, um, you know, PNM
certainly has their um cadre of
attorneys who are in the room
and um advocating for that
position. So I think as we
grapple with these things as a
state, I think, um, one of the
things that I think we should
really strongly look at is how
do we increase sort of
procedural justice um in our
decision.
making processes. There are
other states in the country who
have programs, have funding for,
um, you know, nonprofit
community organizations so that
they do have a voice and can
participate in those decision
making processes and so, um, I
think as a state, just as, you
know, it, as I said before and
as Gideon noted, right, it's
gonna have to be all hands on
deck, um, the transition can't
be shouldered just by
ratepayers, um.
But having uh different voices
in the room being represented in
those proceedings so that, you
know, the record is reflective
of those harms, um, and those
positions, I think that's gonna
be incredibly important for us
as a state.
Yeah, on that note, um, that was
also a recommendation that I had
to offer looking at some of what
some of the other states are
doing to help increase the
representation within the room
is make sure that we have more
groups advocating for lower
income, um, and native
populations and in our case, but
one of those models is with
Colorado where they do have
intervenor compensation and they
also have an environmental
justice advisory Committee, and
you know, that's just a
different vehicle to help make
sure that there is, there are
those voices are heard at the
table.
Um, I think, you know, right now
in New Mexico, um, you know,
going from an elected to an
appointed commission, you know,
I've heard feedback, not my own,
that, you know, there's a
greater even even greater
disconnect with rate making now
just because they don't feel
like they elected that person on
the ballot. Um, so really we
need to look at different ways
that we can help increase that
knowledge, that awareness, um,
and also make sure that there's
different pathways to help be
deeper and better engaged, and I
wish I had the answer for that
where the money would come from
for that, I think.
That's one of the hard
questions, but, um, I think that
would be a really great means to
help make sure that we are um
building those bridges and
making sure that, you know, we
have, um, you know, greater
understanding of the whole
rate-making process as well as
more equitable rate-making
structure.
I don't know if Troy had a
follow-up question.
OK.
Well, I, you know, I just want
to say like,
You know, obviously, the
commission's jurisdiction is,
uh, somewhat limited, right?
Like it
Rural Electric co-ops are less
regulated than the investor own
co-ops.
Uh, though they do have
Uh, investors. I mean, uh, and
we don't have jurisdiction or
the commission doesn't have
jurisdiction over municipal, uh,
Um, utilities.
Um
So
You know, it's ability to to
address some of these problems
is limited.
But
You know, rate making is
legislative in nature.
Right? So where should that
Advocacy be happening.
On those issues. If you fall
outside of that regulatory
paradigm.
Then there's got to be another
Avenue for advocacy where
Those issues of justice can be
addressed.
Right? And, and I think
Rate making is so
I mean, I didn't know anything
about it until Troy asked me to
do it.
Like I literally knew nothing. I
was like, oh, how does this
work? Uh, you know, and Joseph
Yar, who was, uh, who had been
in the office, had just left all
his files and was down in
Albuquerque working in different
division.
And um I was just very fortunate
that, that the bar, the, you
know, the, uh, my colleagues,
um, many of whom were in this
room, took the time to explain
to me how rapema works.
Um, and I'm 5 years in and I'm
starting to get it.
Um, so like the education
component is
It is, um,
I don't know how you make
ratemaking exciting.
Like, it's not gonna be on, I, I
mean, I don't use TikTok, but
like, good luck.
So that leads me to another
question, um, maybe actually
maybe our final one, given that
we have about 7 minutes left.
Wildfires you brought up a
minute ago that the impacts of
wildfires don't stop at the
utility footprint line, right?
They extend across that line,
and yet traditional notice of
utility cases are distributed,
well, it used to be through
local newspapers, but those are
dying. And so our main way of
getting notice out is through
the utility itself. But if those
that are impacted are on the
other side of the utility line.
How
Do we make sure that those
people are notified.
So that they can participate, so
they actually know what's
happening and that something is
happening with their utility
neighbors that may impact them.
Um, in the 13,390 case, the San
Juan case that I was mentioning,
I made many trips up to the San
Juan area to invite
participation because it was a
PNM case.
Notice went out through P&M, and
yet we weren't hearing as much
as
I thought we should have been
hearing from those communities.
So I guess the question is, how
do we get those who don't aren't
traditionally noticed into the
cases.
Just to clarify, we're, we're
not saying notice of a fire.
Right? We're talking. I'm sorry,
right, I'm not talking notice of
the fire. I'm talking about
notice of say a fire mitigation
plan of a utility or something
else that would affect uh
utilities neighbors, but not
utility customers. Well, and
also utility customers.
Um
I can plug nonprofits and
community-based organizations
here. I think many of our types
of organizations have increased
trust, um, so, and greater
connection to actual community.
So that is a great means and I
think a lot of, you know,
nonprofits and those CBOs have
greater access to state and
federal funding, which could be
used to help support services
like that. Um, but it is, you
know, I, I, I could see why that
would be very difficult to try
to do within the typical, you
know, rate making procedural
process, so.
I think in terms until we get to
some sort of model that gets us
there. In the meantime, it does
make sense to rely more and
partner more with those types of
organizations who can assist
with that.
Yeah, I think Gideon's um
TikTok that he's gonna form, I
think it'd be really
interesting, um, no, I, you
know, for me, it's I, I think
two sort of things come to mind.
One is the thing that May and I
spoke of earlier, which is
supporting community groups and
making sure that there is um
funding streams that um
increases representation, just
sort of across the board at all
sort of um within the PRC to
allow those community voices to
come in and participate.
Um, there's obviously a
tremendous amount of expertise,
um, that is required is he said,
you know, 5 years to really
figure out rates, um, you know,
there's folks in the room who I
know have been uh working and
representing groups at the PRC
for their entire careers, um,
and it takes time to build up
that base of knowledge to sort
of adequately sort of show up
and participate in those
hearings. Um, you know, notices
also um a challenge in
a lot of different contexts, but
there's also needs for
translation, right? So there's a
lot of communities where Spanish
translation is, it would be um
really beneficial to get getting
that information out within a
community. Similarly, um, you
know, in the four corners
region, having um things
translated into Dana is, I think
also increasingly important, um,
to make sure that, um, folks who
may be English is not their
first.
language also have um access to
that information. Um, but I
think funding and, and um just
Those equity principles building
that into our notice
requirements, I think um would
be a good place to start.
I, I, I, I know there's a
question, but I just wanted to
say,
You know, the idea of
Uh
These fires.
Impacting adjoining communities.
It just shows that like, you
cannot, like, insurance rates.
are going through the roof, not
just here, but like for
utilities in general across the
country as climate change.
Uh, makes the cost of providing
service greater. But with fires,
it's like, OK, so Moura. I'm
trying to think what the
adjoining.
Co op is, but
You know, think about
That co op saying, oh well, your
insurance rates have gone up,
and so our insurance rates have
gone up. How is, like, how is
that equitable? If, you know,
you're gonna make the cost of
service so high.
That unless you socialize that
cost a across a greater number
of New Mexicans, you're gonna
make those utilities, um,
Well, financially insolvent as
more and more customers
can't pay their bills on time.
So, like, we have to think about
this systemically.
Right? Like
Rama is one part of it.
A regulatory paradigm has
limits, and people need to
understand those limits.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm, my name is Troy McGee,
and I'm the um
The, the EPA organized the um
environmental justice, thriving
communities, technical
assistance center, and I'm the
New Mexico um technical advisory
Committee member and the EPA has
$177 million for these type of
environmental issues, a portion
of that, a good portion of that
is supposed to go to New Mexico,
and we're, we're trying to find,
uh, we're trying to get the
technicals I think it's um it's
very new.
But I think we have 10 kind of
clients that we want to provide
that technical and financial
assistance for um
So that's a great resource we'd
be happy to talk to anybody that
can help the
Tic Tac is the acronym for it,
uh, find the right people for
those, and then also I'm
involved in community solar and
the good news is is that
community solar is one program
that's going to for 43% of New
Mexicans will qualify for the
low income qualifications at the
community solar program and we
calculate its monthly savings
for low income New Mexicans. Is
it close to $1 million. I hope
we're right on the cusp of being
able to start subscribe and
providing savings for the low.
income and disproportionately
impacted communities in New
Mexico with that. So some good
news.
Thank you.
We are just at time, but I think
we could squeeze in another
question if there are any.
And if not, please join me in,
oh, I see one more question. Can
you come up to the microphone
just so we can all hear you?
Um
So
Uh
I was wondering.
There we go. I was wondering if
any of you could talk about the
boundaries of cost causation,
um,
And if you want to talk about
return on equity at all.
I'm looking for, you know,
practical solutions before the
PRC to
Uh, advocate for these
communities and those seem like
two places we could go.
Let's get in.
In 5 years. Well,
um
First of all, you know, CCAE,
uh, and WRA. I mean, these are
two organizations that do
advocate for communities that
are not traditionally
represented before the
commission. So, uh, and that
includes like low income as part
of their coalition. So,
Hey
You know, the
The boundaries of cost
causation.
are
With respect to like what you
can expect ratepayers to.
Shoulder? Is that what you mean?
Um
It's
I think you need the legislature
to define what the policy is, at
least that's what the ETA tells
us, um.
And it's very uh prescriptive
about how it works in that
instance.
Um
ROE
Is part of the rate-making
equation.
Um, and obviously,
It speaks to
I mean it's there to incentivize
investment.
In the utility.
Um, that tends to be money that
flows out of state.
As opposed to
Um
Being invested directly in
plant.
Like
If you were going to put it in
San Juan.
I mean, I'll just say this
inside like there's no amount of
solar and battery, or maybe
there is, but I just don't know
what it, how much it would be.
It's gonna replace the tax base
that comes from a coal plant
that employs
You know, hundreds of people.
Right? Like, that's just not
gonna happen.
Um, or it's not realistic.
Uh, to expect it to. So,
Um
But
You know, like revenue
requirement does, you know, that
is an increase in cash flow.
And so maybe that incentivizes.
Um
Investment
Uh
Which I think is like,
An objective, right? So. All
right. Thank you very much for
the question. Thank you to our
panelists. Please join me in
thanking them.
Clearly lots of unanswered
questions and big things to
think about. So we will be on
break until 10:45. Thanks
everyone.
Recording stopped.
you.
Uh, Tuesdays and Wednesdays,
yeah,
Right.
Yeah, no, so Tom sent out a, a
list.
Well he's like, oh we'll go look
at the form ones, but the form
ones are
so that's why I was struggling
with like.
Yeah, they won't be positive.
So anyways, Laura is gonna go
through it. I'm gonna look on
the oasis, so that's what I
didn't understand.
No
anyway, so where's I go through
this
uh go back,
uh, and then
Yeah,
I will go look at
this.
You're
like, hey, I'm all
right, yeah,
it doesn't matter where it comes
from.
I have no idea, have we ever
done that?
You know what, I like
No, no, no.
Right.
is.
Yeah
Also
I said what I think.
Hi, David. Can you do a mic
check?
Yeah, how are you? Can you hear
me?
Yes, we can. Thank you. Great.
Thanks, Jordan
All right, here's our 2 minute
warning.
Recording in progress.
All right.
Welcome back, everyone. We're
going to move into our next, uh,
panel, which is how
regionalization has changed
regulation.
Uh, it's gonna be moderated by
Commissioner Aguilera, who like
his fellow commissioner
yesterday needs very little
introduction.
But I'll do it anyway.
Uh, commissioner Aguilera joined
the New Mexico Public Regulation
Commission in January 2023 for a
four-year term following uh or
prior to joining the commission,
he spent over 15 years at the
Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission with an expertise
focusing on electric
transmission, interconnection,
and western US electric issues.
Commissioner Aguilera, take it
away.
Good morning.
And that works well. Um,
So I am a accompanied here today
by some excellent panelists who
very briefly introduced and then
I'm going to ask them to
introduce themselves. We
Ricky Sewin, who's the executive
director of Interwest Energy
Alliance, Kelsey Martinez, who's
the director of regional markets
and transmission strategy at P&M
and David Springy.
Who's the executive director of
the National Association of
State Utility Consumer Advocates
or Nasuka.
So, today's discussion is about
regionalization and how it can
affect or has affected electric
utilities, market participants,
consumers, and regulators. After
I tee up the topic, I will ask
our panelists to introduce
themselves.
Uh, and their organizations. I
will also provide them with a
prompt to help lay the
foundation for where we are now
on regionalization.
And as it is, most of our
responsibilities.
I want to focus on how
regionalization will impact
customers, uh, through energy
capacity costs, reliability, uh,
economic development,
decarbonization.
So, once we do that, I'm kinda
just, you know, laying out how
this conversation is going to
go, um, once we do that, I'll
ask David to explain the
fundamental laws delineating
state and federal jurisdiction
at a high level, so you guys
could get a taste of it and then
go back and do further research
on your own.
That's the homework. Um, so,
Given that many of us in the
room are regulators. I also want
to ask our panelists for their
suggestions, uh, about what
regulators should keep in mind
as we further regionalize the
grid in Mexico with the West.
And the east. Um, so,
Finally, I, uh, after we do
that, I'll open it up for some
questions for, for you all.
So, a little bit of my team up
the.
Uh, discussion here is, it's no
secret that I've focused on
regionalization and I want to
explain why. So the American
electrical grid is often
described as the largest machine
in the world.
And it's expensive to run such a
large machine. And for decades
though, it was pretty
straightforward. You could just
keep
Building more generation or more
transmission.
But now it's a lot more complex
than that.
Uh, now we have stronger
consumer preferences.
Laws that dictate the types of
resources the utilities need to
procure.
Customers who want to generate
their own electricity or who are
demanding certain types of
resources.
We have extreme weather, we just
talked about wildfires, extreme
weather that in part is caused
by this.
World's largest machine.
And that in turn creates this
machine, uh, creates more
complexity for this machine and
um just makes it more
challenging to
Uh, have the grid that is
expected.
So we also have load that is
increasing faster than ever. Uh,
we want, we want our cat videos
on demand, so we have, you know,
to have more data centers, uh,
the oil and gas industry is
electrifying, so we need more
transmission and more generation
capacity for that.
And even the cars that we drive
are changing and are demanding
more of the grid.
So we're adding load.
But at the same time, we're
dealing with the grid that is
Essentially at capacity.
These problems are solvable.
But the solutions are not cheap.
And so as regulators, we're in
the difficult position of having
to help.
Ensure that the solutions.
That we find for these
challenges also allow us to
maintain affordable rates.
And so that's why I look to
regionalization to help.
I also see a state that
Could benefit economically and
do good.
By sharing the resources that we
have with the, the rest of the
region.
Um
At a previous uh workshop that
we had at the PRC Kelsey said
that we're, as a state small but
mighty.
And I agree with that.
Um, and so I see a lot of
benefits and this is, this is
the reason why I have been very
focused at the same time, we
have to make sure that as we
progress into this path that
we're making the right decision
for
The customers that we're
representing. So that's my, my
brief uh team up here, but I
also want to ask my panelist
here to to help me do more of
the work and also provide their
own perspective.
Because it's not the same as
mine. We have utility, we have,
um, representative of large
developers. We have uh
representatives of consumer
advocates here. So,
Um, with that, first, I'll ask
David to please introduce
yourself and your organization.
Um, oh, the other thing is, I,
I'm giving each one of the
panelists a prompt to help me
lay the foundation here. So, uh,
introduce yourself and your
organization and then your
prompt is consumers across the
country are serviced by
utilities with varying degrees
of regionalization.
As part of your opening remarks,
can you please explain from your
national perspective, what
regionalization means.
And the different degrees of
regionalization across the
country.
And that's for you, David.
All right. Thank you. Thank you
very much and, and I very much
appreciate you giving me the
opportunity to visit with you
today. Thank you for the
invitation. Uh, my name is David
Springy. I'm the executive
director of the National
Association of State Utility
Consumer Advocates. It's quite a
mouthful, so we go by Masuka,
um, we are much like Daru, uh,
we were, where Naruk is the
created by statute, the offices
are created by statute to
regulate the public utilities
within the states and set rates.
Uh, my member office
are predominantly created by
statute to intervene in those
proceedings, uh, at public
utility commissions and
represent consumers of some
variety. If 61 members operating
in 45 states, uh, plus the, the
District of Columbia, Jamaica,
Puerto Rico, Barbados, um,
And uh our members live usually
somewhere within government or
under sort of a, a, of, of
statutory authority, just for
reference, my member in New
Mexico, uh, is, is the office
Gideon Elliott runs the office,
so I guess it was the AG, but I
think it shifted this DOJ now,
uh, down there, but, but Gideon
Elliott is my member uh in um
in, in the area. And all of our
members are slightly different,
right? So
all of our members, um, have a
different set of authority. I
have some members that only
represent residential customers,
some members that resident
represent residents and small
businesses. Some members often
attorney general's offices will
represent all customers, so they
actually do have some
responsibility for industrial
customers and other customers.
Um, but we, we participate at
the state level.
Uh, as creatures of statute, uh,
in these proceedings, um, and
then, then, you know, I run the
National Association, much like
Naut, uh, where we try and
educate and gather our resources
and share resources and and and
communicate, um, so, just as a
quick plug, uh, Naru and Nasuka
are both having their annual
meetings in Anaheim, California,
uh, starting Saturday I was uh
this week, so uh we actually do
operate quite closely together.
So, um, regarding the prompt,
um,
Varying degrees of
regionalization. So, so let's,
let's start with the idea that,
that um since day one of
utilities, what we have
functionally done is drawing
bigger and bigger circles, uh,
joining, starting with one power
plant and then moving to a
second power plant and going,
hey, if we do a circle around
these two power plants and have
them share, we get better, you
know, better efficiency, wait,
there's a 3rd power plant. Let's
draw that. We've done nothing
really for 100 and some odd
years but draw bigger circles,
right? So
So there's been regionalization
happening since day one, in, in
our utility space. And, and the
underlying reasons I think is
outlined in the, the initial
statement uh by the commissioner
or the, are the same. We, we, we
are more efficient when we draw
bigger circles around utilities,
we share resources, which is
better for consumers. We can
lower rates. Uh, we increase,
hopefully increase reliability,
uh, and our ability to absorb
shocks, um, we are all, you
know, perhaps better when we
work together.
And share. Uh, and so really the
current state of existence on
the, the grid is not that
different. I mean, in some
sense, um, all we've done is
draw bigger and bigger circles,
um, and now in the eastern side
of the interconnect, and you
could argue that there's really
two big to actually technically
3 big circles if you count Texas
and Urcott. Uh, there's east,
there's the west, and, and
there's Urcott, but within that
there are smaller pieces of
regionalization and, and so
what's happened is you've had uh
areas where traditional uh
regional transmission.
organizations have come forth
and so these are Southwest Power
Pool, Myso, uh, PJM.
Those are sort of your big ones.
Uh, those are huge multi-state
uh organizations, and then you
have some smaller ones, uh, New
England is the New England
states it's smaller, and then
you have something like New
York, uh, ISO, which is just
simply New York. It's a, it's,
it's still regionalized, uh, but
only within a state. All of
these, regardless of how you
define them, are interconnected.
So, so these organizations are
still sharing power, so you can
still argue, I think, in the
sense that, that we have
regionalized the eastern
interconnect. Everybody does.
share power. So really it's just
a matter of what structure, uh,
is chosen to do that, and then
what are the underlying uh
regulation as, as, uh, as you
know, in the east, there are uh
along the eastern seaboard,
there are a lot of states that
have uh restructured, that is,
they've taken generation out of
the utility and the generation
operates in an independent
market in PJM for instance, uh,
facilitates that market and
those, those generators have to
bid in uh to the market to sell
their power and
and utilities and power, you
know, load serving entities bid
or or pull power out of those
entities. You have regions in,
in myso and SVP which are really
traditionally vertically
integrated utilities, but they
are still moving their power in
and out of the markets created
by the RTOs, um, and then the
RTOs traditionally, uh, uh, take
over a, a function of
transmission planning and trying
and create transmission.
Ultimately, the goal is to have
efficient markets.
It's the least congested market
and make power move as
efficiently as possible, but,
but you facilitate that by
building the transmission. And
so, so all of these have
happened. I, I should throw in
um just the Southeast also, uh,
not a traditional RTO, uh,
really be out of the Southeast
under what's called seas, um, S
E E M, I think it's Southeast uh
Electric Market.
Uh, it's more of a traditional
old school power pool. Um, so in
that instance, what they're
doing is sharing power neighbor
to neighbor and splitting the
difference, uh, which is kind of
the way it started out before we
got, got into the RTO business
and some of this other stuff,
they just share. And I think one
of the fundamental differences
there that you need to recognize
is, is seems while they're
sharing, they're splitting the
difference between whatever the
economic cost of what is running
versus some of the markets
operate on what's called the
marginal unit pricing uh.
pri n ci ple Um, and that's
important in that um as you bit
into these markets and set, set
prices. The price for all
kilowatt hours gets set by
whatever the marginal unit that
is running and so uh you can
argue there's always big
arguments about whether that's
good or bad for consumers and
what happens uh in markets. At
the end of the day, the goal is
efficient and uncongested
movement of power, which gives
us hopefully the least cost
units running.
Um,
That's number one, the sharing
of power, uh, to get reliability
and resilience benefits, that
really is sort of the second
objective, and then 2nd or 3rd
is to use these both as a way to
administratively build towards
uh the, the type of future and
needs that we have, you know,
you can talk about the recent
FERC order 1920 is sort of a
grand vision of trying to, to,
um, um, build a bigger overlay
to re-regionalize everything.
Uh, so that's the underlying
the, the
Trade-off, I guess, or the, the
things that we think about and
that I hear from my members, you
know, we were all created both
state PUCs and state consumer
advocate offices to regulate
state utilities, and they
controlled the power plants and
we sort of controlled and that
rates and practices at that
level. Uh, once you regionalize,
you realize that a lot of
decision making, both, both at
the market.
Level structure, um, and the
prices that come and the
decisions around transmission
are no longer really
consolidated in the state. So
you're gonna have to travel
somewhere, uh, to get to the RTO
meetings and have the horsepower
and resources to participate in
those types of meetings, uh, and
markets, um, um, to, to
effectuate decisions. So there's
sort of a um regionalization
comes with an inherent shift of
regulatory authority and ability
and that's something I hope that
we, you know,
Get into a little bit more
discussion, um, I, I will say
upfront this disclaimer I'm
speaking from sort of knowledge.
I'm, I'm not representing any of
my particular members. Uh, we
have members across the
spectrum, some that support
markets, some that are
suspicious, some that support
RTOs, some that don't want
anything to do with it, and I
will admit upfront, um, the West
is a creature in and of itself,
and, and I try and, um, um, um,
uh, keep up, but not, not, uh,
wax too philosophic on what
should
shouldn't happen out there. I
know that, uh, for instance,
Michelle Beck, who is my Utah
office out there is very active
in whack in, in all the
discussions on the different
things and, and working very
closely uh with our Western
members on how the West sorts
itself out, which version of
markets or RTOs or something
different, uh, comes into play.
Um, but I think, uh, you know,
ultimately the goals are always
the same, um, um, how we get
there and, and, and our, I
think,
Comfort levels with
The legal framework of, of who
and how decisions get made and
where decisions get made, and
whether or not you at a state,
uh retain certain authorities or
cede certain authorities to
those regulatory frameworks,
again, whether it's someone
that's setting a market or fully
functioning RTO and, and who's
making decisions. Those are
really things that I think are
imperative uh to think about if
our focus ultimately is keeping
uh costs low, or at least
reasonably low.
for consumers. I don't know if
low is ever gonna be, like, you
know, be a reasonable uh
objective anymore, but
reasonably low, we can, we can
shoot for. And and certainly
we're all concerned with
resilience and, and making sure
that that customers keep the
lights on and, and, you know,
are able to to manage through
storms and meet uh state policy
objectives and renewable
objectives and some of those
different things. So, so it's,
it's, it's uh, it's an
interesting discussion to have.
There's many facets I look
forward to, to the discussion
today.
Thank you so much for that,
David. I think that is a really
good uh segue to, um,
The, the prompt that I plan to
give Ricky, you know, one of the
things you mentioned was, uh,
And I like that you started kind
of from the beginning and then
um explained uh how we progress
to more regionalization, uh, you
gave the example of the seams
market in the southeast, uh,
which is really, um, as you
said, more of a power pool, uh,
which is how things started and
so we have different regions
that are undertaking this uh
issue of regionalization
differently.
And
You're right, we, we are
different in the West, uh,
especially when you compare us
to the east, we don't have as
big a population that is as
close together, right? We're
more spread apart.
Um, and we've been taking our
own steps to regionalize much
differently than the East has.
And so, um, with that, I wanna
ask Ricky if you could introduce
yourself and your organization
and your prompt is the West
resisted regionalization for a
long time, but appears to be
headed for more regionalization
by developing viable dayhe
markets. Can you please explain
what has changed that has
Motivated the West to become
more regionalized.
Thank you, Commissioner, and
good to see so many familiar
faces in the room, thanks to
staff for setting this up and
capital and the folks that work
here every day for getting us
this space.
I would be remiss if I didn't
say it on this day in this room
that we're in, but hopefully
this panel is so
Engaging that you aren't
checking the polls the whole
time and stressing out about
that, but I hope it's not so
engaging that if you haven't
voted yet, you don't take this
as your opportunity to please go
do that. I think each of us
would be happy to hop on the
phone with you and give you a
download afterward if you'd
rather just step out and take
care of that today's big day.
My name is Ricky Segwin. I work
as the executive director of the
Inner West Energy Alliance.
Inner West is a regional 501C6
trade association, so nonprofit
organization representing
roughly 60 of the largest
developers and manufacturers of
grid scale renewable energy
resources in the world,
specifically focusing on their
footprints here.
In the inner mountain West.
So we represent wind, solar,
storage, as well as transmission
companies who are doing business
here in New Mexico, which is
where I'm based, as well as
Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, Nevada,
and Arizona.
And I think that region is
important to note that the 3 of
us speaking today all have, of
course, we come with different
perspectives. We also come with
different maybe lenses of the
territory that we're looking at.
We have David coming from a
national perspective with
insight into many different
regions, many different markets,
many different states. In my
case, in the inner west world,
we're looking squarely at 6
states that are all in the
non-RTO region, all up and down
that really the eastern edge of
the
Western interconnect.
Uh jostling to get access to the
biggest markets and the the
greatest customers in the West,
AKA California, and then we have
Kelsey representing the utility
here and of course I'll let her
do her own intro, which looks
into other states and other
regions, but ultimately is
responsible for serving
customers here in New Mexico. So
we each have a different layer
to this, and I think that makes
for a really interesting
discussion.
Inner West does advocacy. We do
work at state legislatures
across the six states. We engage
at public utility commissions in
uh encouraging our utilities to
procure more renewables and a
more competitive fashion that
better plans for and relies on a
transmission system, as well as
regional advocacy across the
states, advocating for better,
faster transmission planning and
development and more thoughtful
sharing of resources that
ultimately allows us to
Bring more zero carbon, low cost
renewable energy resources onto
the system.
I think this question this
prompt is so interesting because
I think we start with this.
Argument that the West is
pushing for regionalization, and
I believe that is a backwards
argument.
The West is reacting to
regionalization. We are
proactively putting structures
in place to respond to the
regional dynamic that we have
entered into today.
And that really is this prompt
and I'm glad the commissioner
asked it that way. We're
reacting to a very different
world than the one we were in 5
years ago, 10 years ago, or 100
years ago. So I thought it was
interesting, David's response in
thinking about planning of the
electric system planning
generation with these bigger and
bigger circles that get built
out from basically the dawn of
time with generation to to
present day. I'm also going with
sort of the dawn of time
approach to today.
which is when we built the
electric grid.
It was a very different world.
The
Population
was much smaller, especially out
here in the West, but
everywhere. There are just fewer
people.
We
Built the grid a long time ago
when where those people were
located or where business was
located were in different places
than they are today.
We were definitely not talking
about renewable energy. We
certainly weren't talking about
carbon emissions.
And we weren't reacting to the
hottest summers on record for
years and years at a time,
massive wildfires in the same
way.
And global cyber threats that
impact national security and all
of our ability to go to work
every day or watch cat videos
when we get home. It's just a
very different world. So when
you think about when we were
building the grid, let's call it
100 years ago to today election
day 2024.
We just have a different
situation on our hands, then the
situation we walked into when we
built this grid or we set up our
utilities or we decided to move
to New Mexico. It's a different
place today.
Some of the key drivers that I
think are
That regional world we're living
in, why does it feel so
different? I mentioned, but load
growth, the commissioner
mentioned this too, where we're
seeing business.
And residential expansion, the
scale of it is so much different
than we were expecting before.
The commissioner brought up the
electrification of the Permian
Basin and the demands from oil
and gas. I think that is a
fascinating example for New
Mexico alone when you think
about the largest load growth
drivers in the state that are
necessarily forcing our
utilities to work together to
think about resource sharing or
think about transmission
planning in a different way.
Load growth that we didn't
necessarily expect to see, which
is our oil and gas sector.
in New Mexico begging for
electrification and additional
transmission. That is a shift
that I, I don't think many
people in this room would have
even predicted in their crystal
ball 10 years ago on election
day.
The other change is the
renewable energy change.
This is another place where
sometimes I think we asked the
question backwards. Why have
state, why have states put
policies in place that drive
renewable energy. I think states
have put policies in place
driving renewable energy,
because they're reacting to the
market. Renewable energy became
abundant and low cost and the
cheapest thing out there. That
drove our utilities to support
the adoption of renewable energy
resource that drove customers to
support the adoption of
renewable energy resources, and
that helped provide cover to our
decision makers here in the
legislature or in other bodies
of of office to put policies in
place to bring more renewables
on the system. As you have more
renewables on the system, you
are necessarily reliant on
Putting resources in the places
where they are best suited. We
can no longer rely on just
putting a gas plant or a coal
plant next to the factory in the
heart of town.
When we in fact are instead
wanting to bring lower cost
renewable resources on the
system. We have to cite those
renewable resources and the
places where the wind is the
best or the solar is the best,
that means our system is
growing, where we're bringing
those electrons in from and
because those resources are
dependent on the weather, we
need to be bringing them in from
a wider footprint, so we're not
reacting to a single weather
pattern that may disrupt our
entire
Um, supply for that day. So we
now, because of all the
renewables that are on the
system because of the low cost
and the policy drivers.
We have to have a grid that is
so big that it is bigger than
the weather that we can bring
those resources in from a
broader geographic footprint,
and we can be resilient to any
of the weather impacts that
would disrupt the supply that
we're depending on. So those are
some of those factors, but I,
I'm really wanna focus on the
renewable piece as we shift to a
more renewable grid, the grid
must be bigger. It must be more
regional. So yes, we are
working.
hard to support regionalization,
but ultimately I think we are
catching up to the
regionalization that came to us
when we decided to put this many
renewables on the system. And by
the way, there are so many more
that are needed.
So I know we'll get to that.
What are the economic
development opportunities that
come from the additional build
out of renewable energy. How can
that support New Mexico's
economy, but that's really key.
The last piece I'll end on here
as we think about load growth.
Major demand, more renewables.
Got to be spread out.
Reliability can't have those
renewables be impacted by the
weather. The last piece is if we
actually want those electrons
from the far away good renewable
energy resources. We need way
more transmission than we have
today. We're just essentially
out of room. So thinking about
ways to spur transmission
development is really important
and regional efforts around
planning, cost allocation,
sharing, breaking down barriers
for moving electrons across
different ownership structures
for wires. That's going to be
critical for bringing those
renewables online.
So
That's my answer is basically
let's flip this thing on its
head. Let's talk about
regionalization is driving this
work today versus this work
today is driving the
regionalization.
Thank you for that and um
I had not thought about.
That way that what I am doing is
reacting, um, you know, I, I, I
feel like I've been pursuing
this, but I think you're right.
That it's a reaction to
Everything else that is going
on, um, all the pressures that
we have on cost, we need to do
something about it.
Um, and, uh, maybe and hopefully
regionalizing as part of that
answer. Um, I was
Um, thank you for mentioning the
cat videos and I was going to,
uh, completely ignore the fact
that there is an election, uh,
but I do want to mention one
thing that cause it, it, you
know, it feels like there's like
a nervous energy and um the, uh,
I'm sure many of you have seen
that picture of the, the cat
with the sticker that instead of
saying I voted, says I vomited.
Um, that's kind of what it feels
like a little bit, but
Um, so that's, I guess, like 3
cat references, and with that,
um,
Uh, so we'll move on to our next
panelist, uh, Kelsey Martinez,
so, um, you can introduce
yourselves. I'm sure people know
your organization around here.
Um, your prompt is please
explain the current status of
regionalization in the West.
And where you anticipate it
going forward.
Thank you. Thanks for having me
today. A few points right off
the bat. One, Ricky is always
really hard to follow.
She's fantastic speaker and I am
a dog video person and and a
human, human baby video person.
I try to skip through all the
cat ones, um, although some of
them are, are pretty cute.
Um, so, thank you for having me.
I'm Kelsey Martinez. I'm the
director of regional markets and
transmission strategy at PNM
based here in Albuquerque, and
that role um is fairly recent at
P&M and the creation of the role
that I had was really um uh like
a response, maybe a reaction and
a jump into P&M's realization
that more and more
regionalization is going to be
imperative to our planning and
going forward both from a
reliability perspective and from
a cost savings to our customers'
perspective.
Um, I did wanna touch here on my
background just a bit because it
always frames my discussion and
um just thought I'd share a
little bit about where I came
from in the utility, so for 10
years I worked in our control
center. Um, so that is the, you
know,
24/7 365 operating center that
monitors the grid in real time,
so there's a few functions
performed in there. One is the
instantaneous balance of supply
and demand, um, so utilities are
working to make sure that
resources match load on a 2 to
second basis in order to
maintain our 60 hertz frequency
at all time. If you don't have
that, then the grid falls apart.
Um, so that's one function there
at the control center. Um,
another one is, is maintaining
um control and situational
awareness of our transmission
grid. So we're constantly making
sure that our transmission lines
are um within system operating
limits and that we're ready to
react to any, any next um
outage, unplanned or planned,
um, on the grid and be able to
withstand it from a reliable
reliability perspective.
So I was a system operator
myself for 5 years and then I
managed that group for 5 years
as well. And um one thing I'll
mention about the control center
is something that even if you're
familiar with PNM, you, you may
not.
Uh, quite, quite understand, and
that is PNM provides an
additional service to most of
the state of New Mexico, and
that's, that's our role as the
balancing authority area for
most of our state. So with the
exception of a load pocket in
Las Cruces and the um load that
SPS owns and operates on the
eastern interconnection PNM acts
as the balancing authority area
for the majority of the the rest
of the state of New Mexico. And
what the balancing authority
area responsibility means
is that we're the reliability
backstop for, for all of the
load in there, so it's like a er
compliance um designation and
PNM is in a, from a real-time
perspective, the reliability
backstop for all the load and
trans and transmission
obligations in the state. Um,
and the reason that kind of
comes into play is that a lot of
these regional regional efforts,
um, stem from the BEA
perspective. So when you're
participating in energy markets
or your um representing um.
Our, our customers and and
stakeholders at regional events.
A lot of it is kind of BA
centric, so balancing authority
centric. So PNM is um the
balancing authority for all the
co-ops in the state, and we work
hand in hand with them in real
time.
Um, in addition to providing
those BA services, I think a lot
of you know about our company,
but I'll just make make sure of
that. So PNM is the largest
energy provider in the state. We
have over 550,000 customers, um,
we are a vertically integrated
company, so we, um, we operate
and plan for distribution,
generation, and distribution and
transmission. I'll get into why
that's important here in a
second, um, but just a, a plug
for
and you might hear more about
this from our president and CEO
later, um, but we are, um, also
really forward in our RPS
meeting our RPS goals or or
renewable portfolio standard
goals, um, today we are
operating at right right around
68% renewable by 2026, we're
gonna be at 75%. So we're doing
all of this, um, these are the
most, most ambitious climate
goals.
In in our country and we're
exceeding them at this point.
Um, OK, so I mentioned that
we're vertically integrated and
we plan and operate for
distribution, generation, and,
and transmission. Um, that's
becoming more and more important
these days because what we're
realizing is that because of
these key drivers of change,
notably and most importantly, I
would say the penetration of
variable energy resources, so
our wind and solar, um, that is
especially prevalent in our
state. Um,
Integrating those from a
planning and operations
perspective is more and more
important, and it's the only way
we're going to be able to offset
the cost of the energy
transition. It's by optimizing,
co-optimizing those three, from
a planning perspective. So PNM
has taken proactive measures to
integrate those. Laurie Williams
is in the audience. She's our
vice president of integrated
System planning, um,
historically utilities would
would plan kind of in a silo for
generation um transmission and
distribution.
Now we're really needing to
co-optimize those three in order
to um you know,
Work to offset our customer
costs and our and keep our
reliability standards really
high in the energy transition.
In my regional role here as I, I
mostly talk with others from
other utilities. So in, in my
role I'm working with P&M but I
uh probably most of my
conversations are with my, my
semi, you know, my similar roles
at other utilities in the
Western United States. And my
perspective here is that those
same co-optimization principles
that are applying to integrated
planning are really needed on a
whole regional level, right? So,
um, I mentioned
The balancing areas, bubbles,
right? So PNM is the balancing
area for New Mexico. There's 38
balancing authority areas in the
state. So as David was talking
about bigger and bigger circles,
we've kind of failed at drawing
big circles here in the West and
for a lot of our um load
resource needs and our
compliance obligations, we are
still 38 small circles here in
in the West. Um, and so we are
really needing to uh apply those
integrated planning concepts,
not just in our.
individual BAs and and load
serving areas, but regionally.
So where are we right now in the
West with, with respect to that
and where are we going in the
West with respect to that, um,
I'll start touching on that a
little bit here. So, um, Ricky
talked a lot about, you know,
like.
How we're responding here in the
West. How that's differ and and
David talked about kind of the
the how the East has done it. So
we are different in the West,
and we are reacting and the, the
first signs of this becoming a a
big problem was in California,
um, of course, they, they lead
the country on a whole lot of
things, and one of them was
renewable energy penetration, so
right around 2013, 2012,
California had so much rooftop
solar penetration that they had
a real problem and some of you
might have heard of this, but
they, um, literally pay people
to take their energy during the
solar uh solar hours. They
didn't have an ability to
curtail that solar, um,
And it really represented a huge
problem and you might have heard
of the duck curve, so California
had a phenomenon where if you
look at load and um time, you
know, load on the Y axis and
time on the x-axis, the duct
curve represented this huge load
rise because rooftop solar would
fall off during the evening
hours, and that looks to system
operators like a huge load rise
because it's behind the meter.
At the same time, the normal
evening peak load rise was
happening, so it represented
really steep, almost vertical,
um, change in load and
California had never had to deal
with this, that that represents
an enormous amount of flexible
resources that have to be on the
grid to meet those. And
California recognized early on
that they weren't going to be
able to do that themselves, and
they weren't going to be able to
do that with historical ways
that we traded energy. So they
created what was called the
energy imbalance market, and
I'll touch on that a little bit,
um, but before we understand
The energy imbalance market,
it's, it's good to take a step
back and see how we were trading
energy here in the West for
decades. Um, so,
This worked for so very long
because everything was
predictable. We had thermal
resources that did what we told
them to and um all of our load
patterns were predictable. All
of our transmission and
distribution line flows were
predictable because of those
very dispatchable resources.
So, um,
How it worked was if we needed
to trade energy for economic
reasons, we would make a phone
call, so merchant trading desks
in the utilities would
recognize, hey, I've got an
evening peak coming up. Um, I'm
gonna have to turn on this
expensive gas peak generation,
maybe, maybe someone else on the
grid has cheaper generation that
they could sell to me, so I make
some phone calls. Yes, Tucson
Power has, you know, 50 extra
megawatts of coal at San Juan.
So they would make a bilateral
trade agreement for some.
Time in the future, uh, maybe,
maybe 4 hours during evening
peak, and at that as that time
came on line, Tucson would raise
their generation. P&M wouldn't
turn on their expensive peak
generation and the energy just
flows. So it works like that for
decades. There was no real need
to change it until key driver
for change and reacting to all
the renewable penetration in our
industry, which is um already
extremely um
You know, impacting us and is
only going to get more and more
impactful.
So the, the California um
offered the energy and balance
market to customers, and that
came online in 2014 as a service
offering and what that does is
instead of these manual
bilateral trades that are
already outdated by the time
they're made, um, the energy
imbalance market requires market
participants to submit an
enormous amount of data to the
California market operator. So
we pass along um in real time,
all of our generating
characteristics, so exactly.
what Min and Max each generator
can do, um, exactly what, how
fast they can ramp up and down
every megawatt of load and
generation in our profiles,
real-time status of our
transmission topology, so the
market has access to which
circuit breakers are open and
closed, what lines are available
for power to flow, and it uses
all that information to um every
5 minutes run an algorithm and
dispatched the very lowest cost
um resource.
to meet the entire footprint.
So this is a a much more
intelligent and much more
efficient way to deal with all
of the variable energy resources
that are on the grid today. We
wouldn't be able to do it
economically with without market
like that.
Um, so, to date, uh, PNM entered
that market in 2021. The market
overall has represented over $6
billion of savings for the
footprint and P&M alone our, our
last metrics, this, this quarter
where that our customers have
saved 125 million.
And that is not
Utility revenue, um, all of that
money is passed back to the
customers through the fuel and
power purchase agreement. So
it's basically just representing
the lower cost renewables and
less curtailment of those
renewables, then we would have
had if we weren't in those
regional markets.
All right, so the West is in
that, the EIM represents 80% of
the load in the West at this
time. We've all gotten a certain
degree of trust with each other.
We trust these markets. What's
next? Um, so right now, the
landscape is that there are
going to be day ahead market
offerings coming online, um,
California's Edam extended day
market will come online in 2026
with a couple of uh flagship
customers, um, Pacific Corp.
Um
Um,
let's see, Portland General and
some utilities in the California
area are all going to be the
first customers of that market,
it will be offered to
Kind of the rest of the grid and
and at the earliest spring of
2027, um, and there's also a
competing market um offering
through Southwest Power Pool,
which is called Markets Plus,
um, and for reasons that I don't
know if we'll get into the
governance discussions, but um a
lot of Western entities were not
interested in moving further
with California market
operations because of their
their governance restrictions,
um, and so at um Southwest Power
Pool did make an offering of an
had market which um
is expected to be approved by
FERC and would represent a
competing market to the to
Kaiser's markets, and this could
represent operational and market
themes that we've never seen in
the West before, so that's
something we're all going to
have to work through and deal
with if it occurs, um, but it,
it will, you know, some people
argue that those two competing
markets are going to make each
of them better.
So that's the landscape for
energy regional markets, and,
and the difference with the day
ahead market is that that same
optimization that takes place in
the imbalance market is applied
a day in advance. So today in
the imbalanced market, each
balancing authority area and and
merchant utility is still
planning bilaterally and with
their own generation to meet
tomorrow's load.
And the imbalanced market is
only looking at the difference
between what you planned and
what materialized in real time
and optimizing that. The day had
market is going to optimize even
your plan for tomorrow.
And notably, it's also going to
optimize the transmission for
those energy exchanges. So it's
going to represent a, a lot more
customer benefits.
So what's left if we get in the
real, we're in the imbalance
market, we get the day ahead
markets stood up. Um, what else
do we have in the West to, you
know, further our
regionalization picture. So, um,
I think David and Ricky both
touched on them, a lot of the
functionality of RTOs in the
east are still things on the
table that we have here in the
West. So some of those are
regional transmission planning,
uh, the cost allocation
associated with lines from that
regional planning and combined
BAs, so we don't need 38.
Bubbles we should have far fewer
of those, um, a common tariff,
so a common open access
transmission tariffs, so people
are only paying 11 price instead
of.
38 prices as you move through
the grid and um a common
resource adequacy program so
that we all trust each other in
these markets. So the West
hasn't just sat on our hands,
um, um.
Because there are, as David
mentioned, a lot of differing
like a patchwork of opinions on
whether RTOs are the are the way
to go or not. The West is
looking at um maybe taking bites
of some of these functionalities
in a very novel approach that
hasn't been seen in the east
before, so there are regional
efforts beyond the energy
markets that represent kind of
bites of this RTO apple, um,
even though we're not all
jumping right into an RTO
itself. So I'll touch on just a
couple of them. Um, there's 2
that are operated by
The Western Power pool, one of
them is called rap, so it's
Western resource adequacy
program, and that is a really
A really good situational look
at um so all all participants
kind of agree on the level of
resource adequacy that you have
to bring um 2 years in advance,
um, and there's penalties if you
don't come with that amount of
resource adequacy and so it's a,
it's a great situational
awareness of what your neighbors
have as far as resources, and
it's going to enable trust so
that we're not overbuilding
resources and we're able to
participate in these markets
without worrying about holding,
holding our
own power in without supplying
it to the market, um, because
we're worried that we might
leaned on by another utility
that didn't bring enough to the
table.
So that's an effort that um is
stood up by Western Power Pool,
PNM is a participant as of 2022.
Um, and then another one that is
also operated by the Western
Power Pool is called West Tech,
and that is um trying to look at
a regional effort around the
transmission planning piece of
things, so that it is going to
kick off with the 10 and then a
20 year study that looks at the
entire Western footprint instead
of each individual planning
region trying to do this on
their own is going to look at
Westwide transmission study, um,
and notably, it's not going to
attempt to define the cost
allocation. It's going to kind
of leave that up to potentially
the states to help with a
determination of the cost
allocation, um, so that we're
not worried about identifying
these lines, and then being on
the hook to pay for them, we're
going to be able to see the
picture of what the most
efficient outlook might look for
the West, um, without, you know,
being obligated at that time
that they're identified to be on
the hook.
to for our customers to pay for
the infrastructure.
Um, one third one I'll mention,
which just because it's notable
is called the Pathways
initiative, and this is looking
at um Cao, California operator
governance reform, and it really
has the potential and the
momentum to enact legislation in
in the California legislature to
change the way um the market
operates or the market operator
is governed and it might
increase Western entities and,
and maybe be able to get rid of
those market seams in the in the
long term.
So I will end there, um.
But welcome any additional
questions. Thank you.
Well, thank you to the three of
you, you guys did a really good
job, I think laying the
foundation from, you know, how
it started to where we are now,
um, as you can tell, I did give
the prompts ahead of time
because they were very prepared
for this. So thank you for that.
Um, so, uh, now we'll get into a
little bit of uh conversation
and I really wanna, uh, as I
mentioned earlier, focus on the
benefits.
To customers. Um, so, maybe
Ricky, I'll start with you. Um,
you mentioned that your
membership supports further
regionalization.
How would everyday New Mexicans
benefit from this
regionalization.
Thank you, Commissioner, and I
think
You know, my whole premise was
regionalization is happening.
We're reacting to it and
regionalization probably means a
couple of different things. We
are becoming more regional in
the West, whether it's the
electric system or
I don't know, name, name some
item of commerce were probably
becoming more regional in this
country and in the west.
The other part of
regionalization is the systems
in place to support that. So
that's what I'm speaking to now
is these efforts that Kelsey
mentioned, the various systems
that we are looking into
organizing ourselves to best
react to this regional world
we're in, the partnership
environment that we exist in
today. When you think about
benefits or when I think about
benefits, we're really saying
what are the benefits of working
together.
And I think that's something
we've all been thinking about
since kindergarten and small
little pockets of our lives,
grow it bigger to the electric
system. What are the benefits of
working together and how will we
as New Mexicans benefit from
that.
A regional system in the West
will benefit New Mexicans in the
form of decarbonization,
affordability,
Reliability.
And economic development.
Within each of those, you know,
we'll, I think we'll spend time
and I know we're having a
conversation here, so I'm not
going to wax poetic forever, but
when I think about affordability
of the system, we talked about
renewables being the lowest cost
resource on the market now.
Access to low-cost renewables is
good for customers, as opposed
to decades long commitments to
fossil resources that are more
expensive and increasingly
Out of compliance with state
law.
It also a regional system with
more renewables, but really a
regional system means less
overbuilding for reliability's
sake, if you can rely on a
shared pool of backup resources
that comes with not having 38
balancing areas, but having
fewer balancing areas in the
West where you can share less
building, less cost, good for
people who are paying. So
affordability benefits, that's
thing number one, reliability
benefits.
I talked about this, but on a
system that is reliant on
variable energy resources,
weather-based resources, you
need a grid that is bigger than
the weather to ensure that this
amazing snowstorm that we had,
there's going to be skiing
potentially this weekend for
anyone in the room that's
excited about that. Me too.
We can react to that by bringing
in resources from other parts of
the West. We aren't so reliant
on a specific area that can be
impacted by extreme weather
events or cyber attacks or
wildfire, you name it.
So that's good for reliability.
Decarbonization, we keep going
back to the renewable piece of
this, but if you're able to
bring on not just the lowest
cost, but the best suited
renewable energy resources, you
can have a system that is
reliable and affordable and thus
reliant on those variable energy
resources, fewer carbon
emissions in the atmosphere,
good for everybody. Economic
development, I think we'll talk
about this more later, but New
Mexico is really sitting on.
A huge opportunity here to build
this really, really, really
excellent wind and really,
really excellent solar resource
and sell it into markets in the
West that do not have that same
access, particularly, I will
highlight New Mexico wind
pairing with California solar.
New Mexico wind opportunity for
selling into other markets is
significant, and you know who's
going to be building those
projects or New Mexican workers
in rural parts of our state
spending money at the hardware
store in Corona. That is good
for economic development.
here in New Mexico.
I will say though, all of this
relies on transmission. So with
the regionalization structures
to say it very clearly in West's
perspective is that you need to
go to the full RTO level.
Real-time market, day ahead
market, full RTO to unlock those
transmission benefits that
ultimately allow you to access
these really yummy goodies in
all the categories of
affordability, reliability,
decarbonization, economic
development.
Thank you.
Thank you for that. Um.
Sounds, sounds good. But we
also, right, need to uh think
about what the potential costs
could be, um, and so, David,
maybe I'll, I'll look to you,
um, right, because the, the
commission's priority is to
ensure just and reasonable
rates, um,
And could you discuss the costs,
um, and you can also go into the
benefits if you like that um
customers might see from
regionalization. Yeah, sure.
I'll I'll, I'll sort of play the
foil a little bit. And first,
let me say up front, in terms of
sort of the, the benefit
framework that has been put
forth by both Ricky and, and
Kelsey. I don't, you know, yeah,
those are the, the benefits. I
mean, we, we all benefit when we
share, we all benefit when we
play together, we all benefit
when we get through, get rid of
things like, you know, multiple
Um, um, balancing areas, uh, we
all benefit when we, we can move
resources, um,
So the framework is, is there,
but, but let's, let's not engage
in magical thinking, OK? Just
because we say these are there,
they don't just magically spring
forth, right? You, you have to
design them into a system. So,
whatever system you are going to
follow and whether it's just
markets or whether it's going to
a full blown uh RTO or some
version in between or some
version we haven't seen.
There's still has to be a level
of governance.
And, and, and structure to it to
make sure that the benefits
happen and that, that consumers
are ultimately protected. Um,
And, and so, so we, what we
think about, you know, in, in
You know, the members that are
deep in sort of the east, the,
the things that have become
apparent is um remote regional
governance makes it very
difficult for you at the state
level to have much control over
what happens to consumer rates,
and you're sort of, um, um, you
become a price taker and to the
extent that if you have not
secured really strong rights in
whatever structure it has to
impact decision making around
what gets built and governance
and, and how
decisions are made, you know.
You're sort of stuck with what
they decide. And then you have
to start getting into a lot of
the political structures, um,
um, you know, who's dictating
what gets built, what gets
built, and why. So you have to
be very careful and very
thoughtful about how you set up
governance in a way that you
retain some state level
authority to have rate
protection because otherwise,
things are gonna just get
decided somewhere else. Uh, the
other thing I would say is some
of these structures are very
expensive. Some are less
expensive and some are more
expensive. So full blown, full
blown RTOs have proven in the,
in the East to not be
inexpensive organizations in and
of themselves. And there's an
argument about whether or not
they've really functioned in a
way that, that specifically with
respect to like the building of
transmission, right? If their
sole role is to like help get
the transmission built. Um,
there's a pretty big argument
about whether they've been
successful, at least at this
point. You know, we have lots of
articles about problems with
interconnection cues and being
able to get resources on that.
The grid, uh, there's an entire
series of issues with um, um,
only local projects I mean
billions and billions of dollars
are getting spent on
transmission in the east. Things
are getting built, make no
mistake, costs are getting
flowed to consumers, make no
mistake, but those are smaller
local projects that maybe don't
solve the big overriding
regional goal that we're looking
for in terms of being able to
move power and increase
resilience and other things.
They haven't actually
necessarily found a way to fix
some of the problems they
do so in fits and starts, and I
have noticed in the last, he's
just in the last week, there's
been billions and billions and
billions of dollars of sort of
projects announced between uh
SPP and, and, and myself, um.
Um, but those are, are not
inexpensive, uh, projects and
processes. The other thing too
is that in, and I, I think
I, I don't want to get into, I
don't want to be the, the person
that sort of gets into the
renewables good, renewables bad,
fossil good, fossil bad. I'm,
I'm not trying to go there with
this argument, but, but this
idea that we have to build the
grid big enough to meet the
weather so that we can put on
tons and tons of new renewables.
I guess the juxtaposition to
that argument would be, well, if
we still use some fossil
dispatchable units, and maybe
those are geothermal, which is a
thing in the West too, right?
If you have dispatchable fossil
units, you don't need to build
as big a grid as you might if
everything is, is renewable. So
there's, there's sort of a, a, a
boundary issue, like how much
would it cost to really build a
grid big enough to really meet
that level of, of renewable.
And, and you know, that's a
question, what you're seeing in
the east is that as you add more
renewable energy to the system,
which is great.
No objection to that. It
certainly serves a lot of
purposes and meets a lot of
policy objectives and, you know,
if we, if we can do it, we
should use it, but you're
starting to see the RTOs and the
balancing authorities start
increasing, you know, they used
to like we started with this
idea that look, if we all pull
everything together, we will
have lower reserve margins
because we're all sharing.
That's a benefit. What you're
now seeing is that as we hit
certain penetration levels on
renewable, you're starting to
see those reserve margins start
creeping back up because uh when
you have
a bigger set of intermittent
resources, you still have to
have a set of
Resources in reserve that are
dispatchable and functional.
Again, to get those reliability
and resilience uh objectives.
So, again, this is not an
inexpensive proposition.
I think the goals are all there,
but you have to be incredibly
thoughtful about how you
proceed, why you proceed, what
you put in place and, and, and
how you make decisions, um, and
again, I, I, I think one of the
biggest lessons that we probably
learned just like governance,
governance, whatever
organization, uh, how you design
your governance, who has a say
on the board, who has a say on
how decisions are made, makes
such a huge.
difference because um, you know,
we, we find ourselves, I think,
and often, you know, fighting
with decisions that are being
made, uh, that we don't
necessarily think are good for
consumers in the long run, but,
you know, you don't really have
a say and you don't have a way
to influence. So, so again,
all of the, the things that we
have talked about in terms of
being potentially beneficial for
consumers. Yes, that's why we're
having the conversation. That's
why regionalization is happening
and that's what we hope to
accomplish.
But it's not magical and it's
not necessarily inexpensive. So,
um, um, having more control over
that. The other thing I just
want to add, and, and sort of
like takes us down a big rabbit
hole, but like,
The thing we weren't talking
about two years ago, that we are
talking about now is the
gigawatts and gigawatts and
gigawatts of new load, whether
it's data centers or chip
centers or battery factories or
whatever it is.
It, it really changes the
equation, and the thought
process because they're just,
there's
And I, I'll say it. I'm not sure
there's any way we meet that
load with, with wind and solar
panels and batteries, right?
Like, it's just massive, and
that's why at least on the east,
I, I, I haven't tracked what's
going on in the West. But on the
east, you're starting to see
closed nuclear plants come back
online. You're starting to see,
um, um, whole generation or
other fossil generation
facilities that were retired or
near retirement coming back
online. Um, you are seeing gas
plants.
sort of the quiet little secret
is everybody's gonna build gas
plants, right? And and again,
I don't know that that
necessarily meets environmental
objectives, but the thing that,
that is going to happen is we're
going to have to find ways to
meet that new load, and it is
mad. I mean, it's just orders of
magnitude bigger and more
complicated than anything we've
had. And I don't think that
we've quite wrestled down what
that new
Challenge means in terms of this
idea, I, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
almost call it quaint that we've
had of regionalization. We're
just gonna sort of ease our way
into this, uh, it's really
gonna, I think, be a game
changer and really change uh how
we have to think about what
resources need to get built and
where, uh, how we dispatch those
resources and how we allocate
cost across those resources. So
it's gonna be an incredibly
complicated uh process. So
again,
I always like more local
control, and again, we'll talk
maybe a bit about this at the
end when we talk about some,
some fur and legal uh issues,
but, but, um, you have to have,
if you can't maintain local
control, uh, you have to have
some faith in the processes that
are happening at a regional
level to do things that are
ultimately good for consumers.
Um, thank you, David, and
Recognize I'm not a panelist,
I'm a moderator, but maybe I'll
play a little bit of a panelist
role since I am the moderator,
I'll call him myself. Um, I,
So
I, I think with respect to, um,
the, the control and uh making
sure that these ideas and these
benefits come to fruition. I
completely agree with you. Um,
you know, the, the devil's in
the details and you have to make
sure that the system that you
set up is going to accomplish.
What you're intending to
accomplish, and I, I will say
that um
I
have made a lot of friends in
the Western commissioners, uh,
because we are spending a lot of
time together, uh, thinking
about these things and engaging
with the markets that are coming
up and, uh, you know, like in
the case of the pathways
initiative, um, you know, uh,
commissioners were the ones who
who um asked for that. And so I
think you're absolutely right
that we need to make sure that
The system is in place so that
it produces the benefits we want
and uh we've been spending a lot
of time working on that. Um,
and, uh, so that's just one
quick response. I don't know if
anybody else wanted to respond
to that.
But, um, OK. So,
And then, um,
I think we could maybe move on a
little bit and we're running a
bit short on time. Um, so,
I'll move on a little bit more
to reliability, um,
And Kelsey, maybe I'll turn to
you for this. Uh,
How
How would being in a regional
day ahead market affect P&M's
operations and does a regional
market make it easier or more
challenging for P&M's operation
staff.
Thanks, yeah, um.
So, getting set up in the
regional markets is no easy task
and um once you're in it, there
are
Any number of problems every day
with the market, so I'm not
underestimating how difficult
and challenging it will be for
real time just to um just to
play nice with the kindergarten
kids, right? It's, it's, it's an
enormous amount of work, um, and
a big undertaking, that being
said, um, regional day had
markets are going to increase
our reliability overall. Um, I
think if, if you can think of
some sort of big weather event
like, like Ricky has mentioned,
so I'll I'll just
frame a recent one for the
Pacific Northwest and it was
I think it was last year, um,
Martin Luther King Day, the
Pacific Northwest had um several
days of below.
0 or below freezing temperatures
and record demands across, you
know, the whole like Oregon,
Washington, Northern California,
um, and they, they would have,
they did not have enough
generation on their own to meet
demand by by any stretch of the
imagination. The day ahead
markets that um are already in
place in California and
represented some some load in
that area.
Had the forecasts and all of the
data sent in by those market
participants.
Ahead of time, right? So.
In addition to system operators
looking at the weather and and
understanding that they need to
react internally. The day had
market ensures that the entire
market footprint, um, had
had visibility and and the
market, um.
bidding auction to clear a
massive amount of generation on
a day basis. So all of the
Southwest, you know, energy that
was probably not going to be
online was online as a result.
So the data had markets clears
and um a massive amount of
energy and that energy is then
then flowed successfully to the
northwest without any major EEA
or load shed events that could
potentially have occurred in the
past in that kind of situation.
You can flip it around in any
kind of situations we would have
with record peak or record cold
days here in New Mexico, that
forecast and that regional
Westwide visibility would be
demonstrated to the entire
market footprint in advance, and
all the generation would be on,
would be online ready to go, all
the generation that was
available would be online ready
to go to move to the southwest
in those instances. So that's
the main way that reliability is
affected by the day ahead
market. There's also just a much
greater deal of communication
and tool.
accessibility that can help you
in real time.
So the amount of communication
that comes from the market
operators with um just grid
events, so whether it's weather
or um really large generation
that was expected to be online
and isn't or, um, you know,
energy emergency alerts in any
area of the system. All of those
are communicated in real time
and it would have been.
Previously that you would kind
of see those events in your
immediate neighbor utilities.
Now you see it westwide, so the
whole grid is just more, more
able to respond to kind of
Westwide events.
Thank you for that. And um
Uh
And so I, I, I'll go to to Ricky
neck so we can talk a little bit
about economic development, you
know, you mentioned this idea of
Uh, building the grid bigger
than the weather, um, and I, I,
I agree because the reality is
that we do have extreme weather
that we didn't have before, and
Kelsey has challenges that she
might have not had before when
she was actually doing the
operation stuff. Um, and not
only that, but
We just don't have a big enough
grid right now. Even, even if we
take the weather out of it, we
just need a
Bigger grid to build a bigger
grid. And so I wanna ask Ricky
if you could talk about um
How regionalization,
regionalization can help with
economic development. And so,
um, one thing that we often hear
is in New Mexico and and in
other states is, uh, why should
we build transmission and
renewables in our in our state
to export them to other states.
Um, so would New Mexicans
benefit from merchant
transmission or even utility
transmission and generation and
um
If they're dedicated to
primarily serve loads outside of
New Mexico, and if so, how would
they benefit?
Thank you.
In the world now where we are
more regional.
Being protectionist.
is not going to serve us.
There are more resources to go
around, then we know what to do
with.
I'm, I'm looking at California
right now, bringing in outside
of California resources to
California is not going to
bottom out building resources in
California.
The same is true for New Mexico.
The demand.
For electricity.
is wild.
We talked about
Data centers.
We have federal incentives to
spur domestic manufacturing.
We have here in New Mexico, oil
and gas operations,
electrifying, demanding.
Renewable resources, we have
electric vehicle load growth.
We have beneficial
electrification of buildings.
Load growth is significant right
now. Big, big, big, big, big.
We're gonna need to build a lot
of stuff in order to meet that
demand.
Additionally, state laws around
the West paired with.
Individual utility goals and
commitments are driving 100%
carbon-free electricity.
To be required.
So the demand for resources, the
demand for new renewables is
unlike anything we have ever
seen before.
It will get built.
Utilities will be out of
compliance with state law if it
does not get built. So it's
going to get built somewhere.
The question is, do you think it
helps us in New Mexico to have
some of it or a lot of it be
built here.
My, my point is, yes. When I
speak with rural communities in
eastern New Mexico who are
suddenly benefiting from massive
investments from a wind farm.
I think the answer for them is
yes. Renewable energy resources
in New Mexico pay taxes.
Hear me say that.
Renewable energy resources that
are exported from New Mexico to
California, pay taxes in New
Mexico.
That's important.
A way to get more tax money to
New Mexico from renewable energy
development is to build more of
that stuff that is required by
law around the West. Build more
stuff, make more money.
Renewable energy resources
played gross receipts tax in New
Mexico on construction and
operations, as well as consumed
electricity and other purchased
commodities.
We pay corporate income tax.
We pay personal income tax on
payroll, land lease payments to
property owners and on operating
revenue of the vendors who are
providing contracting services.
We also pay property taxes to
local communities. There are
ways, there are opportunities to
not pay property tax through
industrial revenue bonds in New
Mexico for now renewables,
storage and transmission, which
results in instead of paying
property taxes, a direct payment
through a pilot, a payment in
lieu of taxes to that hosting
community, which also provides
deductions for other taxes that
we pay. So it isn't so simple as
to say, yes, all taxes are the
same.
everywhere. You can use an IRB
in New Mexico, New Mexico
communities are using these to
court the clean energy projects
they want to build there in
Roosevelt County instead of
building it in Torres County.
They are using that to their
advantage as communities to
court these resources that they
want. The renewables are paying
taxes here today.
They're helping supply a trained
workforce to build out the
demand that is required by law
around the West.
Do we want that here or do we
want that in Colorado as someone
who runs an organization across
6 states.
I think the companies would be
happy to build wherever they
can.
As someone who lives here in New
Mexico and sees our reliance in
our budget on a
Singular industry, which I'm not
saying is bad, but it's a big
portion of our budget to be
reliant on one type of industry.
Why wouldn't we be courting this
type of development that brings
money and jobs and investment
into our state, particularly our
rural communities. So,
I know we're talking about
regionalization and I'm going on
a big tax spiel here, but my
point is sharing resources
around the West. Somebody's
gonna build that. It's gonna get
built everywhere. Why would we
be protectionist? Let's build it
in New Mexico and let's sell it
because the buyers are there and
they're required to buy it by by
law from somebody. We can be
that that somebody.
I wanted to just add on with,
with a, a little bit of
technical perspective as well to
Ricky's, um.
Great answer there, um, but so
yeah, I would also
enthusiastically answer yes. Um,
and if, and if you think about
it in terms of um California's
duck curve problem, right? So,
um, solar added to the grid does
not always represent a an
increase in resource adequacy or
an increase in reliability. If
you have too much of any one
resource, um, the, the ability
for that to increase your
resource sufficiency is
diminished. So for instance,
right now in
Mexico, if we add more solar, it
doesn't help us. We don't need
energy during the solar hours,
um, but California could, um,
you know, they have a different
sunset, sunrise time than us, so
we, we really have to look at
megawatts, not as just something
that's available all the time,
but something that's available
during certain hours of the day
until we have enough storage
online to be able to kind of
move that around a little bit,
but so um same with wind, you
know, if we could get to a point
on our system where adding more.
When does not help our load, and
the only way to benefit from it
is to deliver it regionally. Um,
finally, you know, I, I agree.
Someone is gonna build it
somewhere. It's gonna be built,
so from a utility perspective, I
think of us, you know, as maybe
taking on a role like Amazon. We
need to be the delivery system
and there's a lot of benefits in
being helping deliver that
system. We have it sourced in
our state, why not get some
share of the delivery system
that's
moving it out to the demand and
the customers that represent so
much more load than we have in
our state.
Thank you for that. It sounds
like you guys are talking about
Turning a challenge into an
opportunity.
Um
Here I was worried about that.
We wouldn't have enough content,
Um, so, uh, we have about 10
minutes left. Uh, we might not
have as much time for questions
as I had hoped, but I, I did
want to see if uh David could
help us by explaining the
Fundamental laws of of the uh
delineating state and federal
jurisdiction. Um, since we're
talking about regionalization,
we start to talk more about
where the lines are for state
and federal jurisdiction or
where it might be blurred. um,
so David, could you please go
ahead and do that?
Yeah, and, and this is like
gonna be uh quick and dirty on
10 minutes is just not even
close enough to, to covering and
there's sort of a an interesting
case that I want to touch on.
Um, so, so in terms of I'm kind
of speaking more at FERC, uh, on
this. What's FERC's authority?
And so the federaleral Power
Act, um, in the Federal Power
Act, Connors gave for uh broad
powers. This is it 16 USC 791.
Uh these include the powers, uh,
and the authority to regulate
wholesale, sales of electricity
and transmission.
Of electricity in interstate
commerce.
Pretty broad. Um, and it also
provided FERC with the authority
to regulate practices, practices
that affect the rates for these
activities. So how broadly can
we interpret practices. So it's,
it's clearly rates setting
authority for these, these two
areas, wholesale, electricity
sales and, and interstate uh
transmission. Um, and then, uh,
FERC must ensure that the rates
and practices which affect
transmission of electricity are
just and reasonable, so it's a
standard just and reasonable.
Uh, standard
Um, and then the FPA also
empowers FERC with the ability
to regulate the transmission of
electricity in interstate
commerce with the caveat that
such federal regulation,
however, to extend only, this is
important, only to those matters
which are not subject to
regulation by the state.
That's going to be sort of an
interesting question. That's
where, um, uh, we get into some,
some vagaries about what
actually is within state control
and what is actually within
federal control. So in terms of
rate matters, I think it's
pretty clear. We have a long
history of, of, of work setting
rates and doing tariffs and and
that kind of stuff. So, but I
want to touch on a case really
quickly that's, that's going on
right now in Pennsylvania, and I
think it's kind of a subtle
little case, but I think it's
gonna, um, um,
Maybe get bigger.
Um, and, and the, the name of
the case is Transource PA versus
uh DeFrank and, and Commissioner
Franks, chair of the
Pennsylvania Commission, uh, and
so the, this was a case brought
by him.
And it is a case where uh PJM,
the RTO of the region, uh, went
through its ferroved processes
and came up with a decision that
a line needed to be built. Uh,
the line would reduce congestion
in certain areas, thereby
lowering uh uh uh costs, and it,
it met the, the PJM cost-benefit
ratio, and so they
PGM deems that this line will be
rebuilt. So, Transource the
local utility, uh, went to
Pennsylvania, which is one of
the states where the line was
gonna go through, uh, to ask for
traditional certificate of
authority, very regular thing
that we do in the states. Uh,
the Pennsylvania, um, um,
utility commission and
evaluating that has 44 things
they have to determine whether
there's a need for it, whether
it'll create an unreasonable
risk of danger to health and
safety, whether it's in
compliance with
Amicable statutes and
regulations for the Commonwealth
and whether uh we'll have a
minimum adverse environmental
impact.
The PEC in Pennsylvania looked
at this. And the thing that,
that, that they looked at as
they sort of re-evaluated the,
the question of need, uh, and
under the art or under the PJM
processes, the PJM only
considers areas where costs go
down.
So, they add up areas where
congestion is reduced and costs
go down, and if that is more
than 1.25% of the, the cost of
the project that is deemed
approved. What they don't look
at perfood, for proofd processes
as other areas where costs go
up and whether you net those,
Um, and what PJ, or what, what
Pennsylvania did was take a look
at that, uh, came up with the
determination that, that costs
in Pennsylvania go up, and it
was very unclear whether this
was actually a net beneficial
project and uh determined that
there was no need. Pennsylvania
denied the certificate for this
line, so there's no need for
this line under our statute, um,
and therefore it's denied. So
this whole process is up in
court now uh in the Central
District of, of uh Pennsylvania.
Um, and, and, in that case, uh,
you know, the question is, is
can a state that has a statute
that says it is responsible for
determining need is that
preempted by FERC.
Uh, uh, processes for authority,
PJM processes subject to for
authority. And the court said
that federal law can preact
state law under the Supremacy
Clause, and in this case, it
could, it could preempt state
law, um, directly by conflict or
uh as the law stands in obstacle
to the accomplishment. And the
court basically said, look,
Your Pennsylvania proceeding is
an obstacle to the federal, uh,
uh, goals of reducing
congestion. Therefore, uh, it
is, you are, you are.
It is unconstitutional for the
supremacy Clause. Uh, the court
did also separately find that it
violated the dormant Commerce
Clause, dormant commerce Clause
of the United States
Constitution, which prohibits
the states from imposing
restrictions that benefit in
state economic interests. It
looked at what Pennsylvania was
doing is strictly in state
protectionism.
So, the, the, the
The Pennsylvania decision was,
was overturned. It's
unconstitutional. Now we're up
to the appellate process. So
obviously the Pennsylvania
Public Utilities Commission is
is appealing and then uh Naruk
is on Amicus. Some of my
members, including my
Pennsylvania member are uh um um
in this process. And, and the,
the question really is, is what
is FERC's authority in this
instance, over transmission
planning and siding, and, and
interestingly, FERC itself and
one of the principal plan
planning laws under which PJM
derives its authority as FERC
order 1000.
And 34 1000.
In that order, they specifically
said nothing in this final rule
involves an exercise of
sighting, permitting, or
construction authority. The
transmission planning and cost
allocation requirements of this
final rule are associated with
the process used to identify and
evaluate the transmission
systems needs, um, and, and this
in no way involves an exercise
of authority over those specific
substantive matters
traditionally reserved for the
states.
And then on rehearing for a
quarter 1,000A. FERC reiterated,
it is important to recognize
that order 1000 transmission
planning reforms are concerned
with process.
These reforms are not intended
to dictate substantive outcomes
such as what transmission
facilities will be built and
where we recognize that such
decisions are normally made at
the state level.
So Fer and it's order 1000
basically said, this is a
process, it's a planning
process. It's not a substantive
outcome. It is not in any way
supposed to impose on state
authority.
And then Commissioner Christie
just recently, uh, in, in some
cases has reiterated this. He
said that, well, FERC regulates
RTOs such as PGM and in no way
does that regulatory oversight
represent any intent to preempt
the state's decade-old authority
to conduct CPN CPCN proceedings
that consider issues of need and
prudence. So even Commissioner
Christie right now says, no, we
don't have that authority, but
interestingly, the court, at
least the circuit court level
in, in Pennsylvania says that
Burke's
Oversight statutes give it
preemptive authority, which is
interesting because the other
piece of the appeal is this. If
you think about FERC, generally
speaking, FERC has no siding
authority. Unless you interpret
practices related to race as
giving for broad authority, um,
they really have no siding
authority with one specific
It's uh instance in the uh
Federal Power Act of 2005, uh
section 26, 216 established
what's called the, the National
Interest Electric Transmission
corridors, and that was giving
authority to DOE to identify
certain national interest
corridors and within those
corridors, FERC does have some
fighting, some fighting
authority, and some ability to
side a line even if a state
withholds its authority or
refuses.
There's no to the sightings.
That's the only narrow space
that for at least in theory, by
statute has sighting authority.
So the real question, the broad
question and where it gets
blurry, and I I'm right on time
here is
The first general statutes,
well, so the back up first, let
me phrase it as a rhetorical
question. When I was in law
school years ago, it was sort of
the rule that I learned that you
cannot uh delegate that which
you do not have.
Right, that's sort of the basic
rule. So the question is, does
for a calf siding authority,
subject that would impact the
state's authority, the state's
need-based authority and
statutes. Does FERC have
authority that would
would trump that and if it does,
can it delegate that authority
to PJM or conversely, in FERC
through setting up a planning
process at PJM.
End up with a preemptive statute
or preemptive authority over
state statutes that it doesn't
and couldn't exercise primarily
on its own. So it's a little
blurry right now. Um, there's
the, you get sort of this binary
question, right? So, either, if
you are in a state, maybe New
Mexico, I've looked at your
statute. It says that, that you
have authority, or, or your
responsibility when citing
transmissions to look at need
and location, which is kind of
the way most of them are set up.
Do you still have the ability
Uh, to, to look at me.
Um, if you, if you move to a
trans an RTO or something else?
Are you trading that authority
away and do you have the
authority to trade that
authority away? And 3, doesn't
really even matter because based
on the court's ruling, Burke
functionally has preliminary or
primarily preempted the entire
sort of field on interstate
transmission and you don't have
it even if you think you have it
now. So this is the case that's
gonna get sorted out, um.
Uh, and mor gets way up.
Weirdly, it's, it's a case of
first impression. There's not
been another state that has
overturned uh an RTO sort of
need-based decision. So, I, you
know, that's a quick and dirty.
Uh, again, the case is
Transource versus DeFrank. It's
an interesting read, but, but
this question of who, what, you
know, when I spoke earlier about
what authority you specifically
retain as you start moving
through the joining or
regionalization of these areas,
and you have to be quite
thoughtful about it. You also
have to be
thoughtful based on what you
think the legal framework is,
and if you believe that there's
a preemptive authority. Is there
a way to sort of claw that back
or make sure that you have some
additional level of authority
that you are building into the
process to, again, effectuate
your obligation and ours at the
consumer advocate level to help
protect uh consumers in our
state. So there's a quick and
dirty like 10 minutes uh
question on Fer law, federal
law. Uh, well, thank you for
that, David.
and um
So, the, the lines do get
blurred, um, you know, the, and,
and David, you and I should have
a conversation about this at
some point because I, I am
familiar with the Transoce case
and
you know brief um panel prep
meeting. I, I mentioned that I
would have made a different
decision than the Pen
Pennsylvania commission, um, and
so, uh, you know, but, but that
is a reality that uh it gets
complicated. Um, even
more reason for the regulators
and the commissioners themselves
to be involved regionally,
especially right now is order
1920 is uh really, you know,
starting to get going. Um, so
that's something that we at the
PRC will be very involved in,
I'm sure, um, unfortunately, we
have run out of time. I did want
to uh leave some time for
questions and, you know, ask for
some, actually, can I still do
this? Can you guys?
I, I, I just, I, maybe I'll
give, um,
Uh, Kelsey and Ricky just 11
final question, um,
What suggestions would you have
for the regulators in the room,
if you could.
Please make it quick, um, for us
to keep in mind as we are moving
forward with regionalization.
Kelsey.
I'll just echo a little bit
about what, what you mentioned,
so the, I mean, there's no doubt
way more energy is crossing
state lines, so there is, there
is a
A need to work more regionally
and maybe some transference of
power from the state to the
federal level. But I think
The state commissioners should
just really focus on becoming
more regional themselves. The
utilities and the load serving
entities have done that. We
interact with each other on a
much more comprehensively,
regionally, and I think um it
seems like the commissioners in
the west are on that road and I
would just encourage that to
continue.
I think you all are doing a lot.
You know, you, you too are
reacting to this moment that
we're in, and I think we all
want, or I will celebrate the
work that you and your fellow
commissioners are doing to get
educated on the topic, to get
all of us educated on the topic
to go to conferences, meet with
others.
There are a lot of little steps
we can take. There are a lot of
big steps we're moving toward
and we need to be thoughtful
about doing all of it. I think
one thing you're doing well and
I would encourage you to keep
doing is looking for the
opportunities to act when they
exist.
As well as shooting for the moon
on the big questions. So you
mentioned order for order 1920,
there's a near term opportunity
now around transmission and cost
allocation, engaging with the
public, engaging with the
utilities, the regulators have a
role in. So looking for these
opportunities in the present
moment, seizing them at the same
time that you are collaborating
regionally to move toward
answering the big questions. I
think you're already doing that,
but would encourage you to.
Keep, keep going.
Well, thank you and we're out of
time, so please a round of
applause for our panelists.
And we're on, uh, lunch break
and back at 1:30.
Recording stopped.
All right. Thank you. I'll be
signing off. Thank you, David.
Yeah.
What are you doing
your property.
Although,
although
Yes.
Is
he was he was.
You know.
I don't know.
But yeah.
I.
Yeah
Yeah, I mean, I'm curious to get
because that's the real
question, it feels like we're,
we're, you know, are we, are we
baking in
Um.
This is a 3-minute warning.
Recording in progress.
introduction
OK, no introductions. Um,
welcome back. This is uh Pat
O'Connell or
Panel is the title is Modern
Economic Development in New
Mexico, so we're, we're gonna
have a conversation that I think
really pulls together lots of
things that we've been talking
about over yesterday and this
morning, um, also we're in 4th
quarter, so I just wanted to
take a moment of personal
privilege and point out that for
those of you who've been here,
this has been a remarkable
event, I mean, the minimum
requirement was get lawyers,
CLEs, uh, that.
happened while people like me
were learning new stuff, so for
me that's fantastic and I really
appreciate the conversation
that's happened not just with
the panels, but in the hallways
and uh just thought.
It's important to acknowledge
this whole thing exists because
of uh Choiyakori and Jordan
Guitars here. So I just wanted
to make sure.
All of us who participated
Just recognize their efforts
and, and uh this is the 2nd, we
did one last year, feels like
it's something we should keep
doing
well done.
OK, so there's that, um, next
reminder, we're here to talk
about modern economic
development in New Mexico. For
those of you who are here
yesterday morning, uh, got a
reminder that
Chapter 62, section 3, paragraph
1 is really the thing that
motivates what's going on these
last few days, that's the public
utility Act. Uh, so what we have
is a panel here and if you read
that, it, it's very short, you
know, it's just
Not that much of the page, but
the concept in it is huge,
right? It's uh
public utilities are, have a
public interest and then
These, you know, public interest
will be met if things are
balanced. And so that's your
non-lawyer summary of 62-3.1,
but the devil's in the details.
I mean, as we've learned just
over the last day and a half.
That's a huge question that's in
a very short piece of a powerful
law. So I thought a way to
structure this panel is think of
it, we've got
marvelous human beings here,
they're each representing a, a
concept that is embodied in that
balance. So, uh, we have
Representative Dixon with us,
um, he gets to represent the
state of New Mexico and what its
citizens and, and what we need.
Uh, we've got, uh, Nick Staffel
here from Holland and Hart, and
uh he's representing growth, you
know, he, he's uh his law firm
represents some of the large
customers out there.
that are uh need the electricity
that Don Terry.
CEO of PNM provide, so Don's got
service. Nick's got growth, uh,
Representative Dixon as New
Mexico and uh I'm gonna get some
temporary tattoos of 62.3.1, so
we can all, all us regulators
can remember what it is that
we're doing. So, since I'm the
one that's supposed to be
thinking about the balance I get
to ask the questions here, uh,
and then we had a great prep
session, so I'm just kind of
hoping that, that we can
replicate that here and benefit
from the questions here in the
room. So the kickoff is each of
our panelists are
Just gonna take a few moments to
reflect on what's going on, uh,
from their individual
perspectives, what does modern
economic development in New
Mexico mean, you know, what they
see in
And then we'll have conversation
around what challenges come with
that, and then maybe even
better, how can we turn some of
those challenges into
opportunities.
And then from that foundation,
uh, I have a few questions and
hopefully have some good
interaction with the folks in
the room here. So I'm gonna
Turn it over to Ms. New Mexico,
representative Meredith Dixon.
Thank you. Um,
Thank you for inviting me and um
rather than represent all of New
Mexico, I think I'll, I'll try
to stick with sort of um my
legislative uh knowledge and
perspective. So
As the, the commissioner
chairman mentioned, I am a state
representative. I represent a
district in Albuquerque, and in
my role, I serve on both the
appropriations Committee and
House Energy. And so I think
that those are both fitting when
we talk about economic
development and modern economic
development and why everyone is
here.
I see economic development
moving forward in this state,
particularly.
On the greenhouse gas emission
reduction front, so
decarbonization, and then how we
transition our state's budget
from primarily fossil fuels to
um other more diverse um
economic drivers. So those two
things sort of frame how I look
at stuff in the legislature, um,
and how I see
The future for economic
development here in New Mexico
and why, you know, they're so
intertwined, uh, particularly as
we look at clean energy, um, new
developments in technology,
bringing different companies,
uh, large and small, to New
Mexico and how we make sure that
they have the energy that they
need to be sustainable and
operate in a uh decarbonized
environment.
So
Great. Thank you.
Um, and I'll turn it over to uh
Don Terry, just what are his
PNMC in in terms of requests for
Mm
Service for that are associated
with this modern economic
development.
No, absolutely, Chairman, and
let me, let me start off, uh,
um, I might deviate a little bit
and then he'll knock me back in
place, um, but, uh, you know, I
was here this morning and I
can't echo enough, uh, uh, the,
the, the panels. They did a
fantastic job. They provide a
great perspective. The one thing
I learned is that you have to
have a disclaimer statement and
so my disclaimer statement, if
you like what I say, I represent
PNM. If you don't, if you, I
represent Don Terry, so we'll,
we'll, we'll go with that. Um,
as this is a topic that I'm
extremely passionate about and,
uh, you know, one of the things
that I'd like to start with and
I like to tell stories, so this
is might might be where Charman
cuts me off, but, uh, um, I
mean, how many folks have
actually gone in escape rooms.
Yeah, aren't they pretty cool? I
mean, a lot of times you go in
there and the task is you go in
there, you have a clue, you find
all these other clues and you
have a timetable, usually an
hour, and if you work together
and collaborate really, really
well, then you're able to
accomplish it and you get your
picture taken at the, at the
outside, right? And that's like
the, the trophy. Have you ever
gone in there with somebody you
don't even know? Now, I, I'd
encourage you to do that
because, you know, as we think
about economic development and
we think about the other things
that we talk about today. It's
that collaboration.
and working together and
learning from each other, that's
gonna allow us to continue to
move these opportunities uh
forward that we have. And, you
know, for P&M, uh, we focus on
three key areas in economic
developments is, is one of the
absolutely critical ones. The
second one is education, and the
third one is the environment,
and I think they all tie
together. You can't do one
without the other, on the
environmental front being an MS,
you know, you heard this morning
from Kelsey Martinez, we're over
65% carbon free thanks to the
Energy Transition Act.
And the avenue that it's
created and why they all tied
together will be 75% by 2026,
and that's pretty exciting. But
companies that are looking to
come to New Mexico, one of the
reasons why they're looking to
come to New Mexico. Here's the
tie, is the, you know, the ETA
and the transition that's
happened, because they have
carbon footprints or they have
footprints that they're trying
to achieve as well too. And so
when they look at New Mexico,
that's a great opportunity, uh,
when, when, you know, the state
has legislation like that and
it's moving.
New Mexico for. The second piece
that I think is absolutely
critical is education.
And it's more than just
education in the, in the front
of uh, um, you know, where we
rank on schools, and you
probably have one of those
friends like I do that if
anything ever negative comes
out, they send you an email, uh,
but, you know, for us, education
is you have to have the
workforce to be able to create
the economic development. And so
it ties so closely like this,
and so we invested at P&M uh
non-ratepayer dollars, but we
invest both on the STEM side,
but we just launched a program
in the school that really ties
to the trade.
Because
that's an avenue for these
students to be successful. Then
the third piece is the economic
development, and I've been with
P&M 28 years. I'm entering my
twenty-ninth year, and I can
tell you the last 3 years, I've
never seen the magnitude of
folks that are interested in New
Mexico, and they kind of give
you a feel, and I'll answer
Chairman's question to kind of
give you a feel is, you know, we
average between 3000 and 4000
megawatts of interest.
All the time for the last couple
of years.
In New Mexico. To give you a
feel of how that matches with
our uh our uh system. We're like
a 2300 megawatt system. So you
can see the growth and the
interest, um, uh, that's in New
Mexico. And again, it's those
three areas that they look at as
site selectors come and they
look at the great opportunities
that happens to to be in our
great state.
So thank you, Chairman.
OK, thank you. Um, then turn it
over to Nick, and then Nick, uh,
if you could take that first
question is what are you seeing
and then go ahead and, and start
with challenges and then we'll
do the
Reverse snake for those of you
with your fancy football draft
and uh and we'll go back to dawn
and, and Representative Dixon.
Sounds great. Uh, so Nick Stopel
with Hol and Hart. I guess I
couldn't be the token lawyer up
here without also my own
disclaimer, so whatever I say
are my views, not the views of
my firm or my clients, um, I'm
privileged that I practice
exclusively public utility
regulation across the West, uh,
and so what I've seen in the
last few years really reflects
what we're
to see in New Mexico or I've
seen in New Mexico the last few
years, which um the West for
decades had a capacity surplus.
And so we had more generation
available, then we had load that
needed it.
And we've seen a lot of these
decarbonization policies, much
like the energy Transition Act
in New Mexico, um, really take
advantage of that excess
generation in terms of being
able to retire dispatchable
capacity and replace it
primarily with zero emitting
resources with renewables, and
now, as we've kind of gotten
into a tougher part of that
dynamic in terms of how do we
maintain
The reliability of the system
while going through that
transition, we've now dropped
onto it the most significant
load growth we've seen in 20
plus years, right, before the
California power crisis. And so,
uh, we're seeing that
particularly in Southeast New
Mexico around the Permian, where
we have oil and gas producers,
the, the legacy tax base of the
state, really focused on their
own emission footprint like Don
was
just talking about.
And in order to address that,
seeking to electrify
significantly more of their
operations on the oil and gas
side than they have in the past,
those, those historically would
be uh fueled with on-site
generation, either natural gas
or diesel, uh, and now they're
wanting to take advantage of
being connected to the grid.
And the decarbonization that
comes with that over time.
Uh, but we're running into this
chicken and a challenge of OK,
the load, the load in New
Mexico, the load in the region
is developing or wants to
develop faster than the
resources can develop to meet
that load.
And so I think what we're seeing
is some real tension around, OK,
how do we balance supporting low
growth and economic development
and the benefits that come with
that.
With
Maintaining the trajectory, the
state has been on and the region
has been on in terms of
decarbonization, uh, and
reliability and cost, right? So
now we have kind of this
multi-pronged challenge of
saying, OK, well, these are all
good things, but we can't have
them all at once. And so, do we
keep legacy emitting generation
on longer in order to support
this growth. I mean, we're
seeing in the country
conversations around nuclear
power coming back online for.
plants that have been shut down,
um, which I think is pretty
remarkable, but absolutely seems
like it needs to be part of the
solution if we're going to meet
this demand that's
materializing, um, but in New
Mexico in particular, we have
this challenge of kind of both
ends of the queue. We've got
Load requests on the SPP
footprint that are delayed. And
so those can't get approved. And
part of why they can't get
approved is because we need the
transmission capacity to deliver
power to those loads. The other
part is we've got a very backed
up interconnection queue for new
resources, and then you've got a
utility like Southwestern Public
Service and look at my friend
Zoe here. Um, that has to be
able to show SPP that they have
the resources to meet their load
to get new load
requests approved
And then you've got a situation
where they're regulated and they
have to convince their regulator
that they have a need for these
new resources, uh, to get them
approved and to get them built
and that all has these very long
lead times that going back to
what I was just touching on, are
slower than what industry wants
than what the data centers want
than what the oil and gas
companies want in terms of their
ability to ramp up their
operations. So, uh, I think
that's really a core part of the
problem that we're confronting
now on an economic development
side.
how do you kind of address both
sides of that challenge to get
the load approved, to get the
resources built and to get the
transmission built and
transmissions incredibly long
lead time. You look at SPP just
having approved this new 765 KV
line down into southeast New
Mexico, where they say it's
needed for reliability in 206,
but it won't be online until 29.
And that's the kind of challenge
we have where they can look
forward and see, OK, the load is
materializing, the loads there,
but we can't deliver to that
load for years.
Great, thanks.
Um
So what we heard there was
what's going on plus some of the
challenges uh and then Don, did
you
Help us with the challenges from
your perspective in serving this
load.
No, no, absolutely, uh,
Chairman. I think the key and
Canada to emphasize, it is the
chicken and the egg is we, we
kind of look at it as well too.
Our service territory is a
little different than SPSs and
they have a significant amount
of demand in that area that I
think you just heard about as I
talk about the P&M service
territory. The challenge we have
is the site selectors and the
site selectors somebody hired by
a company. A lot of times you
don't know which company it is.
I mean, there's confidentiality
agreements and they come in and
they usually communicate for
with the, the cabinet secretary
for the governor or one of the
economic development uh
organizations that are in the
areas that we serve. And then
the second call, they always
make is to the utility, and it's
the electric utility. It's OK,
you know, do you have sites
ready? Um, if you don't have
sites ready, how fast can you
get your site ready uh for us to
be able to build our
infrastructure so that we can be
up and running. And the lens
that they look at it from is, I
mean, you know, from a finance
perspective, they look at it
like a
present value. If it, it's gonna
take me 4 years to, you know,
go, both go through, you know,
kind of the, you know,
Approvals process plus the bill
process plus the order process,
which is a whole different other
uh uh gamut today and the supply
chain, and they can go to a
state next to us, and they can
do it in 2 years. You think
about revenue or profits, you
know, the likelihood, no matter
what the incentives are, that
come from the state, that's
gonna probably outweigh it. So
for, for our service territory,
it's a lot about having sites
ready and it's not just electric
ready, it's water, uh,
infrastructure ready. If those
sites are.
than the likelihood is, you
know, we see some of those come
to fruition at a very rapid
pace, uh, you know, I think that
as you kind of look at the
energy transition as a as a
whole, and you look at P&M
that's uh gonna be 75%
carbon-free by 2026, you know,
we really need growth in the
demand, uh, you know, the next
set of megawatts become more and
more and more expensive. The
next set of infrastructure
developments become more and
more expensive. So that economic
development spreads the base,
uh, you know, and allow
us to continue down the path.
And so that's why, you know,
some of the problems we're
seeing transmission is another,
uh, area that we've been heavily
focused on, um, because the
cheapest megawatt is the
megawatt, you never have to, to
put in the ground, you could
leverage through transmission
and so there's a big focus
there. That's more of a middle
middle term solution as you
start thinking about solutions,
economic development is a
near-term solution, site
readiness, how do you kind of
build that? The middle term
solution is transmission and
interconnection in the West that
we heard about in the, in the
And the the speakers before and
then education, you know, this
partnership between businesses,
uh, which is absolutely
important, educators and the
legislature that triangle is
absolutely important to, to make
sure we have the workforce that
can actually, you know, with as
this economic development kind
of goes through the process that
we have the workforce here.
If I can add on that too. It's
been interesting watching with
these data centers kind of in
the west that seemed like a few
years ago, they would go around
and shop for the best deal,
right? Which utility can give
them the best price or the best
discount on an economic
development rate. And now it
seems so much of it is being
just driven by when can you
deliver, uh, and then now that's
transitioning to this real
interest in co-locating
facilities at generating units
to be able to avoid the
transmission build out, um, and
matching that up.
with long term purchase
commitments which
Historically large industrial
consumers were pretty gun shy
around committing themselves to
a long term price. They wanted
to track the market primarily,
they had that option and now
we're seeing their priorities
flip where they're willing to
pay a premium, uh, to locate at
a facility that can get them
power the soonest. I don't know,
Don, is that consistent with how
things have changed with PNM?
No, absolutely. I mean, uh,
those interconnection uh
components where you can
interconnect quickly. I mean,
actually decreases the time.
Uh, so what's going on with
FERC, uh, 2023 is absolutely
important to kind of clear out
those, those queues, um, I think
we have, uh, to give you a feel,
I think we have 20,000 megawatts
in the queue, and a lot of those
are just placeholders and so,
you know, for 2023 should
hopefully start to clear those
out, but it's, it's really
speeding the process along.
So one of the things that I love
about being in the legislature
is um solving problems, you
know, we get to hear from a
whole variety of stakeholders on
any given issue, and um, you
know, we can sort of make a list
of the challenges or obstacles,
um, and then, you know, propose
through legislation or the
budget, um, how we address
those. And so, starting with
some of the challenges, um, Don
mentioned workforce.
Um,
I think in earlier.
comments, but one of the
struggles that we've seen is
just a lack of workforce. So,
you know, the legislature and
the state has put a lot of money
into rebuilding our career
technical education programs,
um, but we also see just across
the board, there aren't enough
workers in the workforce in New
Mexico. Um, and so I would say
that that is definitely uh one
of the challenges.
Um, Nick mentioned, um,
pre-building.
Uh, load.
have been
Yeah, I think I had that.
that you had mentioned something
about that. Maybe I'm getting it
wrong. But um when
Um, site selectors come in or
companies are looking to build
in New Mexico. Um, we don't have
a good option for how we build
out in advance, um, knowing that
people are going to be
interested in coming to New
Mexico. So right now, a lot of
it is you have to have the, the
customer.
Nailed down, um, whereas we're
moving into an economy where
things are faster, right? The,
um, data centers, for instance,
just have a lot more flexibility
with where they're gonna go
based on who can provide um the
energy.
So I think that that's one of
our sort of policy um challenges
that we need to address.
Um
That goes along with the lack of
avail available um commercial
and industrial sites, um, and
then
The Permian Basin, you know,
talking about the energy
companies that want to
decarbonize, um, you know.
Working with oil and gas
companies, they have, you know,
a lot of them have net zero
pledges, and to get there, they
really need to electrify or
they're gonna have to build um
their own sources of clean
carbon-free generation.
But if you're in the Permian,
you do sort of have the
opportunity to just go to Texas
if it's gonna be a faster
pathway. So I would say that
that's another challenge.
Well, I'll just add to that part
of what we're seeing is when,
when they're
Loads are finding out how long
of a lead time it'll be to get
service and then they start
exploring self-generation.
It seems like that conversation
frequently leads to citing the
generation in Texas because it's
more favorable for building
things like new gas units. And
so again, that's this
interesting tug of war where
you're not only losing control
over that power supply, right,
if it goes self-generation, the
state isn't regulating it from
a, a public utility standpoint.
And then you're also losing the
economic development associated
with it because that asset is
being built in Texas where
they're feeling like it's easier
to to get that built on time.
So, um, it is this interesting
kind of squeezing the balloon
and seeing where the other issue
pops up when you try to solve
another one.
the, the comment around kind of
building to serve in advance
building out infrastructure.
You know, I don't, I don't know
how many people appreciate that.
SPS was facing disallowances for
a capacity surplus within the
last several years, right? I
mean, that's, that's how much
the situation has swung and to
the question around balance.
Well, who pays for that? If, if
you build out infrastructure
with the hope that the load will
materialize.
You're adding investments that
other customers are expected to
support until that load shows
up. And so, um, you get into
these really tough public
interest questions around who
should pay for that speculation.
Where's the risk of that going,
or do you wait until private
industry says, yes, we're ready,
we'll sign the agreements and
then the utility can go forward
and order the equipment and now
you're stuck with that long lead
time, but yeah, it's a
It's a very challenging question
around
If you build it they will come
maybe and when uh and who pays
in the meantime.
Yeah, I promise you we'll get
back to that. In fact, that was
uh an interesting conversation
in one of the panels before
lunch was um
Who pays what and where's the
value accrue. Um, so anyway,
just to round out the
Kick off to this, uh, we also
want to talk about opportunities
and uh Don give you opportunity
to go first and just what does
New Mexico look like for you if
this modern economic
development, uh, paradigm is is
advanced. No, absolutely, this
is the, this is the fun part of
the job. So if you kind of look
into the future, I state that I
say, you know, look for the
future, pull, pull, pull from
the future. So I mean, you pull
it for um pull from the present.
I think that's important. So
when you
when you kind of look at, you
know, opportunities that exist,
and you look at the New Mexico,
I mean, New Mexico's 5th and
potential of solar and fit and
potential of wind, and you look
at the opportunities from the
panel before of uh being able to
create tax base and
opportunities associated with
the wind that we have in New
Mexico as well as the solar, but
primarily the wind and as an
exporter of, of that, that's a
tremendous economic boom for the
eastern side of the states, um,
it could be leveraged in the
The premium basin as well too,
uh, requires transmission, so
there, there's a bright future
for New Mexico if we can align
all the stars. As you think
about the opportunity, um, uh,
for us, I mean, right now
because of the lack of
transmission, the last few RFPs,
we haven't gotten any wind, um,
and so building out some
transmission and we're in the
midst of a twenty-year
transmission plan, uh, that will
kind of lay that vision out as
we kind of integrate the
transmission and the
distribution, and the generation
side, that will allow us to
to the New Mexico to benefit
from the wind, but it'll also
allow, you know, as, as, you
know, an opportunity to export
and create those tax bases. As
we look at economic development,
you know, the, the thing that
I'm most passionate about is
education, uh, you know, just a
little history, not to go too
deep, but my, both my parents
were educators and uh my mom
taught special ed and I, I
watched for many years how she
got kids into career paths that
they were successful of, and,
you know, as you think about our
school systems, and you think
about the opportunity of
education. Think about the
linkage between, you know, what
the the legislature is doing on
CT and credits and kind of
aligning that piece of the
puzzle with the economic
development because I can tell
you we need more electricians,
we need more plumbers, we need
more builders, as you kind of
see the horizon, the connection
between education can move that
area forward. So you can see as
you start to connect the dots,
it's not just one little bubble
of economic development. It kind
of moves the whole state forward
while creating tax base, you
know, and, you know, aligning
our
education system with these
opportunities, so.
representative.
So, um, opportunities, so
building off of um some of the
challenges uh and how we can
address those. Um, number one,
the state does have a budget
surplus right now, um, thanks
to, um, oil and gas and the the
fossil fuel industry. So,
I would say that that is one
just sort of overarching
opportunity. The other
opportunity for New Mexico that
is distinct is our um.
Our knowledge, you know, our
national labs, our military um
installations or universities,
we really have a strong um
intellectual capital here in
this state, and I think that's a
huge opportunity, um, that we
can be leveraging. Um, we
actually, um, sort of as a side
note about that.
took um a group of uh
legislators, we went um on a
site visit to Sandia National
Labs, um, and got to see and
hear from some of the engineers
on the different um technology
that they were working on and
some was on wildfire response
and it's really, it, I mean,
it's incredible, um, and so many
of us, especially um in the
legislature, I, I feel like I
ought to know more about what's
going on at the labs. Um, so
that was a great opportunity.
So, um, that, um, intellectual
capital, but also um the, the
knowledge that comes from our
traditional fossil fuel
companies, um, either in the
engineering and the sort of the
production of energy, but then
also um a lot of the um
Major oil and gas companies have
low carbon ventures, um, and are
investing in um different types
of programs whether it's
geothermal, nuclear, um, carbon
capture, you know, just a lot of
research and development going
on um in other parts of their
businesses, um, that I think can
really be an opportunity here in
New Mexico. Um, the state
Investment council investing in
some of our startups and and
being more involved in investing
in funds that
Um, are supporting New Mexico
companies, I think that's
another opportunity.
Um, that ties in clean tech, uh,
decarbonization and economic
development, um, and then the
other thing, uh, that I would
say is, uh, we do have an
opportunity in this coming
legislative session to start
addressing some of these
challenges that we've talked
about, um, whether it's through
legislation trying to speed up
site readiness, um, really, um,
have a stronger uh portfolio of
industrial and commercial sites,
knowing
where they are and, and what
infrastructure needs to be built
out. And then also, um, focusing
on what can the legislature do
to support?
Um, some of the policies and
budgets for agencies that are
involved in permitting and
regulation, uh, sort of those
oversight mechanisms.
So I'll touch on a couple
solutions that I think come from
the regulatory world in New
Mexico that are pretty cool, uh,
at least for a utility nerd like
me. So, um, the PNM sleeping
tariff arrangements, so for
those that don't understand how
those work, it allows a customer
to go out and contract for their
own resource, typically a
renewable resource that is not
located on the same side as
their load, and then they have
that delivered through the
utility system. So PNM has
that tariff in place, um, which
is, I think helpful in a few
ways. It allows that customer to
really support the investment
and the resources required to
serve them. It allows that
resource to be located
potentially in the most
favorable location, given the
nature of the resource subject
to transmission constraints and
uh other citing issues, and it
helps to contribute to the
state's overall environmental
goals because you're
Typically investing in zero
emitting resources through that
kind of program. Uh, so you're
serving load growth, but in an
environmentally conscious way,
the similar type program that's
offered right now on the SPS
system is the standby rate, see
hearing examiner Hurst has
probably some scars from this
fight as the Zoe, but um, so
that was a fight in front of the
commission through a few cases
that got resolved a couple of
years ago about an appropriate
by service rate and rate design
that would support a behind the
meter solar generation facility
for a large industrial customer,
so customers again that are
interested in investing their
own money into a resource to
meet their load, uh, that's
consistent with the state's
environmental policy, but then
how do you kind of balance
acknowledging the costs and
benefits associated with that
resource in terms of the energy
and capacity it brings.
with the fact that it is by
nature intermittent and so it
has to be backed up by the
system when the sun's not
shining or at night, uh, and so
that, that gets deep into the
nuances of rate design, uh, and
how utility costs are incurred
and recovered and how to balance
again the, the public interest
around that customer who wants
to make an investment, get the
benefits of it with the impact
to customers overall, uh, but I
think that was actually a very
Progressive approach. I'm not
familiar with a similar standby
tariff and in the other states
where I work, um, but it's a
really cool model and so Chevron
has already put a behind the
meter solar facility, uh, it's
20 megawatts at their facility
in southeast New Mexico, uh, and
I know there is interest in
customers looking at um behind
the meter installations that get
into the hundreds of megawatts.
Uh, so really looking at how do
they put their money where their
mouth is to
to meet their load as it grows
and that's in part driven by
their own net zero goals and in
part driven by them trying to
solve the problem of the delay
in getting service from the
grid.
Um, but it has benefits to the
system as well because it
reduces the overall load that
has to be served by the system
on peak.
Uh, and then that reduces the
amount of resources the utility
has to carry to serve that load.
So, um, those are two very, I
think, interesting potential
solutions that are already
existing in the state for
customers to take advantage of.
Great. Thank you. Um.
So I think we've explored the
topic really well. I have a
great foundation for that and
then as I, I promised Nick, we
would get back to the the new.
The big regulator question here,
which
Two things I've heard is there's
value in uh I call it slack, but
we've called it pre-building on
this, uh,
Panel where there is ability to
attach new things to the grid
because not every slot is taken,
uh, and then on the other hand,
if the system that we're
regulating can't.
Create that opportunity fast
enough, then the load's gonna go
around right there, they'll go
to another state or they'll
create their own solution off
the grid, um, and then as a
regulator, you know, one of my
charges is to create the
competition that a monopoly
doesn't see, so I frequently ask
myself, well, what's wrong with
that, you know, if there's
If utilities facing competition
from its own customers.
Uh, that might be OK, so, uh,
and then the, the big thing at,
at the end of it, which I think
will be the bigger conversation
is, I think one of the reasons
the system doesn't move.
Quickly is the need to answer
the who pays question, right?
So, um, heard from
Representative Dixon that, that
there's a budget surplus is in
at the
Panel earlier today, there was a
good conversation around what
things should be in utility
customers' rates and what things
should taxpayers be paying for,
um, because
Uh, the example there would be,
you know, they're talking about
wildfire, and if, if the whole
state's affected by wildfires
and in the, maybe the whole
regions using the grid should
the individual customers of that
utility and the example that was
used was Mora, which that was
just a horrific example. Um, so
we're at this moment where maybe
we needed a bigger grid uh for
lots of reasons. One of the
reasons is we want more diverse
economy, uh, or should we be?
you're thinking differently
about the who pays question. So
I know that was
A lot, but uh just hoping that
we can have a conversation if
anybody's willing to go first,
just bite off as much of that as
you want and we'll just keep
working through it, yeah, so
the, the who pays question is a
challenging one, and I think
it's particularly challenging in
the current environment because
We are not just looking at new
resources that are required to
serve new load.
We're looking at a mix of new
resources that are required to
serve a combination of
Capacity needs from retiring
resources.
And low growth.
And so a lot of times these
conversations around who pays at
least just from a customer
perspective, kind of go down
this path of vintage pricing or
growth paying for growth. And so
not only is it already kind of
a, a very messy ball to unwind
at this point because it is not
just very clean cut, we're
adding resources to meet new
load, but we have this mix of
what's happening in terms of the
system turning over, uh, but
what happens if the new
resources are actually cheaper?
And should the growth be getting
the benefit of the cheaper
resources, or should it be an
average cost, which is what the
system's typically been built
off of.
The
So that's part of it. The other
challenge I've seen around who
pays, and I think it gets your
question kind of more broadly
around issues like wildfires or
emissions reductions is what
we're seeing is these systems,
the power systems can get to
close to 80% decarbonization,
and then when you start trying
to close that gap to 90 or 100,
it becomes this trade-off of how
much you overbuild the
non-emitting resources.
And how much capacity
dispatchable capacity, whether
that's batteries or gas.
Uh, or nuclear that you have in
addition to all those renewables
to firm up the power supply.
And, and what we've seen, I'll
take for example out of
Colorado, Colorado and their
resource planning mandates the
use of a social cost of
emissions, a social cost of
carbon and a social cost of
methane.
And when you include that adder.
You drive significant over
construction of renewables
because you're really capturing
the avoided cost of all of that
zero emitting energy.
But you're also creating a more
variable system.
That has to be balanced with
more dispatchable resources. Um,
so to me, that's, that's this
interesting question of, OK,
you've got a decarbonization
policy, and you want to get
there as fast as you can, but
we're in this technological gap
around non-emitting dispatchable
capacity at the scale needed to
back up the whole system.
Uh, and so I, I think that gets
to be a really challenging
question around how much do you
overbuild? What's that rate
impact on customers? Is there a
role for subsidization when
you're chasing emissions
reductions which don't really
accrue to the customer base
specifically, but to the society
overall, um, to, to me, that's a
really challenging one that I
think we're just on the cusp of
starting to confront because
utilities are just inching
closer and closer to, OK, we can
get to 70%, we can get to 80%.
How do we close that gap from 80
to 100 and still have reliable
and affordable service.
you know, as you kind of think
of the pre-build, you know, I
think all of us have had the
opportunity to go through um a
road construction, and they add
a lane and by the time they add
the new lane, guess what?
There's another lane that needs
to be added. And I, and I think
as you kind of think about the
prebuild, you know, there's,
there's economies to scale if
you build just a little bit
bigger instead of having to go
back and retrofit, um, costs
after the fact. And so, as you
kind of plan, having an
opportunity to prebuild, you can
often
do it cheaper in the bigger
scheme of things, as that load
comes on rather than going back
after the fact and, and having
to kind of reconstruct and and
fill that gap. So I think
there's some, some benefits
there that I need to be explored
as you determine, uh, as, as,
you know, legislation comes
forward or other decisions on
economic development for. How do
we balance those factors, I
think are really important, um,
you know, and then rate design,
and I'm not a rate design
expert, but how that kind of
builds into who these new loads
are coming in.
Are they paying their fair
share? Are they paying to for
the whole system and I think
that gets into the second piece
of the question, Chairman, which
is, you know, the sleeving
arrangements or these other, um,
uh, uh, generation where the,
the third party goes and puts
generation behind the meter, um,
you know, what is the cost to
that to run the overall grid.
And, you know, I think you heard
earlier today, uh, Kelsey
Martinez talked about, you know,
for P&M we're the balancing
authorities, so that means
And it was on the hook or the
customers of piano are on the
hook to make sure all that
electricity is balanced properly
and so how do you share the cost
associated with that to ensure
that there's not cross
subsidization or other factors
associated with that, and so
that's part of the challenges,
transparency behind the grid is,
is absolutely important as
you're sitting in the, in the,
as you're sitting in what I call
our NASA center, our operation
center. And if anybody ever
wants to take a tour of that, we
will set it up. It's actually a
pretty good cool facility when
you actually get to see the
whole.
red, and you get to talk to the
operators and the challenge that
they face, uh, uh, related to
the intermittent energy and how
they have to balance that, not
just for our service territory,
but for, you know, our balancing
authority, um, and then the
challenge is that they don't
have transparency be behind
what's the meter, um, and that's
why the grid modernization final
was so important as it provides
transparency for all that DG
behind the meter. It becomes
very complicated to manage the
grid, so.
So one of the things that I
learned.
Really quickly after um serving
my first session on house energy
is that um energy issues are
really complicated. And um as a
citizen legislature, um, I
frequently feel feel um
ill-equipped um with some of
these, um,
These discussions and, you know,
I also had the realization, um,
after my first session that
We, in the legislature will pass
policies that have dramatic
implications for regulators or
um customers or utilities and
not
Not always understand, you know,
the different factors that that
go into all of these things, um.
So, it, you know, I, I think
it's fascinating and I
appreciate everyone being here
because um you can help um all
of us legislators as we try to
parse through some of this. Um,
but in terms of who pays, um,
from the
From my seat as a representative
and as a policymaker, I think
we're in a really interesting
time because someone does have
to pay, but we are also at a
critical juncture for climate
change and decarbonization, and
so, you know, we have a really
small window uh to make an
impact and so, you know, I'm
gonna have a a different
perspective on who pays and some
of my colleagues, um, but bottom
line, you know, someone's got to
pay.
because we've got to do it, um,
and, you know, that's sort of
where
You know, with the sausage is
made, right? Uh, figuring that
out and going back to how
complicated these things are,
and making sure that the
legislators know, uh, the
different
factors that, you know.
And change the dynamics, I
guess. Um, so,
I think that right now it's just
a.
A really unique time and maybe
thinking outside of the box,
looking at what other states
have done, um, but
You know, we can't just do what
we've done in the past.
Yeah, I think you, uh, you
reminded me of my disclaimer,
which is what are they gonna do,
fire me.
What's the worst that can
happen?
But uh, yeah, so anyway, this is
just fascinating, uh.
I mean
Your point, representative is
well made and, you know, we get
wound up in
Get, uh, we'll overshoot the
mark of the people that we
really need to listen to, uh,
when we're trying to make these
decisions cause it's technical
and, and there's jargon and
And like, for example, I think I
still can't handle is SPS is in
SPP.
It's just that one letter
differences like my brain can't,
you know. So anyway, um, going
back to where we started, it
just
You know, the balance that's
required in 62-3.1 is, and I, I
think we've uncovered a couple
of these already, but one of the
things I think is required from
regulatory perspective is always
ask your question of who's not
here, right? So we're having a
fantastic conversation among the
four of us. Uh, we've talked
about things like data centers
and and large industrial oil and
gas customers kind of hinted at,
yeah, there's other things.
things that might help with the
solution, but um, I just say,
If, you know, as a panelist, who
would you nominate that we
should be thinking about that,
that we haven't really leaned
into yet and I'll just start uh
and throw out another load, um,
This uh seminar began yesterday
morning with a speech from
Secretary Melanie Kinderine, and
uh she was talking about how
building all this stuff is gonna
require oodles of copper and
steel and and that.
Type of thing. And then the
advanced technologies that we
all want, uh, require some
exotic minerals that don't
really exist. So one argument
for growth in New Mexico is
mining, right? So we don't have
mining represented on this, and
it's a new load, it's not, uh,
You know, it's maybe in the
rural area, it might be in co op
land. I, I'm not sure where
these mines might be, but so I'm
just gonna throw that out uh to
spark a conversation, you know,
when, when you're working
through this, um, who do you,
who do you think about that
maybe we're forgetting while
we're having these big
conversations.
Just to share my pain.
Um,
I guess I would say the
taxpayer, you know,
Um, and I think of that because
As we, as the state appropriates
money, um, you know, we are
responsible to the taxpayers
and, and have to answer to
taxpayers on, um, trying to
spend their money in the.
Best way, um, possible, and I
think that
As a result, um, the government
can be skeptical or uh reticent
to invest in something that
isn't 100% for sure.
Um, and so that's another area
that we have to balance because
moving forward, a lot of things
aren't 100% for sure.
Um, but, you know, how we, how
we manage that and.
Include the taxpayer.
I like that definition. Lots of
things aren't 100% for sure, uh,
regulate your land we've been
talking about ex ante lately, so
yours makes more sense I think
to more people, uh, any, any
other observations there? I
mean, I, I think
Kind of the innovators, the, the
people that you aren't really
seeing every day that are
working on what is uh
non-emitting dispatchable
resource that can run 24/7, 365,
um, certainly not hiding in the
shadows, but the Bill Gates and
their program. I think he's
invested more than $2 billion of
his own money in the nuclear
company that they're working on
that is planning to locate some
new generation, uh, in Wyoming.
And
How that also kind of fits with
the other, the other people
aren't here kind of following
the taxpayer pieces.
Um
The, the communities where these
legacy resources or these legacy
industries are.
And what happens to those
individuals through the
transition and future
generations around, OK, if you
have whole towns like Colstrip,
Montana, built around a coal
power plant and a coal mine.
Do you really focus on trying to
locate new resources in a
community like that.
And do you ascribe
Additional benefits in a
regulatory process to locating a
resource there.
Or do you just focus on what's
the most cost effective solution
and then address the fallout
after the fact, right? And so I
think that that's an interesting
conversation we're seeing
playing out in terms of saying,
well, do you try to solve the
community problem through the
siding of the replacement
resources through the training
of the workforce to follow the
transition.
Or do you take a step back and
say, well,
Those communities built up
around what was a, a competitive
market solution in terms of when
those resources and mines were
built and, and now we just need
to kind of let the market
dictate what the next solution
is to replace it, but that,
that's a very tough
conversation.
Um, and from a customer
standpoint, it kind of gets back
to this who pays when, when
you're using a public utility
with a captive customer base to
drive policy.
I think that, that gets kind of
tough when you're doing things
that probably should be more
like tax policy paid for by
everyone.
Or you're running it through a
utility and utility rates.
And where do you draw that one?
You know, I, I would probably
caveat is, you know, where I see
it as our customers. I mean,
there's got to be a balance
there as we think about economic
growth. I've talked about, you
know, we have 300 to 4000
megawatts on a 2200 megawatt and
so there's a fine balance there,
um, as we think about growth, we
can't be everything to
everybody. So we have to be
selective um on those those uh
economic development
opportunities that may meet the
policies that we have. I mean,
it's all got a kind of a line to
meet the policies.
At the end of the day, um, our
overall customer base, both the
future customer and the existing
customer really need to benefit
from that. So I mean, when we
think of kind of a landscape in
a big picture, that that that's
gonna have to be the the mix and
match that we're targeting.
I'm great. Thank you.
Um, so that was
Moderator, big regulator
question, um, we've got
About
40 minutes left and so I'd
really like to engage the room
on this conversation cause uh
Part of the uh who's not here is
is who you thinking about. So if
anybody has any questions or
observations that you'd like us
to discuss around this, uh, you
know, growing up in New Mexico,
I've
He plenty of times like, uh,
we're fine the way we are, you
know, so, uh, maybe that's the
question is, do you even see
growth as an option, I mean,
From regulator land, the
conversations that we're having
regionally and nationally, it's
really more like if you're not
Uh, keeping up, you're moving
backwards, so, uh, standing
still is not really an option,
uh, so just trying to vamp here
to see if we get any questions
from the room here. If not, I'm
warning you, I'm gonna keep
asking questions.
go
I get one.
And then do we have microphone
available?
Uh, opportunity for somebody to
get their steps in if you want
to run the mic around.
Yeah, we have them on the table
thinking.
All right, so it looks like uh
Yeah, thanks for coming up and,
and turning the microphone on.
Sure.
Uh, good afternoon, everyone,
and thanks again uh to the PRC
for having this really uh
important and uh useful.
A conversation with the
Mexicans. Uh, my name is Marco
Gonzalez, and I'm here today as
a assistant getting my CLE
credits, um, but oftentimes I
have a lot of companies who call
me and want to locate in New
Mexico and so I heard a couple
of things um that I wanted to
just inquire about, um, as a
comment, I would like to also
say that, you know, part, it's,
it's not only when we talk about
utility infrastructure that's
required, but I get a lot of
concerns about like, what is a
data infrastructure? Like,
where's our long haul fiber?
And in terms of moving forward,
uh, for this whole AI.
Uh, uh, data center, a lot of it
is AI data centers uh that would
like to maybe think about
locating here. We, we need to
think about that, but um, what,
what I wanted to ask was, I
heard a couple of solutions from
Mr. uh Stouffel.
It sounded like they were very
helpful.
And, and then I kind of heard
that maybe we're not using those
because it creates complications
for management of the grid.
If those resources are
Behind the grid and
And then it makes it more
difficult for the utilities to
manage everything else.
So
I, what, what are other states
doing that is helping um
Answer that question because it
seems like there's an
opportunity cost if
There are solutions that aren't
being used and then pretty soon
people stop calling and they
move somewhere else.
And I think it's important to
think about that. And then the
other thing is I just wanted to
know, uh, in, in that regard
that you mentioned those two
solutions. I heard you say
something that it was a sleeve,
a sleeve uh rate, and I was
wondering, is that the same as
the green energy writer.
And is that, how does that fit
into any of this since many of
those companies who would like
to locate here are looking to uh
uh build green energy uh to
support uh whatever
infrastructure they're building
and, and, and so kind of
separate, but I appreciate that
and, and thanks again to the
PRC. This has been a great, uh,
last couple of years that you've
been doing this.
So I'll, I'll take a whack at
answering that and see if anyone
wants to add on. So, um, when I
talk about the sleeping tariff.
The idea is that the utility and
the utility transmission and
distribution system are still
involved in that transaction. So
it's really kind of a three-way
deal between the power producer
selling the output to the
utility and the utility having a
special tariff to then flow
through that cost to a specific
customer or group of customers.
That's different in my mind than
a green tariff, which is really
still a utility resource that is
designated.
to serve loads that want to
participate voluntarily in
purchasing additional renewable
energy than what kind of the
average of the system is.
And then both of those typically
still require what I'll call
traditional generators in terms
of going through a transmission
interconnection process
requiring transmission capacity
to serve load, and that's where
the behind the meter.
is pretty helpful because you,
you don't have to go through any
of that.
The challenge on the behind the
meter side in addition to the,
the variability, I mean that the
point Don was making, right, is
that I was talking about how do
you balance a variable system
even just with utility
generation that's intermittent.
What they're really balancing
now is load that's intermittent
because it looks like it's being
served by a behind the meter
resource or rooftop resource
sometimes and then it shows up
as system load other times, um,
but the behind the meter,
The part of the challenge there
is if
You have a developer, they have
one customer, and they have one
off take opportunity.
Unless they also go through the
interconnection process to get
interconnected to the
transmission system to sell
excess generation.
Uh, so it's, it's favorable in
terms of speed.
But it also is higher risk from
a developer standpoint or even a
customer buying their own
resource because they have no
ability to monetize excess
generation unless they want to
go through the interconnection
process, which takes 4 to 7
years and costs a significant
amount of money. So, um, that's
really in my mind how those are
different and
the sleeping in the green
tariff.
Don't avoid the issue around the
interconnection queue and
transmission buildout and the
behind the meter avoids that but
carries with it some higher
development risk.
Like we get,
ah, yeah, this one works.
Uh, hello, I'm Cass Brulotte. I
work for the Office of Broadband
Access and expansion, and I've
been hearing a lot today about
data centers and how we love
data centers and we want data
centers to be here. I love data
centers too, um, but one of the
big things we're working on
right now in our agency is
building the fiber. Uh, we've
received a significant amount of
money from the federal
government over $600 million to
build out our broadband
infrastructure in the state.
We've received money from the
state legislature as well. But
first, not enough to actually
connect everything.
And one of the reasons that
we're seeing these shortfalls, I
mean part of its geography. We
see fire, things get burned, we
have mountains we have to go
through, but polls have to be
replaced as we are getting in
these rural areas, and we are
seeing, we're funding projects
to build.
Broadband out to rural homes, to
rural communities, and we're
getting grant applications, uh,
from private industry that would
like this grant funding to build
and so much of their budget is
being spent replacing poles. And
so that is a basic
infrastructure upgrade that it
seems as a state we've been
lagging on, and so now we're
stuck having to fix it now and
technically we're spending less
money on broadband because we're
spending so much money on polls.
And so, um, my question for the
panel is, where's the
infrastructure upgrade?
Also come up in that maintaining
of it in our economic
development.
That sounds like a done question
to me. I heard polls.
Yeah, I mean
From a, from a utility cost
recovery perspective, right?
polls are included in rate base
and recovered through sales to
customers, uh, and so you have
this question around, OK,
similar to what's happening with
generation. If you do retire
poles earlier than the end of
their useful life for some
reason. Well, then usually you
have a cost recovery challenge
around recovering the remaining
undepreciated balance for the
old pole.
plus the new pole.
Plus the cost of whatever else
is going on with that build out,
uh, and then you also have with
that, if you're proactively
replacing poles and driving O&M
dollars that direction.
Where is that money not going,
right? I mean, so that the same
balancing conversation if, if
you're focused on something
specific like pole replacement.
Are you maintaining your same
vegetation management policies
and expenditures, are you taking
care of, building out to
accommodate.
Uh, rooftop solar and the
challenges it's causing for the
distribution system. So, um, I
think part of it becomes a
capital allocation question and
recognizing you just reached
some limit where you can't just
keep throwing money at things
cause ultimately the customers
are gonna squeal and if they
have a lawyer like me, they're
gonna squeal really loud.
So it's the old regulatory
nirvana possible loads growing,
it also funds more investment,
and so rates are magically the
same.
So I think part of the challenge
with that is
When are these loads occurring?
Right? And so we've got this
increasingly variable system and
a lot of high load factor loads,
loads that run all the time,
need service all the time. You
look at what what's happened in
Urquhart in Texas with the
bitcoin miners that actually
have flexible loads. So they
become a grid resource in their
ability to ramp down, uh, as
resources are unavailable or in
response to price signals. Um,
so it's, it's an interesting
question that, yeah, the, the
more sales there are
the easier it is to spread those
investments across all, all the
different loads, but um when you
just keep adding high load
factor loads like data centers.
You're still driving the need
for that, um, generation supply.
24/7 essentially.
And and that kind of leads to a
Site selection question to you,
I attended a meeting of folks
who were trying to talk about
how site selection happens and
it was fascinating cause
One of the takeaways was.
If somebody has an idea for a
new business and they engage the
site selector site selector has
20,000 sites across the country,
and it's really a process of let
me just keep putting filters in
place until I'm down to a
manageable number, so it's not
like you can earn your way into
a site selector process, you're
just probably getting eliminated
as they're working through their
filters, but one of the
Things I was interested in and
and would like to hear, you
know, whether it's better for
New Mexico if it's the
challenges to uh
Make the site ready or
different, but they were talking
about.
The difference between, say, one
of these large uh IRA funded
type factories say 150 megawatt
uh, factory, so you got one of
those, or 35 megawatt loads that
so uh are the
And I think that gets to what
you were talking about is when
and and
The character of great classes,
uh, who's gonna end up paying in
both cases you got load. So
anyway, just love to hear
panel's reaction to that, which
is there.
Are they both awesome, uh, where
would we rather have a 1050
megawatt load or would we rather
have 35 megawatt loads.
You know, I think for, for our,
our area, um, the 5 megawatts,
the 10 megawatts, the, you know,
those things aren't hard to
serve. We see very little of
those now, frankly, I mean, most
of what we're seeing is, and
this is what's changed over the
last couple of years, uh, we
used to see 5, 1020 megawatts
and you can plan for those
systems significantly easier
than when you get into 150, 200,
500 megawatt request that comes
from a potential future
customers. So like it
Be able to manage the, the
infrastructure, uh, is, is a lot
easier on the smaller, um, you
know, the site selection will be
easier cause I mean I'll, I'll
be frank with you. There's, when
you actually look at New Mexico,
the sites that folks are looking
at, it's not like hundreds of
sites. I mean, you know,
especially in the Albuquerque
area, you know, it's probably 10
or 15 sites that are left, um,
that kind of fit the
infrastructure and the needs
associated with that, that, that
are focused on that, so.
Um, I would, you know, in answer
to the one big versus a lot of
small, um.
I think that it's important to
balance.
Both of those, I mean, if you,
if you do attract one large
company, um, you're also gonna
be able to build um and support
smaller ancillary companies that
work with one large manufacturer
for, for instance, um, and I
also think that helps, um, you
know, it helps with the state's
revenue and I think also
provides a little bit of a
buffer, um, if something goes
wrong with the, the one big.
Company, um,
So, that would sort of be my
answer.
But I like the hypothetical
cause I was sitting here
thinking about how, wouldn't it
be nice if it was just 150
megawatts. I think SPS is
looking at more than 4000
megawatts which by between now
and 2030 of load requests. Um,
I, to me, it gets back to what I
was talking about before in
terms of really diversity of
those loads and are they
complementary in terms of they
balance each other out in terms
of using the generation
resources and transmission
system, uh, or are they additive
and, and so I think about like
a, a pizza place that also
serves cinnamon rolls in the
morning, right? Same oven,
they're able to drive more
revenue through the same
infrastructure.
But if you had 2 pizza ovens, 2
pizza shops, you're not gonna
get that diversity benefit.
You're not going to be able to
kind of utilize that
infrastructure across the board
to help pay for it. Uh, and so I
think that's part of the
challenge is not just the size
of the loads or the number of
the loads, but how do those
loads look relative to each
other and are there efficiencies
in terms of the infrastructure
they need to serve them, or is
it just cumulative? You just
need more transmission and more
generation to serve them.
Regardless.
Yeah, that's an interesting
point. Is there any way to make
these efficiencies transparent
to the outside world.
I mean, cause it, it, it really
kind of feels like
people dating in the dark.
Yeah, I, so I talked about that
standby rate and
Part of the, the beauty of that
rate is it took
Fixed capital costs that are
normally recovered through fixed
charges and put them in an
on-peak energy charge.
And, and so if you're able to
avoid using the system on peak
because of your own generation,
you avoid paying for some of the
fixed costs required to serve.
And so I think ultimately, you,
you are kind of driving towards
a price signaling type question
around, is there a way to set
rates that loads can respond to
the the cost they're imposing on
the system.
Uh, and in that way they can
make informed decisions about,
OK, if I'm going to go build out
my plant or if I'm gonna locate
a new load.
Am I just gonna be incurring
full fixed charges or am I
actually going to be able to
take advantage of some of the
excess on the system to make it
more efficient.
And I, I think to add to that
that I mean you mentioned the
term peak load, and I think
that's important for, cause for
every service territory, that
might be a little different time
and so one flavor doesn't fit
all, so you take our service
territory, um, you know, what I
love to ask people is when do
you think we peak? And a, and a
lot of folks will say 2 or 3 in
the afternoon, net peak, we're
peak and that's not where we
need energy. We need energy
between 6 and 10 at night. And
what, what happens is all the
solar that we have comes down,
people go home, you know, they,
they want to
watch their, their TV shows,
cook their dinner, and so, you
know, the, the highest cost
piece of the energy is going to
be whatever fills that gap from
6 to 10 or 6 to 11 at night,
because that's when we need
capacity, um, to be able to, to
meet the needs of the grid and
meet the needs of our customer.
So I think that's important as
you kind of think about the the
mix and match. So when we talk
about loads and load curves, I
mean, where do they fit on that
if they're, they're 100
megawatts around the clock,
well, you know, probably during
the
normal peak where people would
think we're probably not in that
bad of shape, but where we're
going to be in really tough
shape is that 6 to 10 or 6 to 11
at night, so.
Well, it's interesting how that
That problem is relatively
recent, and then you've got
because it's, it's driven by
solar, right? And the
Affordability of solder, solar
driving now this peak net of
renewables is where you're
really causing costs to be
incurred and um it's interesting
to me that getting to this
customer education component of
it. And I think a lot of
customers thought, oh, the
The most expensive part of the
day is 3 to 5 p.m. when air
conditioning loads are ramping
up and everything else. And it's
very interesting to think, no,
it's really shifted later, uh,
and to get customers to be
thinking about it 60 to 10 p.m.
compared to 3 to 6 p.m. It's a
big change.
Yeah, thanks for that and, and
Joy are we making a list of
topics for next year because
both Nick and Don wanted to talk
about transactive energy.
Um, any other questions from
room
All right.
Let me look at my notes. Well, I
can hop in here because I think
as you talk about the grid of
the future, you don't mind me
going there for a second, cause
I think this is important. So I
just explained that 6 to 10 at
night is, is, is, you know,
where we need energy. But if you
think about the grid of the
future and one of the things
that P&M just got was a DOE
grant, uh, for the virtual power
plant. And why, why that's so
important is, I mean, it, it
kind of complements our grid
modernization filing that we
just got approved and how do you
kind of leverage kind of the,
you kind of
think about it, the, the vision
of the future is you got a solar
facility, you got a a battery,
you got an EV, you got maybe um
batteries within people's homes.
How do you leverage all those
resources so that you don't have
to build the next megawatt
between 6 and 10, and there's
price, price sensitivities that
regulators can put on, but I
mean, as you think about the,
the grid of the future, that's
where the grid is going is how
do you take all this capacity
that's out there and it as it
continues to evolve and be able
to link it together to, to.
the next megawatt needed, um, as
we go forward, and then
obviously when you get to that
point, there's incentives for
the customers and goes both ways
as you kind of head down that
path, so.
I was just gonna say that I
think an important policy for
the state, um, you know, as, as
we look toward the future is for
Policies to be technology
neutral.
Um, given that so much is
changing, um, you know, good
modernization, different energy
generating sources that are, you
know, being commercialized,
being, um, piloted and
demonstrated, so I just want to
put a plug in for that.
OK, great. Thank you. And then
that also reminded me of a
question I thought was worth
asking when we were going
through that list of who's not
here, uh, Nick's response was
innovators, um, previous panel
today heard a really good
argument for why we shouldn't be
using ratepayer money for.
Utilities be doing the deep big
R&D type efforts.
Creates to get technology moving
and, you know, Secretary
Kinderine, she had
Time scales for how long it
takes for some things to become
uh at scale commercial and and
it can be a while. So,
Um
How to solve that, right? Uh,
first, if there is an innovation
that you see is emerging and
maybe with a little nudge, we
can get it there faster, uh, or
what's the right engine to
create this world where people
are actually innovating uh in
real time on the grid so we can
get.
Things turned around faster than
they have been. You know, I
think and and uh.
Representative Dixon hit on
this. I mean, we have jewels in
our backyard with Sandy and Los
Alamos, and, and we partner a
lot probably that you don't see
on the Sandia front of, of
sharing data and you know, we
have it currently have grants
with them to be able to figure
out how we best, you know, on
all these topics because they're
innovators. I mean, the, the
Sandia Labs has innovators and I
think the more we can leverage
the, the folks in our backyard
for some of these technology
advancements are extremely
helpful, um,
as we continue to, you know,
transition the grid.
Um, I would really like to see
the state use some of its
resources to support more pilot
programs, um, and demonstration
projects, you know, I think that
that has some risks, but, you
know, for New Mexico to be a
place where.
You know, companies can come and
test out a new
Way to generate energy, way to
conserve energy, um, you know,
all of these different things,
you know, parts of the energy
transition, I would really like
to see us, um.
Step out on that.
Yeah, and then
I stand that, then the next
question will be, well, how can
we really put something together
so that can happen. Uh, is that
People should be designing
programs to bring them before
the PRC or is that something the
state would run through like M
nerd and we can help them pick.
What
places need the most help. I, I
mean, just brainstorming, uh, is
there?
A model or something that that
we can all be supportive of to
help make that happen.
I don't know if if Don or Nick,
if you've seen that in other
places. Yeah, so I mentioned the
the Bill Gates coal plant in
Wyoming, and that's an example
of it's, it's a Pacificore
resource, uh, intended to
replace some retiring coal
plants.
But most of the development risk
has been funded entirely by
private capital.
Uh, and so that's a way that the
resource plan contemplates.
that resource being part of
their future portfolio, and
they're counting on it as they
look at other resource
additions, but um they've
sheltered ratepayers from the
risk associated with kind of
that new venture and, and I
think it is tough and when
you're kind of in the role of
being the regulator and
recreating those market forces
to say, OK, how do you encourage
risk taking or being the first
mover in an area, um, while
recognizing, well, that, that
risk then is gonna flow to.
customers and if it fails,
they're also going to bear the
cost of whatever comes in after
it to provide service and so I
think the more that those
programs can be structured where
it is private capital at risk,
potentially with government
support, um, but then married
into a utility supply portfolio,
uh, and with that clear purpose
of this is demonstrating this
technology and with the risk for
customers mitigated. I, I think
that's a good approach.
Um, I, I would be very hesitant
to support.
Utilities being big risk takers
on new technology and I think,
you know, we're we're right at
the, the front end of seeing
this with batteries, uh, and how
do they work over the long term
over multiple charge and
discharge cycles. Do they meet
their expected lives, um, and,
and it's particularly given the
cost associated with them.
question.
Can I, um, add on to that
before, um, so,
Um, collaboration and jobs,
right? Wyoming, Bill Gates, um,
and Google, you know, there are
a lot of private investments
that are um supporting some of
these efforts, and we don't have
the same thing here, but we do
have our permanent funds. We do
have a budget surplus, um, and I
think that goes to sort of the
philosophical debate.
In the legislature about how we
use that money and, you know,
part of my perspective is it's
economic development, right? If
we bring um and partner with
someone to bring a pilot project
in or help them commercialize.
That's jobs in New Mexico.
That's, you know, revenue.
All of the the things that are
associated with it. I'll just
say, you know,
One of the most interesting
things I've seen in my career
was when the clean power plan
was released and with the
assumed emission reductions
associated with it.
And then it was stayed and never
implemented, but at the same
time investment tax credits and
production tax credits were
extended.
That ultimately those tax
incentives resulted in greater
decarbonization than the Clean
Power Plan was expected to.
And so it's an interesting
question where so there's public
money, right, funding tax
credits.
But to accomplish a specific
policy objective and, and that
carrot approach proved to be
more impactful than the stick
approach of just regulating the
emissions was expected.
You know, and I think I would
add, I mean, another element of
it is, you know, with whether
it's grip money, whether it's
state funded money. If you look
at partnering with our great
universities that we have, if
you take businesses, utilities,
partner with the universities,
you can solve and continue to
solve, uh, some of the problems
that exist and what you're
creating is you're creating
innova innovation that will stay
here in New Mexico as well too,
which I think is important as
well.
Yeah, I, I agree with all of
that. I've heard collaboration,
I've heard economic development,
um, as I've dreamed about these
things for years, I think that
it would take the energy,
minerals and natural resources
department to have and the
economic development department
to have somebody like a czar
working, sorry to use that word,
right under the governor and to
pull those resources and the
land office and then to pull
resources from the labs, which
in the industry, I don't see
enough of it.
chance from the labs, um,
And you look at New Mexico's
economy in general, we don't see
enough of technology transfer to
economic development in New
Mexico from the labs. And then
with the universities, but I
think it's, and then, and then
go to Martin Heinrich's office
and pull whatever
Great things he brings to our
state to you know, for the, the,
the Department of Energy to fund
and uh I do see some of the
efforts similar to all this
collaboration with like the, the
Navajo Nation and the Ute
Mountain tribes on projects that
they've been in evaluation for
over a decade, but um I do think
it's going to take
red tape cutting amazing ninja
powers, um, of collaboration and
directed from people that are,
are very high up, but um I'd
love to see more of that.
Um, so that's exactly what I
love hearing and love talking
about, um, for two years, um,
one of my
Big initiatives has been, um,
how do you take energy minerals,
natural resources, the
environment department, um, and
economic development and
basically have an entity that is
not regulatory, but is all about
decarbonization and innovation.
Um, and there's some really
interesting models across the
country, um, you know, Niceerda
was one of the ones that I spent
a lot of time looking at because
they invest in research and
development, and they do a lot
of loans and grants and
different.
areas, um, but I absolutely
agree, I think that.
Personally
That function needs to be pulled
out and separated um from
You know, the other departments,
and I think you need to have
staff that understands economic
development, but also
understands um energy issues and
what's happening and that's, you
know, really focused on the
collaboration and working with
the labs in specific areas in
our universities, um, I see that
as um something I think we're
doing a better job of, but I do
think it's missing in New
Mexico. Well, thank you for that
and it feels to me like a great
place to land, um.
It, I guess I'll give each one
of you just a couple of minutes
to, to share your, your main
takeaways from this, and if you
just a couple of minutes to, to
share your, your main takeaways
from this, and if you've got
anything.
Mr. 62.3.1, you should be
thinking about, I'll take it.
You know, I, I would say the
future is bright for New Mexico.
I mean, we, we're in a great
opportunity right now, um, as,
uh, New Mexicans to, to really
benefit from the transition, but
it's gonna take collaboration,
it's gonna take all of us
sitting down listening,
collaborating, uh, working
through the escape room and,
and, and get into the, the
picture at the end, because I, I
firmly believe that if we kind
of align and, and, and the great
opportunities that we have, we
can see the economic
development, we can see the
connection between the education
and the university and even the
high schools, and I think we can
continue to transition to the to
carbon free, you know, under the
ETA so excited about the the
opportunities that are ahead. I,
I tell all our folks at PNM, I,
you know, I've been there 2028
years going on 29 years, you
know, the 1st 2024, weren't that
exciting. I mean, I wouldn't
tell, they weren't that exciting
because they were kind of, this
is what you always did, uh, the
last 3 or 4 have been extremely
exciting in the next
10 are going to be tremendously
exciting as well. So thank you.
Thank you, Chairman for for
hosting us.
I'll just add on to that, I
completely agree and um from,
from what I've seen both in New
Mexico and elsewhere, it, it
really seems like kind of an
All of the above solution
approach and figuring out kind
of every different tool that can
be used to contribute to that. I
You know
Not going to get into the
details, but SPS has a new
interruptable proposal, and
erruptible tariff proposal in
front of the commission that um
leverages market pricing from
SPP for loads to be bid in and
that they clear as a resource to
be interrupted, uh, and so it
literally looking at loads that
have that flexibility to be a
resource to the system, looking
for opportunities for customers
to invest their own capital in
resources to help meet this.
state's energy needs, both their
own and the needs of others, I
think is really important. And
then, like what you said
earlier, kind of taking a, a
resource agnostic view, uh, and,
and allowing that room for
innovation to develop and for
the resources of tomorrow to
materialize, um, to help close
that gap, and I think then it
gets into a question around
How does a regulator and a
regulatory process move forward
to both make the firm
commitments that need to happen
to meet the loads of tomorrow
and next week, uh, while also
leaving the flexibility for that
evolution over the next decade
plus that we're gonna.
Seems inevitable at this point.
We don't know what those
resources will be exactly.
So I think my um sort of
takeaways, um,
is
Moving forward and particularly
for the legislature and um
appropriators.
is that we have to be OK taking
some risk.
Um, I think that, you know, the
state has been
Uh, risk averse, you know,
particularly with funding, and I
think that it's um.
And I mean, it's, it's a um
reasonable uh position given
Our dependence on oil and gas
and the, the price fluctuations,
but
I think it's, we are in a unique
time in this world and global
economy.
And
Um, I think that we just, we
need to think big, um, and
except that not everything is
gonna pan out 100%, um, but we
need to try a lot of different
things.
Great, uh thank you all for
that. Um,
First of all, a round of
applause for the panel.
Um
Certainly lived up to what I
hoped this would be when, when
we did our prep session and I
guess just prerogative of my two
cents, one of the things is just
a thread that's come through,
and we really nailed it here is
that seizing an opportunity
requires action. You, you just
can't watch it go by, so.
Uh, thanks again and looking
forward to working with all of
you as we move forward.
Thanks everybody. We'll come
back for our last, uh, ethics
credit last not by accident, um,
at 3:15. Thanks so much.
Recording stopped.
So if you're sticking around for
the uh final presentation there
are handouts over here on the
sign in table.
Handouts. There are handouts if
you're sticking around for the
last presentation, there's a
handout over here.
All right, everybody, this is
your 3 minute warning.
Alright, everyone, we're gonna
get started with our last
presenter of the day. Before I
do that though, uh, I just wanna
go over some housekeeping
matters so you can be free the
moment that Brian is done with
his presentation. So, um, first
and foremost, I have a list of
thank yous that I want to get
through because there's some
people who really deserve some
recognition. Uh, I don't know if
there's anybody here still who
is from the capital or capital
staff. I, I see a couple.
I just want to say thank you uh
for letting us use this room.
It's been wonderful. We've tried
to be good stewards of it, so
thanks for having us here in the
capital.
Um, also, I want to thank the
PRC commissioners for
volunteering their time to host
or moderate these panels.
Some PRC staff that are uh
deserving of some special
recognition. We have Phil Bolton
in the back who's been running
our IT. Thank you, Phil.
We have Patrick Rodriguez, our
PIO who's been running our Zoom
and other
things.
Jen Baca has been out in the
hall. She's kind of the, um, I
wrote down hall monitor, but
she's not actually the hall
monitor. She is the lady that's
been silently keeping things on
track. She's been trying to keep
this room at a at a livable
temperature. She provided me my
warning signs because I forgot
to print them out. So thank you
to Jen for monitoring everything
that's happening in the hall.
Uh, thank you to Scott Cameron,
our OGC Little do most of you
know that he is the reason why
we have coffee, um, coffee urns
specifically where his
contribution to this, so thank
you, Scott.
And then as far as PRC staff go,
last but not least is Jordan
Gutierrez. This is the guy that
literally has made this whole
thing happen. um, he's been
behind the scenes running,
making sure that all the
speakers had what they needed,
reaching out and reminding
speakers that we need a bios.
He's been doing all the
logistics, so without uh Jordan,
excuse me, this would not have
happened. Thank you, Jordan.
Um, couple of notes about CLE
credits, so we tried last year
to get this pre-approved. And
what happened there is, as
everybody was submitting their
own applications to the bar if
you weren't a PRC employee, they
told you that you couldn't do
that, even though they had told
us previously that you could,
and so there is this whole
kerfluffle about PRC couldn't
pay because it was the
anti-onation issue, um, which is
why you may have gotten an email
from Jordan saying we need to
check for.
you. So what we're doing this
year is trying at the opposite
way and you'll be getting a
certificate of completion from
us to submit uh for
certification that you were here
and we'll give it a try that
way. If you get pushed back,
call us. Call me, call Jordan.
We'll be on it, um.
And we'll, we'll see how it goes
this year. So watch for those
certificate of completions or
attendance uh haven't decided
what we're gonna call them yet.
Jordan will be sending them out
to you. Make sure that you
registered and that your names
have been legible on the sign
in. Those are all that you need
to do to get your CLE credits.
So, thank you. Um, that's a
reminder also to sign out when
you're done today.
And then last but not least, as
far as housekeeping goes, please
remember to do a trash check for
all the snack bags and water
bottles and everything, so that
we can leave this room in good
shape afterwards.
So thank you for your attention
to those details. I'm gonna turn
to introducing our final speaker
of the seminar, Mr. Brian
McMath. Brian is
I think without exaggeration,
one of my favorite people on
this planet. He's a phenomenal
attorney. He works hard, uh, he
doesn't take himself too
seriously, though that's part of
what we love about Brian. Um, I
also want to thank Brian and the
Nashawati Law Group for
sponsoring our refreshments
today. Uh, he's one of the few
law firms that we have contact
with that actually has no
connection to the PRC
whatsoever.
He's just here because I asked
them to do it and uh so thank
you Brian and the Nashiwati Law
Group for the refreshments.
Um, with that, Brian, I'll turn
it over to you. Thank you. Um, I
appreciate it, recording in
progress.
Goodness. Um, so first and
foremost as everyone in this
room probably knows when Choi
asks you to do something,
You, you do it. I mean, that's
the, I don't work for her
anymore, but none of that has
changed and so, um, uh, super
happy to be here, uh, super
happy to be, uh, presenting to
you today, um, putting some of
uh what we have learned through
our practice, uh, out to the,
out to the group and, and
hopefully it helps some folks
and um helps avoid some, some
potentially hilarious uh hijinks
in the future, which we'll,
we'll get into. Um, so, uh, I
worked for Choya, um, doing
So we protection worked for
quite a while, uh, and now work
for the Natchawati Laroup, I
will say for the benefit of the
regulators in the audience, um,
my law firm represents a number
of families who lost property or
uh loved ones in the winter
storm Yuri disaster that struck
in Dallas, Texas, um, it is grid
integrity, um, maybe isn't sort
of the headline grabber that uh
that everyone in this room
thinks it should be, but, um,
the, the, the consequences if
you get it wrong are dire.
And so I just appreciate
everything y'all do because I
don't know how any of it works,
and I don't want to know, but
I'm glad that you guys know and
that you do a really good job.
So thank you for that.
So, um, Choi asked me to, to
talk a little bit about, um,
Video conferencing, right? Video
conference technology.
Call it Zoom, call it Skype,
call it whatever you wanna call
it, right? The, the Kleenex of,
of, uh, video conferencing, but
video conferencing is what we're
here to talk about. It is a
factor of everything that we do.
It's a part of our lives. It's
not going away, um, show of
hands, how many attorneys in the
room?
How many non-attorneys?
And so, sir, in the, in the blue
shirt, what do you, what do you
do?
You're an economist? OK. Do you,
do you have an ethics code or
like a, a, a licensing structure
that you, um,
Under, under that profession.
Got it. Sure, yeah, yeah. So,
and, and my point is I don't
mean to put you on the spot,
but, um, obviously I'm an
attorney and so a lot of this is
going to come from the
perspective of sort of attorney
codes of ethics. But for the
non-attorneys in the room, I
think there is something to be
learned here and something to be
gained because we all have
licensing requirements. We have
duties to our employers, we have
duties to our clients, we have,
um, sort of duties to, to, to,
to do our job as best we can and
um I'm gonna make an argument
that video conference
is, is a necessary part of that.
So, here's where we're going.
Um, we're gonna talk a little
bit about this, the where this
technology has been and where
it's headed. Uh, we're gonna
talk about the ethical and
financial considerations, we're
going to get to some common
missteps, um, and then for those
that, uh, that would like it,
uh, put together a checklist.
If you're attending a meeting,
if you're hosting a meeting, uh,
if it's something you don't do
all the time, and it's not just
sort of committed to memory
because you do it constantly,
um, checklists can be a lot of,
uh, can be very useful. So, uh,
those are on the side table for
you once we're done, plus the
state bar just loves it if you
have a handout, right? That's
like their thing, yeah.
Next time I do this, Troya,
could you get me a large desk?
All right.
So, uh, everyone remembers
Skype. What, like what happened
to Skype, by the way?
They were perfectly positioned.
For this to happen. And then
everyone blew by them and no
one, I think understands why.
Uh, so 2011 Skype is sort of
synonymous with, uh, with video
chatting, uh, now, of course,
you've got Zoom, you've got
Teams, Go to Meeting Webex, uh,
there's more on the way, um,
video conferencing is sort of
something that a lot of um
companies are building it, they
have internal sort of
company-wide, uh, uh, um,
systems, uh, courts even have
come up with their own sort of
internal, uh, video.
conferencing systems perhaps
built on a Webex or a or a
team's backbone, um, but
Obviously, sort of going crazy,
right? Um, 2019.
Uh, it was estimated that the,
uh, VCT market cap would be
about $6.7 billion by 2025. Um,
it was $28.6 billion by 2023.
Um, obviously, in 2019, COVID
hadn't happened yet. We didn't
really know what all that was
about, um, the COVID pandemic,
obviously, uh, supercharged
everything and through
everyone's estimates sort of out
the window.
But that doesn't necessarily
mean we're going back right now.
So that's kind of the, the one
of the important points I want
to point out is
Just because the pandemic is, is
over or winding down or however
you want to characterize it,
that doesn't necessarily mean
that these technologies are not
gonna go away.
Um, and you can see trends in
remote work, uh, 2014, about a
quarter of US workers did at
least some work at home. Uh, now
it's almost 50, um, 14% are
fully remote. Um, a little bit
about my division within my law
firm.
Um, I live in, I live in Lamy.
My firm is in Dallas. I have
attorneys in South Dakota and
Albuquerque and Atlanta and DC,
uh, I have clients and 4 time
zones, um,
We're a small group and the only
way that we're really able to,
number one, recruit, 2, sort of
serve our clients the way that
we do is through the use of this
technology. So my office is my
extra bedroom in my house. Um, a
lot of my attorneys, uh, have
similar setups, uh, some of them
rent space at offices nearby,
because that's how they work
better, um, but it's a very
flexible sort of approach.
And that's just gonna continue,
right? I don't, I, I don't, I
don't know that, well, perhaps
people think that we'll go back
to the old days. I, I, I would
respectfully disagree. Um, I
think this is here to stay. Um,
in the courtroom, specifically,
uh, pre-COVID, I mean, unless
you were calling in for a rule
16 scheduling conference.
Pretty much you plan to be there
in person, right? Um, now, we've
got all 50 states, uh, and many
federal courts uh able to
perform video hearings, um,
trials not so much, there's a
lot of courts that are, that are
leery about doing trials, um,
virtually, um, but hearings,
conferences, mediations, you
name it, right? I mean, we've
all been on, on those, um, and
again, I think that's only going
to increase as opposed to
decrease.
Uh, anyone up here before Judge
Wilson in the First District?
Judge Wilson loves video
conference. He loves it. It's
his favorite.
Anyway, so
Where do we go from here? Um,
like I said, it's only gonna
grow, right? So now you have
artificial intelligence, um,
being used to construct tools
that uh can do things like
provide real-time transcripts,
uh, they can create chatbots
that can actually sort of serve
as a, a customer service, uh,
type role. Um, I do want to talk
a little bit about how video
conferencing touches on the
public facing work that this
body does, right? You have
public hearings, um,
Having sort of AI driven uh uh
responses to common questions
can be a source of efficiency.
Um, it can also be a source of
endless frustration, uh,
depending on whether or not
they, they're uh they're doing
their job right. Um, but again,
this is we're, we're looking at
iterations, right? We're looking
at, at iterations going towards
more of this and not less of
this. Um, market cap for this
industry, the video conference
technology industry is estimated
to grow to $60 billion by 20.
32. Remember, it was about a
10th of that.
Um, in our estimate before.
And about 25% of US workers will
be fully remote by 2025.
So, again, to, to anyone out
there that is thinking, you
know, this, this too shall pass,
um, I want to disabuse you of
that because I don't think
that's gonna happen.
Sorry, I'm just getting over a
cold, so got a little.
Scratch.
All right, some of the ethical
and financial considerations
that we're going to talk about.
Um, ABA model rule 1.1, uh,
requires competent
representation, comment 8
specifically is what we're, uh,
we're gonna talk about today.
Uh, that has been adopted, um,
as Rule 16101 NMRA, uh,
competence, 9, and then you have
ABA model rule 1.5, uh, which
talks about fees and billing,
which uh has been adopted in New
Mexico as rule 105.
And then again to the, uh, the
non-attorneys in the room. Um,
I'm, I'm not an expert in your
ethical, uh, responsibilities,
but again, I imagine that if
you're a licensed professional,
you have a duty of competence,
you have a duty to uh perform
your responsibilities with due
care, um, at a minimum, you have
a duty to act in your employer,
your client's best interests,
and depending on your role, you
may have fiduciary duties to
your, to your clients, right?
Um,
Excuse me.
So, let's talk about 101.
Uh, Comet 9. So again, this is,
uh, this is the language to
maintain the requisite knowledge
and skill. A lawyer should keep
abreast of changes in the law
and its practice, including the
benefits and risks associated
with relevant technology.
So, um,
I don't know uh how many lawyers
you all know, uh, our industry
is not known for its embrace of
new stuff.
Right? We, we, we're the reason
fax machines are still a thing,
I'm pretty sure. Um, somehow we
have not managed to move past
fax machines. Um, but I digress.
So,
So, but why is that important?
Right? Why is it important that
we understand the benefits and
risks associated with relevant
technology. Why is this so
important that the ABA thought
it necessary to add it as a
comment to their model rules.
Anyone want to take a guess? I
know that it's late in the
afternoon and this is the last
one and the last thing standing
between you and your CLE credit,
but anyone want to take a stab?
One more time.
And, and why is that a bad
thing?
So, if you were hiring a
contractor to do work on your
house.
And the contractors like, I only
use hand tools and I don't use
caulking and I don't use, you
know, fancy PE tubing and I, you
know, I just don't believe in
all that new stuff. Are you
going to hire them?
No. Number one, you're never
gonna pass a code inspection.
And number 2, there's new stuff,
right? Like this stuff is
improving and as it improves, it
improves our ability to do our
job and our responsibility under
the, under the ethics rules is
to do it competently. That
doesn't necessarily mean you
have to, you know, be certified
in the latest and greatest and
whatever, but you do have to be
competent as to the state of
your industry and the state of
our industry is not fax machines
and Word.
Perfect. The state of our
industry is
AI generated uh Docker view,
right? It is uh e-discovery
platforms that are, you know,
terabytes in size, um, and it's,
and it's video conferencing
technology, right? It's, it's,
this is, this is stuff that
It's, it's not just
Good for your business if you
want to think of it that way, it
is good for
Your client, right? Regardless
of whether your client is an
agency or the the public or your
boss or whatever, um, put
yourself in their shoes and
think about if you were talking
to someone who's like, ah, I
just, I write everything down,
you know, longhand and uh I
don't believe in the computer
stuff, like it, that's not that
long ago, right? That that was
all happening. And so this is,
this is just another sort of
step down the road.
So
Excuse me.
Let's talk about some benefits
and risks, right? That, that's
what the rule requires,
including the benefits and risks
associated with relevant
technology. So here's some
benefits.
Obviously efficiency, right? It
is much more efficient for me to
get 5 lawyers and 3 time zones
on a team's call than it is to
fly everyone in for a for a
meeting.
Cost savings, same thing, right?
Obviously, a team's uh license
costs much less than a whole
bunch of airfare and hotels.
Uh, equity and inclusion. So
this is one that I wanted to
touch on because of the, the,
the public nature of your work.
Um, I don't, I don't know what
the, what the commission does as
far as like, uh, putting, you
know, public hearings and things
like that online, but I assume
you do it, right? I mean, yeah,
absolutely. Um, that can be a
really important way to provide
Uh, uh, uh, individuals without
the means and opportunity to
travel here to Santa Fe to
participate, right? They can
inform themselves, they can
participate in these, in these
open meetings. It, it actually
sort of expands the tent, uh, to
those that maybe can't, you
know, take a day to come up here
and, and make their voice heard,
uh, as is their right, right?
Um, same thing for prose
parties, right? So those
representing self-represented
parties that don't maybe
necessarily have, um, the
ability to travel to a court for
a hearing. This is really
important when we're talking
about, um,
Uh, uh, cases that for
jurisdictional purposes have to
be brought in another state,
right? So if a big company hurts
you, you don't necessarily get
to sue them here. You have to
sue them where they are. Um, so
personal jurisdiction used to
effectively ban um individuals
who didn't have the means to do
that, whereas now we have tools
that actually can sort of
protect, you know, companies
sort of due process rights to,
to the jurisdiction where they
are, where they, where they
live, um, while also ensuring
that, that, um, plaintiffs.
can pursue claims, even though
they may not, may not have the
means, uh, and maybe they don't
have a case that a that a lawyer
wants to take on.
Um
The collaborative um elements to
this are, are quite substantial.
Um, I, we regularly on my team
will put a document up.
On a screen share and we'll all
hop on a call and we'll run
through it and we'll kick things
around and we'll bash our heads
against things and we'll put
ideas up and shoot them down
and, and what ends up happening
is we end up with a much better
product at the end of the day.
Uh, for our client, then we
would have if we had sort of,
you know, hit forward and said,
OK, send me your edits, right?
Who, who is, uh,
ever had the, the, the, the
document version control problem
when you're collaborating with a
group. It's the pits, it's the
pits, right?
You get 16 different versions,
who knows who's was last and
first and whatever. Um, whereas
now you can literally, you can
do it in real time, right? So,
That's something that I think is
really, really valuable, uh,
certainly to the, to the
practice that we have. Um, I do
want to throw it out to the
group. Any other benefits to
video conferencing and just sort
of like digital collaboration
that folks can think of, or
that um that touches on perhaps
your, your particular area.
I'm not letting people go and I,
I'll just sit here.
It's easily recorded. Great one.
Absolutely, right? Who's been on
a meet and confer and then the
other side has some different
ideas about what went down.
Happens all the time. We record
all of them.
And so you can always go back to
the tape, um, so the AI, uh, uh,
Mm
Tools that are now built into
these modern platforms, not only
record them, but they generate
transcripts.
Right? It's, it's not a, it's
not a court reporter transcript,
and certainly there, again, the,
the technology is sort of
iterating, um,
But you can, I mean, you can
sight to it in your, in your
meet and confer letter or
whatever, right? Huge time
saver, right? Anyone else?
Others?
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely. You, you can,
you just can all sort of join in
at the same time and um you
don't have to do it via email or
even via chat, right? Like even
chat can sort of be kind of
clunky, whereas you all can just
jump in and and do it together.
Now,
There is another side, there's
another side to that coin.
Video conferencing can be I
impersonal and isolating, right?
A lot of lawyers
Will
Uh, choose not to attend
hearings via video conference,
because they feel like it
deprives them of the ability to
sort of have a one on one
relationship with a judge or a
jury or a witness or whatever,
and that's a real thing, right?
If you're a litigator,
especially being able to be in
the room and sort of take the
temperature of the room, um, is
really quite important. So there
are going to be places in your
practice where
Using video conferencing
technology is not going to be in
your client's best interests,
right? It's not actually going
to be a good idea for you to do
that. So I'm keeping this on
time because I know what Choi
will do if I don't.
Um
technical issues, all the
technical issues.
I, so for, for the economist in
the, in the, in the, in the, in
the room. I, I have a, I have a
proposition for you.
I want to figure out.
How much of the US GDP.
Has been wasted.
By people going, oh I'm sorry,
no you.
No, I, no, you go. No, I'm,
can you hear me? Can everyone
hear me all right? It's got to
be trillions, guys, it's
trillions of dollars that have
been flushed down the toilet for
over the last 5 years. It has to
be, it has to be trillions. I'm
not an economist. I feel very
sure that it's at least 1
trillions of dollars, right?
Because every every single time,
right? Talking over each other,
the connection issues, the, the
microphone doesn't work, the
camera doesn't work, the
lighting, you
Can't see. You can't hear
whatever. Um,
Obviously, like huge, huge
problem. Um, very, very
annoying, and we'll talk more
about that when we get to the to
the next section. Um, so video
conferencing can also be
exclusive just like it's
inclusive, right? Um, we live in
a state where broadband, um, is
not everywhere, right? It is a
folks don't necessarily have the
money to have a good internet
connection to have a laptop and
a webcam and all the things,
right? It's, it's, there is an
investment that's required. Um,
so it's not necessarily a
Free, um, service. So there you
do actually run a risk of
excluding as well as including,
right? Um,
And then, of course, there's
over reliance, right? So people,
I, my, my, uh, my wife works for
Los Alamos National Lab. She,
uh, heads up the internal, uh,
design and furniture and, and uh
carpeting uh type of efforts up
there, and she will hop on a
meeting.
And someone 3 doors down.
We'll get on the virtual
meeting rather than walk 3 doors
down to have a meeting, right?
It's, so we get into this mode
where we just sort of get holed
up again and it sort of goes to
this isolation point of we just
get too reliant on it. And so we
forget how to
How to, how to talk with each
other. We forget how to, uh, run
a meeting. We forget how to, how
to be in a meeting with uh with
other human beings, right? I
think we all sort of experienced
some of that coming out of COVID
as we all sort of relearned our,
our, uh, our, our social skills,
uh, after all, being locked away
for a while. Any other risks
people want to shout out. What
are some dangers? Yeah.
Huge, huge stuff, right? Um, so
especially as you, as you, as
you talk about recordings, as
you talk about AI transcriptions
as you talk about, um, creating
records of these meetings,
right, of the, of the stuff that
you're talking about. Where is
it going?
Who has access to it. Um, is it
secure? Are you violating
privilege, right? All of that
kind of stuff, huge, huge
issues, absolutely.
What else?
IPRA.
If you're recording meet and
confers, uh, those are public
records subject to public
records requests. That's it,
yeah.
Creating information as a
government.
is a proposition.
Right,
see Sally in the back, she's
like.
Yeah, creating records, not
always the best, right? Not
always the best idea, um, and
certainly there are lots of
rules that go along with it.
Once, once it's in existence,
it's in existence, right?
That's, uh, that's what it is.
All right.
So, here's some, some strategies
I want to offer, um, to help
attenuate the risks, right? Um,
first of all, it sounds silly
because these, these tools are
so ubiquitous. But again, if you
don't do it all the time,
practice, practice, practice.
Do dry runs.
Log like just have your, have
your colleague down the hall log
in, do some screen sharing, do
some recording. Make sure you
know where all the buttons are.
I swear, whoever designs all the
platforms, they all put the
stuff in different places.
And they're all labeled
differently, and they're all
different colors and stuff. So
if you, if you do teams meetings
every day of your life, and then
you switch over to Zoom, you're
gonna be hunting for stuff,
right? That's when inevitably
someone will try to unmute
themselves and instead they
click hang up or something like
that. We've all, we've all done
it. We've all been there.
So
As ridiculous as maybe it
sounds, um, I'm a big fan of
practicing. That goes double for
if you are in front of a
tribunal, if you're in front of
a judge, if you're in front of a
hearing officer, um, and you
absolutely have to make sure
that it goes right, um, you best
be doing a dry run. Uh, most,
uh, court clerks will actually
um help you out with that. So if
you call up and say I've got a
hearing before Judge Wilson next
week. I just want to make sure
that my tech is working. Uh,
generally, they will, they will
set up something and, and help
you out.
Um
Hugely, hugely important, hugely
helpful, uh, to just sort of run
through things, uh, before,
before the main event. I
considering the stakes, right?
It's a staff meeting, it's a
staff meeting. If it's
The trial of the century, um,
you know, obviously none of us
would go in there without
practicing a time or two, so,
um, the same, the same, uh,
principles apply here.
So there are different um
opinions on this second one.
This is how I like to do it. Um,
if it's a large group, um, it
tends to be pretty difficult to
focus if everyone's got their
cameras on. And I, a large
group, I would say more than,
you know, maybe 10 people,
right? Um, if you're, if you're
in a, in a, in a video call with
more than 10 people and
everyone's got their cameras on
and everyone's kind of moving
around and making facial
gestures, whatever. I think it's
hard to focus. Um, so generally,
if you've got a large group
Um, I do cameras off unless
you're speaking. The other
benefit that you have there is
when someone turns their camera
on, it's sort of, it triggers
you like, oh, so and so's got a
comment. I'm going to throw it
to them. I'm gonna let them sort
of, um, naturally be part of the
conversation instead of talking
over each other, uh, like we
constantly do.
I think the opposite is true.
If you have a small group and
you're working in a
collaborative environment,
right? If you are trying to
collaborate, having a bunch of
blank screens staring back at
you is pretty disconcerting, and
it's not very helpful. Um, so if
you are collaborating and you
are uh uh engaging and seeking
engagement, um, same as here,
right? If you all were facing
the other direction, this would
be a very difficult talk to
give. That would be very
unpleasant and uncomfortable.
Um,
So, and, and the other part of
that is being able to make eye
contact, right? Being able to
actually connect with people,
even if you're hundreds of miles
apart, um, can really, I think,
tamp down on the isolation. It
can help you sort of team build
even when you're in a remote
setting, um, you can still sort
of feel connection with those
people. You can see their
emotions, you can see their body
language, um.
It's not, it's certainly not in
person, um, but it's, but it's
close, right? And so having
cameras on, um, the other thing
about making eye contact, so I,
what I always recommend is
people put their screen under
their camera.
So we all, you know, if you have
multiple monitors and stuff like
that, maybe your camera's over
here, and maybe your screen's
over here, and you may not think
that it's really that big of a
deal if I'm, if my cameras here,
and I'm talking this way, then
all you guys are seeing is sort
of the side of my face, and
we're not really making any sort
of eye contact, right? It sounds
super small, but it really makes
a huge difference
whether you are like eyes front
versus sort of like off to the
side.
Um
Ensure full participation. Uh,
so again, if you are, if, if the
point of the, the meeting is
engagement, uh, then you best
engage, um, because it's so easy
for people to just hide out, um,
as some of you are doing in this
room right now.
Uh, but, but people can hide,
right? They can, they can just
sort of stay off camera, they
can stay quiet. Um, so if
you're, if, if you are looking
for engagement and
participation, then it's
incumbent on you as the meeting
runner as the meeting host, to
build that in, right? So you
don't want to sit there and
lecture for minutes and minutes
on on end because everyone's
just gonna kind of glaze over
and, and, and lose interest. Um,
you want to pause for questions,
right? Does anyone have anything
to add? So and so, did you have
a thought on that? Um,
Are you, you know, does everyone
feel OK about that? Give me a
sign. Give me a, give me a
thumbs up, whatever. Um, but if
you're not thinking, if, if
you're just looking at sort of
the information that you have to
plow through, it's really easy
to forget that you need, this is
a two-way sort of conversation,
right? You really want to, to
build that engagement.
But you have to do it
deliberately cause it doesn't
really happen naturally when
you're when you're online.
You want to know the local rules
and customs, so this is
important if you're, if you're
attending a um uh a hearing,
especially before a court or a
hearing officer.
Um, we, uh, we have a client in
Nevada, the judge is very uh
stringent about people staying
off camera. You must stay muted.
You must, in the chat, you must
put your full name and who
you're there representing and
whether or not you plan to have
a speaking part or not, she is
very, very strident about it.
Um, more than one of our
opposing counsel has been
excoriated on the record, uh,
for failing to, to meet with her
expectations. Um, so you best
know, right, before you, before
you head in again, practice,
right? Do some leg work, figure
out ahead of time what, what's
expected. Um, if we didn't have
lawyers in Nevada telling us
That this is how Judge Kushner
did it, we would have no idea,
right? And we would have walked
right into the lion's den, and
it would have been horrible, uh,
but, so because we did sort of
leg work and we and we did some,
some investigation. Uh, we ended
up being OK.
Um
Pay attention to the meeting
size and content. So I've
touched on this sort of
tangentially a couple of times.
Video conferencing is not
Uh, uh, a panacea. It is not a
solution for everything. Um, and
it's really, really important to
remember that it's a tool in the
tool kit, and it's not a
replacement, right? Um, if you
are, uh, so for example, um, if,
if I'm going into a mediation,
and I want the parties to have
some skin in the game, and I
want folks to understand the
stakes. We're doing it in
person. I'm going to fly to
wherever.
I'm bringing my client, they're
gonna bring their client and
we're going into that room and
we're gonna, we're gonna sit
across from each other. This is
not a good solution for that,
right? It's way too easy to
unplug and disengage if you're
just doing it from your, from
your hotel room, right? Um,
Any other examples that folks
want to throw out for like,
you've tried it as a video
conference and it just was
abysmal and didn't work.
Something that's really got to
happen face to face.
Yeah.
Management conversations.
As someone who has been across
the desk for a couple of those,
um,
I wish they were virtual
sometimes, but, uh, but I agree
completely. It's, it, it's, if
you, if it's personal and it's,
and this, and there are steaks.
Video conferencing may not be
the right, the right fit, right?
It's too easy, it's too easy to
sort of escape. It's too easy to
to escape by.
Any other examples? Yeah.
We're slow down. We're gonna.
I, I gave you an agenda at the,
at the outset.
With common missteps on it.
So slow down.
You're, you're running to the
end, you're gonna get there.
Um
Meeting size too, right? We
talked a little bit about that.
So if you've got 100 people on a
Zoom, it's not probably gonna be
super engaging, right? It's
like, it's like lecturing to a,
to a big hall. Um, if you've got
8 people or 5 people or 2
people, um, then
You better sort of be building
that engagement. You better
actually have them sort of
engaged with you, um, as your,
as you're accomplishing whatever
you came together to accomplish.
Um, so again, I offer this, uh,
to, to the, the, the folks that
do public facing stuff, um,
options, so maybe it's a call in
for folks that don't have video
conferencing. Maybe it's a
YouTube channel, so people can
watch from their phones if they
don't want to, you know, watch
from their computers, um, maybe,
uh, you know, offering different
options for how folks can engage
with, say, a public meeting, for
example, um, would really help
sort of tamp down the um those
risks that we talked about,
those risks of exclusion. Um,
Training your folks, right?
Training people up, if you're,
if you're sitting at the, at the
head of an organization and you
want people to use this tool and
use it effectively, coming up
with standards, coming up with
just rules of engagement, rules
of the road, um, really, really
important because again, we're,
we all just sort of got thrown
into this world 5 years ago.
We've all been just kind of
figuring it out, right? Um, so
coming up with best practices,
right? Coming up with training,
frequently asked questions, that
kind of stuff can really help,
um, your
Folks use these tools, uh, to
their, to their utmost.
And then I'm just going to throw
in a sneaky little barb. Uh, you
could also upgrade New Mexico
Broadband, but that's on you
guys, that's not on me.
Whenever, whenever you want,
just whenever you get to it.
All right, 1605, uh, 16105
rather. Uh the lawyer shall not
make an agreement for a charge
or collect an unreasonable fee
or an unreasonable amount of
expenses. This means you have to
be responsible with your
client's money as contingency
fee council to governments, that
is my primary client, um,
whatever I spend, that
government is going to have to
pay me at the end of the case,
and that's all going to be
public record, and it's going to
be audited and it's going to be
scrutinized. And I have a
responsibility.
To make sure that I am treating
their, their, their funds with
respect, right? And that's true
regardless of if you represent a
government or or an individual
plaintiff or or anyone in
between.
So, the rule lists these factors
to consider, um, time and labor
required, novelty or difficulty,
uh, so again, am I
Is it a basic hearing that's
just for scheduling, or is it an
evidentiary hearing where I'm
taking witnesses, right? That's
obviously going to affect
whether or not I, I, I go
online. Preclusion from taking
on other work.
So this is a factor when law
firms are, are, uh, are
asserting a recovery for costs.
Did it prevent me from taking on
other jobs. Well, if I insist on
flying in for every little
hearing everywhere across the
country, that's going to
preclude me from taking other
work, whereas if I had a mix of
video conferencing and in
person, I can probably be more
effective for more people,
right?
Uh, amounts involved and results
obtained, right?
You know, flying uh uh across
the country and staying in a
hotel for a case that's of, you
know, modest value, um, is not
going to be the best look in the
world, and, um, it's something
that, that lawyers really do
have to think about.
Time limitations. Is the hearing
tomorrow? Is the hearing next
week? Is the hearing 3 months
from now, right? That's also
going to, to affect, um, the,
the cost effectiveness of these,
of these different approaches.
Experience, reputation, ability.
We talked a little bit about
that again, that goes to the
courts, right? The, the, the
hearing officers, the folks that
you're actually in front of, um,
if they, if they love video
conferencing, that's great. If
they despise it, that's great.
You have to know that, right?
And that's going to affect sort
of how you evaluate, um,
Your, your different, uh,
contingencies and whether or not
it makes sense to do it
virtually versus get on a plane
or get in a car and, and, and go
show up, right? Um,
Any other factors, these, by the
way, 16101 says these are in
non-exhaustive. So any other
factors
Having to do with your, with
your, with your client's costs,
yeah.
Sure.
And, and what your client's
expectation is, right? So is
your client going to think that
you're literally phoning it in,
right? And do they expect
something more than that? And
are they willing to pay for
that? Um, absolutely, yeah,
great, great point. Anyone else?
Yes, ma'am.
Absolutely, yeah. And, and
depending on the dynamics, maybe
you can use video conferencing
to, to accomplish that, right?
You can, you can get parties
together from disparate corners
of the country or the state, um,
to try to work something out
before everyone starts incurring
a whole bunch of costs and maybe
it starts to get dug in, right?
Absolutely.
Excuse me.
I told you I was gonna get
there.
The last 5 years have been a
wild time, you guys. It's been
crazy, um.
And uh this is uh all right,
raise your hand if you do not
know what that is in reference
to.
Exactly.
I
I got
That video clip sent to me.
By 4 different lawyers and
judges.
Within 8 minutes.
Some of them I, I hadn't spoken
to in months, and it, this was
the funniest thing that has
happened in the legal
profession.
In the last decade, easily, like
if they're just, this is, this
was the pinnacle, right? This
was it, we just, we watched this
poor guy, uh, uh, and, and we
all just had such a laugh. Um,
I will tell you, so, uh,
there's, there's some additional
examples. Uh, we had our Good
Morning America anchor, uh, not
wearing any pants, uh, we had
our BBC News reporter, uh, whose
kid came in and was asking who
she was talking to, uh, and
then, uh, I believe a British
member of parliament whose cat
decided to walk in front of his,
uh, in front of his camera
repeatedly as he was trying to
say something very important
and, and, uh, and, and, and with
much gravitas. Um,
So, a quick story about myself.
Uh, I, uh, when I, when I worked
for the uh for the AG's office.
I covered a hearing, um, before
this, this very commission, um,
and, uh, was not
Uh, prepared.
And was informed that that
particular hearing officer
expected everyone, whether you
had a speaking part or not, to
be on camera the entire time. It
was a public hearing, it was
broadcast on YouTube, and I did
the 1st 2 hours of that hearing
with Bedhead in a ratty t-shirt.
From like my spare office, uh,
because I had not planned to, to
turn the camera on, had not
planned to do it at all. Hearing
officer says, go ahead and turn
your camera on.
So I did.
That is, that is in the public
record. That's out there for,
that's out there forever.
It was me.
That's it. Just hair all sort of
up in the thing, it would, yeah,
absolutely. I, so
Like, it's, again, the sort of
sounds silly, but it happens. It
definitely happens and if you're
not careful, it will happen to
you and it will hopefully, I, I
hope that if there isn't a
permanent record of it when it
happens to you. There is a
permanent record of when it
happened to me.
Um
Any, anyone have a story that
they feel like sharing. You can
say it happened to a friend of
yours or a family member if you
don't wanna, yeah, go ahead.
The
Outstanding, wanting a popsicle.
Anyone here the, the US Supreme
Court argument where someone
flushed a toilet in the
background.
That's SCOTUS. That's permanent.
That's in the library of
Congress, you guys. That's
forever. Someone flushing the
toilet on a, on a transcript,
like, this is, you know, the
stakes, we're talking steaks
here. Um, what else? story to
share, some uh cautionary tale
we can all learn from.
Perfect.
Yes, uh, befitting the, the
esteem and the, and the gravitas
of such an occasion. Yes,
absolutely. Yeah, go ahead.
Stars
Oh,
yup, yeah. Now everyone knows,
and now everyone knows. I know,
it's the worst. Yeah, so.
And, and, and it's simple stuff,
right? It's just clicking the
button, clicking the button,
clicking the button. Um, but it
has come for all of us, and if
it hasn't come for you, it will.
Um, so,
Yeah, so here's, here's sort of
the common issues, right? This
is the stuff that, that
regularly happens. We all have
bandwidth issues, right? We have
cameras that that sort of shut
off or, or lag or whatever, uh,
we talk over each other, um,
we're forgetting to turn the
camera on and off, uh, muting
and unmuting people running
through behind us, um, all, all,
all sorts of uh things that I'm
sure are, are, are quite
familiar. The screen sharing,
right? So setting up permissions
so that you, you know who does,
who you can share with and who
you can't.
Um
All very common stuff, um, and
again, that, that learning curve
was, was steep. So, um, just in
case it's helpful here, just
some potential solutions uh for
your benefit, um, to these, uh,
common problems.
If you don't have the bandwidth,
um, if you can upgrade your
internet, obviously that is an
option, not an option for
everybody.
Again, I live in Laney and our
choices are also limited. Um, so
upgrading New Mexico's broadband
is definitely a selfish uh
request from myself. Um, you can
add uh additional sort of
routers to your house, you can
add sort of designated um uh uh
hubs that are that you really
only use for this one purpose.
Um, you can limit your, your
other devices in the household
that are online. uh Internet of
things, right? Everything is
hooked to your internet now,
right? Your thermostat is on
your internet.
your Alexa, your phone, your
kid's phone, um, all of that
stuff sort of takes bandwidth,
and so, um, if you're
encountering insufficient
bandwidth, shutting things off,
making sure things are unhooked
from the, from the network
during that critical time can
help. Um,
You can also relocate. Um, I did
a, a job interview, uh, from my
local library, um, at one point
because my internet at home was
down and I showed up and they
had a private office and Wi Fi
and so I went and went and got
it done. Um, not while I was
working for you.
Later, it was later.
Um, over talking, cross-talking,
um, so a lot of platforms have
the hand raised. Again, when
you're talking about rules of
the road and rules of
engagement. This is, it's, it,
people think it's sort of silly,
but it is so helpful, especially
if you have a lot of voices and
some big personalities on a
call, right? If you're the
moderator, you get to decide
what the rules of the road are.
And so if you expect people to
raise their hands and wait their
turn, which not all of us are
very good at, uh, then you have
to
en f or ce those rules, right?
You have to sort of lay it out
and lay out your expectation.
This is how I'm gonna get to
you. Go ahead and raise your
hand and I'm going to get to you
after I, I talk to them,
whatever.
Excuse me.
Um, as far as your camera on
mute, I like to start with them
both off. Um, or I, uh, your
camera off and your, and your,
and your microphone off. Um,
that gives you sort of the
ability to turn them on when
you're ready. Um, another thing
that folks don't often realize
is you can usually hit your
space bar and temporarily unmute
yourself while you talk, and
then as soon as you let off your
space bar, it will meet you
again, so you don't necessarily
have to remember to go in there
and, and actually click it,
right? It's sort of a, a, a
fail-safe uh type of type of
approach.
Um, the other thing that I just
would encourage folks to do is
treat it like a real meeting.
That's, that's part of where all
of these sort of faux pas come
from. If I had treated the
hearing before the PRC as if it
were a real hearing before the
PRC ain't no way I was gonna
show up the way that I showed
up, right? That was so if you
treat it like it's what it is,
which is a real meeting, you
actually solve a whole bunch of
these issues, right?
Um, for your privacy.
You want to set boundaries, uh,
with your, with your family,
with your roommates, with your
kids, um, closed doors, plan
ahead, you know, always sort of
broadcast from the same
consistent location. If you're
moving around a lot, that sort
of injects uh uh uh uh
uncertainty, um, that can, that
can kind of throw you off. Um,
The, uh, if you, if you listen
to the pros that do this all the
time, especially the, the, the
folks that appear in front of
courts, virtually all the time.
First question, can you, can you
see and hear me OK?
Your Honor, can you see and hear
me OK?
Yes, absolutely. Great. And then
you proceed, right? So you don't
have, you, you're not getting
halfway through your opening
argument, uh, and then someone
says, yeah, we, we can't hear
you, right? There's nothing
worse than just sort of really
getting on a roll and then
realizing that you were muted
the whole time or whatever. Um.
Uh, I, I'm a big fan of the ring
lights. Um, I, I'm not, uh, a
TikTok influencer yet, but, you
know, hope springs eternal, um,
but those little ring lights
that they use do a great job.
Um, avoid backlighting, right?
So having a bright light behind
you turns you into a shadow, no
one can see you, um, it sort of
defeats the whole purpose, so,
um, light in front, light to the
side, um, try to avoid the
backlighting uh if you can.
And of course, like, all of this
is dependent on your situation,
right? I have a room in my house
that I'm fortunate enough to be
able to set up to do this,
right? This is all I do from
that room because it's my job.
Um, you may not have that, um,
so obviously take what's
helpful, um, and, and, you know,
iterate on, on what isn't.
We talked about sound quality,
uh, screen sharing permissions.
This is a big one,
especially in this era of um a
lot of attorneys have their
paralegals or their legal
assistants set meetings for
them, but quite often what will
happen,
is only the person who, who sets
the meeting can share their
screen or can designate someone
else as the owner of the
meeting. And if you don't do
that ahead of time, you're going
to find out at a very
inopportune moment that your
legal assistant who's off that
day, uh, is the only one that
can, that can actually share
that document that you had, that
you had planned to share. So,
again,
Running through it ahead of
time, right? Thinking through
this stuff ahead of time, I
think is really, really um
important.
All right, so here's, here's the
checklist that I came up with.
Um, again, uh, a lot of this is
gonna seem sort of wrote a lot
of it is going to seem, you
know, a little silly. Um, I'm a
big fan of checklists and if
again, if, if it's not something
that you do all the time. Uh, I
think this can be really helpful
to you. This is on the table
over there.eel free to take one
if you so, uh, so desire. Um,
Are you dressed appropriately?
Um, are you lit appropriately?
Can people see you?
Are you wearing pants?
If you're not wearing pants, you
better know that they can't see
you and you're taking a big old
risk. I'm just telling you,
you're gonna be a meme for the
rest of your life. Um.
Is your background appropriate,
right? Do you have masks hanging
on your wall that are gonna,
that are turned into spooky
faces, right? Um, do you have,
you know, I, I mean, I, we've,
we've all seen the, uh, uh, you
know, the spouse walking past
the camera in their underwear,
right? Like it's, you, you got
to sort of think through that,
right? You got to think about
what is, what is the camera
seeing behind me?
Um
Is everything working? Am I, am
I often muted? Do I have doors
and windows closed? Do I have
sort of sources of noise
eliminated to the extent that I
can. Um, if I'm having bandwidth
issues, have I shut off my
unnecessary devices to sort of
save some of that bandwidth for,
for this activity. Um, and
that's, so, so I have the sort
of the attending checklist, and
then the hosting checklist,
right? So if this is your
meeting, if this is your sort of
um
Arrangement, um, there's some
other stuff that that I think
you should think about.
Are the contents appropriate for
a video call or are you just
doing it because it's easy,
right? Is, is your client or is
your purpose better served by
doing it in person, um, or by
making it an email or making it
a phone, right, again, this is
only one tool in the toolbox. So
make sure it's the right tool
for what you're hoping to
accomplish. Um,
A lot of, a lot of businesses as
they shift to flexor as they
shift to sort of part in home,
part in office, they will
schedule.
Collaboration time, right? So
when you are in office, we
schedule the things that make
sense to do when we're all
together in the office. And when
we're not in the office, that's
when we schedule all the things
to do when it doesn't matter if
we're all together in the
office, right? But that still
requires some planning. It
requires for forethought. It
requires, um,
Just a little effort on the
front end to make sure that you
are maximizing sort of the, the
efficiency of these various
tools.
Um
And who's been on a, a Zoom call
with way too many people on it,
half of whom didn't need to be
there.
Yeah, we've all done, yeah. So
again,
Is the, is the content
appropriate? Is the invite, is
the invite list appropriate? Are
you inviting people just because
or do they really need to be
there, right? That really
matters, um, because as you, as
you, you know, sort of create
this large grid of people, um,
you, you may be sort of
defeating the purpose uh that
you got everyone together for uh
in the first place.
Do you have a designated
moderator and a muter, right? I
mute people all the time.
In my meetings, I, if they, if
they forget, I mute them.
If they are, I, I've never had
to cut anyone off, fortunately,
but if I had to, I could do
that, right? So active
moderation and, and sort of
Being engaged in sort of the
moderation and, and making sure
that you're moving things along
just like you would in a normal
meeting, that's really
important.
And, and even more so in this
world because it's so easy for
things to just sort of go off,
go off the rails, right? Um, or
people that just sort of tune
out.
Um, I think this goes for any
meeting, whether it's virtual or
otherwise, having an agenda
really does help, keeps people
on task, keeps people going in
the right direction.
Have you looked at your
permissions, you know where
you're going. You have sort of
your rules of the road. Do you,
have you sort of set the
expectation for whoever your
audience is, as far as like what
you expect from them if they
have a comment. Uh, does
everyone know when they're
scheduled to speak? Does
everyone know sort of what
their, what they're responsible
to provide all of that, all of
that kind of stuff.
Um, have you, uh, do you have a
recording set up? If you're
recording, uh, the particular
meeting.
Excuse me.
Um, for the lawyers in the room,
uh, do you, uh, can you record
it? Do you need someone's
permission to record it. We're
in, we're a single party state,
so as long as I know it's being
recorded, that's good enough for
me, but that's not always the
case, right? Um, some people get
really sort of nervous if
they're being recorded or they,
they shut down or they disengage
or whatever and so, uh, having
that set up and and making sure
that everyone understands what's
going on is really important.
Um,
And then especially for big
meetings, uh, where you're
asking for lots of feedback. Um,
I like to have someone actually
monitor the chat for me. So if
I'm speaking and I'm running
through information, I'm not
also looking at the chat as it's
sort of running with sort of
these tangentially related sort
of things, right? It's, it's
almost impossible to do both of
those at the same time. So, um,
having someone actually monitor
your chat, uh, be responsible
for, for responding to it or,
you know,
slipping you a note or, or
however you want to set it up,
um.
I see a lot of speakers actually
get derailed when a chap comes
through because they initially,
you know, they immediately sort
of look at it and they read it
and then they lose their place
and, and sort of get, get off
off uh off topic.
Any other checklist items that
folks can think of that should
get added, yeah.
Yeah, big one.
Absolutely, yeah, you don't want
to share the, uh, the document
entitled Stuff We're going to
screw them on, um, when you,
when you're going into the
mediation, right? You don't want
to do that. Absolutely. What
else?
If your private chatting, if I
intend to send you a message
making sure it doesn't go to the
whole big, big one, yeah, that
has sunk. I've I've watched that
sink lawyers in real time.
That is an unpleasant feeling
when you're just talking trash
about the other side, and you
realize that it went wide
instead of uh just to, just to
your pal, um, big,
Mm, sure.
Sure, absolutely, yeah, in your
calendaring, right? You can, you
can sort of help your, your
attendees triage their own
workflows by saying, oh, am I
needed or am I, is this just for
my own information? Totally, you
can, absolutely, yeah.
That's what I have for you. Um,
I ended exactly one minute
early.
You're welcome. Um, but I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Um
Or y'all can get out of here,
whatever you prefer.
You know, I kind of knows.
Thank you.
Thank you all for coming and
spending the last two days with
us. I hope you enjoyed it as
much as I did, and we will see
you around.
And Jordan
